Friday, 14 June 2013 

Parliament met at 11.09 a.m. in Parliament House, Kampala. 

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.) 

The House was called to order. 

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR 

THE SPEAKER: The Rt Hon. Deputy Prime Minister, the Leader of the Opposition, members of the Cabinet, honourable members of the House, I welcome you to this sitting of the House. I regret that I had to interrupt your recess, but I received information about a looming crisis in one of our Government institutions. That is why I invited you to meet this morning and I will try not to keep you long. 

Hon. Ayoo, you have three minutes. Hon. Ayoo had something small and then I will invite the minister for the next item.

11.11
MR TONNY AYOO (NRM, Kwania County, Apac): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance. My constituency of Kwania in Apac District, and other districts across the country, have been facing a serious problem of drought for over one and a half months and this heavy drought has resulted into scorching of most of the crops that were planted by farmers.There is a threat of looming famine in Kwania County and Apac District yet most of our farmers normally use the produce to get income to pay fees and buy seeds. 

I, therefore, rise to request and ask the Minister for Relief and Disaster Preparedness that in the next planting season, there will be need to provide the farmers in Kwania, Apac and other districts with seeds under the disaster preparedness department and also to prepare some relief items for the people because if we do not do this - just like other areas where there has been disaster, the people of Uganda have been helped. If we just keep quiet, you will be surprised as Parliament to find that people are crying of famine and have no money to buy seeds to replant in the second season. Madam Speaker, that is the issue that I think the Minister of Relief and Disaster Preparedness should respond to before it is late for our people. I thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. We shall ask the minister to respond when we resume for the formal session after 25th June - (Prof. Kabwegyere rose_) - Are you ready?

11.13
THE MINISTER FOR GENERAL DUTIES, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Tarsis Kabwegyere): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I propose to the honourable member that as soon as we leave this Chamber, he should come to my office, we sit down and work out a mechanism of how we can intervene rather than wait. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, hon. Ayoo. You will work with the minister expeditiously. Next item.

LAYING OF PAPERS

11.13
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Madam Speaker and colleagues, I beg to lay on Table Supplementary Expenditure Schedule No.2 for financial year 2012/2013. I beg to lay.

11.14
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Nathan Nandala-Mafabi):  Madam Speaker, I have seen here Schedule No.2, and on page 2 of the Schedule, they say “Approved provision for financial year 2012/2013.” In the third column and in the fourth column, they are talking about how much they want and the total. Where is the column for Supplementary Schedule No.1 because that will give us the exact figure so that we know what we are looking at?

MR OMACH: Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, Supplementary Schedule No.1 was laid here and was passed by this Parliament and normally, we recognise it when passing the Supplementary Appropriation Bill, which will come at the appropriate time to this House. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, if the minister is right, then the column for approved provision 2012/2013 should not have existed. The moment you put this column, then you would say, approved Supplementary Schedule No.1; then the Supplementary Schedule No.2 and the missing money. That means that this document is wrong and we cannot rely on it. 

MR OMACH: Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, I have already mentioned that Supplementary Schedule No.1 was passed by this Parliament and I have the schedule here. If you want us to resubmit it, I can lay it on Table because it is what you passed and is contained in this document, which I can read to you and then lay on Table. 

11.17
MR IBRAHIM SSEMUJJU NGANDA (FDC, Kyadondo County East, Wakiso): Madam Speaker, thank you very much. The problem is not the inclusion of Supplementary Schedule No.1 but the lies in column three. You are telling Parliament that the total revised is Shs60 billion for State House yet last time we gave them an additional Shs 128 billion. You must have done this in a hurry. I don’t think you will come here and justify hurrying everybody. The document you have laid on Table is a forgery. You cannot say that the total revised is Shs60 billion when you know it is about Shs 200 billion. This is forgery.

11.17
MR TIMOTHY LWANGA (NRM, Kyamuswa County, Kalangala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Honourable minister, with all due respect, let us face the facts. The figures for your revised estimates for 2012/2013 need improvement, and let us agree that there is something missing here. Let us be realistic and much as we are not arguing about the rest- this last figure is- and I think the best thing is to ask your staff to quickly print out a list including the actual amounts that have been approved so that the revised estimates agree with the total estimates. That is all I have to say, Madam Speaker. 

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am rising on a point of procedure, whereby I have heard hon. Ssemujju Nganda alleging that the papers that have been presented by a government minister, the Minister of State for Finance, are a forgery. And he has repeated it – (Interjections) – a Government Minister. A paper might have a mistake; it is different from presenting – (Interjections) – I am on a point of procedure.

THE SPEAKER: Order, members. Please proceed.

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. A paper presented by a government minister might have an omission or an error and to err is human. So for a Member of Parliament to allege that a government minister is presenting forgeries to an august House is not procedurally right. Therefore, I am seeking your intervention – whether we should leave this record on the Hansard that a government minister has presented forged documents to this House. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, there could have been an omission; you know, forgery means that you have created something that does not exist. So it is possible that it is just an error but not a forgery. (Interjections) No, no, no, forgery means that you have intentionally doctored something or created something that does not exist. So this is just an error but not forgery. Hon. Minister, please continue.

MR OMACH: Madam Speaker, I thank you for your ruling. As I earlier mentioned, we have Supplementary Schedule No.1 which totals to Shs 555.7 billion and it was an omission not to include this in the Supplementary Schedule No.2. But the practice has been that in Supplementary Schedule No.2, we recognise what was appropriated and what is being requested for under Supplementary Schedule No.2 and then we total it up. But I have here Supplementary Schedule No.1, which was passed by this Parliament and which I can read and then lay on Table in order to have this adjusted as requested by the Members.

MR KWIZERA: Madam Speaker, I would like to get clarification; if you look at column three, it talks of total revised estimates for the financial year 1213. Is the Minister telling this House that if this is the right figure, is it a right title?

11.22
MR PAUL MWIRU (FDC, Jinja Municipality East, Jinja): Madam Speaker, we are dealing with a matter that is very close to my heart. When we were here last time, we raised a very pertinent question – that as the finance minister brings this Supplementary Schedule No.2, he should furnish Parliament with the sectors that have been affected and where this money is being re-arranged to be moved under the supplementary. 

I am wondering if it is not appropriate at this time that before we proceed to Supplementary Schedule No.2, the minister should lay on Table documentary evidence to show what sectors have been affected through this Supplementary Schedule No.2. I am a member of the Public Accounts Committee and I know that ministries do not receive releases from the Ministry of Finance.When you look at budget performance and you ask them why it is so, they say, “We didn’t get any money.” This embarrasses us as Parliament. 

Isn’t it procedurally right at this point, Madam Speaker, that we are privy to the sectors where money is being re-allocated? It is now becoming a ritual for us to sit in this House, appropriate money and the Ministry of Finance unconstitutionally gets people’s money and puts it in a supplementary on something else.

MR SABIITI: Madam Speaker, I have no problem with the minister coming here to present a supplementary budget, but I am concerned about the suspension of Rule 47. If you look at – 

THE SPEAKER: We have not yet reached there.

MR SABIITI: Yes, but I am just giving a preamble. If you look at the Public Finance and Accountability Act, 2003, Section 38(4), it states: “Notwithstanding that supplementary estimates may have been submitted to Parliament for approval, no action shall be taken by any accounting officer, which creates a commitment on public funds before parliamentary approval is obtained.”

Madam Speaker, the implication of this is that this supplementary should have come here long time ago because this is nearly the end of the financial year and they are looking for money for that particular ministry. I want to know if this is procedurally correct. 

THE SPEAKER: But, honourable members, you are asking me to rule on something which the minister has not yet even moved; he has just laid the papers and has not moved to the motion.

MR ALEX RUHUNDA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand to inform Parliament about the crisis that is out there, especially when it comes to our health workers – people who have gone without salaries for the last two months -(Interjections)- I am giving you information, Members, because I have been at the centre of the problem. As members of Parliament, I have not seen us missing our salaries but I have seen medical workers on strike in Fort Portal. 

Now, I am here, Madam Speaker, to appeal to the Members that although we have seen the anomalies rightly put across by Members, at the same time, there are people out there from Kabale, Masaka, Mbarara, Fort Portal and the rest;they want our intervention as Parliament. So what do we do? Do we just concentrate on these technicalities and we leave these Ugandans to continue suffering? We must be proactive and we get the minister to bring the right figures and we pass them. At least let us stay here and wait so that we pass the figures for the sake of our people who are suffering. We must be considerate.

MR OKUPA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I just want some clarification from the minister on Votes 201 and 205. When did we start having High Commissions in New York and Thailand? I thought we had embassies there? But here we have them as High Commissions and yet we know that we have High Commissions in only former British colonies. Have we now established High Commissions in these countries?

MR AMURIAT: Madam Speaker, thank you very much. I am sure that as we debate, we, as much as possible, try to preserve the dignity of this House and we shall not allow Parliament to be stampeded by the Executive.

Only yesterday, the Minister of Finance, on behalf of the President of this country, read to Parliament an elaborate speech on the Budget. And in your wisdom, you did tell us that we would be returning here on the 25th Juneto pass a Vote-on-Account. Today, we are being bombarded by what seems to be an emergency- a supplementary budget- even on matters regarding salaries that this House laboured so much throughout this current financial year to pass.It was our assumption that matters of salary had been sorted out. 

Given that we just have a few more days to the 25thof June, I do not know whether Government will do the most decent thing of bringing all that is contained in these pieces of paper by way of Vote-on-Account.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the problem I have is that you are moving ahead of the minister; he has not moved his motion; he has not explained the problem. You are moving ahead of him. He was just laying papers. Can we maybe go to the second part and he tells us why and then we can decide whether to listen to him or not?

MR AMURIAT: Madam Speaker, I do not know whether we should deal in anomalies while knowing that actually that is where we are going to be led. This House should not be treated like a blind person who can be led to a pit without him or her protesting. (Interruption)

MS KASULE LUMUMBA: Madam Speaker, is the honourablemember in order to directly tell you that you are leading this House blindly? 

THE SPEAKER: No, he is out of order. But honourable members, either allow the minister to lay the papers and listen to him; let him move his motion and then we hear whether we should- but the papers are just supposed to be laid; there should be no debate. However, I had allowed you to have a debate. They are just for laying. So let us hear what the minister has to say. He has laid the papers as required by our Rules of Procedure. Let us hear him in the next part of the motion. Go to the next item.

MOTION MOVED IN ACCORDANCE WITH RULE 15 SEEKING TO SUSPEND RULE 47 TO ENABLE THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT TO PRESENT SUPPLEMENTARY EXPENDITURE SCHEDULE NO.2 FOR THE FISCAL YEAR 2012/2013 BUDGET

11.32
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Madam Speaker, I beg to move a motion under Rule 15 seeking to suspend Rule 47 to enable me present Supplementary Expenditure Schedule No.2 for fiscal year 2012/2013 budget. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Seconded. What is the justification? 

MR OMACH: Madam Speaker, we have received additional pressures from ministries, departments and agencies requiring the passing of supplementary schedule No.2 urgently. The first very urgent issue is under the Uganda Police Force which entered the fourth quarter of this financial year with severe cash constraints.As such, a supplementary was submitted to my ministry to the tune of Shs32.3 billion, of which Shs19.5 billion is recurrent and Shs12.8 billion capital, to cover critical areas. However, due to budgetary constraints, my ministry is only able to give Shs19.5 billion- (Interruption)

MR ODONGA-OTTO: Madam Speaker, I rise on a point of procedure. My understanding of the rules is that the minister has moved a motion seeking to suspend certain rules. I thought that the motion should be disposed of before we get to the substance of why he wants those rules suspended. I seek your indulgence.

THE SPEAKER: They are related. He is going to explain why he wants the suspension first. I believe that is what he was doing. Mr Minister, why do you want the rules suspended?

MR OMACH: One, there is emergency expenditure under the Police and that is the detail that I was giving that we are able to immediately give them up to Shs19.5 billion. 

The second issue is what hon. Alex Ruhunda already mentioned. It is on health workers in referral hospitals in the Ministry of Health. Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, you will remember that this Parliament did direct that we make new recruitments of health workers and this was done. So there was need for deployment of addition staff to referral hospitals in the course of the financial year and as a result, by March 2013, most referral hospitals had already exhausted all that they had under the wage bill provisions and could not pay staff salaries. Currently, most of the hospitalshave exhausted their wage bill and have not paid salaries for the months of April and May and will also not be able to pay the bills for June, unless this supplementary is passed.

These funds are available, some of which are coming from excess non-tax revenue, others from technical supplementary and then others from the suppressed budget for this financial year. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

11.37
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Nathan Nandala-Mafabi): Madam Speaker, what the minister has presented is so technical that it needs some help. But one thing I want to plead with you and the Members about, Madam Speaker, is that a supplementary is for unforeseeable things. And if it is for unforeseeable things, if you look at Police, they need about Shs6.2 billion for electricity and water. There are many institutions that have arrears of water and electricity bills; not all of them are here. For us Parliament to come and pass a supplementary for salaries and wages which we budgeted for, I do not thinkis being fair. So, before we can debate this, I would have been happy that when the minister is laying his documents, he attaches –(Interruption)

DR BITEKYEREZO: Thank you very much, Leader of the Opposition. Madam Speaker, I want to inform the Leader of the Opposition that I personally went to Kitagata Hospital but the doctor who was posted to Kitagata Hospital to cater for the patients had not received salary for three months - he was a new person and he wanted to go away. We have so many health workers right now at health centres IV who were postedbut up to now they haven’t received their salaries. I am talking as a health worker who is properly trained. So, I know what they are going through.

I want to ask the Leader of Opposition to be very honest with himself and kind to the health workers, for example, in Mbale who now need some little money for salaries. You have been sleeping in these wards and you know what is happening. Please be kind to health workers. I thank you.

MS KABALE KWAGALA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. It is very clear that the issue that the minister is raising is about health. But I think we should be very consistent because one member told us that Members of Parliament never miss their salaries, which is true. But how do we think about our voters; the people who are being treated? Unless we are saying voters should not be treated. Nurses have gone without salaries –(Interruption)

MR SEMUJJU NGANDA: Madam Speaker, with due respect to the honourable member holding the Floor, Parliament does not release money to departments. But I am surprised at the way Members of Parliament are attacking the institution of Parliament for something they know does not exist. This House appropriated money for every government works. That money was spent on other businesses. Recently, when we were passing Supplementary Schedule No.I, we were told there was money for hosting meetings at State House to the tune of Shs 48 billion. This is all possible because you reallocated money meant for such people’s salaries. That is why you have also been able to carry money in sacks to some areas; you are now in a crisis.

So, is the honourable member in order to blackmail Parliament when she knows very well that the problem squarely lies elsewhere for people working for Government and missing their salaries as a result of diversions?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, whereas what you are saying may be plausible, however Parliament is also the court of last resort for the population. They have come here to say, “Give us our salaries” and I think we should respond.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, it was information –(Interruption)

DR LULUME: Thank you, Leader of the Opposition for giving way. I also thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity. We have just been told that part of this money is to pay salaries for health workers at regional referral hospitals.

One time I travelled with my friend, hon. Bitek (Bitekyerezo), the physician, to Kitagata Hospital and several other lower health units, which are not regional referral hospitals – that is what my friend was talking about.It is true the medical superintendent of that hospital, which is a general hospital, had not received his salary, something that made us go and seek explanation from the district authorities.

But now the minister is seeking this money, purportedly and sensationalizing it on matters of health, of which I am very passionate, but talking about regional referral hospitals yet the examples being given are for lower health units including general hospitals.So, the information that hon. Bitek (Bitekyerezo) was giving was meant to derail the Leader of Opposition by sensationalising this matter and arm-twisting Parliament.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, let us get onto the substance of the debate.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, I have a copy of Supplementary Schedule No. I and for the information of the Members, I would like to say that we passed Shs 43 billion as money for health workers’ salaries. 

Let me say something to do with how to deal with a budget for the benefit of the Members who don’t know. My understanding of this situation is that salaries are a direct charge to the consolidated fund. So, nobody should try to blackmail people who are raising this matter. The moment we pass a budget to the effect that a person’s salary is, for example, Shs 10 million, that money has to be paid whether what or what. What I am saying is that this money you are seeing here has nothing to do with salaries. 

Let me inform those colleagues who are saying we are delaying salaries that the budget for salaries of workers was passed. This is just a different item –(Interjections) – please, listen to me because I am talking from a professional point of view and not these kwara-kwara issues of yours. (Laughter)

So, for my colleague to wake up –(Hon. Abraham Byandala rose_) – please listen to me; you can give me that information later –(Interruption)

MR BYANDALA: Thank you very much, Madam, Speaker. I also thank the Leader of Opposition for giving way. What the Leader of Opposition has said is partially true. The money for those people we budgeted for is there. But there are those who were recruited after passing the budget whose money for salaries is not there. Those are the ones we are catering for under this arrangement. Recruitment of staff is not cast in concrete. We continuously recruit staff to respond to people’s needs and what you people have always talked about as service to the people not being enough, without enough staff; Government is obliged to do that.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, I want to agree with hon. Abraham Byandala – (Interruption)

MRS SEZI: Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, the provision for the payroll for salaries is made basing on staff numbers as at 30thMay because we have to prepare the budget for approval. That means that all positions that are filled in June don’t have budget provisions. 

What happens is that at implementation, the staff who may have been recruited are received by frontloading the wage bill for us to pay them as they assume their duties. That means that by the time we are in the fourth quarter, there will be insufficient wage to pay for those particular sectors that may have recruited. This is the case with the health sector for referral hospitals and some of the tertiary institutions. Salary is a must; we have to pay them. That is why we are looking for this supplementary. We should not carry salary none-payments into the new financial year because the issue of salary arrears – for those who have had experience – is a nightmare. We need to pay them. The list of PAYE is already with us. We are only waiting for the approval of the money to pay their June salaries. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, both hon. Abraham Byandala and the Minister of State for Public Service are right. But you need to get this information.

First, before recruitment is done, there will always be what we call the numbers required. Every year, we make a budget for additional recruitment. Those people who were recruited were budgeted for. What I know is that, first, you budgeted for the manpower and the money.Madam Speaker, you recall very well Supplementary Schedule No.1, which included wages of Shs 43 billion for local government and hospitals. I am worried and I do not know, which Government we are in. Did you recruit these people yesterday after Supplementary Schedule No.1? I want us to be realistic. Did you recruit them last week?

Secondly, if it was not last week, I want to answer the issue of my colleague from Fort Portal- [Hon. Ruhunda: “Can I give you information?”] – wait a minute. When you say that there are people who have gone for two months without salaries, that is different. It means that Government has not paid their salariesbut we have approved it. I want you to know that, that salary is already approved so do not use that to come and ask for this one. What we are talking about here is that this was never approved and these are the people who they recruited. When did they recruit them yet we passed Shs 43 billion for health workers the week before?

Madam Speaker, I want us to be realistic to one another. This country is for all of us, not for a few. We are not blocking anybody’s salary. I want to inform the public that your salaries were approved and must be paid to you, if they have not done so. The only problem we have now are these new ones of last week and we can only deal with the ones of last week, if we have a schedule that this one was recruited the other day and his salary was not budgeted for.If it was budgeted- (Interruption)

MR SABIITI: Madam Speaker, it is true we passed that schedule and we are aware of the malpractices that have been exposed in the Public Service. If we just pay it without the relevant committee scrutinising what we are paying for, it will be violating the way Parliament should manage the finances of this country.

I, therefore, propose that if there are people who are being recruited, or who were recruited last week- it does not matter even yesterday and they need this money, let the relevant committee scrutinise whether these are authentic people to be paid and you come here and we pay them. We have no problem with it; we want our medical workers and teachers to be paid but you cannot just stampede Parliament and you want to pay- you want to change the Rules of Procedure of how Parliament works and then just pay money when it is the nature of Finance to come with the right information to this Parliament.

So, Madam Speaker, this is the information I was giving to the Leader of the Opposition.

MR SEBULIBA MUTUMBA: Thank you, Leader of the Opposition, for giving way and thank you, Madam Speaker. It is only about a fortnight ago that the last interviews were done and like the Leader of the Opposition said, that is when we appropriated the money for those people. What I would like the minister to do now is to produce for us the list of those people who they are purportedly seeking money for. Otherwise, as far as we are concerned, we know that when we passed Supplementary Schedule No.1, they were catered for and the last interviews they had were two weeks ago. Let her bring the entire list so that we can scrutinise it.

This is because like the Leader of the Opposition said, supplementaries are really for emergencies. What if an emergency occurs? Because you have to bear it in mind that there are emergencies, which can occur and we are just looking at this. There are people whose salaries have not been paid like the staff of Makerere University. So we should get clear information from the Ministry of Public Service and Ministry of Finance with the list of those people who have not been catered for.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and I want to thank my colleagues for the information –(Hon. Ruhunda rose)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Ruhunda wants to give information.

MR RUHUNDA: Thank you very much, Leader of the Opposition, for giving me this chance. I followed up this matter very closely from Fort Portal referral hospital, because I was personally concerned and said, “How can the staff who have been there for all this time go without salaries?” For me this was a fundamental human rights issue, which I could not stomach as a leader of those people.

I went ahead to scrutinise and engage the respective ministries and what I found out was that there was a big problem, which emanates from Public Service. The Public Service Ministry has had so many big problems in terms of ghost workers, cleaning the registers and pay rolls and so forth, and that in itself caused a lot of loopholes in terms of leaving out important information to update the Ministry of Finance.

What happened in the real sense is that the new staff who were recruited could not go without salaries, so they started encroaching on the already existing salaries. This means–(Interjections) - I am just giving you information on what I found out.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I have understood and now I will help you. Madam Speaker, I understand what my brother from Fort Portal is raising. The moment you get - [Hon. Kamateeka, “Further information”] – I will give you a chance, my sister, in just a few minutes.

The moment you have ghost employees and you delete them, it means you have a saving. So there is already a saving in the process. Given the fact that we have a saving, it means that you budgeted for (a) when it should have been (b) and the money for (a) moves directly to (b). If there are more ghosts, you have more savings.

Having said that-

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, you have moved ahead of the motion. The motion is that Rule 47, which requires three days’ notice be suspended. That is what we are dealing with.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, we are saying that before we think about suspension, we have issues. One, the schedule which, they have shown us in Supplementary Schedule No.2 does not have a column for Supplementary Schedule No.1 so that we know the amounts. That is the first issue.

Secondly, the Members who are saying that we should quickly pass the salaries of employees- these are not the salaries of those who are already working and who were budgeted for. We already did that; we do not want you to raise sentiments that those workers who have not been paid are a result of this money - No. That is a direct charge on the consolidated fund.

Thirdly, if these people were recruited last week or yesterday, which we want to assume, I do not see the attachment of the list-

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Nandala, you are going into another motion, which has not been moved. Right now we are asking, shall we suspend the requirement of three days’ notice? That is what the motion is about.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, that is why I am justifying that given the information from the minister, there is no way we can suspend the rule unless we have all the supporting documents, including those to be paid and why they were missed in Supplementary Schedule No.1. There is no need for us to spend, the House is not burning. If there is need to demand for arrears, we have only ten days to go. If this money is in the savings, it will be balance brought forward. We shall pay them in July as soon as we come back. Short of that, Public Service has a problem. 

11.59
MR ODONGA OTTO (FDC, Aruu County, Pader): Madam Speaker, I am almost thinking that the motion moved by the minister is in itself defective. The motion is moved in accordance with Rule 15 seeking to suspend Rule 47. Rule 15 says: “Any Member may, with the consent of the Speaker, move that any rule be suspended....”

So, the presumption is that the minister is moving with the consent of the Speaker that we suspend Rule 47. Now, when we come to Rule 47, it says: “Subject to the provisions of Rule 48, no motion shall be moved unless the Member moving it has given written notice of the same to the Speaker....”

Now, what the minister is trying to do is not in any way related to the motion. My understanding is that, you are trying to persuade this Parliament to dispense with the Budget Committee looking at this supplementary schedule so that Parliament constitutes itself and even does the work of the Budget Committee. Your motion does not address this. So, the motion is incurably defective. (Laughter) I do not see anywhere, where you are specifically requesting that the Budget Committee should not look at this supplementary schedule; this House should constitute itself to do the work of the Budget Committee. 

Even if your motion is defective, let me take that as a technicality and go to the substance of your motion. Are we safe in this Parliament to start doing work of a specialised committee? The issues the Member from Fort Portal is raising are substantial. He has raised the issue of ghost workers, clearing the registry and the Leader of the Opposition said, we passed Shs 43 billion one-and-a-half weeks ago to pay medical workers! He has also stated that this recruitment is not one-and-a-half weeks old. Those who have been missing their salaries for four months should have been addressed one-and-a-half weeks ago.

For someone to come and persuade us that people are not being paid their salaries for three or four months – you failed to address that issue one-and-a-half weeks ago when we were passing a supplementary schedule. Now, you want to get Parliament on a Friday when everyone has gone to the constituency; you have not even created a column for the first supplementary schedule, now you are bringing a second supplementary schedule. 

Hon. Minister, you should have been kind to at least create a column for what we passed last week and a column for what we want this week, and then you add the total so that we can analyse these things. If you want us to do the work of the Budget Committee, then help us to do it well. (Applause) We are from different professions - some are accountants and others are engineers. You have thrown away the Budget Committee and you want us to do the work right now. So, let us do it well. 

I would like to correct the impression – everyone on this side wants the workers to be paid. We want Police to be paid and the doctors to be paid. But in the process of paying the doctors, we do not want someone to smile with Shs 20 billion because Parliament did it in a hurry. 

Therefore, how do we proceed - because we have a difficult situation! The doctors need to be paid and yet, there are a lot of errors that we may give someone Shs 20 or Shs 30 billion because they want to jump away from the Budget Committee. 

The worst I would request, Madam Speaker, is, if the Budget Committee cannot sit because they are time barred, then assign a small committee of ten people - the Speaker has that discretion - to scrutinise these figures and bring us the tabulation and let that committee report to the House so that we can move together - (Interruption)

MR KAKOOZA: Thank you, hon. Otto, for giving way. I have listened to Members very carefully. Sometimes, those of us who sit down and listen cannot go against figures - they catch up with you. And this is a warning to the Minister of Finance. I already said this and I will say it again. When we were passing the Budget, the Deputy Speaker was in the Chair and I said, we passed one third of Vote-on-Account. We allowed Government to spend without appropriating the figures properly. We just stood here and said, “Change the activities, which are already budgeted for”. I told you that in future, we shall have a problem. Now, here it comes.

You know the process; from the point you lay the documents on the Table, take them to the Budget Committee, the Budget Committee forwards a report, the mistakes and errors are corrected and dealt with. Now, I want to echo the words I said in the previous minute; a problem has come. How do we go about it? A mistake has been done and we have a problem. 

The best way forward is that, this should be the last warning to the Minister of Finance. As hon. Otto said, you know what is happening in the public domain. Unless you want the health workers and the teachers to negatively affect the lives of the people. We the Members of Parliament are the ones to find a solution. So, the best way is to generate consensus from the other side and our side and forge a way forward. 

MR ODONGA-OTTO: Thank you hon. Kakooza for your submissions. You see, when we are looking for the best way forward, we should not endanger this institution. I should personally be the last to want the Speaker to preside over something that may backfire. You know how much that means for the institution. 

So, Madam Speaker, the second supplementary budget is defective; even the motion the minister has moved does not address what he wants. If this Parliament hurries to say, “Aye, pay the teachers”, it is like taking someone for an operation without anaesthesia. It is something we should be very reluctant to do –(Interruption)

MR KWIZERA: Thank you, honourable member, for giving way. What we are saying is that, there is an emergency in Police. But lack of planning on anybody’s part should not rush another authority. We know that Parliament works through committees. 

So, on that matter, circumventing the work of the committee will bring an anomaly. So, with all humility, I move that this matter be referred to the committee to scrutinise all these anomalies so that Parliament does not waste time. 

12.08
MS JOY ATIM ONGOM (Independent, Woman Representative, Lira): Thank you, Madam Speaker. In his statement, the minister moved a motion for this Parliament to suspend the rule and the justification he gave us, I can see here, one of them is that Police have entered in the fourth quarter and they have no money. They had allocated them about Shs 19 billion. Madam Speaker, in part three of his statement, he is saying that the supplementary is to cater for the outstanding bills and utilities: electricity, water, feeding, in operation, fuel, maintenance, vehicles and the rest of it.

We are here for a supplementary. A supplementary comes about in a situation of emergency and we are seeing a situation where this Parliament failed to appropriate funds for fuel, for vehicle maintenance of the Police, for electricity, for water and we are calling it an emergency, when we are about to appropriate –(Interruption)

MR MUWUMA: Thank you very much, hon. Member, for yielding the Floor. It is true that Police came up with a budget. If I come up there and say, “I will not be able to run all my activities in a financial year, I need Shs 100”, then Finance comes and says, “I am giving you Shs 60 instead of Shs 100”, it is no crime for me to come at the end of the year and say, “You people, I am unable to run my operations.” That is why you see police patrol cars are parked; they are not able to carry out their duties.

Honourable members, I want to remind ourselves. Over the weekend, a Jaguar bus from Western Uganda was robbed because of the absence of the patrol cars plying the high way. What I have to tell you is that, Police as of now are incapacitated. Please, bear with the situation and provide resources for the operation of the Police. Thank you very much. 

MS ATIM ONGOM: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am an accountant and I know that when they budget and it is approved, and Finance releases less, it is upon Finance to see what they can do, because as Parliament, we have approved and we are aware of what we have approved. It is my humble request that if possible – we are not opposed to this supplementary. We like our workers and we want their conditions to be improved. If possible, let Ministry of Finance give us the approved budget, what has been released to the different departments and ministries. That is what we want. The approved, the releases, then we also see what we appropriated in the first schedule. We want to see.

When they come back with the second schedule, that is how we can help them. We are not opposed to this. I am seeing a situation where Lira Referral Hospital in my district is affected. Can I believe that they recruited new doctors and nurses? Are these not people who were already on the payroll? What affected their payment? We want to know so that we can appropriate some of this money.

It is true that it is Parliament’s role to appropriate funds but we give it to the respective committee, which is responsible for scrutinising this so that they analyse it and report to us and then we work on it. 

12.13
MS MARGARET KIBOIJANA (NRM, Woman Representative, Ibanda): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The good thing with figures is that, they speak for themselves. I have been looking at the justification of the minister. Whereas he said that he needed Shs 32.3 billion, he says Shs 19.5 billion was of a recurrent nature and it was actually approved by Cabinet. However, Shs 12.8 billion, which he says is for capital development was even never approved by Cabinet. Cabinet, in its wisdom, saw that this Shs 12.8 billion was not urgent because for capital development, you can take your time and you can even operate within the coming budget.

Therefore, Madam Speaker, from the submission of some of the Members, I am actually convinced that the motion is actually defective. I would wish that Members recommend that this goes back to the Committee on Budget. (Applause) They scrutinise all these figures and by the time we come here, everything is streamlined and is clear to each one of us. 

Definitely, all of us want to pass the budget. Indeed, the staff in health, even in Ibanda, are suffering; they have not received salaries. Yet, when you look back, I remember that we passed a supplementary that was catering even for salaries. But as I speak, I am concerned – I would not want us to be stampeded in passing figures that are not right. 

I support the motion that it goes back to the Committee on Budget for scrutiny and they come up with the figures that we can understand, which we shall pass expeditiously. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Before hon. Katuntu comes, join me in welcoming teachers and pupils of Kiira View Secondary School Butagayarepresented by hon. Mukayi and hon. Nabirye. You are welcome. (Applause)

12.15
MR ABDU KATUNTU (FDC, Bugweri County, Iganga): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. We seem to be wasting your time because whoever drafted this motion was not cognisant of our Rules of Procedure. What the minister seeks to do, as rightly pointed out by hon. Otto, is to suspend Rule 47, which talks about only notice. Even if we are to uphold the hon. minister’s motion now, we would be back to square one, because business would then be required under Rule 161 and 177 to go to the committee. So, what are we debating about? 

I think Government needs to act a little bit better, because some of these would not be mistakes and you drag us here for two hours talking about nothing. (Laughter) You are supposed to seek suspension of Rule 161 and Rule 177, then we would be debating that. Instead, you have to talk about Rule 47 and we are debating Rule 161 and Rule 177. Who drafted this motion for you? 

Madam Speaker, all of us are aware that there are critical areas that need immediate financing and that is – actually, I do agree because of the criminality going on in the country today, we need to have an effective police force. For example, if there is robbery and I picked a telephone and called the Police, Police should be there as soon as possible. They would need fuel, they would need a vehicle, which is functional and if they have run out of money, they would need the money, if the money is there. That should not even be a debate. The workers have to be paid. 

I appreciated what the Minister of State for Public Service said - at the time of recruitment, there were workers who were recruited and there is no money. Madam Speaker, you cannot have health workers working without being paid. We are putting our lives and the lives of our people, who access government health units in danger.

What do I propose as a way forward, other than wasting time? We are debating a different rule and the motion is seeking to do a different thing. I would propose that, Madam Speaker, you can evoke your powers and close this debate right now and give the Budget Committee the shortest time possible to come up with a brief report and we sort this thing out. It does not matter whether it is one day, two hours, the afternoon or even if they came with a report this afternoon, I am sure we would pass it. We would pass it as long as they can now justify and they have looked at the figures such that we do not turn ourselves into – nobody is even looking at these figures now. So, maybe we can give them a short time – even this afternoon, after lunch we can come - or tomorrow or Sunday or any time and we pass the figures. But as of now –

MS MBAGUTA: Madam Speaker, I do appreciate hon. Katuntu’s proposal but I want to give information that for this financial year, we must cut off and pay public officers by the 20th of this month. We must close. 

So, now that you are saying that the “shortest possible time” – I do appreciate it but the payroll, Madam Speaker, is a process.We must process the payroll and close them by the 16th latest so that we are able to pay salaries of public officers by 20th as we close, as part of the procedure.

MR KATUNTU: We do appreciate exactly what is going on - (Interruption)

MR JAMES BABA: Madam Speaker, I would like to very much appreciate what hon. Katuntu said and I also want to appreciate his commitment to see that we move forward by the way that he has suggested. But in respect to the Police, we are on “drip” and we cannot move. (Laughter) Operations have become impossible! We needed this money as of yesterday. We are the first at a scene of disaster. (Laughter) There have been very many cases of accidents. 

THE SPEAKER: Now, honourable members, it is because I was informed of the emergency that I invited you to meet today. However, what I have to say is that the supplementary schedule has been properly laid but it is also clear that there are some very glaring gaps in the schedule and I think that if we insist on proceeding without correcting them, it will not be good for this House. (Applause)

So, I want to send the same to the Budget Committee to consider it and when you are ready, you will let me know. The House is adjourned.

(The House rose at 12.24 p.m. and adjourned sine die.) 
