Disclaimer: The electronic version of the Official Report of the proceedings of Parliament (Hansard) is for information purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Office of the Clerk to Parliament.




Thursday, 27 June 2019

Parliament met at 2.04 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this sitting. We have come to that time when things get a bit complicated. When you start unwinding a roll and it gets to the small part, it moves faster. Therefore, we have been unwinding the roll of this Session of Parliament and it is going towards the centre and the time is running faster. That complicates things in many ways.

It is for that reason that a decision had been taken that we could use this period, immediately after the commencement of the Fourth Session of Parliament, to do as much as we can and use as long a time as possible, to be able to achieve that. However, even in the process of that, we still have some challenges. If you look at the Order Paper today, I see the substantive business, which is supposed to have been handled today is item 7 - the Kampala Capital City Authority (Amendment) Bill.

You will recall that when this matter last came, there were issues raised by hon. Sseggona and other honourable members about certain changes that needed to be made to this Bill. I referred this matter back to the minister and the members who were concerned to have a discussion. They reported here that they had a discussion and that they had agreed on some amendments. I informed them that those amendments should be brought to the House and should be circulated so that when we come to process the Bill, we move faster because there is agreement from Government and from those who think the Bill, as presented, would complicate rather than simplify the workings of KCCA.

However, as I speak and the matter is coming up this afternoon, there are no amendments. That applies to what we have on business to follow. If you look at item 15 on business to follow, we have Bills. The discussion on the Administration of Judiciary Bill came and the minister said they needed to have discussions with the chairperson and some members of the committee so that they could harmonise. 

I am told that they met and harmonised but the results of that harmonisation and the documentation that came out of it we are not privy to. We do not know what has happened and yet it would have helped us, as Parliament, to understand what we need to do to improve on the Bill; so, we don’t know. The same applies to the private member’s Bill by hon. Sseggona. There were issues that the Bill needed to be improved and that was a few months back. There seems to be no activity regarding these Bills.

The same applies to the Sugar Bill. I gave one month and I actually remember very clearly that I said when you start a journey and you get lost along the way, you go back to where you started the journey from and look at it again as it can give you guidance on how to proceed. I had guided that we could look at the original Bill as it provides more fundamental guidance on the issue of regulation of the sugar sector better than what had been proposed later.

It is over a month and I have not heard anybody say anything about the Sugar Bill. The honourable minister is here, I do not know if you want to say something, at this stage, about where we are with this Bill.

2.09
THE MINISTER OF TRADE, INDUSTRY AND COOPERATIVES (Ms Amelia Kyambadde): Mr Speaker, it is still under consultations.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I gave one month.

MS KYAMBADDE: You gave us one month but the President also asked us to give him some time but we will communicate, Mr Speaker. I pray that you give me another month or two weeks.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let us agree on two weeks, honourable minister.

MS KYAMBADE: Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let us see if we can look at this Bill that was returned to Parliament by the President. Let us give a timeline of two weeks to come back to this and we see how to proceed.

In addition, several other Bills - the National Graduate Scheme Bill was active on the Order Paper. Is the chairperson of the committee or any member of the committee ready? It is a private member’s Bill, which was active but now it is inactive.

Honourable members, let me give this notice. We will proceed with or without a report of the committee for some of these Bills, including the National Graduate Scheme Bill because we have done that before and it has helped. We will not stop. Therefore, if the committee is not ready to handle this, we will have challenges waiting for them.

If you look at the rest of business on business to follow, some of them have been overtaken by events. Others have been handled but they are still there. The notice of business to follow is five pages of the Order Paper and most of them are really not substantive enough to take the time of Parliament. Therefore, I will have occasion to go through them together with you and we see the ones that have been overtaken by events and those that could still be active and we see how to handle them.

If you look at item 25 on business to follow, for example, we have the motion on Bank of Uganda still lingering there. I thought that matter had been exhaustively handled. I think I will use this time to say it should be removed from business to follow because the matter of Bank of Uganda and the closure of banks has been sufficiently handled. The Speaker even gave guidance when the COSASE committee wanted to reopen some of these things. Clerk, please kindly remove it from business to follow on the Order Paper. 

That also applies to Item No. 26. You will recall that we referred this matter to the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline to deal with the situation that was becoming very difficult. The work of the committee, its processes and the time has passed and therefore, it may not be necessary for us to activate this particular item. I also advise that item 26 on the business to follow now be struck off from the business of the House because the matters have now subsided. 

In addition, there are several others, which I cannot go into now but we need to look at these things again and see if some of them still remain active or some of them now need to be removed from the Order Paper.

For example, in business to follow on item 16(h), I wish hon. Paul Mwiru was here. This is about something that happened; 14 people were arrested on 23 December last year and subsequently, we were informed that they were released but the matter is still here on the Order Paper. How do we proceed like this? We need to remove such items from the Order Paper so that we see how to proceed with the rest of the matters.

Otherwise, the ones I have mentioned for example, the one in 16 (n), which talks about hon. Paul Mwiru on the 14 people that were arrested; subsequently, we were told they were released and the processes were going on. We cannot keep this on the Order Paper. Therefore, it is accordingly also removed.

There is also item 16 (f) which has hon. Muhammad Nsereko on the refusal to obey the ruling of the Speaker to stay the issuance of new passports pending an update to the House on the matter. Is it still valid? When was this? How do you suspend the issuance of passports until certain things are briefed? This has been long now. I think we need to get time and get some of these things off the Order Paper so that we deal with substantive matters that remain outstanding. 

There is also item 16 (a) brought forward by hon. Franca Judith Akello - the minister was here three times but the honourable member was not in the House. The day the honourable member came, the minister was not there. How do we handle these things? I think we need to take that opportunity to clear some of these things off the Order Paper. We need to find out if some of them still remain outstanding so that we remove them from the business to follow in the House to we deal with substantive matters that remain.

As the session begins, we also expected a clear guidance from the Leader of Government Business in the House on what you call the legislative agenda for this session of Parliament; a clear guidance coming from the Rt. Hon. Prime Minister to guide us about the scale of work that we require for this session so that we see how we can structure it. 

Honourable members, there is, therefore, need for us to update ourselves and the committees on all these Bills that I have mentioned, which remain in situations whose status we do not quite understand. This will enable us deal with them comprehensively. There is business but that business is not ready. We will make a communication to that effect. Thank you very much. 

2.16
MR THEODORE SSEKIKUBO (NRM, Lwemiyaga County, Ssembabule): Thank you, Mr Speaker. You have rightly pointed out the dilemma faced by this House. It is true that business had been put off the Order Paper. It was also very important for your decision that there was consultation, particularly in the case of the Kampala Capital City Authority (KCCA) Bill, which had generated heated debate on this Floor. It is now item number seven on the Order Paper. 

May I seek your indulgence, Mr Speaker, that since the item is now on the Order Paper, it acts a notice so that the very important ideas behind the consultation are not lost? We can have this moved to next week, within which period all the stakeholders would be brought on board and prepare so that debate can move smoothly. This Bill is very critical not only to members of Parliament of Kampala but to all Ugandans. 

I, therefore, seek your indulgence that you allow the matter be put for business next week when we have got feedback from all stakeholders. I thank you, Mr Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is what I said. I said the committees and everybody involved in these processes should finalise and submit the proposed amendments in advance so that the House can understand what we need to do with them so that we can quickly deal with the Bills; not just the KCCA Bill but also the Administration of the Judiciary Bill, the Law Revision and Miscellaneous (Amendment) Bill and several others that I have listed. All of them have come to the House before and they have been active on the Order Paper but we are not able to process them because of these difficulties. 

Therefore, all amendments due to these Bills should be brought and circulated in advance so that when we go to committee stage of these Bills, members know exactly what the proposed amendments are and they have understood them. In that instance, we will be able to process them quickly rather than coming and we begin “shopping” for amendments in the wrong “shops.” That is what I requested from the Members. 

2.20
Ms MARGARET RWABUSHAIJA (NRM, Workers Representative): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I stand to present a matter of urgent concern, which is a challenge to the human rights norms, particularly equal opportunities. This comes from the fact that our netball national team, last year in August, qualified to participate in the Netball Team World Cup Tournament, which is due in two weeks. It will start on 12 July 2019 and end on 21 July 2019. 

However, many people including the players are bothered and they are not certain whether they will travel to participate, in spite of the fact that they participated and qualified for the tournament. 

What is happening right now is that our Uganda Cranes Football Team is actively participating in the Africa Cup of Nations and everybody is excited because they are making us proud. However, as far as the ladies are concerned, our national netball team might not participate in their tournament because they do not have the money right now. 

Nonetheless, as Ugandans and Government, we should be proud of them because in the past, these ladies have done us proud. Their ratings are very high and so, we are optimistic that if they participated, they would do wonders for us, as they have done in the past. 

Therefore, my concern is that something has to be done and my prayer is that the Government tells us, particularly the Ministry of Education and Sports, why the netball team cannot participate using the money that is always allocated to the ministry. 

Also, at this critical time, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should tell us where we stand because we know that games and sports are a unifying factor as far as this country is concerned.

I also pray that the honourable members of this House try to encourage the people concerned to ensure that our netball team participates in the upcoming tournament so that we are not embarrassed. 

2.22
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Thank you very much, honourable, for raising this issue. We have been brought to notice on the urgency of the matter by the Ministry of Education and Sports. We are working with them to ensure our team participates in the games; we are handling it internally to ensure that happens. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, will our team participate? Is that the assurance you are giving the House? Will the funds be available for the team to participate?

MR BAHATI: We are working on it, Mr Speaker. As you know -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It is a direct question and it requires a direct response.

MR BAHATI: Mr Speaker, as you know, the financial year is ending today. Therefore, the two ministries are working together to see whether we can raise money to send to the team. However, the financial year is also opening on Monday and there is an opportunity that we can work to raise the money. I will give concrete information at the next sitting of Parliament.

THE CHIEF OPPOSITION WHIP (Mr Ibrahim Ssemujju): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and thank you, honourable minister, for giving way. We have just passed the budget for the next financial year. What the Ministry of Education and Sports calls “sports and physical-” as a subsector, the entire budget is Shs 19 billion. I think it went up last year because of the Akii Bua Stadium to about Shs 36 billion. 

Last week, we were here speaking about the Uganda Cranes. The clarification I seek from the minister in charge of finance is whether the policy of this Government is that sports is going to be handled by way of hand-outs. You have the national football team in Cairo, they put a request like you did last week and you said that you were processing.

The national netball team qualified for the World Cup and you told Parliament that you were also doing something. Cricket comes next week – the clarification I seek is whether it is the policy of this Government that that is how you are going to invest in sports by ad hoc receipt of petitions either through the members of Parliament or the Speaker like it was the case with the Uganda Cranes? The broader issue is that don’t you think you need to invest and not handle these issues as they happen?

MS WINFRED KIIZA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I know for a fact that when our teams go out there to play, they market our country. I would like to tell you that our teams are doing perfectly well in marketing Uganda and reflecting it as the Pearl of Africa; not only in hospitality but also in sports. 

What hurts me is that we have not given sports the adequate attention it deserves, for the sportsmen and women of this country, to be proud of nurturing their talents and to be proud that they belong to this country that will help them to go to the next stage.

Mr Speaker, every time there is a tournament in which our people are supposed to participate, they always come to Parliament to collect money from the Members of Parliament. On many occasions, we have facilitated these teams from our own salaries and emoluments and Members are not happy that we are facilitating the budget of the country and our contributions are not captured in the national budget.

However, what I would like the minister to clarify, is whether every time the netball team is going to play, it will be a matter of begging the House. The other day when the budget was being read, His Excellency, the President of the Republic of Uganda drummed and thumped up for the Uganda Cranes but he did not even mention the She Cranes, yet both teams are teams of the nation and have played for this country.

As we speak right now, the girls are in the camp and their worry is whether they are going to pack their bags and even be able to meet the hotel bills of where they are now. They were informed that the money was approved and it is only the delivery of the money that is becoming a problem.

Honourable minister, we would like you to clarify to us – (Interjection) – yes, the same problem occurred even last year. The other day when they were going for the World Cup in Sydney, it was the same problem. We had to solicit for money amongst ourselves. Is it going to be the order of the day that when our national team is going out to make us proud – and yesterday, we were all glued on television seeing how the national team is doing. The Speaker was even compelled to stop the Session of Parliament because Members wanted to go and cheer their team. If she had not resisted, Members wanted to go and cheer. Can I be clarified whether it is going to be a matter like the honourable Chief Whip mentioned that every time our teams are going to perform on behalf of the country – (Member timed out.)

MR BAHATI: Mr Speaker, if I can first finish these two.

MS NAMBOOZE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to hear the minister clarifying whether as a country, we own these national teams. Does Uganda own the Cranes? If we own them, how do we come in in the management of this team; the She Cranes and all these national teams that represent us at the international tournaments?

Last week, the minister told us that he was going to work on the possibility and fund the relaying of the AFCON football matches, which are going on in Egypt now. However, to date, there is nothing on Uganda Broadcasting Corporation (UBC) yet you promised this House that you were going to work on it. The football matches are going on and they are not being relayed. I would like to know how far he has gone with that commitment. 

MR BAHATI: Mr Speaker, UBC is on and you need to watch that. I would like to retaliate that sports is at the core agenda of the NRM Government. We have supported sports throughout the years despite the difficulties. Some of these teams have started performing excellently and we would like to thank and assure them that we will support them. Some of the teams and these games have been coming when we are not prepared for them –(Interjection)– Yes, sometimes that is why they come abruptly. 

However, beginning with the next financial year, we have increased the budget for sports and hope that in the next financial year, we will not get problems with the games that are going on.

MR SSEMUJJU: Mr Speaker, we have just passed the budget and you have less figures because last year, Akii Bua Stadium factored into the budget of sports. Is the minister responsible for finance in order to tell a lie to Parliament, which actually processed this budget that the sports budget has been increased?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, has the budget for sports been increased?

MR BAHATI: Mr Speaker, to the best of my knowledge, we added money to the sports budget and even hon. Ibrahim Ssemujju, a few minutes ago, said that we have increased it. It is really unfair for him to come on the Floor and put me to order on something he has confirmed to the House that we have increased. 

We added on some resources and we are doing a lot to develop talent. As you know, we are developing some stadiums in Karamoja and Kapchorwa. We are also doing other things to ensure that we develop talent in this country. The issue, which has been asked this afternoon, is whether our netball team is going to participate in the games on 12 July 2019. The answer is, “Yes.” 

I would like to seek the permission of the House to give the Executive some time to sort out this matter because it is an internal matter that has got to be sorted. Our team is however going on 12th July and we pray for them that they excel and give their country the pride it deserves.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister. If you had said that at the beginning, we would be handling other matters by now. 

2.33
MS WINFRED KIIZA (FDC, Woman Representative, Kasese): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to raise a matter of national importance regarding the shooting of people in Mpondwe-Lhubiriha Town Council. Mpondwe-Lhubiriha Town Council owns an abattoir. There is a company that has a Memorandum of Understating (MoU) with the local government to operate the abattoir. The company is called Babwirana Butchers’ Association. 

The company got into an MoU – I think it was a renewal of an MoU – in 2016 and the local government gave them the mandate to run the abattoir up to the 2021. The understanding was that the town council was sorting out issues of land to relocate the abattoir in a proper place so that it owns its own place as an abattoir. 

Currently, the local government rents a place from the Adventist Church. It is what they had designated as an abattoir. However, after they had rented the place, they then called out for bidders to run this abattoir. 

Mr Speaker, in 2018, one other party wanted to start another abattoir and interested the local government in this facility. The local government was not in agreement with him initially on whether he should start another abattoir when there is one that is being run under the auspices of Government.

The local community where the next investor wanted to put the abattoir was not comfortable with putting an abattoir in an area that is meant for habitation by the population. The local community resisted the initial stages of the investment and they advised against it, including the planner. 

Later on, many officers got into the issue. The matter eventually went political and then the argument of the local leaders was, “We can’t stop people from investing. Let us allow the two investors to operate.”

Along the way, the investor who came in second could not get market for his cows –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable, get to the urgent matter please.

MS KIIZA: I wanted to give you that background so that by the time I make the prayer, you know where I am coming from.

The urgent matter is that on 5th May, the Director of the Internal Security Organisation wrote to the RDC of Kasese District proposing to him that these traders should operate the markets on an alternate system – this one operates on this market day and the other operates on the other market day. I think the traders found this a bit uncomfortable. 

On 19 June 2019, the RDC of Kasese wrote and identified this as a matter of security and gave the dates when one should operate the market and the other should not. 

Therefore, on Sunday, as the traders were ferrying in their cattle for sale, the RDC, working with the DISO and the DPC of Bwera, deployed around the abattoir. They started shooting people and they injured three. One had his leg amputated and he is in Bwera Hospital. The other was in critical condition and Bwera Hospital could not manage his condition; he was rushed to Mbarara Hospital. He is a trader from Bushenyi. Many other people were injured in the fracas because there was ammunition and there was tear-gassing of people who had come to the market.

The prayer of the people is that markets are always determined by the forces of demand and supply and we should not see a situation where Government determines who should sell and who should not sell; at what time one should sell and what time they should not. 

On the contrary, that Government decides to protect a person with whom they do not have a memorandum of understating against the official person with the MoU with Government – in other words, the one running business on behalf of Government. 

We, therefore, pray that the Minister of Internal Affairs gives us an explanation as to why the markets should be turned into matters of security and you end up shooting people who came into the market places.

Secondly, whether it is appropriate that we begin telling people when to go to the market and which market to go to, when we are saying that we have a liberalised economy – where markets should be determined by the forces – (Member timed out.)

2.40
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Obiga Kania): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am hearing about the shooting on Sunday for the first time. I have not been briefed.

Secondly, over issues of location of markets; the Minister of Internal Affairs does not hold responsibility. Therefore, I have to find out whether what the Member said is true or not and why. 

Thirdly, the letter, which the Member quoted, is from the Director-General of ISO. I suggest or I will undertake to bring it to the attention of the minister in charge of security. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Clerk, please extract these matters, forward the letters to the concerned people and draw this to their attention so that we can have responses from the sectors involved in this.

The problem with these kinds of letters is that I have no way of verifying them. Please pass it to the Clerk and she will handle them. (Interjection) They will not deny. 

Honourable members, in the public gallery this afternoon, we have 36 pupils from Kira Primary School together with staff from their funders, Building Hope Project. They fund 46 children in the school. They are represented by hon. Moses Grace Balyeku. They are here to observe the proceedings of the House. Please join me in welcoming them. (Applause)

We also have a delegation of 15 constituents from Kiboga District. They are represented by hon. Keefa Kiwanuka and hon. Ruth Nankabirwa. They are here to observe the proceedings; please join me in welcoming them. (Applause)

LAYING OF PAPERS IN ACCORDANCE WITH RULE 32 OF THE RULES OF PROCEDURE

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the Member for Koboko here? (Interjections) Let us go to the next item.

MR KATUSABE: Mr Speaker, I would like to appreciate you for the opportunity. My Woman Member of Parliament has just raised a fundamental point that three people were critically shot and are fighting for their lives. Mr Speaker, as I stand before you, another deployment was made in the same community and people were again critically injured. 

I really appreciate the minister’s response but in the intermediate term, what is it that Government is going to do? We have two groups that are fundamentally clashing and police and other security agencies are violently breaking up these communities.
 
Mr Speaker, this particular community is at the border. If Government does not arrest the situation, negative forces could take advantage.

Therefore, Mr Speaker, wouldn’t it be procedurally right for the minister to undertake or at least bring to the attention of your office what they are going to do in the immediate term because right now there is conflict and what he is talking about is something that will probably help in a week’s time? How can we help people who are caught up in the violent conflict right now? Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: That is exactly what the minister said; that she will contact the District Police Commander (DPC) and advise the House on the findings. Thank you.

MR KATUSABE: What of the time, Mr Speaker?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Well, he will contact the DPC and advise the House. The matter has just come to him now.

MR KATUSABE: Much appreciated.

MR OBIGA: Mr Speaker, in addition to what you have said, I appreciate the right of members of Parliament to come and raise issues on the Floor. However, in my view – with your permission – it would help me, the ministry and Government if a Member could get a matter of national importance and bring it to our attention immediately for us to take action. A Member could then come to the Floor and raise the matter for the record or for other people to hear. 

However, when a Member waits from Sunday only to come and raise the matter here on Thursday, it becomes difficult for me to say immediately what I am going to do because I do not know what is on the ground. Thank you.

MS WINFRED KIIZA: Mr Speaker, on Monday, I called hon. Jeje Odongo and informed him about the matter. He told me that they were in a Cabinet meeting but that he was going to take appropriate action. Yesterday, I called him but his phone was off. Actually, I even called him this morning but he did not answer my call. 

When I called him in the morning, they called me from the constituency saying that security forces had again deployed the Police Field Force Unit personnel around the market, ready to teargas and shoot people again. That is why I have been forced to raise it here. Otherwise, I had contacted the minister responsible and I thought he would correct the situation before it could go out of hand. 

Therefore, the minister did not guarantee the necessary remedies I had sought before I came to the Floor of the House. Otherwise, I do not like those ambushes as well, especially when it is for purposes of saving lives.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The minister has made the undertaking that he will do the necessary consultations and brief the House. Next item.

RESPONSE BY MINISTER TO THE ISSUE RAISED BY HON. PATRICK OSHABE ON PARTIAL PAYMENT OF SALARIES TO SOME EMPLOYEES OF KASSANDA DISTRICT IN FINANCIAL YEAR 2018/2019

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The Minister of Public Service? Next item.

RESPONSE BY MINISTER TO ISSUES RAISED BY HON. MATHIAS MPUUGA ON THE ALLEGED UNFAIR BID CONDITIONS FOR A TENDER BY MINISTRY OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT FOR THE SUPPLY OF 2,000 MOTOR CYCLES

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Minister of Local Government? Next item.

RESPONSE BY MINISTER TO ISSUES RAISED BY HON. HENRY KIBALYA ON THE LOSSES INCURRED BY SUGARCANE GROWERS IN BUSOGA SUB-REGION DUE TO THE LIMITED CAPACITY OF THE SUGAR MILLERS IN THE REGION TO ABSORB HARVESTED CANE

2.48
THE MINISTER OF TRADE, INDUSTRY AND COOPERATIVES (Ms Amelia Kyambadde): Mr Speaker, the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives wishes to refer to the statement made on sugarcane in Parliament on 28 May 2019 by the Members of Parliament. 

The statement has been uploaded on the iPads and the statement was centred on the excess sugarcane, which the millers are unable to process. The honourable members raised a concern as to why excess sugarcane cannot be exported to the neighbouring countries like Kenya. 

What is the current status of the sugar industry in Uganda?
Some quotations were made here but I am going to refer to the status quo. The existing installed capacity of the sugar mills is about 650 million metric tonnes of sugarcane per year, expected to produce about 600,000 metric tonnes of sugar annually. In practice, the sugar mills have been milling about 430 million metric tonnes annually, producing on average 410,000 tonnes of sugar for the past five years. This is a shortfall of sugarcane supply of about 30-35 per cent caused by lack of sugarcane. 

In 2010, with the coming of the new sugar mills, the production capacity of sugar mills increased in the country. Analytically, since 2014, we witnessed a steady decline of annual sugar production from 413,000 metric tonnes to 354,574 metric tonnes in 2017 and a slight increase to 416,000 metric tonnes in 2018.

We made the following findings on why there exists excess sugarcane:
    i) Two sugar mills – the Sugar Corporation of Uganda Limited (SCOUL) and Kakira Sugar Limited underwent planned annual factory maintenance activities for five to six weeks in the months of May and June 2019 respectively. Kakira Sugar Limited only resumed sugarcane milling on 24 June 2019 while SCOUL resumed on 5 June 2019. 

This caused a gap of one-and-a-half months, amounting to approximately 500,000 metric tonnes of sugarcane. This annual maintenance created a gap in consumption of sugarcane. However, on the resumption of these mills, the situation is expected to normalise soon.

We experienced some incidents of machinery breakdown in nearby sugar mills namely Kamuli, Mayuge Sugar and G.M Sugar Ltd factories. This was at a time when the two large mills were on annual maintenance. 

Reasons why we do not export sugarcane in Uganda 

    1. As explained earlier, sugar production has been dropping from 2014 to 2018 due to lack of sugarcane supply to the mills amidst increased installed capacities. This increased capacity can consume all the sugarcane grown in the country. Therefore, export of sugarcane would further escalate the lack of raw material to the sugar mills.

2. 	Experts recommend that sugarcane, once harvested, should be processed within 36 hours because the sucrose, which is meant to be processed into sugar crystals, deteriorates by bacteria once cane is cut down. This is not good for millers because of low recovery of sugar and also, the farmer will lose money because of loss of weight of cane due to evaporation, which is the basis for cane payment. Mr Speaker, this cannot survive the export of cane to another country.

3. 	It is Government’s policy that export of raw and unprocessed materials such as sugarcane should be avoided to stimulate industrial growth. It is not economically viable to export raw materials, which would otherwise be processed locally for job and wealth creation.

4. 	In spite of the Common Market Protocol, our partner states in the region are reluctant to absorb all our excess sugar in a bid to promote their local industries. We presume that the failure by sugar millers to access the regional market has culminated into the slow absorption of sugarcane.

Mr Speaker, I would like to conclude that the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives is committed to ensure that the status quo is mitigated through the following measures:

    i. Prevail over the millers to phase out their annual maintenance schedule
    ii. Engage millers and out growers for an amicable solution 
    iii. Engage our partner states to abide with the Common Market Protocol. For example, the bilateral negotiations with Kenya, Tanzania and Democratic Republic of Congo.

Mr Speaker, my prayer is that the august House grants the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives one month to work on interventions to stabilise the sector to normalcy and report to this House. I wish to submit. 

Mr Speaker, allow me to lay this report on the Table.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Where is hon. Kibalya? Has he delegated any Member? He has delegated the Member of Bulamogi. Do you have any supplementary questions?

2.56
MR KENNETH LUBOGO (NRM, Bulamogi County, Kaliro): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and the honourable minister. You may not be aware but sugar manufacturers have made statements to the public that they have the excess sugarcane that they can absorb. Madhvani has made a statement to that effect saying that the sugarcane available is now too much for them to take. You are now telling us that allowing the export will lead to scarcity of raw materials. That is not true, honourable minister.

Mr Speaker, I am wondering whether the minister is aware that there is information out there of manipulation of the weighing scales. It is alleged that in some of these factories, a farmer losses half a ton or a ton when he delivers on a truck.

Finally, the minister’s statement that sugarcane must be processed within 36 hours is very untrue because what is subsisting now does not support you at all. Trucks are parked for up to 10 days with sugarcane loaded on them and here you are telling us that they must be processed in three days. That is not what is happening around the country. (Interruption) Mr Speaker, I can take that information.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, please wind up on your supplementary question.

MR LUBOGO: I would like to conclude by saying, please do not condemn our people to poverty. The steps that you are taking are actually going to keep our people in poverty.

I would therefore like to say that what you have proposed is inappropriate. Our people need to survive; they need to pay schools fees for their children, pay off their debts and service their loans. Therefore, you cannot continue stopping them from exporting cane. Your intervention is inappropriate and I would request the House to reject the statement from the minister. Thank you.

MS KYAMBADDE: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. As you probably heard when I was beginning my statement, I informed members that the factories were under repair and therefore, they could not absorb all the sugarcane at that time. 

Secondly, the issue of weighing scales is something we are going to establish - (Interruption)

MR KISA: Thank you very much, honourable minister, for giving way. Mr Speaker, the minister has stated clearly that the factories were undergoing renovations and this caused excess sugarcane. The clarification I am seeking is, it is already on the record that after factories realise that there is sugarcane that they are not willing to buy, they reduce the prices per ton. For example, Madhvani has reduced prices from Shs 128,000 to Shs 120,000 like any other monopoly would do. 

Therefore, honourable minister, could you clarify to this House whether this is in line with the explanation you are giving as to why sugarcane farmers must not export their raw material to where the market is?

MS KYAMBADDE: Mr Speaker, the issue of weighing scales is something we will raise with the millers. It is not something I can comment on because that is malpractice but I am going to raise it to them.

On the issue of 36 hours, I did not say that sugarcane cannot be processed at all. However, if you want a better yield, it should be within those days. After that the quality is not so good. So, I still pray - the issue of exporting sugarcane is out of order, if you want to promote our industries; we are not going to allow it.

Give us time to make the interventions with the millers and then we come back to you but we are not going to export raw sugar at all. I wish to submit.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, this question was raised under Rule 46 and we know the rules. When a matter is raised as an urgent matter under Rule 46, the Member who raised it is only entitled to a supplementary question; it does not attract a debate.

The minister has requested that she be given time to come back to the House with her own statement. That statement will attract a debate; she has asked for a period of one month. Can we give her one month to come back with a comprehensive statement to deal with this matter because the housing of the urgent matter that was raised cannot sustain a debate. Honourable members, let us follow our rules; they help us.

Can we give her one month or a shorter time? Okay, two weeks. Let the minister come back in two weeks for us to have a debate on this particular issue with all the evolving issues. I so guide on this matter.

MS KYAMBADDE: Mr Speaker, I concede.	

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, the minister please come with a statement, which will now attract a debate then we go exhausted with the matters but if we use wrong housing for our debates, we will be messing up our own rules of procedure and I am not the kind of person who can allow that. 

RESPONSE TO A QUESTION RAISED BY HON. BETTY NAMBOOZE BAKIREKE ON POSSIBLE DOUBLE TAXATION OF OWNERS OF RENTABLE PROPERTY BY LOCAL GOVERNMENTS AND UGANDA REVENUE AUTHORITY

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The minister was here what has happened? Let’s go on to the next item.

MOTION SEEKING LEAVE OF PARLIAMENT TO INTRODUCE A PRIVATE MEMBER’S BILL ENTITLED: “THE PARLIAMENTARY PENSIONS AMENDMENT BILL, 2019”

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we will receive this motion but also remember that at 4 o’clock we have Prime Minister’s Question Time. You might want to have issues generated so that we can have a discussion with the Prime Minister at that time. 

3.06
MR REMIGIO ACHIA (NRM, Pian County, Nakapiripirit): Mr Speaker, I am here to move a Motion seeking leave of Parliament to introduce a Private Member's Bill entitled, "The Parliamentary Pensions (Amendment) Bill, 2019."

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the motion seconded? Okay, the motion is seconded by the members for: Ngora County, Workers, Rukungiri Municipality, Busia District, Kasese District, West Budama South and Kajara County. Would you like to speak to your motion, honourable member? 

MR REMEGIO ACHIA: This motion is moved under Article 79 and 94 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda and Rule 120 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament. 

It reads: “WHEREAS Article 79 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda empowers Parliament to make laws on any matter for the peace, order, development and good governance of Uganda;

AND WHEREAS Article 94 of the Constitution and Rule 120 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament empower a Member of Parliament to move a Private Member's Bill;

AWARE that the Parliamentary Pensions Act, 2007 establishes a Parliamentary Pensions Fund for the payment or granting of pensions or retirement benefits to members of Parliament and staff of the Parliamentary Commission, among other matters;

FURTHER AWARE THAT the same Act makes provisions for a portion of the members benefits to be assigned for medical treatment and allows members seeking early retirement to access their accrued benefits upon the recommendation of the Uganda Medical Board, among others;

ACKNOWLEDGING THAT the implementation of the law has posed some challenges to the operations of the scheme when it comes to distribution of death benefits to relatives and dependants of deceased’s members, for timely access to funds by members or pensioners who urgently need them owing to the lengthy and bureaucratic process involved in obtaining a recommendation from the Uganda Medical Board, among others;

CONVINCED THAT amendment of the Act is necessary to promote good governance of the scheme and enhancement of efficient operations of the scheme, in as for as payment and distribution of death benefits of members and pensioners, access for funds for medical treatment and early retirement of members are concerned;

NOW THEREFORE be it resolved by this House that: The House grants me leave to introduce a Private Member’s Bill, for an Act entitled, "The Parliamentary Pensions (Amendment) Bill, 2019" a draft of which is hereto attached and I do order the publication of the said Bill in preparation for its first reading.”
I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, this motion has been moved and seconded. Honourable member, would you like to speak to your motion briefly.

MR REMEGIO ACHIA: Mr Speaker, The Parliamentary Pensions Fund was established by this House in 2007 and we initially started with a sum of Shs 20 billion.

Today the scheme has a total net asset value of over Shs 250 billion and a membership of about 980 most of whom are staff of Parliament.

With the implementation, there have arisen a number of challenges that we need to bring to the House for amendment to improve its efficiency. One of them is a clause that requires a Member or staff of this Parliament who gets sick - the Act is very clear that this person must be able to access funds from the scheme for medical treatment either in the country or abroad.

We have faced a number of challenges, one of them being that a Member must get permission and clearance from the Uganda Medical Board. From our experience, we have lost members because the Uganda Medical Board did not find time to sit to clear a Member to get funds in order to get that treatment.

The object of this Bill is to amend the PPS Act, 2007, to replace the requirement for a recommendation of the Uganda Medical Board, with a recommendation from a medical practitioner approved by the board, in cases where a Member or a pensioner seeks to use a portion of their benefits for medical treatment either in the country or abroad.

We have also faced a problem - every member here is required to fill a form with us indicating the beneficiaries of the savings there, in the event of death.

Mr Speaker, a Member clearly states that; “When I die so and so should get the money” but we have faced a problem. Our PPS Act is very clear that we must nominate beneficiaries but we have faced a challenge where people who are relatives, friends and other in-laws go and get letters of administration and they come and say that the benefits are subject to the Succession Act.

This means that it totally conflicts and contradicts the rationale of asking everybody here to declare the person who will get the benefits in the event of death. So, we would like to exclude the application of the laws on succession to a member’s pensioner’s death benefits so that we say it is not subject to insolvency; it cannot be attached for any problem and is not subject to succession. In the event of death, whoever has been nominated by the member receives the money instead of going to court.

In that event also, I would encourage members to be clear about the persons they want to get the money because I have had challenges as the chairperson. Colleagues here and staff put their girlfriends. The next day, they come back and tell us to remove that one and put another one. (Laughter)

The third objective is to repeal the application of the vesting scale to a member’s benefits upon early retirement. When you are here, every month, you contribute five per cent of some money for your pension and Government gives you 30 per cent, which is double that.

In the law, there is a vesting scale that if you leave service before five years, you will not be given the 30 per cent contribution by Government, even though it is your money. We want to amend the law to remove that. It is your money; it is a contribution while you were serving and working with us. We want to remove that vesting scale so that in the event that you leave Parliament as an MP or staff, you are entitled to receive your contribution, as well as the contribution from Government to you.

Lastly, we are also interested in amending one of what we call the asset classes. Under Section 67 of the Uganda Retirement Benefits Regulatory Authority (URBRA) Act, it specifies the asset classes, either treasury bonds or equities and then makes allocations on those classes.

In that asset class specification under Section 67 of the Uganda Retirement Benefits Regulatory Authority Act, the asset class and percentages for investment of the scheme funds are skewed. There is no class called “loans” so we would like to amend the asset classes to introduce a specific asset class called “loans”, so that we have an opportunity to even provide a percentage of our assets; how much will be available for Members to borrow. This is one of the most lucrative and fast growing asset classes in the scheme right now.

Mr Speaker, I can tell you that every month, I receive an average of half a billion shillings in terms of interest payments from colleagues who have borrowed. When you borrow and you come to us, we redistribute the profit that you pay to us back to you at the end of the year. We think that this is a very good thing.

These are the key tenets of the objects of why I am bringing this amendment and seeking leave of this House to introduce this Bill so that we can correct these things, for the benefit and efficient operations of the scheme. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. There is hon. Mugume who is seconding the motion. Would you like to speak on this?

3.16
MR ROLAND MUGUME (FDC, Rukungiri Municipality, Rukungiri): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to second the motion to grant us leave of Parliament to introduce a private member’s Bill entitled, “The Parliamentary Pensions (Amendment) Bill, 2019, because of the following reasons.

I am a trustee. I have been on the Board for the last four years. In doing our work, we have been suffering with problems, especially the conflict between the Succession Act and the trusteeship law, as the mover has said. 

While the trusteeship law requires us to respect the wishes of our members, the Succession Act demands for the letters of administration before a person can access the estate of the deceased person. As a trustee, I would like to advise that pension should not form part of the deceased’s estate. It should be treated under the trusteeship law, which requires equality and respect of the member’s wishes. 

On this point, I would like to add to what the mover has said. You are here serving as a Member of Parliament. If you want to leave behind everything you have intact, make sure you move down to our secretariat and fill those forms. We would like to know. Information is power.

Right now as I speak, we do not have any information from some of the Members. We request that you go down to the secretariat and fill the forms. The files are empty so I would like to call upon Members so that in future, we do not see your family members running up and down in the Administrator-General’s office. That one will then be a problem.

So, Mr Speaker, I call upon my colleagues to see this one because pension is my money. It is not anyone’s money; it is my money, I am working and saving so it should not be part of the estate and it is causing us problems.

I would like to also say something about the Uganda Medical Board. Some of these issues – when you are still serving – are not big. However, after you have served - after 2021 - and have lost and then get some challenges, you start to ask where the pension office is. You cannot ask now because you are still serving.

So, the Act, as the mover has said, grants you permission to access part of your benefits for medical treatment but it also requires clearance from the Uganda Medical Board. We all know that the medical board does not sit every day. It takes months to sit and during this time, life can be lost, negating the intention, which was to save life. So, this is why we are recommending the replacement of medical board with a medical practitioner approved by Parliamentary Pensions Board.

Lastly, I support the mover on the issue of providing for other principal signatories to the scheme accounts, besides the Clerk. Because of the nature of the Office of the Clerk to Parliament, the office is busy. Therefore, we are requesting that we have other signatories on the accounts so that in case you have an urgent issue, it can be worked on. 

I would like to give an example. I am the chairman of the loans committee, Parliamentary Pensions Scheme but when the Clerk is out of the away or is on her official duties outside Parliament, we suffer. Members tend to also be impatient because someone wants money. However, because the principal person to sign is one, they cannot be served. So, we feel we should have a law so that we allow other signatories so that when they are three or four, it can help us to move on.

I thank you, Mr Speaker. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, the motion that I propose for your debate is that hon. Remigio Achia, MP Pian County, Nakapiripirit District be granted leave of this House to introduce a Private Member’s Bill entitled, “The Parliamentary Pensions (Amendment) Bill, 2019. 

That is the motion for your debate and the debate starts now on why we need to grant this Member leave to present this Bill.

3.22
MR IBRAHIM SSEMUJJU (FDC, Kira Municipality, Wakiso): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Granting a Member leave to present a Private Member’s Bill should actually be a simple thing. I, however, have questions. I do not want to appear like I am opposed to the motion. 

The pension sector needs reform. The moment you begin moving to ease work for yourselves as legislators and beneficiaries, you present yourselves as a very selfish lot that only care about themselves. We have had proposals from those who are responsible for the pension sector and they were speaking about liberalisation and inclusion – Maybe Kenya, in the region, have nearly 24 per cent of the population covered by various pensions. In Uganda, I think we are not even at 12 per cent. 

The informal sector is being included elsewhere. So, this proposal will make us look like we are extremely selfish. I would, therefore, be reluctant to support this motion except if there will be a similar motion to do with other beneficiaries to reform the –(Interjection)– because you are a beneficiary. The moment you say you do not want any humps when you are driving and then make roads for other people with humps, then you are a very selfish human being. That is the first question.

Secondly, I am also reluctant to remove the Clerk to Parliament to allow the chairperson of the loans committee and maybe someone else to be the ones signing. There must be a reason why humps are put on the roads and you cannot remove them. The Clerk to Parliament does not face the same pressure like we all do here. So, the moment you and the executives are the only ones signing, it would appear as if you want to sign each time an application is filed. You cannot tell me that if you apply for a loan, you cannot wait for two or three days; it must be given immediately. That is the practice of money lenders in town. 

So, I do not want to ease the process because I am not sure it will not be abused. I do not want to make a categorical statement that it will be abused; I fear it might be abused. Therefore, Mr Speaker, before I vote either yes or no, I would like the movers to convince me that they are not going to make Parliament look selfish. For example, before I joined Parliament, I was here as a journalist. The Committee on National Economy then presented a report to Parliament and in their wisdom, they said the moment you consolidate people’s allowances for purposes of pay as you earn, it is illegal. 

What the Members of Parliament and Government did at that time was to go into a deal cutting to exempt Members of Parliament. They said, “Only exempt ours; the rest is okay.” You also know what we did recently. 

Therefore, I am reluctant to continue making Parliament to look extremely selfish. The moment you want to remove inconveniences, you remove for everybody and not for yourselves alone. What will the other pensioners say? Who will come here to help them? In fact, if for anything, we should start with others and then we come last. Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

3.27
MR KENNETH LUBOGO (NRM, Bulamogi County, Kaliro): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have one reservation on the intention of this Bill where the mover says he wants to remove the issue of being subject to the Succession Act from this pension scheme. The Succession Act lists who should benefit when somebody passes on. I think it is very extensive to include as many as possible. To imagine that someone will look too far outside that and maybe leave his money to some friend somewhere is farfetched.

Personally, I have reservations and I think we should not put this as an exception from the Succession Act. If anything, we may need to make an addition to what is provided for in the Succession Act. We only have to do that. However, if a Member of Parliament passes on and leaves a lot of money, the children or maybe the wife cannot benefit from this money because he put a different person somewhere. I think this should not be acceptable. 

I think we must refrain from making an exception that this is exempted from the Succession Act. We can only create a small leverage and make addition to what is provided for in the Succession Act. Thank you. 

3.29
MS BETTY NAMBOOZE (DP, Mukono Municipality, Mukono): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Because it is not easy to get a clearance from the Medical Board, I ended up going to the scheme to borrow my own money at an interest to be able to go for treatment. It was so unfortunate. I should have, therefore, supported this motion very much because I have been a victim. As I speak right now, for six months, I have not been able to go back to the hospital. I have defaulted on treatment for six months because I am still waiting for the Medical Board. 

Mr Speaker, this, however, is not faced by Members of Parliament alone. It is a general problem to all Ugandans. That is why I would like to request my honourable brother to instead seek to change the whole legal regime concerning pensioners in the whole country. 

Mr Speaker, in some countries like Malaysia, even house-helps are on the social security fund. This is a very important sector of life and the fact that we are feeling it as legislators is a wakeup call for us to change all the laws concerning succession and accessing one’s benefits after work.

Lastly, I would like to request you not to allow us, Members of Parliament, to hurt ourselves. When we are still Members of Parliament, we spend a lot of money on the constituencies. Today, I met hon. Silwany running around to get an ex-Member of Parliament out of prison for Shs 12 million. I would like to request you to make it very difficult for a Member of Parliament to access the pension. This is because people spend on the constituencies but we forget about ourselves and our children and then, we live a miserable life after here. 

So, I would like to request my colleague – yes, there is a need to change laws regarding pension and even other social security funds but when it comes to us, Members of Parliament, let us stop spending all our money on the constituencies. Commercialising politics has become a very bad problem. Members of Parliament live miserably after here.

Therefore, I would request that the mover of this motion if it pleases to withdraw it and go and target the whole pension sector for all Ugandans. I would also like to caution colleagues –(Interruption) 

MS KAWOOYA: While I do appreciate my colleague hon. Nambooze’s concern and which is true, I have heard her correctly saying that it must be very restrictive -(Interjection)- very restrictive to access our pension. I would like to be clarified on that. However, if you make it to that, there are some of us who are nearing retirement and we need our pension earlier. Thank you very much.

MS NAMBOOZE: Mr Speaker, as I conclude, people who are retiring should get their pension quickly; not only Members of Parliament but everybody. However, I was throwing a word of caution to colleagues that let us not open this window to access money just because we want to use it in the campaigns. There will be a time when you will need your money after elections or term of office here and we do not want you to die painfully.

It is prudent to protect somebody from himself or herself. In this case, we need to protect hon. Kawooya from herself that she does not consume her money today when she is still earning a salary. Thank you very much.

3.34
MR JACOB OBOTH (Independent, West Budama South, Tororo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I find the previous speakers to be correct. The attraction I have in this Bill was the first intention and objective. The debate here should not be about Members of Parliament being selfish. It is already selfish because it is Parliamentary Pension Scheme. An Act exists in Parliament; we are not doing a new thing.

However, even when God created, He did not create all birds to be ostriches where we can bury our heads and leave our backs. We have weaver birds, cranes; I do not want to be an ostrich that I pretend that everything is fine when it is not.

Tell me, what is more useful to you or your children when something is threatening your own life and you cannot access the said money you have saved for. I hear pension, the development and revolution or liberalisation of our social welfare, which people call pension is still wanting. However, must it stop us from doing what we think we can do now?

The conditions of Members of Parliament and how we operate is very peculiar. Hon. Nambooze, my Member of Parliament from Mukono Municipality -(Interjection)- she is protecting me but forgetting that most important thing you have as first wealth is life.

I have in my phone a message as evidence to support hon. Ssemujju and hon. Nambooze; from a member of my constituency saying he would like to access his money from NSSF but the only ground given is medical and has to go through the process. In Parliament, we say the medical board is such a hierarchy that they do not sit all the time. What better advice or evidence can we get other than that of hon. Nambooze? 

About saving, nobody wants to save. However, this is not about saving but pension; this is about a contribution made by three stakeholders for the welfare of a particular member and not all Members of Parliament - even with the staff. 

The case I would like to distinguish, Mr Speaker, was that when matters are relating to my wellbeing as health and they are making it easy for me to access that money only when I have no any other way to get treatment but through borrowing and accessing my pension; I would support the Bill.

I may not be able to support the Bill to reduce on the bureaucracy of the Clerk. That, as rightly said by hon. Ssemujju, we need some humps. You can easily get an accident on the roads without humps. It should not be so easy for us to get the signature all the time. However, on medical grounds, it is well thought-out that after we have done this, we should have all the authority to think outside the box and do the same for all Ugandans.

The issue of pension in Uganda is a matter that has been handled and is being handled by Government, generally speaking. The exclusion of the Succession Act, for the information of this Parliament, the Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Committee on behalf of this Parliament is processing that Bill.

We should not worry so much; Succession Act is some very old law made long time. It gives percentage to the dependant, customary- it is being streamlined. How I wish that Members get involved when we are processing that Bill so that we enrich the debate and not fear it.

I would see a challenge which hon. Mbogo said; we would be suspects if we remove the Succession Act because if you have your successors in title or would-be beneficiaries and you do not want that law to apply, and then people would suspect us that we have other deals. 

The mover mentioned that a Member would have a girlfriend; no, a Member can also have a boyfriend who is not her husband to put. However, the Member concentrated on the girlfriend as if it is only the male who would do that.

Therefore, my concern and agreement where I would like to invite Members, if the proposed Bill- of course it could be having other things, it is not going to go entirely. However, we would be able not to stifle the process, listen and process this Bill for purposes of accessing it- 

Why do you keep money that could not help yourself and you are interested in leaving it for other people? Those people also have to work. You spend all your time with the insults you face and yet this money cannot help you but help other people. I cannot entertain that. Actually, if your wife and children know that, they will stop working. With the kind of money in the account of hon. Nambooze, they will stop working.

Honourable colleagues, if we cannot help ourselves, as Members and staff of Parliament, we cannot help members of the public. We cannot even speak for them. I beg to submit.

3.42
MR PENTAGON KAMUSIIME (NRM, Butemba County, Kyankwanzi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. This is a good motion as it portrays a good gesture towards streamlining our performance in terms of pension. It will also be of great benefit to the people who are contributing to the scheme. I would like to allay any anxiety about how people may view this. This should be the beginning and set a platform to streamline other schemes, as my honourable colleague said. This is the Parliamentary Pension Scheme but the national pension scheme can surely be rectified after we have sorted out this one.

I would like to raise an important issue concerning how members of pension schemes - and not only the Parliamentary Pension Scheme - can use their money as loans. We are aware that almost everyone is using a loan from a financial institution and we pay a lot of profits there, which profits we shall not share.

Assuming that we were using our own money or that anybody could have access to the money that they have been saving, you accumulate the profits and at the end of the year, you share the dividends. I think this would be beneficial.

About who will claim what a member has left when God has called him, that can be discussed since it is the wish of a Member. A Member may wish to leave everything to a person of his or her choice. Since it is a personal wish, it can be discussed at the next level.

Mr Speaker, I also have reservations on the principal signatory. I believe that we should keep it very tight because we have to be very careful with money issues.

Otherwise, I call upon Members to support this. Let us be seen to start the process of making things better so that the majority of people under NSSF and elsewhere can benefit from their money and not just wait for the money to bury them. It should make their lives better. I actually have the opinion that someone should access this money as early and as young as he leaves service so that it can be of use. I thank you.

3.45
MS LOWILA OKETAYOT (NRM, Woman Representative, Pader): Thank you, Mr Speaker. We have a law in place and during the 10 or so years of implementation, there are some challenges. The mover of the motion has ably highlighted areas where there are practical challenges encountered. For instance, somebody has passed on and there are people who should benefit from the money that has been saved from his labour and you are here stuck with the money. You cannot give it to the beneficiaries because of conflict in the two laws. Should we just look on? I think it is in order that we streamline some of these areas that are making the implementation of this law difficult.

Regarding the issue of medical clearance, just like my colleague, hon. Nambooze, I have also experienced this. It is really difficult. In this case, we are not talking about sitting members of Parliament. If someone wants to take it as an issue of conflict of interest, maybe we will get into that area but we are talking about people out there; people who are dying when they have some money saved which save their lives. Are Members sincerely saying that we should just look on?

I think it is in order for us to grant leave. Let the Bill be tabled and we can get down and look into the details of what will come in the Bill and make the necessary amendments. This is what I would like to submit, Mr Speaker. I thank you.

3.47
MR ABDULATIF SEBAGGALA (Independent, Kawempe Division North, Kampala): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. As members of Parliament and having observed that there is a need for the amendment of our pensions scheme because of what we have gone through and because of what hon. Remigio Achia has outlined, of course, as representatives of the people, I believe that each of us has ever got a complaint from their electorate about how difficult it is to access pensions. We have heard complaints about people lining up and taking months and years without accessing their pension.

I appeal that in as much as we need to make amendments so that we can be in a comfortable zone, let us also look at the pain that our voters go through. Let us see how we can balance things because we are talking about what we have gone through as members of Parliament in as far as accessing our pension and other related concerns. However, these are the concerns that are in the public. If we, as members of Parliament, can go through these pains, how about our voters?

In order to be seen as people’s representatives, if the Government has not come up with a national amendment in as far as the pensions scheme for public servants is concerned, can we request our colleague who has come up with a private member’s Bill specifically for members of Parliament to widen it so that it becomes a general amendment to include even our voters? This is because we know that, that will be seen to cater for and even express concern for our voters.

Mr Speaker, I believe that as members of Parliament, we can, for the time being, stomach the various challenges that we are going through in our pension scheme. Let us first give a share to our voters; the ones who brought us here, before we look at ourselves. I beg to submit.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we need to draw this to a close, reason being that the Prime Minister’s question time is coming up in a few minutes. There are some guidance issues that we need to look at. First of all, Article 94 is clear; it grants a private member an unfettered right to present a private member’s Bill. 

Our rule 120 provides a process of ventilating that request to see whether it does not make any violations.

The same Constitution provides for the restrictions specific to a private member and general to Parliament. Specific to private member is Article 93 on financial implication matters and the Constitution is very strict on that.

However, there are also other general restrictions for the whole Parliament, which would then by implication apply to a private member. Issues of retrospective legislation, derogation of certain kinds of rights but those things are there. These discussions here are meant to help us to come to a reasonable conclusion as to whether it is the proper way to go.

My understanding - and the discussion we have had in the Parliamentary Commission – is that initially, on these amendments that are being proposed now, was that there was a restriction by the mother law on how much the scheme can lend to its members. 

As far as I remember, the Commission said that the law needs to be revised because I think it is five per cent. I think that was the fundamental thing because if it limits how much the fund can lend to its members to five per cent when the request from its members are beyond five per cent, then that restriction is not necessary. That is what we discussed in the Commission.

However, a pension scheme is different from a contributory scheme. It was very deliberate that this was called a pension scheme and so the rules that apply to pensions must apply. Therefore, these proposals should not be to ease access to money, that any time you want, you just get it because then it stops being pension. 

However, it should be able to make members access in another way by borrowing. Borrowing means you are under obligation to refund with interest. 

On the issue of the medical board, the general rule is that those processes must go through the medical board. What we can do is to create an exception and that exception would be that in the event that the medical board is not sitting, then this particular provision would kick in. Otherwise, we cannot say, “do not go to the medical board.” Members, please. 

We can say, “In respect to Parliamentary Pension Scheme, where the Medical Board is not able to sit, the following provisions shall apply” and then you go on. Otherwise, the operating rule should be that the Medical Board should be the key determinant of all medical references. These are issues of principles we need to abide with even when we are Members of Parliament. We cannot make things too easy for us to deplete our investments, which are for the future. 

The rest of the things are discussable but the private members’ request - and I think the Member has over enlarged from what the Commission discussed, this has been a complete departure from what the Commission agreed on.

Therefore, leave is going to be granted but when the Bill finally comes, we should look at it in that light; that we are not here to open up everything so that by the time we are done, we are actually done with our pension. (Laughter) That will be very irregular. Let us protect ourselves from ourselves. (Laughter) We have the authority but those with maximum authority must exercise the greatest restraint on how they exercise that authority and I think we are one of those people and we should apply these things with caution.

I am now going to put the question to the motion whether we should grant the Member leave to present the Bill. Can I put the question? It is about Prime Minister’s Question Time. 

Honourable Minister of Health, do you want to say something?

3.56
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (GENERAL DUTIES) (Ms Sarah Opendi Achieng): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I just want to make one clarification because the issues regarding the Medical Board have been raised here. It is not true that the Medical Board is inaccessible and they do not sit. It sits monthly but in cases of emergency, the Board - any of the members can actually give approval in cases of emergence.

However, what is also true is that we have had cases where people want to travel on public funds for ailments that can actually be treated here. That is where normally the conflict is. There is a lot of political pressure to the Medical Board and that is why when the Board does not give instant approval because they see that this person can actually be treated here, then you hear all these statements that the board is inaccessible.

Otherwise, the Board is available and we have had cases where colleagues have come to me and we have had to reach them. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I will now put the question that hon. Remegio Achia, Member of Parliament for Pian County in Nakapiripirit District be granted leave of this House to introduce a private members’ Bill entitled, “The Parliamentary Pensions (Amendment) Bill, 2019”. I put the question to that motion. I put the question again.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Motion adopted.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, once such leave is granted, the mandate now rests with the department of Government responsible for drafting to assist the honorable member to generate a comprehensive Bill to deal with the subject matter for which leave has been granted by the House.
 
Thank you and congratulations. Please, liaise with the First Parliamentary Counsel and other departments of drafting to make sure that that the draft that comes to the House is fit for purpose.

PRIME MINISTER’S QUESTION TIME

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Rt Hon. Prime Minister, do you want to give some general remarks in about five minutes and then we ask questions? We have a lot of time today. If you are available, you could give general remarks in about five minutes and then we can start asking questions.

3.59
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Dr Ruhakana Ruganda): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank you for giving me a few minutes to say one or two things. 

The first is to emphasise to everybody that the country is peaceful and moving forward very well.
 
Secondly, that there are a number of issues that have been raised and I can just make some general remarks about them. One, on Bank of Uganda, I think the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development has already made some statements on the matter. Suffice to say that the media has been awash with reports about money coming from Europe and coming with some equipment on the plane. This matter is being investigated and as soon as investigations are complete, this august House will be duly informed.

Other issues that I have also seen in the media include some exchanges where the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development (Privatisation and Investment) has released some communication on UTL. This is a matter that we have quite discussed and investigated in this House. 

Fortunately, the honourable minister wrote to the Attorney-General. Government and this august House are waiting for the advice and opinion of the Attorney-General on this matter. Then, we will go by his position.

Otherwise, I am ready to respond to a few issues that colleagues may want to raise. I thank you, Mr Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Rt Hon. Prime minister. We will start with the Member from Ngora County. 


4.02
MR DAVID ABALA (NRM, Ngora County, Ngora): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me the opportunity to ask my very good – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, just ask the question direct. 

MR ABALA: This Parliament gave a directive to Government to establish or construct silos at regional level. How far has the Government gone in addressing this issue? There is an issue of food shortage in the country in some cases. Can you help us to understand what Government is doing in addressing that scenario? Thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, as all colleagues know, the warehouse receipt system was approved some few years ago. The operationalisation has been slower than all of us wanted. Nevertheless, I see it as the logical way to sort out our problems. Indeed, this will also be working with the storage facilities and silos that this august House is aware of and that Government, in principle, has agreed to construct. 

Nonetheless, the Ministers of Trade and Agriculture would be able to give us more specific information on this very important subject matter. I will ask him to come and brief this august House. 

4.04
MR ABDULATIF SEBAGGALA (Independent, Kawempe Division North, Kampala): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Recently, Rwanda opened its borders but after four to six days, they closed them. Why has it taken long to normalise our relationship with Rwanda? 

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, normalisation of relations between the two countries is a process, which is underway. The relevant political and technical authorities in both countries are pursuing this with vigour.

4.05
MR ROLAND MUGUME (FDC, Rukungiri Municipality, Rukungiri): Thank you, Mr Speaker. What is the fate of Sam Mugumya in DRC? I understand he is very sick and you had promised that you are doing something to bring him back.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, Sam Mugumya, like other Ugandans in DRC or for that matter in other countries, has consular facilities available. I will need to get the Minister of Foreign Affairs to provide specific information as to how far they have gone in dealing with his case.

4.06
MS JESCA ABABIKU (NRM, Woman Representative, Adjumani): Thank you, Mr Speaker. How best are you going to help this country ensure that the over delayed compensation of veterans is handled? It has become a social, economic and political problem to all of us. Thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: My colleague has raised a very legitimate point. It is true that our veterans of different categories are entitled to their payments. It is a question of mobilising the requisite resources to ensure that these veterans, who contributed much to building what Uganda is today, indeed, get their requisite sums of money. 

Therefore, the minister responsible for veterans, Ndugu Bright Rwamirama, would give us more definitive information. I will, therefore, ask hon. Bright Rwamirama to give that information to this House. 

4.07
MR FRANCIS ZAAKE (Independent, Mityana Municipality, Mityana): Thank you, Mr Speaker. In Article 4 (a), the State is mandated to promote public awareness of the Constitution translating it into Ugandan languages. Why is it not done? 

DR RUGUNDA: I share the views of the honourable member. It is true that it is the intention of Government and it is a question of resource constraints. As soon as resources are mobilised for that purpose, this important document will be made available to the people in the languages that they can more easily understand. 

4.08
MR ASUMAN BASALIRWA (JEEMA, Bugiri Municipality, Bugiri): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The Judiciary is currently struggling with the issue of case backlog. Many Ugandans are currently languishing on remand for as long as five, 10, 15 years. What is Government doing to ensure that this matter is handled? 

DR RUHAKANA RUGUNDA: You have raised another very legitimate point. It is true that we have a backlog of the cases and the Judiciary is overburdened. That is why this budget, which is coming to this august House, has already approved proposals from Cabinet: 

    1. To improve package of the judiciary officers and; 
    2. To increase the number of judges on the bench so that cases can be handled more expeditiously and judges can be more settled with an improved package. 

4.09
MS HELEN KAHUNDE (NRM, Woman Representative, Kiryadongo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The National Forestry and Tree Planting Act was passed in this Parliament in August 2003 with section 40 of the same Act establishing the Tree Fund. 
However, Rt Hon. Prime Minister, the fund has never been operationalised up to now. What explains the failure or the delay to operationalise the fund? 

DR RUGUNDA: Colleagues know that there are quite a number of funds that have been passed by this august House and have not been operationalised yet there has been concentration on making sure that instead of having many different pockets, where funds go, we assemble the money in the Consolidated Fund. Then, on the basis of short term, medium term and long term requirements of the development of the country, funds are distributed.

Therefore, it is not the only fund that has had challenges but there are a number of other funds, which have had challenges in order to ensure that these funds are properly aligned to the Consolidated Fund and the development requirements.

4.11
MR FREDRICK ANGURA (NRM, Tororo County South, Tororo): Rt Hon. Prime Minister, during the first rains this year, the roofs of very many schools were blown off. For some affected schools from Tororo, their roofs have not been replaced up to today. When should we expect these schools to have their roofs replaced for our children to go to school? Thank you. 

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, in addition to schools, many people’s houses, churches and roads were indeed destroyed because of the hostile weather. The Government has assembled the requirements to be able to replace the essential services like schools, health facilities and resources are being mobilised so that the urgent issues can be addressed as quickly as possible.

4.12
MR DEOGRATIUS KIYINGI (DP, Bukomansimbi County South, Bukomansimbi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, you have just stated that this country is very peaceful and is progressing very well. However, we experience rampant killings by unknown gunmen and panga-wielding gangs within Kampala, Wakiso and the neighbouring areas. Is this being peaceful, Sir? Can you explain why this is still going on in this good and peaceful country? 

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, I am a very proud Ugandan and I did not realise that the honourable member is not one of us. I would like to believe that he is one of us.

The honourable member has raised a legitimate point. It is true there have been incidents by bad elements who have attempted to disturb the peace but fortunately, they have failed. A number of them have been arrested and President Museveni himself has been actively involved in the matter. I know there was this case of Zzana and beyond where he was involved. Some of these culprits have already been arrested. Let us be vigilant and make sure that anybody who tries to disturb the peace or injure anybody is arrested, charged and dealt with in accordance with the law.

Nevertheless, Uganda is a peaceful country and these isolated incidents will be dealt with. I call for vigilance by the leaders and wananchi to work with security forces to make sure that our peace is not disturbed.

4.15
MS BETTY NAMBOOZE BAKIREKE (DP, Mukono Municipality, Mukono): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, you have told this country that we are doing all that we can to normalise our relationship with Rwanda. Christians who were travelling from Rwanda to Uganda for pilgrimage to Namugongo were stopped by their country. Would you tell this House what you are trying to normalise and what went wrong? For example, if any person in Mukono wants to travel to Rwanda, what should I tell him? I would like to know what is abnormal that you are trying to normalise and the advice you are giving to Ugandans as far as travelling to Rwanda is concerned.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, we have no problem as countries as far as Uganda is concerned. We also respect the rights of the Republic of Rwanda to handle its borders and manage them as appropriate. As far as the borders of Uganda are concerned with all our neighbours, we are open and Ugandans can choose to travel as and when they want. 

Therefore, if the people in Mukono ask you or any of us, as far as Uganda is concerned, they can go anywhere they want to go and we cannot stop them from going where they want to go.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. We will have the following: Ngora District, Aringa North County, Pian County, Butaleja, Busongora County North and then we will continue from there.

4.17
MS JACQUILINE AMONGIN (NRM, Woman Representative, Ngora): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, as it is estimated that by 2025, countries must have achieved zero hunger as per the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs). As a country, I would like to know how we have progressed in terms of addressing food insecurity and also coming up with standard policies that will address food insecurity in the country. Most of the people in the region, especially Teso and some parts of Karamoja still live on less than a meal a day.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, Uganda has been doing quite well in terms of food production. However, we would like to do much better so that Ugandans can indeed have enough to eat and be secure as far as requirement for food is concerned. 

Additional measures that are being made:

    1. Measures are being made by the Government to promote irrigation so that we do not depend on nature in times of drought;
    2. A fertiliser factory has just been completed in Tororo District, to give capacity to the people of Uganda and the neighbouring countries to be more productive using fertilisers;
    3. We have now approved – and you know that agricultural extension workers are now available in the districts. 

I heard one of the honourable members saying, “How can this be done without irrigation?” I would like to remind the honourable member that irrigation is the very first point I made that Government is serious with irrigation and plans are underway not only to supply solar irrigation pumps but to assemble solar pumps in Uganda so that it would be easier for the people of Uganda, including those in Bududa to irrigate their gardens.

4.20
MR GODFREY ONZIMA (NRM, Aringa County North, Yumbe): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, in 2017 when the Refugees’ Solidarity Summit was organised, leadership from refugee-hosting districts had joint meetings with the Office of the Prime Minister to identify projects that they thought would be very essential to boost development in their areas, which was supposed to be used as a basis of lobbying for funds during the refugee summit. Since this summit took place, up to now, we have not had any briefing in terms of these developments. Some of the areas were bridges and roads like from Koboko to Yumbe, a bridge on Kochi River linking Yumbe District; all these were earmarked. When do we expect the briefing and update on that joint meeting?

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, it is true that resources have come in the country targeting the refugee-hosting districts of Uganda. They are focusing on making health facilities and educational institutions available and additional projects will be coming. I will ask my colleague, the minister responsible for refugees to come and update this august House.

4.22
MR REMIGIO ACHIA (NRM, Pian County, Nabilatuk): Thank you, Mr Speaker. My question is derived from the comments of Members before the Prime Minister came. That whereas the Parliament of Uganda and its staff are organised in respect to their pension, we are also aware that the President in several State of the Nation Addresses has mentioned the need for a Public Sector Pension Liberalisation Bill, 2011. 

I would like to know from the Prime Minister when Government is finally bringing that Bill before the House so that we can carry out an analysis and a reform of the pension sector in this country like many other countries in the region.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Rt hon. Prime Minister, additionally, have you given us a legislative plan for the session?

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, this is a very important area, which has generated a lot of debate. The liberalisation has been debated in the media, in this House and many other areas. 

The position of Government is that the Bill will be coming. However, there are still a number of issues to be agreed upon especially the level and extent of liberalisation and the assurance that these funds will be safe. There have been fears expressed that liberalisation of these funds could instead lead to Ugandan sweat developing country X or Y when the person sweating here gets no benefit. 

Those are the pros and cons of the Bill. The Bill will be coming after the internal consultations have been completed. 

4.24
MS MILLY MUGENI (NRM, Woman Representative, Butaleja): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Over the weekend, I held a meeting with the chairmen LCI to harmonise a few things on how we can eradicate poverty, especially at their level. 

However, the biggest question they were asking me was about their bicycles. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, how far have you gone with this matter so that it can be settled once and for all? Thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: When the honourable member raised this point, I was looking around to see if the Minister for Local Government was in the vicinity because my understanding was that this is a matter to be finalised. 

I will ask the Minister for Local Government to come and make a statement on this matter so that this House does not have to discuss it often. It is a simple but important matter. It has left an amount of dissatisfaction among our local leaders. It is a matter we must conclude. The minister will come within the next couple of weeks and make a categorical statement on this subject.

4.26
MS WILLIAM NZOGHU (FDC, Busongora County North, Kasese): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The Prime Minister is aware that Kasese is one of the densely populated districts and that it is Government policy that every sub county should have a government-aided secondary school. He is also aware that they have made a pledge to that effect, not only to the people of Kasese but the entire country. 

I would like the Prime minister to assure the people of Kasese of when the pledge will be realised for the sub counties of Bwesumbu, Bugoye, Buhuhira, Hima Town Council and Mubuku Town Council. All these sub counties do not have a government-aided secondary school. 

Aware that we are coming to the next general election, the promise should be fulfilled before then.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, I would like to salute hon. Nzoghu for making sure that the manifesto of the National Resistance Movement Government is implemented. This is very welcome. This is the cooperation and encouragement that we require as we move the country forward.

I would like to assure not only my colleague but the whole country that it is the intention of Government to fulfil the pledge of a health centre III and a secondary school supported by Government in every sub county. This is going to be done. As you know, it is part of the implementation of a five year manifesto. It is going to be done within this period.

4.25
MAJ. GEN. PECOS KUTEESA (UPDF Representative): Thank you, Mr Speaker. My question is simple. I am from a cattle corridor. Is the extension of water a project or a programme of Ministry of Water and Environment?

My understanding is that a programme must be SMART – Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Realistic and Time-bound. Now, a programme comes after a project is finished. There are uncoordinated movements on how they are extending this water. When you ask them what their plan is, they say that this is a national thing or a government programme.

There is water here in Kampala and you know how National Water and Sewerage Corporation is doing it. Is it the same way they are doing it in the villages? 

They claim that the water will come but we would like to know in which year it is coming.

I would like the hon. Prime minister to inform us, when we get money here for a project, when does it become a programme? Thank you. 

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, the commitment of Government is to ensure that the people of Uganda have water. There should be water in every village. Government also ensures that the animals of Uganda have water. 

There are several efforts that are used to ensure that this is done. One of the efforts that has come, which Ndugu Kuteesa may be able to use is that Government has provided equipment under the ministry responsible for animal industry so that you provide best fuel and the equipment will be able to do work for you. 

To me, this programme has worked in a number of areas and it is a programme that could expand because it, in a way, sustains itself, especially with farmers contributing fuel. However, the point on water is a point we take seriously. In fact, there are other programmes such as the silting of the old dams and making new dams in areas where they may be needed.

Whether you call it a project, programme or plan, the critical point is to make sure that the people, animals and of course, the crops have sufficient water.

4.32
MS LILLIAN NAKATE (NRM, Woman Representative, Luweero): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt hon. Prime Minister, the country needs to know the fundamental steps taken to curb the rampant killings. You are aware that in June last year the President gave a directive to a sub-committee of the National Security Council to recall all the guns and have them fingerprinted. I would like to know how far that has gone. 

I agree that the entire country is peaceful but other parts like Luweero are not peaceful and people are living in fear. A one Sarah Namusoke of Kibanyi in Bamunanika was gunned down and police has since taken the cartridges for forensic analysis but we have not heard from them. When are you going to recall the guns for fingerprinting?

Allow me also to put this to you, Rt hon. Prime Minister. You are aware that we are extending electricity to most parts of the country –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable, we are entitled to one question, please.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, the point about security is obviously a very important one. I think the question can be handled better by asking the Minister of Security or Minister of Internal Affairs to come and update colleagues at regular intervals about the security situation until all these issues are closed.

Therefore, I will ask the responsible ministers to come and respond to some of these specific areas as well as explain the measures being taken to stump out these public irritations that colleagues are raising.

4.34
MR GEORGE KUMAMA (NRM, Bbaale County, Kayunga): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt hon. Prime Minster, I have one concern. We all know that Uganda is developing at a very fast rate. Sometime last year, we learnt that there was an exercise, which the Government was undertaking. We also learnt from the Committee on Natural Recourses and Ministry of Water and Environment that there is an attempt to degazette and gazette certain areas in this country for development purposes. 

When are you bringing this Bill to Parliament so that the National Forestry Authority (NFA) and other stakeholders are not left rubbing shoulders left, right and centre so that we can guide this country well in the interest of development?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Rt hon. Prime Minister, it was a motion before Parliament and it was referred back to you. When is it coming back?

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, I am acquainted with this subject matter. It is true that in the last Parliament, we discussed it and, as you have rightly said, it was sent for further consideration. 

The Minister of Water and Environment has been following up the matter and making consultations. In the consultations, it was discovered that in some of the forests some wrong methods may have been used to even apportion some areas before this House could take a decision. Therefore, the whole thing has been reviewed and it should have already been completed by this time. 

I am going to ask the minister responsible to ensure that this House gets a report. I will give him a period of four weeks to come to this House so that this House sorts out this matter once and for all.

4.36
MS LOWILA OKETAYOT (NRM, Woman Representative, Pader): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt hon. Prime Minister, what is the Government doing about the persistent lack of drugs and medical supplies at the health facilities, now that it has even come to light that embossed drugs are being stolen by health workers?

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, we should salute National Drug Authority for putting in place measures that have enabled us to impound substantial amounts of drugs and equipment that were being taken out of our health facilities to either the private facilities or even other countries. The first point is to plug the holes that have been used to steal the Government drugs. Secondly, with more resources we will make more drugs available and, thirdly, Government and Parliament will soon be discussing the question of a national health insurance system so that an appropriate system can be in place to buttress our health sector.

4.38
MS MARGARET BABA DIRI (NRM, Woman Representative, Koboko): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Honourable Prime Minister, the business of hides and skins was very lucrative and many businessmen and businesswomen would go looking for hides and skins. However, today, nobody is buying this important commodity. As a result, people have resorted to burying this important commodity, especially in Koboko. What has happened to the business of hides and skins?

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, I do not have a specific explanation to what my sister has described. However, if that is the case, I will ask the Minister of Trade and Industry and Cooperatives to come and give us the scenarios that can explain the situation and also give us proposals on how the people involved in this trade can be helped. Suffice to say, we have really been talking about value addition and I think this is an area where value addition may end up solving the problem.

This is also where the State, if necessary, through Uganda Development Corporation (UDC), can come in and work with the private sector so that the issue can be sorted out. Without any doubt, every country requires the leather industry and I think if this problem is on, it will be there for a limited period. However, I expect this industry to be a robust one. Nevertheless, the minister responsible will come to this august House and give a more comprehensive response.

4.40
MS RUKIYA CHEKAMONDO (NRM, Woman Representative, Kapchorwa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Honourable Prime Minister, I came from the constituency yesterday. Last month, I raised an issue on this Floor of Parliament that for the first time in history, Sebei subregion got rains in May yet last year, the crops were damaged by sunshine. I also raised the issue of lack of food. 

Mr Speaker, yesterday, I came from the constituency and people there are badly off; there is famine. There was a delay in planting crops. We are supposed to have Irish potatoes now but because of the late rains, there was a delay and the district is doing badly. I would like to request for food items. If we could get food for two months, it would help us.

Secondly, there is an area where accidents have been rampant on the Kapchorwa-Suam Road -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let us deal with the question of food shortage in Kapchorwa. It is one question for each Member; we have to share the time well. 

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, on the question of food shortage in Kapchorwa, I will ask the minister responsible for relief, disaster, preparedness and refugees to send a team to assess the situation and see how Government can come in to support the people concerned.

4.42
MR DAVID MUTEBI RONNIE (NRM, Buikwe County South, Buikwe): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, the road from Wantoni to Katosi and Nyenga is in its last phase of completion. However, there are quite a number of people whose properties were valued in 2010 and 2016 and they have not been compensated. Can we get clear timelines within which the compensation will be conclusively addressed?

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, being compensated for land is a constitutional right. There have been a number of other complaints by a number of people. Therefore, the minister responsible for works and transport will come to this House and give detailed information so that we know when the people affected by the Wantoni–Katosi–Nyenga Road will be compensated, and it will cover other areas that fall in a similar category.

4.43
MS JUSTINE KHAINZA (NRM, Woman Representative, Bududa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, I would like to find out measures Government is planning to put in place to enable persons with albinism access sunscreen lotions. 

DR RUGUNDA: It is a legitimate point that the albino people should be protected. Nevertheless, we will need to get advice from the Minister of Health to see what is feasible and what can be done to support these compatriots.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Rt Hon. Prime Minister, you are piling ministerial statements for the House. I do not know when we will be able to exhaust them because you have outlined almost 13 ministerial statements and each takes one hour to debate. I do not know when we will have time to deal with them. Nevertheless, let us have the Member for Gulu Municipality on the Floor. 

4.45
MR LYANDRO KOMAKECH (DP, Gulu Municipality, Gulu): Mr Speaker, I rise on a matter pertaining to the issue of dealing with passing justices in this country. Prime Minister, we are aware that Cabinet adopted the Transitional Justice Policy. Could it be prudent that Parliament be deeply updated so that we understand your implementation agenda? May we and the country at large be updated on this matter?

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, it is true that Cabinet has, in the last couple of weeks, finally passed the Transitional Justice Policy. It will be obviously coming to this august House. The House will have time to not only listen to the minister responsible but make contributions on how the policy can be better improved   and subsequently implemented.

4.46
MR ALBERT LOKORU (NRM, Tepeth County, Moroto): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Because of the long dry spell experienced in some regions, especially in Karamoja, some people were rendered food insecure. Cabinet approved some money to provide food aid to these affected areas but up to now, no food has been delivered to Karamoja region. What is exactly happening? I am asking this question because this is the time for labour demands. People are weeding and they need food to produce more food. Thank you very much.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, if food was promised, I expect that it will be provided. It is just a question of finding out from the responsible ministry when this will be done. We can easily get this information from the Office of the Prime Minister.

4.47
MR JOHN BAPTIST NAMBESHE (NRM, Manjiya County, Bududa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, we have heard from reliable sources that Cabinet has adopted a new policy on a compulsory health insurance scheme, which is crucial in our country and long overdue. However, it is alleged that it also includes compelling those that are private subscribers –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is anticipatory; it is not yet out.  

MR NAMBESHE: May I then ask a different question? (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No. 

4.48
MR GILBERT OLANYA (FDC, Kilak South County, Amuru): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, we have regional football tournaments going on within the country and this is uniting people from all the regions. I would like to know Government’s plan in building modern football grounds in all the regions and later on in all the districts including Amuru, where I come from. 

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, Ndugu Gilbert Olanya is raising a very important point. All of us are very interested now in football and in various stadia because of what is happening. However, it is Government’s programme to build these stadia. I know that the plan is to start with regional, zonal or specialised stadia like the one which has been built in Sebei. So, there is a programme in place and I am sure there will be several additions apart from Pece Stadium. 

4.50
MR LAWRENCE SONGA BIYIKA (NRM, Ora County, Zombo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, this Parliament approved a loan of $1,000,000 from the World Bank recently, to connect West Nile to the national grid. We expected the work to have commenced on the 20th of May 2019. What is the latest concrete information that we can give to the people of West Nile? 

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, if the date was 20 May and perhaps this has been delayed by a month or two, this is a matter that the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development would be able to provide information on. However, suffice it to say that I was recently in the West Nile region with a number of colleagues and everything is geared towards having this power connection done. 

There is more than one power connection that is expected to reach Arua. Therefore, the current problem of lack of power in Arua will soon be something to read about in the history of Arua.

4.51
MR KENNETH LUBOGO (NRM, Bulamogi County, Kaliro): Thank you, very much, Mr Speaker. Honourable Prime Minister as you are already aware, Government made a commitment a few months back that the water weed, which has infested Lake Kyoga, especially the branch of Lake Nakuwa, which extends to Bulamogi in Kaliro District, would be dealt with. However, as I speak now, no action has been taken. Our people can no longer access the lake and yet this is the basis of their livelihood. There is famine in the villages and they cannot access the lake.

Why has Government not responded to this very crucial issue? What message do you have for the people of Bulamogi County, Kaliro District, and the fishing community of this country who are suffering from this infestation?

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, the problem the honourable member has raised is well known. The ministry responsible for water has already raised this matter in Cabinet and a general direction has been given on how to deal with this matter. I do not have the specific progress report but we can get a report on dealing with this weed, which is a problem. 

I will ask the minister responsible to give information. I think it is good to encourage authoritative information so that colleagues can be as well informed as possible, so that they can be empowered to inform the people in the whole country. Thank you.

4.53
MR FRED ANGELLA (NRM, Moroto Municipality, Moroto): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, the shortest route to access Karamoja by road is through Muyembe-Nakapiripirit Road. However, that road is in a sorry state. When is Government going to upgrade it to tarmac?

DR RUGUNDA: Colleagues, you know very well that Government is on a crusade to tarmac roads and to ensure that potholes, mud and rains are not obstructive to us anymore.

The documentation of the Ministry of Works and Transport and some of the statements made by His Excellency the President have outlined the number of roads and even named specific roads that are going to be done. If this information does not include Muyembe-Nakapiripirit Road, then we will provide information to you. 

4.55
MR ANDREW KOLUO (NRM, Toroma County, Katakwi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Honourable Prime Minister, I would like to find out what steps the Government is taking to solve the problem of understaffing in secondary schools countrywide. In Toroma, for example, Magoro Community School has four teachers out of 26 on the payroll. Thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, that sounds very bad and I think it requires immediate attention. We will share this information with the Ministry of Education and Sports and ask them to deal with this matter as an emergency.

4.56
MR TERENCE ACHIA (NRM, Bokora County, Napak): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, in order to promote efficiency, effectiveness and review of Government programmes and projects, it is better that when some projects or programmes have not performed to the required expectation, something must be done. There are projects in Karamoja, for instance, which the Auditor-General’s Office checked on and the results up to now-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable, please ask the question.

MR TERRENCE ACHIA: Is there a possibility of your office organising a meeting in which Karamoja Parliamentary Group, for instance, can come and share with you about some of these projects because some of them are already in big trouble, having done nearly nothing?

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, it appears to me that the issue raised by the honourable member would be better handled by the minister responsible for Karamoja. If some of the issues remain hanging, then the Office of the Prime Minister will be more than happy to deal with them. 

However, I propose that you raise this matter with the honourable Minister for Karamoja. We will get a report and if there is need for our intervention, we will be happy to do so.

4.57
MS JANE AVUR (NRM, Woman Representative, Pakwach): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, Uganda is well versed with water bodies, West Nile inclusive. I would like to know what plan Government has to promote water transport.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, this is a major issue. Water transport is not being optimally utilised; we are just scratching the tip of it. Government intends to extensively use the water resources that we have for transport, starting in particular with Lake Victoria to connect us with our neighbouring countries, and to use the internal lakes and rivers optimally for transportation of goods and the population.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Rt Hon. Prime Minister. I am going to seek your indulgence so that we can extend by two or three more questions. Under the rules, the time is up but I am going to ask the Member for Kampala Central and Dokolo because they were already on the list but they have been caught by time.

4.59
MR MUHAMMAD NSEREKO (Independent, Kampala Central Division, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, two days ago the honourable Member of Starehe Constituency in Nairobi, Kenya, hon. Charles Njagua Kanyi, known as Jaguar, came up with xenophobic attacks and statements against Ugandans, Tanzanians and other foreigners. He clearly stated that he had given Ugandans and Tanzanians 24 hours to vacate Kenya or else they would send a team to terrorise them and close their businesses.

Aware that we have a ministry in charge of foreign affairs and we have the Rt Hon. Prime Minister here, what steps can we take to assure Ugandans who are part of the East African federation that they are safe in Nairobi and that no one is going to disturb their businesses or their residences? Thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, we take it that such a statement was not authoritative. A statement that we would take seriously would be one from the Government of Kenya. We know that the Government of Kenya is a strong believer in the East African Cooperation and free movement of the people of East Africa. So, let our people in Kenya and the Kenyans in Uganda be settled. They should know that they are in East Africa and that there is free movement of people in East Africa.

5.01
MS CECILIA OGWAL (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to ask the Rt Hon. Prime Minister whether he is aware that on several occasions, this Parliament has discussed very important and sensitive matters that affect this country. However, most of the times, ministers responsible for various sectors are not available in the House. Even today, on the day that the Prime Minister is asked several questions which must be answered by the relevant ministers, they have defied your presence and are not here.

I would also like to know from the Prime Minister whether he is aware that yesterday, two ministers disagreed on the Floor of Parliament when Members were discussing – at a critical stage – the Landlord and Tenant Bill. A minister said it was a position agreed upon in Cabinet but another one shot up and said it was never discussed in Cabinet. 

This puts this House in a very difficult situation. We are here to discuss matters that make your work easy and to help and guide you in certain areas. However, your ministers, first of all, do not come and then they put the burden on the Prime Minister to listen to us and keep talking through a third party – “on this day, it was discussed in Parliament, can you take up the matter” - when actually, they should be here to listen to us first hand.

My question is: Rt Hon. Prime Minister, are you aware of this happening? Are you aware that your ministers are in disarray, even when they are discussing on the Floor of Parliament?

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, I agree with my sister, hon. Cecilia Ogwal, that colleagues should be present in Cabinet and Parliament. We are in complete agreement on that. Indeed, it is true that we are taking it up even more energetically. It is also true that the Parliamentary Commission has discussed this very matter.

Secondly, on the question of disagreement on the Floor of this House, I obviously do not expect that. I expect that if there was even disharmony, it would be quickly sorted out so that one harmonised Government position is given. If it was not possible to harmonise, it would be quite in order for one of them to say, “By the way, there are issues we must sort out first, then we will come back to the House.” I would not expect contradictory positions to be presented in this august House.

5.05
THE CHIEF OPPOSITION WHIP (Mr Ibrahim Ssemujju): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to comment on some responses that the Prime Minister has given.

First, on Rwanda, the President of Rwanda briefed his country as to why there was tension between Rwanda and Uganda. He said Uganda was harbouring dissidents, whose intention is to destabilise Rwanda. Secondly, he said that Uganda was also harassing the citizens of his country by arresting and torturing them. 

I did not expect the answer from the Prime Minister to be neither here nor there – to say that we are normalising. These were specific issues. This Parliament will benefit if you give a specific answer as to when you think the relationship will normalize - if you have no issue with Rwanda, they have issues with Uganda.

Secondly, on Bank of Uganda, the statement by the Prime Minister is also neither here nor there. The country is worried about the credibility of this institution. If you read the functions of Bank of Uganda in the Constitution, they are very serious functions for both the economy and the country. 

This Parliament made recommendations after an investigation. It appears that some of the human resources you have at Bank of Uganda are either due to retire or they chose to retire at work and cannot exercise the duties imposed on them by the Constitution. That is why you are dealing with one problem after another.

Can you tell Parliament whether the policy of this Government is to survive by chaos and it has changed or whether you are going to sort out issues of human resource to win back the confidence of the public?

On the issue of food security, the Government, through the Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries, presented a policy statement promising what they call the “single-spine policy”. It appears you do not have the human resource promised by that policy at the district, constituency and sub-county level. Instead, you have decided to militarise that sector. 

The National Agricultural Advisory Services (NAADS) is now run by veterans. Fishing has now been taken over by the military. Has the policy of Government now shifted? The military at one time had the National Enterprises Corporation (NEC) farm. At the time they took it over, there were 3,000 cows on the farm but now, they have zero cows. So, they have no demonstrable record that they are very good farmers. After running down theirs, you are now saying they will be very good in running farming in the country. 

As I try to quickly conclude, I would like to talk about the issue of Sam Mugumya. When a Ugandan called Tumukunde – I think working with Internal Security Organisation (ISO) – was arrested in London, every single Government department responsible hurried to send help and that Ugandan, who had been accused of money laundering, was rescued. When it comes to Mugumya, you are saying “consular services”. Why don’t you do the same thing that you did for Tumukunde when he was in London on money laundering charges? 

On investment in sports, I have looked back at the budget we passed here for sports. The Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development has gone away but the budget for physical education and sports under the Ministry of Education and Sports is Shs 19 billion. There was also a directive by the President that Shs 10 billion should be given to football under the Federation of Uganda Football Associations (FUFA). 

You are now saying the policy of this Government is to build infrastructure in every district. Policies are reflected by budgetary lines. They are not like dreams of someone sleeping at home. So, can you show us in the budget where that policy is going to be financed, if in the budget you only have money to run National Council of Sports and yet there is a directive that they share half of even that little money?

On land compensation, the Committee on Public Accounts (Commissions, Statutory Authorities and State Enterprises) is considering the report of the Auditor-General and is meeting Uganda National Roads Authority. Money for land is being invaded and used to do other things, year after year. Maybe the Prime Minister or other Government agencies do not remember that every year in January, the Auditor-General issues a report. I sit on this committee and this morning, the committee was asking about money for Acholibur and other roads. The land issue has become a soft target for the Uganda National Roads Authority yet people stay uncompensated and suffer all the attendant effects.

On the issue of the Member of Parliament from Kenya, Tanzania has not handled this matter as casually as you appear to have, Mr Prime Minister. They immediately summoned the Kenyan Ambassador to Tanzania to explain whether the policy has now changed. Can you tell Parliament whether even when there are serious matters it is your business to handle them casually?

Finally, with your permission, Mr Speaker, allow me touch on two issues that have not been raised. I know they are not covered under the rules. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, let us leave those for another day. 

MR SSEMUJJU: It is okay. Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, I will just make a few remarks in response to what my good but occasionally caustic friend, Ndugu Ssemujju, has raised. We do not, however, intend to emulate him in that rather barbed piercing of friends. 

Mr Speaker, on Rwanda, it is true that these points he has said have been in the media for quite some time. Government has had occasion to make statements on the matter, emphasising that Rwandese who are here are treated like East Africans, brothers and sisters and if they commit a crime, they face the law like anyone else. The people of Uganda and Rwanda are brothers and sisters; that is a factual, historical and biological position and it will remain the case. No leader can change that situation.

Secondly, on the question of Bank of Uganda, like any other key institution, investigations are going on. Let us not over prejudge - Parliament, the Inspector General of Government (IGG), the Criminal Investigations Directorate (CID), and my daughter, Ms Nakalema, are all investigating. Sometimes, we do a disservice to our institutions by literally over exposing them. Let us handle them as valuable assets of this country. Let us investigate them with the view of reaching constructive conclusions that will support those institutions.

On the question of food security, Mr Speaker, it is true that there has been recruitment of single spine officers at the district level who are responsible for extension. They may not have reached other levels because of resources and the like, but the policy of Government is to ensure that we have knowledgeable extension officers that would be able to guide our people to be more productive and increase the capacity of Uganda to produce for our needs and other markets.

On the question of militarising agricultural production, those of us who have seen what both NAADS and Operation Wealth Creation have been doing clearly know that there has been a very significant contribution in the production of various commodities because of the good work these officers have been doing. My view is that we should give them more support. Let us constructively, instead of destructively, criticise these friends. 

They are doing good work. We all know they require more support from Parliament, instead of being pulled down, abused and their work not appreciated. So, we appreciate their work and there is evidence in the field about increased production of various products and commodities as a result of their work. 

On the question of –(Interjections) – If I may just conclude since we are winding up. On the case of Mr Mugumya, I have already made my point. I know that my friend, whom I do not want to say much about, occasionally wants to put himself in the equation in order to make his point. He does not have to do that.

On stadia, it is a public policy that we should build more stadia. It is also true that resources are not readily available. When they become available, why won’t we put up these facilities? 

On money for compensation, we should be on the lookout. If any money has been abused, the people who abused it should be dealt with in accordance with the law.

The last comment is on the statement made by the Member of Parliament from Kenya. I had better make this point that we are taking the matter seriously and not casually. If Tanzania has summoned the Ambassador of Kenya to Tanzania, it does not mean Uganda should do the same. Uganda has its well established methods of dealing with her friends and neighbours, and we are employing those methods. We know those methods work and we have no regrets at all. We do not subscribe to the type of diplomacy of confrontation and abrasiveness in order to demonstrate that we are working. (Applause)

Mr Speaker, I thank you for giving me this opportunity to respond to the questions.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, I think we should thank ourselves; we have done very well with the Prime Minister’s Time today. The questions were sharp and the responses were good except where the Prime Minister referred the matter to the sector ministers to deal with them. We will find a way of creatively handling these references that the Prime Minister has made so that those questions are substantially dealt with by the ministers responsible and the issues are clear to the public. Thank you.

LAYING OF PAPERS

5.20
MS SARAH NAKAWUNDE (NRM, Woman Representative, Mpigi):  Mr Speaker, I wish to lay on the Table the report of the African Parliamentary Union Executive Committee Meeting, which took place on 13 and 14 June 2019 in Bangui, the capital of Central African Republic. There were a number of resolutions and key among them is an appeal to the United Nations to lift the arms embargo on Central African Republic in support of the ongoing peace process. I beg to lay the report on the Table.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. As the rules say, we will find an appropriate time to look at this, debate it and see what we can pick and advise the country on. Thank you very much.

Honourable members, was there a procedural matter?

MS OGWAL: Mr Speaker, in good faith, I had risen on a procedural matter and if you allow me -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We do not expect any bad faith.

MS OGWAL: Okay, in good faith as always. Mr Speaker, I would like to inform and share with the House that on matters of security, the Government does not have to labour to persuade us, and the Government should not be shy to share with us issues of a security nature. Therefore, when the Prime Minister is trying to gloss over matters of security, I get upset because this Parliament has been very committed to adequately fund classified expenditure that relates to activities that would ensure we are safe in this country.

Mr Speaker, the Prime Minister is telling this House and the country that there is nothing serious between Rwanda and Uganda yet we know that some Rwandans have been returned to Rwanda. The Prime Minister did not explain to us the circumstances under which Rwandans were returned and yet he is saying any Rwandan who has committed a crime will be treated in accordance with the law and so on. At the same time, the Prime Minister has not explained why some Ugandans have died in Rwanda. Those are the explanations we are expecting. If it is bad, we will stand with you. Give us areas where we can help you.

Therefore, wouldn’t it be procedurally right for the Prime Minister to explain to the House, while submitting those cases, why some Rwandans have been returned and what has been done about Ugandans who have been killed in Rwanda? Is it not procedurally right for the Prime Minister to tell us that, rather than speaking sketchily on matters of security? Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It is procedurally right for the Prime Minister to discretionary tell us what he thinks this House should know.

Honourable members, like I said at the beginning, we have business that we are unable to process. We have the KCCA (Amendment) Bill, which is an old proposal of 2015 that we will not be able to handle today due to the reason I stated earlier - there was supposed to be an agreement between Government and Members who had raised concerns about this. They had reported that they had agreed on some amendments that were harmonised to enable us to proceed. However, we have not seen these amendments and so we will not be able to proceed with this.

Similarly, we have other Bills, which are listed under business to follow. I am concerned about the older ones of 2015, 2009, 2018 but of course we also have many of 2019. With the exception of the Sugar Bill, which was returned by the President and we have already given the minister two weeks to come back so that we can conclude with the matters that were referred back to Parliament by the President, all those other Bills - the KCCA (Amendment) Bill; the Administration of the Judiciary Bill, 2018; the National Graduate Scheme Bill, 2018; the Law Revision (Penalties in Criminal Matters) Miscellaneous (Amendment) Bill, 2015; the Marriage and Divorce Bill, 2009; the Administration of Parliament (Amendment) Bill, 2019; the Institute of Parliamentary Studies Bill, 2019; the Physical Planning (Amendment) Bill, 2018 - have already been in this House for a while. The committees and the people responsible for these Bills must therefore take time off from now and the whole of next week to finalise with these Bills because even if we are to come back on Tuesday, we will have no business if these matters are not handled.

Therefore, can we use next week to deal with these matters and have them ready for processing? We agree that we will use this time to deal with Bills coming from the Government. We also expect another set of new Bills from the legislative programme that will be brought to Parliament by the Prime Minister. They have proposed the budget, the President has made the State of the Nation Address highlighting some areas, which are urgent and require legislative regulation. Therefore, we expect a new set of Bills to come. 

Of course, there is also the big issue of electoral reforms. There was also a pending motion from a private Member who would like to introduce a private Member’s Bill. We also have the undertaking from the Attorney-General about what the Government has decided that they should bring to the House, which they are likely to bring. Therefore, if we cannot finish what is already with us, then we will have a jam as we handle business. 

I would like to say that let us use today and next week to finalise with the processing of all pending Bills, and all those matters that have been referred for consultations should also be concluded so that when we resume, we are able to proceed and conclude with these Bills. Some of them are embarrassingly old and I have quoted them.

Secondly, the whips have not submitted names for constitution of sessional committees. The Speaker requested last week and this week that there should be a list from the whips of both sides but we have not received them - You are saying they are ready but they are still with you; we have not seen them yet. We need to proceed and constitute these committees to enable us move with the business of the House.

Therefore, given all these concerns, we will not be able to proceed with the plenary next week. However, we will be able to engage at committee level to finalise all these matters so that we can be productive in the week to follow. Accordingly, this House is adjourned to Tuesday, 9 July 2019 at 2 o’clock. Thank you.

(The House rose at 5.29 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 9 July 2019 at 2.00 p.m.)






