
THE REPUBLIC OF UGANDA

IN THE PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA

Official Report of The Proceedings of Parliament

FIFTH SESSION - 5TH SITTING - FIRST MEETING

________________________

Thursday, 16 June 2005

Parliament met at 2.40 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: I just want to welcome you hon. members. 

BILLS
FIRST READING

the Copyright and Neighbouring Rights Bill, 2004

MR OULANYAH (Omoro County, Gulu): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that a Bill entitled the Copyright and Neighbouring Rights Bill, 2004 be read the First time.  Mr Speaker, -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: The Bill stands committed to the appropriate committee of Parliament.

MR OULANYAH: And its accompanying certification –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Yes, the certificate of financial implication.

MR OULANYAH: Mr Speaker, I should add that that is what has caused us a lot of delay.  The motion was passed last year in July, the Bill was published on the 23rd of July and we requested for the certificate of financial implication.  We only got it last week, moreover we have been visiting there everyday and this is a problem that should be addressed, Mr Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Let the Committee handle it expeditiously. 
MR ERESU: I suppose the appropriate committee handling this Bill is the same committee whose mover is the Chairperson of.  Would there be conflict or no conflict of interest in considering the Bill in this regard?

THE SPEAKER: I think our rules deal with the issue of conflict of interest, should this be an issue I think we have appropriate solutions to handle it and I have no doubt. Of course, when he is presenting it to the committee he will not be chairing the committee; there will be somebody to chair the committee. 

CONSTITUTING THE SESSIONAL COMMITTEE  ON PUBLIC SERVICE
AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, you remember yesterday we adjourned to allow the counting of votes. Can I ask one of the members that constitute the committee here to tell us what happened?

MR NSUBUGA WILLIAM (Buvuma County, Mukono): Thank you. Mr Speaker, yesterday as the hon. members are aware, there were elections of members to the committee on Public Service and Local Government.  Mr Speaker, 140 Members voted, three votes were invalid and 137 were valid and the results were as follows:

•	Hon. Yiga Anthony scored 126 votes 
•	Hon. Balemezi Lydia obtained 124 votes 
•	Hon. Besisira Ignatius got 124 votes
•	Hon. Wacha Ben got 117 
•	Hon. Byamukama Dora obtained 116
•	Hon. Byenkya  Nyakaisiki Beatrice got 112
•	Hon. Dr. Mallinga Stephen got 111
•	Hon. Awongo Ahmed got 108
•	Hon. Tubbo Christine got 107
•	Hon. Gagawala Wambuzi got 105
•	Hon. Mukasa Anthony Harris got 104
•	Hon. Sinabulya Nambidde Sylvia obtained 103 votes
•	Hon. Madada sulaiman got 100
•	Hon. Wanjusi Wasieba obtained 92 votes
•	Hon. Kigyagi Arimpa John obtained 89 votes
•	Hon. Kule Muranga Joseph obtained 88
•	Hon. Ekanya Geoffrey obtained 84 votes
•	Hon. Capt. Byaruhanga obtained 80 votes
•	Hon. Orech Martin obtained 79 votes
•	Hon. Kajeke Wilfred obtained 78 votes
•	Hon. Kagimu Kiwanuka obtained 77 votes
•	Hon. Mwondha Patrick obtained 76 votes
•	Hon. Kayanja Elly obtained 73 votes
•	Hon. Prof. Ogenga Latigo obtained 72 votes 
•	Hon. Ndaula Ali Sekyanzi obtained 72 votes.

Mr Speaker, there are also members below the line, those are:

•	Hon. Omodi Okot obtained 70 votes
•	Hon. Nacha Lorika obtained 67 votes 
•	Hon. Alaso Alice obtained 64 votes
•	Hon. Dr. Okot Alex obtained 64 votes
•	Hon. Kikungwe Issa obtained 57 votes 
•	Hon. Mbalibulha Christopher obtained 55 votes
•	Hon. Matembe Miria obtained 48 votes.

Hon. Speaker these were the performance results.

THE SPEAKER: Well, thank you very much hon. Nsubuga. (Applause) Honourable members you have heard 25 names that ended with hon. Ndaula. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: This is the Committee for Public Service - congratulations. Hon. Members, the position of the Committees are as follows; there are Committees still lacking Members, Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry, there are 10 vacancies. Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs, 7; Committee on Works, Housing and Communication, 3; Legal and Parliamentary Affairs, 3; Presidential and Foreign Affairs, 4; Finance, Planning and Economic Development, 2. So, I request the Members who are not yet placed in these various committees to notify me here or later as to where they want to serve on those committees still lacking members. Thank you very much hon. members.

Hon. Chairperson Public Accounts Committee you had prepared to present?

DR OKULO EPAK: Sorry, Mr Speaker. I think that was a mistake. We already tabled that report. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: It is okay, thank you.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

2.50
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr Adolf Mwesige): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I have instructions from Cabinet to make the following statement on the Domestic Relations Bill 2003. 

Following the motion for the Second Reading of the Domestic Relations Bill 2005, general debate in Parliament should have ensured that: The Domestic Relations Bill was on the Order paper of this House on Monday the 16th May 2005. On that day, Government informed Parliament that it had received a number of petitions including one from the Moslem Community in Uganda and another from the Uganda Joint Christian Council. The substance was raising various objections to the Bill. 

Government had asked the Uganda Law Reform Commission to consult all the stakeholders with a view on the way forward. Government requested Parliament then to suspend further consideration of the Bill until those consultations were completed. The Hansard of 16th May shows that Parliament debated this request at some length. At the end of the debate, the Chair ruled that the Domestic Relations Bill must be on the Order Paper of Parliament, today, the 16th of June 2005.  Mr Speaker, this is what has exactly happened.

Mr Speaker, permit me to indicate that my ministry sought the guidance of Cabinet on this matter at a meeting held on 15th June 2005. The Government had received a progress report on the consultations carried out by the Uganda Law Reform Commission. Government then took the position that debate in Parliament on the Domestic Relations Bill 2003 continue to be suspended until further notice. The following are Government’s reasons for this position:

One, is that the Uganda Law Reform Commission had reported that consultations with the Uganda Moslem Supreme Council and the Uganda Joint Christian Council had broken down. There was need for more time to see if the consultation process could be revived. I wish to report Sir that that consultation is going on.

Two, Government was unable to accept the proposal to have separate family laws for different religious communities. This would be contrary to the national interests of building a strong, united and harmonious country.

The Uganda Law Reform Commission needs to be given more time to do more research on how to accommodate the interests of various religious communities in one unified family law. 

Three, it had come to the attention of Government that the rural women were not consulted in the formulation of the Domestic Relations Bill. Government therefore needs more time to consult the rural women who, Mr Speaker, make the bulk of the women folk in this country.

It is my instructions from Government that I do request Parliament to continue the suspension of the consideration of the Domestic Relations Bill 2003 until further notice. I have stood up this afternoon to execute these instructions. I am also in position to state Sir, that Government will be in position to make a progress report to this Parliament on the matter on Tuesday, 18 October 2005. Thank you, Mr Speaker and hon. members.

THE SPEAKER: Well, hon. members you have heard the statement, you should note that this is a Bill entitled “ The Domestic Relations Bill 2003” and we are nearing 2006. This Bill is not – but Government has given its reasons for that, but it could be that some people think this Bill belongs to the women. There is that impression apparently which needs to be cleared. Yes, there are some people who think the Domestic Relations Bill is for women and there are those who think that it is about property of men. So, all these need to be cleared so that, eventually, this Bill goes through. But the minister has given the position of the Government; why you cannot proceed with this Bill today.

MRS BYENKYA: Thank you Mr Speaker. In position with what you have said, I would also wish the minister to correct his statement by saying that it had come to the attention of Government that “the rural populace” not to state that “the rural women” –(Applause). He should correct that. 

THE SPEAKER: Okay. So that it is not only women but even men in rural areas. Okay.

MS KIRASO: Mr Speaker, hon. Mwesige read this statement on behalf of Government. It is not his fault but otherwise, I would have really been very, very shocked and surprised for the hon. minister, a lawyer, a family man and from my district –(Laughter)- more especially, to refer to this law as if it concerns women and Moslems!  To go ahead and say that there were objections to certain sections of the Bill is what he does not say! 

Mr Speaker, I find this withdrawal of the Bill and postponing it to October… well, I hope we will be there in October and it will come, because, this Bill has come to this House and been withdrawn so many times.  I find it very, very sad, Mr. Speaker and I think this move, is not in good faith.  We are all Members of Parliament here, representing rural constituencies, except a few Municipalities.  When a whole minister says; that the rural women were not consulted; since when did you start consulting rural women?  Do they come here or we are here to represent them?

THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Kiraso, this has been corrected; not only women, but people in rural areas.

MS KIRASO: Are we just going to say, “aye,” withdraw the Bill, because there is this explanation? We should take individual responsibility for this kind of action.  I think it is wrong, let us be counted as Members of Parliament for this action that we are going to endorse.  Mr Speaker, I beg to seek your guidance on how we are going to proceed with this.

THE SPEAKER:  No, I think what we are going to do, let us listen; then we shall determine what is reasonable, because the appeal is that, Government be given more time.  What more time, is what we shall decide, but in their view, it is October.

MR SEBULIBA MUTUMBA:  Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  Procedurally, I do not know how you are going to guide us, particularly me.  Already, it has almost come from the committee Stage for the Third Reading, how are we going to proceed, because new things are going to be incorporated into this Bill?  

THE SPEAKER:  No, that does not become a problem, because, normally Bills are brought, they can me amended and there is no measure that it can be 10 per cent or 20, I do not know, we shall address that issue when it arises. 
 
MR MUTUMBA:  But Mr Speaker, it is already at the Committee Stage of Parliament.

THE SPEAKER:  That, I do not know, but we are still in the Session.

3.00
MR BEN WACHA (Oyam County North, Apach):  Mr Speaker, I want to start where my colleague left.  First of all, this Bill is already at a very advanced stage in this House.  I would have expected the minister to allow the general principles of the Bill to be debated while he is making proposals of amendments to be brought to this House at the Committee Stage.

Two, it is enlightening to know that every time a group of people opposes certain issues, which are coming to this House, they will be listened to.  I am happy that the stand being taken by the Uganda Joint Christian Council in respect to this Bill is weighing heavy on Government.  I am saying so because the same group of people, including various individuals in Civil Society, opposed the concept of the third term; but Government is still going ahead with the third term.  I do not know where this selective application of these issues is being handled.

Three, the minister talks about break down of dialogue with these groups of people who are opposing the Bill.  I do not know where he based the idea that by October, this break down would have been refined.  I think this is expecting too much.  If there is a break down, the possibility of the issues being handled by the discussions cannot be pin pointed in respect to time.  

I still insist, Sir, that the minister allows this Bill to continue; the principles be discussed, if he has any amendment, let him bring it here.  Short of that, let the minister withdraw the Bill; let him not deceive the country that there is anything like a Domestic Relations Bill (DRB) before this House because, Government is simply not interested. So, let him make a motion for withdrawal and we vote on it individually so that the country knows which side each one of us is.

MR AGGREY AWORI (Samia Bugwe County North, Busia):  Thank you Mr Speaker.  Earlier on, this afternoon, we got a circular about the legislative programme for the 1st Meeting of the 5th Session of the 7th Parliament of Uganda and on that sheet, there is no indication whatsoever, that this kind of business will take place.

THE SPEAKER:  Honourable, we shall introduce and we shall give you the details. You proceed with the subject.

MR AWORI:  My subject, which was a preamble; I am simply saying when do they ever consult the office of the Speaker?  These people knew very well, these consultations and the reasons advanced by the minister definitely could not have occurred to them yesterday.  This is a fact known to them for the past three months or so.  Why do they come at the last minute with the excuse, how are they going to fit in the legislative programme?  

Mr Speaker, I do not think I am fishing in very deep waters when I suggest or when I opine that there is a political agenda.  The Government is too scared to handle this matter a few months prior to elections, come October, they will postpone it to the 8th Parliament, lest it affects the votes for this government and especially for President Museveni. They are scared of the implications of DRB.

We have read elsewhere the impressions and the opinions of the Head of State on the matter of DRB; definitely, he is against DRB in its present format.  I would like to go along with what hon. Wacha has simply said; there is more to it than we see, if they cannot withdraw the motion and stand up to be counted.  Honourable minister, stand up and be counted on behalf of the Government.

3.04
DR STEVEN MALLINGA (Butebo County, Pallisa):  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I think it would be a mistake for us to rush through Bills without appropriate consultation, especially when the Bill is specifically going to affect a lot of people in this country and here was the example of a Bill, which was going to inconvenience a lot of people in this country, if it was passed without further consultation.  I am a highly civilised person –(Interruption) 

MRS BYAMUKAMA:  Thank you, hon. Member, for giving way.  I think we have a problem of lack of a reading culture. When you look at the memorandum, it says consultations on this bill began in 1965 and there was a report by Kalema to that effect. Therefore, when my colleague claims that there have not been enough consultations, he defeats my understanding. And when he goes ahead to talk about dire consequences, I wonder what they are. 

The principles in the Domestic Relations Bill are well known. They state:

•	Do not marry a woman who is below 18 years.
•	Do not marry your daughter. 
•	If your husband has contributed to property which is in your names, please share it with him. 
•	Do not inherit a widow forcefully because you may give her HIV/AIDS.
•	Do not force your wife into sex without her consent because you may hurt her and she may have to go and be readmitted in hospital and be re-stitched after childbirth.

Mr Speaker, I would like clarification from hon. Dr Mallinga who is a doctor and  gynaecologist, as to whether these principles are really fair and just, I thank you.

DR MALLINGA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Consultations are like studies. After some time they expire and they become irrelevant. If there was a consultation in 1965, we have to make another consultation in order to make it relevant. Personally, I agree with the honourable lady but there are people in this country who form a majority and think otherwise. People in the rural areas for instance still believe in polygamy. Therefore, we should not make this a bill of the elite since not everybody in this country is one.
  
Mr Speaker, if this Bill is passed in its present form, we would have created several societies in the country. We have to look into that carefully and build a single society with laws, which apply across the whole society. Therefore, I applaud the honourable minister for saying that there is need for further consultations, thank you very much.

3.09
MRS LYDIA BALEMEZI (Woman Representative, Mukono): Thank you Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the honourable members for what they have contributed. I would also like to thank the Minister for communicating the government’s position.  On such matters where Government feels that not enough consultations are made, Parliament is normally given time to go out and consult. This seems to be an important bill concerning all people in the country and they have been waiting for it to be passed so that it can be enacted. 

Since Government has found that it is lacking some areas, I request that they point out those areas which may need polishing so that we come up with a bill of some kind.  This is because very many workshops have been held for parliamentarians and I believe all of us went to our constituencies and consulted. 

Government, therefore, needs to redirect us as to what to say and where to go. I believe Parliament will accept this. Let there be facilitation and some days off so that we can consult. By the time we go through the bill, every member here will be able to contribute. 

However looking at the roadmap of Government, I see no room for presenting a bill in October. Maybe we have forgotten that our term in Parliament has been shortened and that by October most of us will be concentrating on other issues in our constituencies. However, if the minister is sure that we shall have time in October, then let Government consider facilitating the members and giving us some days off so that we can go to our constituencies and consult on the issues which will be highlighted by the minister, I thank you. 

3.12
MR PATRICK MWONDHA (Bukooli County North, Bugiri): Thank you very much Mr Speaker. Most of the oaths of office we swear conclude by saying that we shall consider all matters that come before us without fear or favour. Government seems to be timid and afraid at this juncture. Otherwise why are they not adhering to the oaths of office they have taken? In the last sentence of paragraph 3, the minister says, “At the end of the debate, the Chair ruled that the Domestic Relations Bill 2003 must be on the Order Paper of Parliament on 16th June.” This is today and this was a ruling of the Chair. To revisit this ruling, our rules require that we must do so on a substantive motion. Therefore are we proceeding correctly, Mr Speaker?

THE SPEAKER: The Bill belongs to the government and it is the owner of the Motion for second reading. I think the case he is making is that he is not prepared. What you have to examine is whether the case for not being prepared is a good one or not. We shall, at the end of the day, decide when this bill is to be handled. At the moment, we are being given opportunity to comment on the statement, which the minister has made.

3.14
MS MARGARET ZZIWA (Woman Representative, Kampala): Thank you very much Mr Speaker. I want to thank the government for honouring the 16th by coming back here and according us the opportunity to have this bill talked about.

Mr Speaker, my greatest worry is that we are all representatives of the people. We came to this August House with a mandate, manifestos and promises, which we thought were very important to our constituents. I want to mention before this House that domestic issues such as conflicts and violence are rampant in my constituency of Kampala. I thought that the Domestic Relations Bill would be one of the remedies to minimize such incidences.  

One of the commitments I undertook before my constituents was to ensure that this bill is passed. Mr Speaker, I wish to read my manifesto, which I have brought before this House to ensure that –(Interjection)- yes I will lay it on the Table if need arises. Number 2 of my manifesto states that I will ensure that the Domestic Relations Bill is brought before Parliament and passed.

Mr Speaker, by being a signatory on the UN CERO convention, I believe Government made a commitment to protect human rights.  Recently however, I have heard Uganda’s ratings on the human rights lowered in some international conferences.  One of the reasons being forwarded is that we have not respected this area on the women, which is so instrumental. Mr Speaker, I know that –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, there is a problem of projecting this bill as being one for women only. Please make this bill for everybody.

MRS ZZIWA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. This Bill is not only for the women. However, it is a known fact that mainly women are oppressed when it comes to domestic violence.  When we are addressing gender issues, the issue of domestic violence, which affects mainly the women, comes highest on the agenda. Because the gentlemen are normally masculine and strong, they are always able to fight and they are always –(Interruption)

MS KIRASO: Hon. Zziwa, thank you very much for giving way.  The information I would like to give is that actually even some men have been victims of domestic violence although they do not want to admit this. They have very weak bodies and they have got very rough wives. There are even people here who have suffered that, Mr Speaker. When we want to make a law to protect them, they claim that we want to protect ourselves. Both men and women have suffered from domestic violence.  I thank you.  

DR MALLINGA: Mr Speaker, I think there is a misunderstanding of Domestic Relations Bill in this House.  Let us not confuse domestic violence with this bill. There are already laws in this country to protect women against domestic violence. Is the honourable member in order therefore to imply that there are no laws in this country which protect everybody against violence?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think you should know that last year or so, there was a constitutional case which questioned some provisions in domestic laws that are prevailing in the country. At the end of the day, the court ruled on a number of provisions in those laws as being unconstitutional. 

As of today, there is a lacuna on a number of issues because the constitutional court ruled them unconstitutional, therefore they cannot operate. Certain things cannot be addressed because there is no law in place and I think the argument is that this law is required to come and plug these loopholes. I think that is what he is saying.

MRS ZZIWA: Mr Speaker, thank you very much.  The other day, hon. Kibirige Sebunya stood on this Floor and said that he had wanted to divorce his wife and I nearly asked him under which law since the law was struck off the books of this country. This is the very reason why we need this law to come in place –(Interruption)

DR KIBIRIGE SEBUNYA: Mr Speaker, I got married on September 29th 1972. I have therefore been married for 33 years. It is true that I stood up in this House and wanted to be as cynical as possible because I do not believe this law we are talking about can in any way improve my marriage. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

MRS ZZIWA: Well, it is unfortunate that the honourable member can be cynical in this August House because I thought he was as serious as he always is. That not withstanding, Mr Speaker, there are many people who may wish to have their state of marriages solved in either dissolution or divorce. This is why we think that the earlier this law comes in place the better for all us especially those who may think that they cannot live compatibly together. The courts of law will definitely be assisted also.

I want to stress, Mr Speaker, that the issue of matrimonial rights and property sounds very contentious because nearly every time, it is the male spouse that is in charge of the property and the female spouse is in the disadvantaged position. I want to pursue this issue from that perspective and argue that this Bill, which we are about to pass, will help a lot of women, particularly those sold out of their homes, divorced or chased without any recourse. When this law is in place it will be able to address all these issues.  

When we were here in 1998 and we were debating the Land Act, the issue of co-ownership was brought before this House. The Executive convinced us at length that the issue of co-ownership would be addressed under the Domestic Relations Bill. It was an undertaking on this law. Yesterday I was approached by one of my residents who lives in Luzira; this lady has seven children and her husband has sold their property. When she went to make an appeal in the courts of law they said, “You do not appear anywhere on the title and you cannot claim ownership”. I believe that when this Bill is passed, provision for the matrimonial home will be made and we will be able to protect our people.

Normally when a law is brought before this House it may not be perfect. As a Parliament we have the obligation to make adjustments. I appreciate that people have had concerns but they have not listed them. I wish to see objections to a clause or clauses, with amendments. Then we will be able to make amendments, accommodate those concerns and move on. 

However, when a Bill remains as it is for a whole term and when I say “term” I really mean ekisanja, I do not know whether it is also going to demand another kisanja. I think we are becoming unreasonable to the people we represent. I do not want the women and this time I really mean women, to go and draft a Private Member’s Bill and bring it before this House.  

I know it is for the good of the population, for men and women alike who may wish to have their marriages and relationships more defined. I wish to appeal to the honourable minister that September or October is still too far away. It would be better if we handled this issue before or during the next session because after that we shall be busy looking for votes for another issue. Can he minimize this time so that we can have this DRB brought earlier and debated? I thank you.

3.27
MR JOHN ERESU (Kaberamaido County, Kaberamaido): Mr Speaker, Government has given three reasons for this Bill to be pushed aside until a progress report is given to this Parliament on Tuesday 18th October 2005. However, permit me to say this. I represent a considerable number of the rural people and the reason that government is giving that the rural population have not been consulted on the Domestic Relations Bill should be accepted. However, government should let us know how they will consult the rural population so that we know how much consultation is taking place.

Secondly, different religious communities with their beliefs have different ways in which they want their matrimonial homes to run. Government should update us on how this harmonisation is going to take place.

I am glad the minister said the breakdown of communication between the Joint Christian Council and the Uganda Moslem Supreme Council has been solved. We would like government to give us a progress report so that we and the people of this country are not left in doubt or made to feel that government is not really for this Bill.  

Otherwise, I would like to add that it is important to consider the fact that a sensitive Bill like this one needs a lot of patience and accommodation. If we are not patient with this Bill it may not serve its purpose. While we may legislate and make laws for this country, like a Domestic Relations Bill, the –(Interruptions)

MRS BALEMEZI: Mr Speaker, I have been listening to my colleague very attentively. When he says that some Bills are deliberated upon impatiently without consideration he is implying that members come here to debate when they are moody and that they do not show any patience. Is the member in order to give such a statement or to imply that some members here are impatient regarding particular Bills? Is he in order?

THE SPEAKER: That is a personal assessment, which may be faulty. However, let me ask him to substantiate.

MR ERESU: I was saying that while we are making laws, these laws may easily be flaunted at family level. In other words, the law will not have the same effect if we are not as accommodative as possible. The efficacy of the Domestic Relations Bill will only have meaning if individual homes or families give it due regard. After all, a home is founded on love and understanding, not on laws, which are made in Parliament.

I would like to conclude that I support the Domestic Relations law but I do not want to attach it to a particular group of people because I think a home is not only for women but for the husbands and children as well and to a large extent, in the African society, for the immediate relatives too. Therefore, in my opinion, we need to exercise a lot of discretion and patience within ourselves in the enactment of this law.

I support the Domestic Relations law to be made but the womenfolk in this country should not think they are the only ones being oppressed. I know some men are also undergoing the same treatment in their homes. Does it, therefore, mean men should also come up with their own law?

MR AWORI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The honourable minister in charge of the Bill has made it clear that he is not proceeding with the Bill until further notice. Is it in order for my honourable colleague to belabour a point, which cannot yield any results?

THE SPEAKER: I think the essence of this debate should only be about the inordinate delay in passing this Bill. It should take into account the period, which the minister has asked for. Is it reasonable or unreasonable? We need to pursue that trend? Eventually I will ask the minister, in view of what you have said, whether he can adjust his time so that we expeditiously deal with this Bill, which was tabled in 2003. Therefore, I will give the opportunity to hon. Kigyagi so that eventually the minister comes in –(Interjection)- you have not concluded? Conclude then.

MR ERESU: Mr Speaker, in conclusion I support the period the minister is giving of 18 October 2005 to report progress to this House, given that this is a Government Bill. I thank you.

3.34
MR JOHN KIGYAGI (Mbarara Municipality, Mbarara): Thank you, Mr Speaker. This Bill is about 90 to 92 percent done, and it has no contention and no dispute. But the 8 to 10 percent is highly contested and it needs to be reviewed. I am sure you have read it and I will not get into those details. My request to honourable colleagues is to honestly address these views, which are highly contested by the population. We make laws for people and these laws should be acceptable. They should be laws that can be implemented, laws that should improve the welfare of society. They should not be laws that will disturb the welfare of society.

During the debate on the Domestic Relations Bill, we need to be very accommodative. In the Ugandan context a family does not only mean man, wife and children. We live in communities; African homes have communities. This law should be able to accommodate our context because some of the clauses that come up in this Bill seem to indicate a family, which is not a typical Ugandan family. A typical Ugandan family has a community to consider and we should be accommodative. My call to honourable colleagues is that we should do more consultation. The 8 to 10 percent of this Bill is being highly contested by almost the whole population, including the women and with due regard, it is very well known because during my consultations with Mbarara Municipality, the women asked me whether we did not have anything else to do instead of debating this Bill. 

I explained to them that the Bill is not only on these few clauses, which are contentious, but addresses a larger –(Interjections)- protect me, Mr Speaker. I think we should give the minister more time for extensive and consultation. Thank you.

3.37
THE MINISTER OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Prof. Tarsis Kabwegyere): Thank you, Mr Speaker. In making laws one makes the first assumption that there is a normal situation before he legislates to handle the abnormal situation. The moment the abnormal situation is so pervasive that it is normal, then the law does not operate. The law, therefore, has two purposes. One is to protect society from the deviants and secondly, to guide society. 

In many cases where law has been ahead of society to guide it, that law has not worked because a law that is too far ahead of society is not obeyed; and when it is not obeyed by everybody, that is not law.  

Mr Speaker, what the minister has presented to this House is not that the Bill is being withdrawn. What he is requesting for is more time for consultation so that we do not pass a law that fails to work. This is not a law that is based on a broken home or a broken domestic domain. We must assume that there is a normal domestic domain where relations are working, and that when things are not right then there is a law that can catch those who do not obey. The majority of people are saying everything is wrong and we need this law to help us to protect us, then you have a challenge to face. If society is averse to the kind of things you want to put in the law, you will have difficulty in enforcing it. 

The plea is, let there be more consultation, including among religious groups. Government is saying, what is the purpose of bringing here a law that will cause controversy in the country and will probably solve fewer problems than it has created? You do not want, as a responsible government, to do that. I would like to plead with members –(Interruption)

MRS BYAMUKAMA: I would like to raise a point of procedure in respect to the fact that the hon. Prof. Tarsis Kabwegyere is a member of Cabinet and this is a Government Bill; I believe it is provided for in the Constitution of Uganda. Therefore, when he says that this is a law, which is ahead of its time and he stands up to make a contribution, I get a little bit perturbed. When the Attorney-General made his presentation he said that this was a directive from Cabinet. I would like to find out if Cabinet has therefore decided that this Bill is ahead of time?

THE SPEAKER: No, I think he came in to support his colleagues justifying that there is need to give him time since the issues involved are complicated. He is emphasising the Attorney-General’s request for more time.

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am actually, I am not revealing –(Interruption)

MR BEN WACHA (Oyam County North, Apac): I respect your ruling, Sir. Are we to assume that by Tuesday, 18 October 2005 this Bill will have caught up with time?

THE SPEAKER: No. That is not what he is saying. He is saying that we need to study it so that you scrutinize it and bring provisions that are moving with the times. I think he is saying that perhaps the original draft was very advanced and that is what they want to change.

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would not like to reveal a secret but we had an exchange with hon. Dora Byamukama over this very point. I think what she should be worried about is whether what I have said is nonsensical or whether it makes sense. 

So I want to conclude by saying that Parliament is still mandated to make laws and must make this law. But it is in the wisdom of government that if you have Churches and the Moslem community not happy with - and these are very volatile forces in society - what we are trying to do in this House will make us go to our constituencies and we land in fire. Mr Speaker, I strongly support the proposal as presented by the minister.

3.41
Mr Mwesige: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the honourable members for their observations and comments. I would like to correct the impression that –(Interruption)

DR OKULO EPAK (Oyam County South, Apac): I am sorry to intervene in this way but since you have cut the contribution short, I had no choice. I want to know what method the Government is going to use to consult the rural population. The rural population –(Interjection)- no, it is here; it is population in the text and yet in the statement it was women. Are we talking about consulting a sample of rural population or are we seriously going to consult the whole rural population and shall we have achieved this by October? To me the only way one would really consult the rural population effectively is through a referendum. (Laughter) If we have a problem with this Bill – because since 2003 this Bill is jammed, –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Order, please!

DR OKULO EPAK: Mr Speaker, government was unable to accept the proposal to have separate family laws for different religious communities. Who is government not to accept yet this is the Government, which is all the time saying, “The people have the right”? I stood up to seek clarification but I also wish to make a very substantial statement on the reasons given by the government as, “A, B, C”. Surely is the Government not willing to go by the wishes of the people? Now it is saying we are not ready to accept separate family laws. Is the Government now prepared to go against the people’s wishes?  

Secondly, is there any better method of consulting people on an issue like this one other than by referendum?

MR MWESIGE: Well, Mr Speaker, it is only through further consultations that the wishes of the people on this subject can be ascertained. We have no problem with the referendum in principle but as you know this Bill has about three sets of interests. There is marriage, property rights and divorce.  So, an omnibus referendum on this Bill would not really be in the interests of the mischief that this Bill seeks to cure. So we would not recommend a referendum at this stage.  

I want to correct the impression that Government intends to withdraw this Bill.  My statement is very clear. It seeks to suspend debate on the Bill until further consultations are made so that we can have a comprehensive law that will not remain in the statute books but which will stand the test of time.  

Mr Speaker, the rural population is crucial and I would like to accept the amendment in the statement that the consultation will not target the rural women alone but also the rural men. I was challenged as to why I did not make the specific objections in the statement, which were raised by different sections of society.  

But as I said in the statement, some sections like the Uganda Moslem Supreme Council rejected the entire Bill. They rejected the Bill and there is no way I could have come here to point out that the Moslem Supreme Council proposes the following amendments, which amendments do not exist. So, the alternative would have been to withdraw the Bill but we do not want to go to that stage because we still believe that interactions with these groups will provide a solution. Mr Speaker -(Interruption)  

MR LULE MAWIYA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am still moving –(Interjection)- yes, I have a wife. I would like to seek clarification from the minister because in his reason B he is saying that he wants to bring a law that will actually harmonise or accommodate all the interests of the various communities in one. 

I would like to say this and be put on record. This cannot work because we are totally different communities and religions. One law cannot harmonise all our interests in total. I, therefore, say that it cannot work however much time government says it need. I want to be on record, unless we want to turn some societies into lawless ones. Thank you.

MRS BYAMUKAMA: Thank you honourable minister for giving way. I want to raise clarification on the issue on your page 2(a) where you say that the Law Reform Commission’s consultations had broken down. I would like to plead with government that if the Law Reform Commission is not in position to carry out these consultations, is there no other way that government can use maybe other mechanisms for these consultations to go on? I find it ridiculous that there is a breakdown, which definitely shows lack of respect for the institution and other people’s views. 

I would also like to find out, under (b) where you say that - and I suppose it is the position of government that we should have one family law. I have heard my colleagues talk about it but there are some issues such as principles of marriage and the age of marriage, which are provided for under the Constitution and there are degrees of consanguinity where you cannot marry your sister or brother. This cuts across the different types of marriages. Therefore, because we are not a secular state, it is important that we sustain the principle of observing these binding principles, which are in our Constitution. I support government on this.

My last comment is about the need for more time to consult the rural population. Mr Speaker, we have waited for 40 years. One month would not be too much to wait. I would like to plead with the hon. Attorney-General, my colleague and learned friend that when he says Tuesday 18th and preferably the 16th of July so that we can give him another month of massive consultation, that Parliament may be in position to agree on some principles in form of a family code. 

I say this because the issues of marriage, separation and divorce and the way they are addressed by the law are not new. But there are some aspects, which need to be reviewed so that we conform to the Constitution. 

There are also some aspects, which have been struck down by the Constitutional Court, which were declared unconstitutional. Therefore, it would be in the interests of all of us that we have laws, which are comprehensive indeed. We also take into account the fact that courts are having a hard time dealing with issues where a specific law is lacking. Thank you.

MS AMONGI: Mr Minister, I want clarification from you on the issue you have just raised about the Moslems. On the 13th of February 2004, the Moslems wrote to you through the Chairperson of the Moslem Parliamentary Caucus. In the letter they totally disagreed with the DRB. It states clearly that they will not accept the DRB because it is the Sharia law that must govern Islamic marriages. 

I want to know from the minister, in the event that this Moslem Council or the Islamic community continues to contest the DRB as manifested by one of the Members of Parliament who is a Moslem, if they still contest the DRB in its totality, which they have done for the last 40 years since the consultation started – and now these are three to five months - I do not know the miracle that will come for the Moslems to accept it. But just in case they continue to contest its totality, what will be the response of the Government? Will you still continue on suspension? Will you withdraw it? What will be the action of government?

MR MWESIGE: Mr Speaker let me wind up - (Interjection)- if you could allow me to - (Interruption)

DR NKUUHE: Since our Constitution states that there is separation of Church and state, what is the whole point of consulting the Moslem Supreme Council and the Uganda Joint Christian Council? The Constitution does not allow us to be governed by Sharia law. (Applause) 

What is the whole point then? Why do we not go on and write a law that we think will cater for the interests of the various people since we know –(Interjection)- yes, based on the Constitution?

MR KATUNTU: Mr Speaker, we shall need a little more guidance. The Constitution clearly provides for the establishment of Khadi’s courts. Khadi’s courts do not administer secular law. They only administer Sharia law. It is the constitutional right of Moslems to take their matrimonial disputes in regard to marriage, divorce or inheritance to a Khadi’s court. So, you cannot have a secular court administering Sharia law. Neither would you have a Khadi’s court administering secular laws; you cannot.

MR MWESIGE: Mr Speaker, the aspects in this Bill have a bearing on religious beliefs. Some marriages are contracted in Church and actually some religious sections have positions on divorce. So, it is only fair that before this law is enacted by this Parliament, different religious sections are consulted.  

If the argument that we are different people and therefore we need different laws to govern us were to be followed, then we would never have had any law because we are different. So, I am saying that although we belong to different religious beliefs, we can still have a universal family law that accommodate the interests of all Ugandans. (Applause) This practice will not be peculiar to Uganda alone. Tanzania, which has a wider section of Moslems, has one domestic relations law. So, that argument does not hold water, in my view. 

Government has a mechanism of consultation. We have a constitutional body called the Uganda Law Reform Commission whose duty is to continuously review and revise the laws of Uganda and advise Government and Parliament.

The Law Reform Commission will endeavour to reach the population through mechanisms that it will design and the outcome of those consultations will be returned to this House through the process, which I undertake to present on 18th October this year.  

I need that time because consultations on this Bill are evolving. I do not want to come back and ask for another extension. It is only fair that the extension I have prayed for is given so that we are able to do a thorough job so that when we come back this Bill takes off. I, therefore, pray that members accept my request so that when we come back with a progress report this House should be in a position then to make an informed decision as to whether this Bill should continue or not. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Let us really prompt the Government to act on this matter. Initially let us give you a period of two months then you will come and report. If you have not done anything then, we go to mid August. You will come back and give us a progressive report on what you have done. We shall appreciate your problem if you are –(Interruption)

MR MWESIGE: Mr Speaker, I accept your ruling. I will come with a progress report on the 15th of August.

THE SPEAKER: Fine.

MS KIRASO: Mr Speaker, what does progress report mean? Progress report can be anything from saying, “We have failed to convene meetings because we had a very busy schedule”, to, “We are still disagreeing on our positions”, or anything else. Why don’t we, as a responsible body give the honourable member a specific time and date to come up with a Bill arising out of the consultations, which they would have carried out?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, come back on the 15th of August to tell us the position you have reached and we expect you to work tirelessly so that by then we may proceed with it. 

That brings us to the end of today’s business. The House is adjourned until Monday afternoon.

(The House rose at 4.03 p.m. and adjourned until Monday, 20 June 2005 at 2.00 p.m.)

