

Sunday, 10 June 2018

Parliament met at 11.01 a.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this morning sittings. We are meeting on a very sad occasion to pay tribute to our colleague, hon. Ibrahim Abiriga, who was brutally murdered between 6.30 and 7.00 p.m on Friday evening. He was brutally gunned down. He was travelling with his brother, Saidi Kongo Buga, a Uganda People’s Defence Force soldier who had just returned from a tour of duty in Somalia.

I would like to thank the mufti of Uganda for accommodating our request to delay slightly the burial so that we can accord hon. Abiriga his burial as a former Member of Parliament and also to allow the Islamic rights to take place.

On this Floor, this comes at a time when we have been complaining about the unexplained murders and kidnaps in the country. We would like to urge the public to be more vigilant and identify things that look strange. Furthermore, I would like to urge the security forces to do more to secure the peace in the country. 

Honourable members, there will be transport to Arua. Transport will depart from south wing parking lot this afternoon, at 3.00 p.m. However, the full programme will be announced by the Prime Minister because there will be ceremonies in Arua Municipality and finally, at Rhino camp where both the late hon. Abiriga and his brother Buga will be laid to rest. 

I would like to announce that today is free sitting and Members can sit anywhere because we all need to be accommodated.

Today, you may notice that things are different. There will be no laying of the wreaths. The Islamic law does not allow laying of wreaths. Thank you very much. 

(Entrance of the late Col (Rtd) Ibrahim Abiriga)

The National Anthem.

The East African Community Anthem.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO PAY TRIBUTE TO THE LATE HON. COL (RTD) IBRAHIM ABIRIGA, MP ARUA MUNICIPALITY, ARUA DISTRICT.


THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, before the motion is moved, I would like to inform the House that a part of hon. Abiriga’s family is here; Mrs Sijali Amina and the children are here, together with the brother to the late, Mr Yusuf. 

In the distinguished member’s gallery, we have the Secretary General of the NRM, hon. Justine Lumumba, the NRM Treasurer, hon. Rose Nsereko Namayanja, hon. Sam Engola, and hon. Lydia Wanyoto. 

We have the following former MPs: hon. Balikudembe Joseph Mutebi, hon.  Nusura Tiperu, hon. Sulaiman Balyejusa, hon. Jimmy Otekat, hon. Anthony Butele, hon. Mariam Nalubega, hon. Sam Okuonzi, hon. Ezat Wadri and hon. Nobert Mao –  the President General of the Democratic Party. 

From the Uganda Muslim Supreme Council, we have the pleasure of the company of Sheik Gugwa Sulaiman, Chairman Imam Council of Uganda, His Eminence Sheikh Abdullah Semambo-Deputy Mufti of Uganda, hajji Musana Suleiman Kawanguzi. They have all come to pay respect to our colleague.

Honourable members, the idea is that we complete the tribute by 1.30 p.m. so that the casket can move from here to Kololo for the lift off at 2.00 p.m. so that by 4.30 p.m. they are in Arua. Therefore, today we may have to shorten the general contributions to two minutes. I beg for your indulgence.

11.13
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Madam Speaker, I wish to move a Motion for a Resolution of Parliament to pay tribute to the late hon. Col. Ibrahim Abiriga for his dedicated service to Uganda. I am moving this motion under Rule 58 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament.

“WHEREAS the Parliament of Uganda received with grief the sad news of the sudden and brutal demise of Hon. Col Ibrahim Abiriga, a Member of Parliament which occurred on Friday, 8 June 2018 near his home in Kawanda, Wakiso District;

AWARE THAT Hon. col lbrahim Abiriga has been the Member of Parliament representing the people of Arua Municipality, Arua District and served on the parliamentary committee on Defence and Internal Affairs, as well as the Committee on Human Rights in this Parliament;

RECOGNISING THAT Hon. Col. Abirigo has also served Uganda in several other distinguished positions:

    1. he was the Resident District Commissioner (RDC) for Arua District for 12 years and Yumbe District for four years;
    2. from 1971 to 1976, he served in the Uganda Army and later joined the Notional Resistance Army wherein he rose to become the 2nd Division Administration Officer, a position he held until his retirement from the Army at the rank of Colonel;

APPRECIATING THAT Hon. Col lbrahim Abiriga has been a diligent leader and legislator who has served his people and Uganda with dedication, patriotism and distinction;

NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved by this Parliament as follows:
    1. That Parliament collectively conveys its deep condolences to the bereaved family, relatives, friends, the people of Arua Municipality in Arua District and the entire country for the loss of a distinguished and gallant son of Uganda.
    2. That Parliament takes cognizance of the distinguished service rendered and contribution made by Hon. Col Ibrahim Abiriga to the people of Arua Municipality and Uganda at large.
    3. That we pray to the Almighty God to sustain the bereaved and grant Hon. Col Ibrahim Abiriga's soul eternal peace.”

Madam Speaker, I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Is the motion seconded? The motion is seconded by all the Members of the House.

(Motion Seconded)

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, this is the justification for the motion.

The brutal and senseless murder of our colleague, our brother and our comrade, hon. Ibrahim Abiriga, Member of Parliament for Arua Municipality and his young brother who was also his bodyguard on the evening of Friday, 8 June 2018 was an act of cowardice carried out by evil people.

As His Excellency President Museveni said yesterday, the killers of hon. Abiriga will be hunted down and brought to justice. We should all be vigilant to ensure that killings of this nature are fought and defeated once and for all. I agree with the remark made by the Rt Hon. Speaker that the people of Uganda need to be vigilant in this crusade to hunt down these criminals and murderers.

The agents of these evil acts want to instil fear among the wananchi, but we would like to assure all Ugandans that they will not succeed.

Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you and to salute Members for coming out of their recess to join the family and the country in paying tribute to our fallen brother. This is the true spirit of solidarity, which we greatly appreciate.

Hon. Abiriga was a man of peace who easily got along with many people. He believed in peaceful co-existence, respecting the diversity of views of others. He was a tolerant man. He did not deserve the kind of brutal death that claimed his life.

Our brother, hon. Abiriga was easily approachable and always reached out to people whenever he needed answers on anything. He would never hold back his concerns whenever he had any issue to raise.

Only a few days ago, Madam Speaker, hon. Abiriga came to see me at the Prime Minister’s Office to pursue the development concerns of the people of Arua Municipality, the constituency he very ably represented in this Parliament. We had agreed to meet again. Sadly, the meeting will never take place.

Madam Speaker, our brother, Abiriga, was a courageous man. He was bold and stood firmly and proudly for what he believed in. He openly professed and talked about his love for the National Resistance Movement (NRM). His trademark yellow attire was one example through which he demonstrated his love for the NRM. We will surely miss his unmissable presence in this august House.

Hon. Abiriga was the foremost legislator who called for the amendment of the Constitution on the issue of age limit.

Madam Speaker, our brother, Abiriga, was born on 5 June 1956 to the late Yusuf Buga and Jena Alabiru. Hon. Abiriga started his education at Rhino Camp Primary School and completed in 1967. Thereafter, he joined Kampala Grammar Secondary School for the Uganda Certificate of Education in 1973. In 2008, after several engagements as an army officer, he decided to go back to school for further education.

Madam Speaker, hon. Abiriga was a man of the people. He connected with people from all walks of life: the young, the old, women and men; religious and non-religious; Government and the Opposition. The outpouring grief and the hundreds of people who have been flocking his home in Kawanda, Arua town and Rhino Camp since the tragic murder is testimony to his character.

Madam Speaker, in his career as an administrator, army officer and Resident District Commissioner, hon. Abiriga performed his duties with diligence, dedication, discipline and commitment. People who worked with him bear testimony to a man who was honest, principled and straightforward. These are qualities which we should all emulate. 

The death of hon. Abiriga is a blow to all peace-loving Ugandans. We will miss his principled and consistent contribution, humour and warm personality.

We thank the people of Arua Municipality for electing him as their representative, which gave us an opportunity to interact with him. We commiserate with the family, friends and relatives and all the people of West Nile and the country at large.

We pray that God strengthens us all and rests the soul of our fallen comrade and brother, Abiriga, in eternal peace.

Hon. Abiriga is survived by a widow, Sijali Amina and nine children. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Prime Minister. As I invite the Leader of the Opposition, I would like to announce the presence of hon. Huda Oleru, who has just walked in. I would like to announce the following contributions from:

    1. Buganda Caucus – a message of condolence and Shs 1,000,000
    2. Bukedi Caucus – message of condolence and Shs 1,450,000
    3. Acholi Parliamentary Group – message of condolence and Shs 1,400,000
    4. MPs of East African Legislative Assembly (EALA) – Shs 1,000,000
    5. Ankole Parliamentary Group – Shs 1,100,000 and a message of condolence.
    6. Bugisu Parliamentary Group – Shs 1,500,000 and message condolence
    7. Kigezi Parliamentary Group – Shs 2,000,000 and message of condolence.
    8. Busoga Parliamentary Group – Shs 2,000,000 and message of condolence.

We also have condolence letters from:

    1. The NRM Secretary General, hon. Lumumba. 
    2. The Chairperson NRM Women’s League, Lydia Wanyoto. 

Others will be read as they come in. I now invite the Leader of the Opposition.

11.26
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Ms Winfred Kiiza): Madam Speaker, on behalf of the Opposition, I rise to second a motion for a resolution of Parliament to pay tribute to our brother, friend and comrade, hon. Ibrahim Abiriga, the MP Arua Municipality, Arua District, who was taken away from us brutally and sadly.

To the people of Arua Municipality, his family, the nation, Muslim fraternity and all people of goodwill, Inna lillahi wa inna ilaihi.

Madam Speaker, today is a Sunday and Member of Parliament –ordinarily – are not supposed to be here. However, seeing the attendance of Members of Parliament today is a true testimony of who Abiriga was. It is not common that when Members of Parliament are abruptly invited from recess, you can see them in such a number. The number was not even half of this when we were passing the national budget in this House but for Abiriga we are all here. (Applause)

Why are we all her? We are here to thank God for the gift of Abiriga. In his own way, Abiriga meant a lot to all of us. Abiriga was hard to annoy. Even when you talked bad about him, he would come to you and make fun of your annoyance and from there, you would all start laughing. 

Madam Speaker, I would not want the death of the man laying before us here to be politicised. This is because in Abiriga, we had a uniting factor. I send my condolences to the NRM party, which he very much believed in. His love for NRM was always around him in his way of dressing, his way of speech and more so to the leader of the party. His love for the leader of the party was far beyond his love for the party itself and Abiriga would not shy away from saying it. 

At some point when we would make fun of him as to why he was always in yellow yet senior leaders in the party were never in yellow, he said: “You know, you Opposition members are funny in your way. Some of you are in the party colours during day and at night you are in other colours.” He just made fun of it but to me he had made a statement. Therefore, he had a way of communicating his messages that is not the usual way in which people communicate their messages. I found him an easy person to work with.

Madam Speaker, death has really robbed us of a man of a humble character. (Applause) If I may use Niemöller words but bringing them closer to our situation; when the murder of children started, we referred to them as ritual murders, child sacrifices and we brushed them off. When the murder of women started, the issue of prostitutes came in; they said they were prostitutes. Then the issue of illuminati came in and it was also brushed off. Further, when the issue of Muslim clerics came in, it was all about religion, terrorism and it was also brushed off.  

Madam Speaker, when we demanded for reports, no report has been seen. Ms Joan Kagezi was gunned down but the rhetoric was “We shall bring the perpetrators to book.” When the Assistant Inspector General of Police, Mr Andrew Kaweesi, was gunned down it was the same story, “We shall put cameras all over, so that the deaths do not continue.” Now the death is in our House.

Here, we are, mourning one of us, who was gunned down in a brutal manner. During Niemöller time, he said, they came for the Catholics, and he did not speak because he was not a Catholic. Then they came for the Jews, he did not speak because he thought he was not a Jew. When it happened to the Protestants, he said it was for them, he was not a Protestant. But when they came for him, there was nobody to speak. Let us rise up to the occasion and start speaking about the insecurity in this country. Killings have no colour. (Applause) Killings have no status. Killings and the killers have no shame. That is why they have gone for children, women, religious leaders and now killing Members of Parliament. My call to the Government is to ensure security of persons and property; it is the cardinal role of Government. 

Madam Speaker, yes indeed all of us Ugandans are called to be vigilant and ensure that we take care of each other being keepers of our brothers but the sole responsibility of providing security for persons and property lies in the confines of Government.

Madam Speaker, we shall not get tired of saying that the many private security companies that are not well controlled, the many guns in our population, which are not in the control of Government and the many paramilitary groups that are in the country, combined with the joblessness in our country, this is bound to happen.

Therefore, as we send off our dear brother, we should remember our brothers and sisters who have died in similar situations and be able to make a firm commitment of ensuring that security of persons and property remains a cardinal responsibility of our Government. The NRM Government for a long time has been celebrated for security and everybody says, “I will vote the NRM because I now sleep.”

However, Madam Speaker, of recent, sleep is a privilege. You wake up in the morning and you say, “Allah Akbar, Alleluia, thank you God, I have seen a day.” But even when you have seen a day, you are not sure whether you will go back home and sleep. That is what happened to our brother hon. Abiriga; we had spent the day with him. Friends are making testimonies of how they were with him in Parliamentary Staff Welfare Fund meeting. We were with him in the State of the Nation Address and I remember him beckoning me to sit closer to him but I told him I feared his yellow colours. I asked him whether I could first dress him in blue so that we could sit together. He said, “My sister these colours should not separate us; come and sit closer to me.” I said hon. Abiriga, “I must go and take my seat.” We were with him but little did I know that we were speaking for the last time.

It is very sad that we have lost him and gone in brutal manner and I really wonder who could have killed hon. Abiriga and for what reason. Madam Speaker, hon. Abiriga talked what he believed in. If he did not like you, he would tell you so. There are people who really massage hypocrisy but straight forward people like hon. Abiriga, would tell you if they liked you or not. He would tell you what he believed in and what he did not believe in.

The Rt Hon. Prime Minister talked about the age limit programme and hon. Abiriga was very keen on this matter saying, “you people, we needed to give ourselves seven years so we can be able to work for our people.” Little did he know that he was not even going to finish the five years!

Therefore, this world is just useless. Let us avoid making enemies because we shall leave the stage. (Applause) We are on a stage and each one of us will come to play their part and go. Hon. Abiriga has finished his part in a sad way. My wish and prayer is that our Government takes control of the security of Ugandans, so that we can all wake up in the morning and know maybe, I will not die in a brutal manner as we look forward to joining him in future. God gave you to us and He has taken you away. Hon. Abiriga, my brother, may your soul rest in peace.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. I now invite hon. Baryayanga, on behalf of the Independent Members of Parliament.  However, before he comes, I would like to announce the following message of condolence and contributions: 

    1. Sebei Parliamentary Caucus -  Shs 1,500,000
    2. Uganda People’s Defence Forces -  Shs 1,000,000
    3. Hon. Nyakecho - $100;
    4. West Nile Parliamentary Group -  Shs 10,050,000;
    5. Lango Parliamentary Group - Shs 1,000,000;
    6. Teso Parliamentary Group - Shs 3,600,000; and
    7. Karamoja Parliamentary Caucus -  Shs 1,400,000. 

11.38
MR ANDREW BARYAYANGA (Independent, Kabale Municipality, Kabale): Madam Speaker, I indeed stand to second the motion, to pay tribute to late hon. Col. Ibrahim Abiriga. 

On behalf of the Independent Members of Parliament, the people of Kabale Municipality and on my own behalf, I wish to extend my sincere and heartfelt condolences to the family of the late hon. Col Ibrahim Abiriga, the people of Arua Municipality, the NRM party and Ugandans at large.

On Friday evening, the nation was yet again engulfed with high emotions and fear, as the death of the deceased comrade spread far and wide, especially aided by social media. I was in utter disbelieve and prayed that it was fake news. When I first heard the unfortunate news, I wondered who on earth would want such a man, hon. Abiriga dead and more so, in such a brutal, inhumane and gruesome manner; I thought it was a lie.

Madam Speaker, the man we are eulogising today, was one of unquestionable loyalty and principles. Hon. col Abiriga was an NRM stalwart whose loyalty to his party was unquestionable, from the time he joined the party up to the time of his demise. He was a household name, as far as the NRM is concerned and his commitment to it was unwavering. He was a yellow man from his car, clothes and utensils and much more. 

After NTV went to his home, they ran a clip that showed that even his bed sheets were yellow. The cups in the house were yellow. He was not only about words but he believed in what he believed and also actions he practiced were about him being NRM, up to his demise. We can, perhaps, emulate this character or trait from our fallen colleague; loyalty and commitment. Whatever you choose to believe in, honourable members, do it with all your ability. 

He will be remembered as a man who served in this country in various capacities. As the Prime Minister has said, he was an administrator and a Resident District Commissioner (RDC) in Arua and Yumbe. He also represented his constituents in the House and really loved them. 

Some of us may not have agreed with him on many issues regarding the future of this country and governance. However, I also believe that in politics, there must be tolerance and accommodation of all diverse opinions. (Applause) We cannot be a country that terrorizes and assassinates people because of their political beliefs. (Applause) 

Madam Speaker, as we bid farewell to our colleague, we must demand that Government produces reports and accountability for lives of Ugandans, famous or otherwise, that have gripped this country - gruesome murders, kidnaps and more. We cannot stop at the rhetoric of “everything is under control”. No. Ugandans are demanding for answers and they should be provided. No one is safe these days; Ugandans deserve better.

Madam Speaker, we need to be reassured that security organs of our nation are still in charge; that it is safe for one to move to their homes and not be attacked by machete-wielding thugs at their gates; that women will not be waylaid, raped and killed; and that Ugandans are safe from kidnaps because these have become a routine these days; that someone shall be gunned down by men on boda-bodas in broad day light or otherwise. The security of every Ugandan is a must and it has to be guaranteed. 

You can never know whether you are going to get home. Nowadays when they open the gate, you first peep to see whether there is anyone outside waiting for you. When you are getting close to your home, you do not know whether the gate will open and no one is there to beat you up. A few months ago, my wife was getting into the gate and all of a sudden, stones were being hit at the car. All the windows were down. The only thing she could do was scream until they just came, picked her handbag and ran away; that was at the gate. Therefore, there is a very big problem, honourable members. We really need accountability. Rest in peace, hon. Abiriga.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable members. We now begin the general contributions. Can I invite the Chairperson of the Muslim Caucus and then hon. Elijah Okupa, who was the first to arrive at the scene? However, let me take this opportunity to thank the Members of Parliament who volunteered to go to the scene, spent the night there and spent the day there. Rt Gen. Moses Ali, I would really like to thank you, members of the West Nile Caucus and many other Members. Thank you for the support. Hon. Hood Katuramu, but two minutes.

11.45
MR HOOD KATURAMU (Independent, Persons with Disabilities, Western): Madam Speaker, we are mourning a gallant son of Uganda, the hon. Ibrahim Abiriga. Humility and calmness are rare attributes that few people have. Hon. Col Ibrahim Abiriga had those qualities. He practiced what he believed in and identified himself in what he believed in. On behalf of the Muslim Parliamentary Caucus, I wish to extend our very sincere and heartfelt condolences to the family, his constituents in Arua Municipality, the entire leadership and fraternity of the National Resistance Movement for the loss of this gallant son of Uganda.

Madam Speaker, hon. Col Abiriga did not miss any meetings of the Muslim Parliamentary Caucus. He made sure that if he was absent, he would call and inform you that he would not attend the Muslim Parliamentary Caucus but would adhere to whatever we resolved; he did that exactly. He did not miss joint prayers in our parliamentary mosque. We have been praying with him and the Muslim Parliamentary Caucus fraternity will indeed miss him.

He has been a truthful man and the scriptures affirm to this, that once you say the truth, it is that truth that you have spoken that will set you free and be a peaceful person on earth and thereafter. Col Abiriga has been exactly that. 
We wish to extend our condolences to the family; to the widow and the orphans and assure you that the Almighty God, the provider will keep and sustain you.

Madam Speaker, the Muslim Parliamentary Caucus has made a contribution of Shs 5 million to the family - (Applause) - to help them in starting this journey of a new life; we believe Allah will comfort them. May the Almighty God give you Jannah and rest you in eternal peace. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the contributions we are making will go straight to the family. They are not going to be part of the food and rice; they are for the family. (Applause)

11.49
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Serere): Thank you, Madam Speaker. We sit here today on a very sad note because we have lost one of our own. I was seated in the canteen with hon. Lydia Wanyoto when we received a message that hon. Abiriga has been killed. 

At first we thought it was fake news but within no time, we saw the pictures on social media. We decided to drive to the late’s home because we thought possibly, maybe he was not dead and so we would mobilise to evacuate him to the nearest health facility. However, before we could reach there, we got information that they were both dead. It was sad and it remains sad. 

Madam Speaker, hon. Abiriga, whom we have no choice but to refer to as the late, we all know his trademark. I decided to put on a yellow tie today to honour my brother. (Applause) 

Hon. Abiriga was honest and true to his party. Like the Leader of Opposition has stated here, during the constitutional amendment, there were some people who were shy to support the amendment. However, hon. Abiriga, in certain terms, said he supported the seven years. There were those who were shy and still continue to be shy up to today but the late here - even in his grave or wherever he will be – will be true to his word. This business of lying and pretending was not his character, which is not typical of most politicians and Ugandans.

That was the level of simplicity and honesty of the late hon. Abiriga. When that thing, which finally became known as abirigation, was all over the social media, he was very honest. He told people “You are laughing at me”- but some people who would like to raise issues in this House are shy. He said, “Put yourself in my shoes. If you had diabetes and you are faced with this situation, what would you do?” Even when he went to court, he said, “Your worship, I did it and I am sorry.” That was his level of honesty; he was not a pretender. He was honest and believed in what he said.

We mourn him today here in such numbers because he was our brother and colleague; he cut across. That evening when he was killed, I had just watched a video of his diploma graduation on YouTube with a former Member of Parliament for Usuk, hon. Charles Oleny, which was held at his home but everything, whether the hanger or chairs was yellow. Who of you here who believe in this party can reach that extent? There is no one. That was the love for the party by hon. Abiriga. 

Madam Speaker, I would like to appeal to colleagues across the board to be there for each other. When I drove there - I was there with hon. Lydia Wanyoto and hon. Bernabas Tinkasiimire who joined us later but others were just busy calling. Can we learn to be there for each other and for this country?

On the security situation, Madam Speaker, we have been asking for a statement and reports to explain these killings. Yesterday, when we received His Excellency, the President at the home of the late Abiriga, the residents asked him when the country will get the statement on all the killings. I think the Ministry of Internal Affairs had promised to bring a statement such that the country gets to know - the President also directed that the public should be informed on the cases including those in courts; even if they are not yet concluded, so that the public can know what the government is doing to secure them.

More so, to the security organs, can we step up our security to ensure that each and every Ugandan is safe and alive? Let it be a natural death but not this kind of death. Why would one want to kill hon. Abiriga? Why would one want to kill him? It is very unfortunate, Madam Speaker. May his soul rest in eternal peace.

THE SPEAKER: Let me invite hon. Ogama who is the Member of Parliament for where he is going to be buried. 

11.55
MR ISMAIL OGAMA (NRM, Lower Madi County, Arua): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues who have gathered today in this House in such unbelievably big numbers. It is a very sad situation for us the people down in Lower Madi Constituency where the late hon. Col. Abiriga is going to be laid to rest. 

Madam Speaker, I was out of the country with the Committee on Public Service and Local Government in Nairobi when we got the news. At that very moment, we were together with our members of the East African Assembly who were also with colleagues from other states. Members, you cannot believe that those who were in the company of our Members and were not particularly from Uganda were even able to confirm that they knew the late hon. Col. Ibrahim Abiriga.

Hon. Abiriga’s image was never a secret. I know a lot has already been said for the outer part and I will go straight to the constituency part; what he means to us as the people of Lower Madi. As you have said, Abiriga was a very honest and transparent person. He has been a pro-people leader. He would always do anything that meant much for the interests of his people.

When our people along the Nile Valley were suffering from bad leadership of the previous governments, the late hon. Col Abiriga here joined the rebel forces together with the likes of Rt Gen. Moses Ali in UNLF I and he fought to defend the people of the Nile Valley.

When the late hon. Col Abiriga was appointed RDC of Arua, his record remains clear. He fought corruption both within the Government agencies and at the border points. (Applause)

Madam Speaker, the late hon. Col Abiriga was honest to the extent that he never held a position in his native constituency of Lower Madi; he always led elsewhere. He came to Arua Municipality where my people are the minority but he was elected a Member of Parliament for that constituency. 

When we were in Kyankwanzi for the retreat of the party, everyone can confirm that if the hon. Col. Abiriga had been nominated for any position to be voted for, nobody would attempt to compete with him. 
Even when the President made the State of the Nation Address in 2016, where he tried to promote “Buy Uganda, Build Uganda” the person who proposed the name of the late hon. Abiriga to pick the shoes from the President, I remember, was from the Opposition and everyone was in jubilation. That is how much the late hon. Col. Abiriga has had a distinguished leadership from most of us.

Here you have turned up in big numbers but in the village right now, as I have been part of the people co-ordinating the burial arrangements, we have already changed three venues. The first one was his home village where he was born; the compound was not enough. They shifted it to Rhino Camp Primary School where he studied but the compound is not enough. As I speak now, we are going to mourn him in a community centre, which is an open football field because the numbers are overwhelming. That is what he meant to us and we will continue to miss his character. 

On behalf of my people of Lower Madi and the country at large, we have indeed lost a man who meant so much to everyone. Even in his current residence from where he was killed - if you go to the neighbourhood - you cannot believe - I am sure some of the members within the community, with due respect to the area Member of Parliament, might have not known him but people there had known the late hon. Abiriga because of his generosity. (Applause)

He was killed at a point when he had just given his tokens to the community as it has always been the case.

Most of the leaders in this House, with due respect, are not so down to earth as much as hon. Abiriga was. That is the kind of leadership our generation needs. I would rather leave my neighbourhood in Entebbe where I stay and focus on my constituency in Lower Madi. However, hon. Abiriga would look at improving the livelihoods of those who surrounded him. 

I extend my sincere condolences to the family, on behalf of my people, and will forever live to miss our icon for very many reasons. May the Almighty Allah rest his soul in eternal peace.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, last night when I was at his home, I heard that he built a mosque where he was living. That is the type of person he was.

12.02
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Obiga Kania): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Let me, on behalf of the people of West Nile, particularly the Members of Parliament here, thank you, Madam Speaker and this Parliament, for honouring not only hon. Abiriga but all of us with this sitting.

I know hon. Abiriga is gone - we shall all go - but what is important is the recognition of what a person stood for in the short time that we have lived on this earth. I sincerely want to thank this Parliament for this honour from your leave to be here.

Secondly, since Abiriga died, I had this difficult task; when I informed the President and the Prime Minister, I have been asked to coordinate from the family at home. Many of you colleagues send us messages, many have physically been there till this morning and I want to thank you.

I want to thank particularly, on all your behalf, the hon. Elijah Okupa and many others who were there. I also would like to thank the community in that village that have been with us from that time up to today, making it possible for us to arrange this send-off.

I want to thank you, Madam Speaker, and the Prime Minister for the support you have given to us by way of messages and physical presence with us since that time of hon. Abiriga’s demise at his home up to today.

I would also like to thank the Muslim community for having dispensed a number of religious rites which they would have performed earlier as soon as hon. Abiriga died. However, you honoured us and gave us that opportunity to say this.

I am concentrating more on thanking because what else can I say? Hon. Abiriga lived his life and it spoke for itself. I don’t think that I need to speak for hon. Abiriga to say who he was. Hon. Abiriga talked eloquently, believed in himself, and open handed is exactly what he was and that speaks for itself.

I therefore associate myself with all the other people who have already spoken before me and there is absolutely no need for me to repeat them. However, I would like to make emphasis on two points; hon. Abiriga who you see here after death, held many positions, starting from a very humble position. 

He was not one of the highly educated people but he believed in himself and that even without education he had talents he could use to propel him from the position of a mere village person in Rhino Camp up to being a Member of Parliament and referred to as “honourable”. He used his talents.

We all have talents but how many of us spend our talents wastefully? Hon. Abiriga is proof that all of us, if we believe in ourselves and in the people we work with, can change our own lives and of many other people.

In spite of the positions which he held as RDC, in the UPDF and as Member of Parliament, the hon. Abiriga died a poor man. Yesterday when the brother Yusuf was talking about - relating to the President what hon. Abiriga has left behind, he merely talked about the house which Abiriga had acquired with the loan that he acquired from this Parliament when he joined in the place near where he was killed. He could have been corrupt or used coercion to get wealth when he was an RDC but he didn’t and today we are here honouring him.

Arua Municipality in West Nile is one of the most difficult constituencies. All the tribes of West Nile are there. And you know these people from West Nile can be extremely difficult. They can speak like hon. Abiriga speaks; speak the truth in your face. But the good thing is that they always speak the truth which was exemplified by hon. Abiriga. 

Now in that municipality all the people of Uganda are there; rich, poor and so forth. Hon. Abiriga managed that constituency when he was both RDC and Member of Parliament. I don’t think Abiriga got his votes from NRM alone; he got votes from all the parties in Uganda in that constituency because of his identity.

Therefore, I would like to ask the family to be proud of who hon. Abiriga was. He may have died poor but you as a family, you have a legacy to be proud of in this country.

My final thanks go to the staff of this Parliament. Sometimes we forget these people who we call very little and we thank the big ones. However, it is these lower people who make us to be big because if the little ones are absent, then there will be no big ones.

The staff of this Parliament, represented by the Clerk and down to the lower ones, represented by one Matua, helped us to organise this man’s funeral up to this extent. All the officers who work in this Parliament were and they are still telling us that they will be in Rhino Camp, Arua; we would like to thank all of you.

Tonight the Col Ibrahim Abiriga has shown us the importance of unity in diversity. He has shown that we can live together in spite of our political differences. We can grow this country to higher levels even if we have different political ideologies. I would like us to start living that and to abandon the element of wishing each other death, destroying life but rather use our differences to live together.

As Members of Parliament from West Nile we were 31; we have lost one but soon after we shall replace with God’s support and we shall go back to 31.

Col Abiriga was a very instrumental member of our caucus and I am sure that we shall learn from him. Like he has brought the nation together, his death will bring this caucus of West Nile together. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: I would like to announce the presence of hon. Milton Muwuma and hon. Samuel Semugaba, you are welcome.

12.13
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (HOUSING) (Dr Chris Baryomunsi): Thank you, Madam Speaker and honourable members. When a tree is still standing you cannot accurately tell its height not until it has fallen. 

The presence of the Members of Parliament and the gallery being full and the national debate over the death of our colleague, Col Abiriga, tells you how tall he was. We would like to thank God for giving him to us and we thank Col Abiriga for the good work he was able to accomplish while still on earth.

On behalf of my constituency and the people of Kigezi, I would like to convey our condolences to the family, Arua Municipality, the Muslim community, Members of Parliament and all Ugandans. We can speak a lot about Col Abiriga until cows come to rest. However, he had grown a popularity of his own in the whole country.
There are many people in Kanungu who used to approach me to ask Col Abiriga to come to Kanungu so that they could see him. And in many WhatsApp groups if you are a diehard supporter of Col Abiriga they would call you Abiriga. 

They had also developed an Abiriga scale to measure your loyalty and commitment to your party ranging from one per cent to 100 per cent because they were measuring Col Abiriga at 100 per cent. That is the influence of Abiriga in our politics extending down to Kanungu in south western Uganda. 

There were many people, especially the young, who used to come to Parliament not to see me as their Member of Parliament but to take photos with Col Abiriga and they would feel very proud associating with him. This is a man we are paying tribute to and we would like to thank him for the life and time he spent in our Parliament. 

The key question which keeps running in the minds of Ugandans is that: Why was a harmless, innocent and honest person like Abiriga killed?

If he was killed because of his political beliefs then it again reminds us of the occupational hazards that we have as political leaders: That when you take a decision in politics you should be prepared for three things; prison, exile or death at any time.

Was he killed to intimidate Members of Parliament because of the decisions we make in this House? If yes, then the killers are wrong because we shall not be shaken as Members of Parliament. We shall take decisions in this House which we think are good for this country.

Definitely we are in a multiparty dispensation; we may disagree on issues but all of us have views. We would like to urge Ugandans to promote a culture of tolerance. Even when our ideological dispositions are different, that should not be a reason to kill each other. We belong to the NRM but we are friends to people in the Opposition. 

We would want a culture of tolerance, co-existence even when we differ ideologically. We would like our security forces to hunt down whoever killed our colleague, Col Abiriga, until justice is served.

Once again, I would like to convey condolences to you, Madam Speaker, the entire House and comfort the family that the God who gave us Col Abiriga will fill the gap that has been left by his demise. May his soul rest in eternal peace.

12.18
MS CATHERINE LAMWAKA (NRM, Woman Representative, Omoro): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to bring condolences from the people of Omoro District to the Parliament of Uganda, the people of Uganda, Arua District, Arua Municipality and particularly the family of our fallen colleague, Col Abiriga. 

Madam Speaker, I bring condolences from the caucus of the former Resident District Commissioners of Uganda, who are in this Parliament and served this country before joining Parliament just like Col Abiriga did.

I am one of those who stayed dumbfounded on Friday evening for quite some good minutes upon hearing about the death of our colleague. It is very true that Col Abiriga served the country very diligently while he was the Resident District Commissioner of Arua and later Yumbe, before he was elected to come to the Parliament of Uganda. I would like to confirm the statement that was presented by the Prime Minister about our late comrade. The late was a very honest and patriotic cadre. 

From the late hon. Abiriga, many who served with him around the same time learnt quite a lot. I recall vividly when I had just been appointed a Resident District Commissioner at the age of 23 that hon. Abiriga sat me down out of his own initiative. He said, “Catherine, you have joined this service but one thing I want to tell you is: Leave your academic papers and qualification up there. Some of these jobs require you to come down to the grassroots and be with the people. You are going to chair the district security committee and for you to gather enough intelligence and perform as a District Commissioner, you must be down to earth with the people_” (Member timed out.)

12.22
MS JOVAH KAMATEEKA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mitooma): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also rise to support the motion to condemn the senseless and brutal murder of our colleague, hon. Abiriga. The late was on the Committee on Human Rights of Parliament and our first oversight visit was to the refugee settlement and detention centres in West Nile. 

At the Arua Police Station, we found out that two inmates had died under mysterious circumstances, one of who was alleged to have hanged himself while he had handcuffs on. 

At Arua Central Prison, we found the usual over-crowding that undermines all the efforts that the Prisons Service is trying to offer in our detention centres. We also found inmates who had torture marks; some of them took him aside as their Member of Parliament and gave him the details. This is when hon. Abiriga lost his temper and said, “Chairperson, how can we have a Committee on Human Rights, which keeps on coming here yet such things continue to happen?” In their characteristic fashion, of course, the press reported that Abiriga threatened to beat up Kamateeka but this was not the case. (Laughter) 

This was a deeply caring leader expressing pain at not being able to make impact in the lives of his people. I wish to confirm that hon. Abiriga and I maintained a cordial relationship. That caring personality came out. This also showed us that some of us and the local government leaders sit in their offices and do not check on the conditions of the Government facilities in their areas of jurisdiction. Hon. Abiriga had just been an RDC and things could not have deteriorated so fast within a year. I am not blaming but I am saying that all of us should check on these facilities. 

I would also like to urge the Government to regard the recommendations that are made by the Uganda Human Rights Commission in their annual reports as very important. We also pick these recommendations and make resolutions in Parliament and we would like to urge Government to regard them seriously. We are told that compliance with these recommendations only stands at 48 percent. If we were regarding them seriously, we would have better security in the country and better prisons services – (Member timed out.)

12.25
THE MINISTER FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (Ms Janet Museveni): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also stand to support this motion. Hon. Abiriga was a humble and blameless son of Uganda; a good servant of his people and a friend to very many, whose life has been put to an end prematurely. We can add many other good people like Joan Kagezi, Felix Kaweesi and all other good people serving their nation with dedication whose lives have been ended in the same brutal and merciless manner. What sign is this that we see? What trend is this that makes serving one’s country with passion and dedication a crime? What is this message trying to tell Ugandans? Is serving your country with love a crime? 

Hon. Abiriga spread love, understanding and goodwill right from Arua to Kampala. His actions, speeches and work always portrayed love, jokes and laughter even with children. Therefore, indeed all Ugandans loved him as others have said across the whole country. Right now, all are in shock and they mourn him.

Among the same people, there are those who could have the capacity to hate hon. Abiriga to the extent of mercilessly murdering him in cold blood; that clearly shows us that the direction we are taking is regrettable. I cannot stop hoping that indeed his death becomes the mirror that all of us will now hold to ourselves; to search our hearts and ask ourselves the questions whether our daily work and our speech, in anyway, could have contributed anything to this hatred that is bringing these merciless murders in our country. (Applause) 

While hon. Abiriga spread love and understanding, there are many of us who spread hatred and poisonous stories that truly poison large sections of our society - (Applause) - In time that poison boils and spills over as lava from a volcano and it runs through communities destroying everything in its way. That is how we get people, who may not even have known Abiriga as a person but knew him in yellow, his desires to serve his country and the party he serves with dedication then they become so inspired to kill him in such a way because of that? Would it be because of giving himself so completely to serve his people and his country? Is it possible that that is why our countries have remained backward for generations? Do we inspire hatred so much that there is no room for making a critical departure from our crippling past? Would we rather destroy the attempt to develop our backward communities so that we go back to square one so that our children find the same chaos we found? 

I pray that this evil act of the murder of hon. Abiriga pauses these critical questions for all of us at this time to find answers.

We should not and cannot ignore the needless pain that this murder causes to the family of hon. Abiriga but also to the extended family of Ugandans who loved him. You have heard many people say how they loved him across the country, not just in Kampala or Arua. People loved him because he showed a unique character. He was Ugandan and he wanted to serve Ugandans.

It did not matter whether they loved or hated him; Abiriga just loved Ugandans and wanted to serve. While it might be easy to blame Government - and it is okay to blame Government because it has the responsibility to protect the people. We can blame it for what it may have done or not done, but we must remember all of us as we sit in this House, that we all have the responsibility of building this country and leading our people in the direction they ought to go. May God rest hon. Abiriga’s soul in eternal peace. (Applause)

12.33
MR DAVID MUTEBI (NRM, Buikwe South County, Buikwe): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity you have given me to put on record my condolences on behalf of the people of Buikwe South Constituency but most importantly the West Nile community which forms the biggest component of people coming from outside Buganda.

It is a very sad moment for this country to gather here and pay respect to one of the most honest, a man of humility and a person committed to serve this country and his people.

At around 2 o’clock last Wednesday, we shared light moments with the late hon. Abiriga and hon. Mwijukye in the lounge. We had the last handshake. Little did we know that that was the last time we were going to share with hon. Abiriga. A lot has been said about him but I would like to concentrate on one aspect - the peace loving Col Abiriga.

At a very tender age, he chose to serve his country in the armed forces and later in the liberation struggle. Very many people are asking themselves why hon. Abiriga cherished the Movement so much. It is because he saw the bad times in Uganda and also witnessed the goodness of this country under the NRM administration.

He cherished that peace to the extent that he could not want to see it varnish as it has almost varnished to see to him perish the way he perished.

Last November when this Parliament almost went to war I told hon. Abiriga that “We need to do something today to save this Parliament from going to war”. He said that if members had seen him at the front, maybe things would get worse and so he chose to sit down there. 

I stood there pleading with members to avoid this Parliament going up into flames. Honourable members, let us have our political arguments as we want but let us stand together and protect this peace. We may even fail to get down here. The kind of public statements we make are provoking anger and hate - (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Half a minute to conclude that.

MR DAVID MUTEBI: We are continuously sounding war drums as if this country has no tomorrow. Even at the point of death, some people are sending messages on the social media that are derogatory. 

There is no disagreement that can make any one of us to treat one another like an enemy. We can have any kind of disagreement but we cannot afford to be enemies. We can achieve a lot together. Let us not sit here for the sake of the public to see but let us agree that we pursue the cause of peace in this country. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

12.36
MR REAGAN OKUMU (Independent, Aswa County, Gulu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also stand to associate myself with the movers and seconders of the motion and with all those positive sentiments.

I admired the late Col Abiriga out of principle. He is NRM, he identifies himself as NRM, he does not hide whether you meet just the two of you, he would tell you that “I am NRM and I believe in the President”. He loved the President, his party, Northern Uganda, West Nile and his religion. I learnt those five things from him. 

I will always respect people who respect themselves by being principled but not hypocrites. If you belong to a political party belong to it - we can disagree on issues but I will hold you with respect and that is the relationship I had with hon. Abiriga. 

He was very instrumental in supporting us in our Local Government Accounts Committee. He is not a member but he would come up; that is why we send a message - I think most of the members of the Local Government Accounts Committee came at least to give their final respect.

At a time like this, we talk because we want to learn lessons. I would like to request our politicians - please save this country by being principled because that is where the problem is coming from. You belong to another political party but in the night you are a different person and again in the morning you are different. You are the ones causing confusion in this country. (Laughter). Be what you are but be objective. That is the only way we can move this country forward.

I think people who did not and who up to now do not understand hon. Abiriga is because they understood him from far. They never had a close interaction and that is where we always get our problems. If you do not get closer to somebody, you will fail to understand that person if you just hear and see what that person does. 

Another member similar to hon. Abiriga to great extent in this House is hon. Otafiire. You can misunderstand him for what he says but I think he means well. He calls a spade a spade and can make any statement but he means well and that is what he is and that is where we should be. (Laughter)

Finally, Madam Speaker, I think the greatest problem we have is –(Member timed out.) 

THE SPEAKER: Please conclude.

MR OKUMU: My biggest worry is our security. What we see here, are things that enter statistics and newspapers. Outside there, similar things are happening. What is wrong with our security organisations? As Members of Parliament, we should ask this.

There is confusion, internal rivalry, fight over resources and people are not serious. How dare you recruit thousands of people into community policing and you give them guns and yet you have not trained and paid them and you lay them off tomorrow? 

How can you recruit boda boda riders and you give them money purely for political reasons? Have our security people become politicians? They recruit those towards elections. Why? (Applause). That is where the problem is. 

We should go back to the drawing board. Death does not select when it comes to things like this. Whether you are yellow, blue or what, it will catch up with you whether on a highway or at your residence. 

As I conclude, what wakes me up are sirens escorting some political leaders and ministers. This is an indication that the country is not well. The law only allows few people to be escorted. However, in this House, how many people are escorted with sirens and lead cars all over the country? What message are we sending to the community? That things are impossible and that we cannot live as ministers and have one policeman to escort us? 

Must we have guards ahead and behind escorting us? What message do we send to this country? We must stop this and I would like to appeal to Government that we should all join hands and restore hope and security for our people, right from the grass root to State House so that everybody is secure not only the few who are escorted. May the soul of Col Abiriga rest in peace. I thank you. 

12.42
MR FRANCIS MWIJUKYE (FDC, Buhweju County, Buhweju): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. The big numbers here show two things: whereas we looked at hon. Abiriga as somebody who was good to all of us, the other angle is that we are concerned about security in this country. 

Most of us came running today to Parliament because of the concern. He is a Member of Parliament but there are very many people who are dying every day and they are not being talked about. We are concerned not just about our security but the security of Ugandans.

Hon. Abiriga has been talked about as a patriot, honest man and very loyal. I hope that patriotism will be reflected in how we care for his children. (Applause). I hope the children are going to benefit from the patriotism of their father and they will not go and suffer because hon. Abiriga has gone. 

I hear talks like the “killers idiots and cowards”. If we are going to continue being killed by idiots and cowards, then we are not serious. (Laughter). We must realise that this is a very serious matter and we stop political comedy. These cannot be cowards and just idiots but serious killers. If I was shot tomorrow, you think - (Member timed out.)

12.46
MS BEATRICE ANYWAR (Independent, Kitgum Municipality, Kitgum): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am here to support the motion to pay tribute to our fallen brother, hon. Abiriga. 

I bring condolences from the people of Kitgum Municipality and on my own behalf to the family of the late hon. Abiriga, to His Excellency, the President also party president for the National Resistance Movement and its members. I also bring condolences to the House, the people of West Nile and the country at large. 

I would like to thank Members of Parliament for turning up in such a number to give testimony that hon. Abiriga was indeed a friend across the board. In particular, I would like to thank hon. Oscar Omony who left his hospital bed after his accident - his family members are still in hospital - but he had to come to be with us.

Madam Speaker, so much has been said but dear Ugandans, we are here mourning and as leaders of this country, the whole country is looking at us. What we say here sends a message:

    1. To the family of the late hon. Abiriga. The widow and the children are here and we are here to console them. We are not here to add salt to the wound.

    2.  As a country, we have this bad happening. The message we send out there must be a tone to enable the security people to do their work –(Member timed out.)

12.48
MR ELLY ASIKU (NRM, Koboko North County, Koboko): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I had the benefit to be with hon. Abiriga as a friend for a very long time. Abiriga was a nationalist, a freedom fighter and loved people. He was also a God fearing person. 

I have not worn my medal as a freedom fighter for a long time but I have today as we commemorate the loss of our dear colleague, hon. Abiriga. 

Hon. Abiriga speaks from his heart and whatever he does, comes from his heart. I am very happy that his life has impacted on many of us. My humble request to all of us here as legislators is that we have a key role to play –(Member timed out.)

12.50
MR FRED BASEKE (Independent, Ntenjeru County South, Kayunga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. In the interest of time, I will not repeat whatever has been said about hon. Abiriga.
 
On Wednesday, I chatted with hon. Abiriga and we had planned for July. However, today, we are here mourning him. When you look at what is happening around the country, none of us is safe. As we mourn our beloved brother Abiriga, I would like to ask honourable members to pray to God to heal our nation and protect all of us from the evil that has befallen this country.

Hon. Abiriga thought he would be alive today, but he is not. May his soul rest in peace and may the King of Glory strengthen all of us and the family at this trying moment. I thank you. 

12.51
MR ANDREW KALUYA (Independent, Kigulu County South, Iganga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. On a day like today, it is difficult for someone to catch your eye, so I am grateful that I have caught your eye. 

We are here to bid farewell to our brother, hon. Abiriga, who was murdered in one of the worst ways that anyone can imagine. I do not want to talk so much about hon. Abiriga because a lot has already been said. Since I have only two minutes, I will only say that Abiriga has been a man worth relating with.

The matter at hand is not just Abiriga’s death; it is simply a message. It is a message to this country and its leadership. I happened to attend one of the NRM Caucus meetings and His Excellency the President assured honourable Members of Parliament that it was not difficult to provide security for Members of Parliament. If we now ask whether his statement was true - I leave the answer for another day.

When this incident happened, I was in my constituency. I received a call from one of my relatives asking whether hon. Abiriga was actually dead. I did not have the answer at that time. The next call that came – Madam Speaker, I drive a yellow car and the message was that Andrew –(Member timed out.) 

THE SPEAKER: Half a minute to conclude.

MR KALUYA: The issue of the security of Members of Parliament is not something we are going to joke about. We should find a solution either for Members of Parliament and the country at large or we find a solution to the bigger problem. There is a bigger problem in this country that we are merely dillydallying around. What we need to do is find a way of addressing those problems so that Ugandans at large can calm down and regain their hope in this nation. Thank you very much.

12.54
MR BARNABAS TINKASIIMIRE (NRM, Buyaga West County, Kibaale): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. My condolences go to the people of West Nile and the family. I also bring condolences from the people of Bunyoro and all Members of Parliament from the Bunyoro sub-region. 

Hon. Abiriga had a principle that I share, that is, being honest. We loved one another –(Laughter)– because most of the time when he wanted to do any serious transaction, he would call me and consult with me on whether he was going to be cheated. When I decided to do business in West Nile, it is hon. Abiriga who offered to get me a person who would not cheat me when buying property –(Interjection)- Do not ask me the kind of business I am involved in. (Member timed out.)

12.56
BRIG. GEORGE OULA (UPDF Representative): Madam Speaker, I would like to convey my sympathy and condolences to the family of the late Ibrahim Abiriga. 

I met Ibrahim Abiriga in 1989. We were deployed in the same unit, the 7th Division based in Fort Portal. From that time, I became close to him. In one of the meetings that we had in that division, we were talking about the welfare of the soldiers. At that time, you remember the Government was still young, the economy was bad and the welfare of the troops was bad. In the meeting, Abiriga came up with a brilliant idea; he suggested that since we had a lot of land where we were, we should engage in agricultural production so that we could individually alleviate the fate of our soldiers. 

He was immediately appointed the production officer of the division. In a short time of about three months, he turned things around. He produced about 10 trucks of cabbage. We had many cows in the division from which we could feed the children of soldiers, thanks to Abiriga.

Hon. Abiriga, who is lying here, loved what he believed in. The first thing he believed in was his religion, the Islamic faith. When I was with him, he would pray five times –(Member timed out.) 

THE SPEAKER: Half a minute to conclude.

BRIG. OULA: There are times when hon. Abiriga and I would be in a difficult situation and we would not even be sure when we would have the next meal. He would choose to fast, saying that the God who created us would give us what to eat.

He believed in his children. Those two children you see there – whenever hon. Abiriga would be coming to Parliament, most of the times he would come with his children in the car. I do not know what happened that day to make him come without them because the children were always in the car. It was only by God’s grace that the children were not in the car that day. They would have been killed as well. Hon. Abiriga, rest in eternal peace.

1.00
MS SPELLANZA BAGUMA (NRM, District Woman Representative, Kyenjojo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. On behalf Kyenjojo District and on my own behalf, I stand to mourn a patriot. 

We had a patriot in hon. Abiriga because he loved himself and he loved everybody around him regardless of the differences in ideology. He also loved his party and country. This is a clear definition of a patriot. 

I was particularly saddened by the fact that we spent most of Friday with hon. Abiriga at the pension meeting. We shared a very light moment with him as we were taking a group picture and we sung and clapped for him. I remember shouting on top of my voice, reminding the camera man to particularly capture his thumbs-up pose. This was very saddening to me because that was the last time we met and a few hours after, I heard on radio that hon. Abiriga was no more. 

Today, as we eulogise hon. Abiriga, we remember many such incidents in this country for which we have not got an explanation. What is most disheartening is that these incidents continue to happen. We have a lot that is being posted on social media and unfortunately, some of these very negative posts are coming from some members of this House. (Applause) It is very unfortunate. 

We would not want to propagate more hatred but surely, let us scrutinise ourselves. My appeal is to the ministry in charge of security as well as the one in charge of information and communications. We have registered our telephone numbers; I do not see why such people cannot be brought to book. People out there continue to be robbed using telephone numbers that have been registered and nothing is being done. We would like to know what is not happening right so that we put in place measures to rectify whatever is leading us this direction.

Lastly, Madam Speaker, we have heard about hon. Abiriga’s family. Very few people go back to help the families after such a death. He has left behind nine children. I would like to thank those who have sent in their condolence contributions but please, let us look at Abiriga’s family so that even as they cry for the loss of their family head, they do not also cry because of failure to get the basic needs in the family.

THE SPEAKER: As I invite hon. Jacklet, honourable members, during the budget debate there were issues raised here about the national guidance in this country. Who is speaking to the country about how we should behave? It is silent.

1.03
MS JACKLET ATUHAIRE (Independent, Woman Representative, Sheema): Madam Speaker, I rise to also support the motion and condole with the family of the late honourable Col Abiriga. On behalf of the people of Sheema and this Parliament, we really condole with the family.

Many things have been said about hon. Abiriga – he was principled, honest and many things – but my concern is about the security, which everybody has talked about. Some security organs such as the Internal Security Organisation (ISO) and Chieftaincy of Military Intelligence (CMI) are not well funded. In fact, I was discussing with somebody yesterday that when hon. Abiriga was killed, the ISO operatives on the ground near Kawanda did not even have motorcycles to go and see what was happening. This is very sad. 

A supplementary budget was brought to this Parliament and you, honourable members, rejected it yet they were talking about addressing issues of the Allied Democratic Forces (ADF) and all these things. If we do not fund the security organs for them to be able to do their work properly and we are still talking about security – I think this is something that we need to look into and see that they are funded so that they can do their work properly and investigate cases that are supposed to be investigated.

Hon. Abiriga, I wish you a safe journey to where you are going. We will all find you there. To the family, we condole with you and pray that God will comfort you. May the soul of hon. Abiriga rest in peace.

1.05
MR FRANCIS ZAAKE (Independent, Mityana Municipality, Mityana): Thank you, Madam Speaker. It is very sad that when colleagues speak the truth, some colleagues start murmuring – (Interjection) - This is the truth. It is very sad that we have lost one of our Members in a very brutal manner. I am here to represent the very many voices out there, especially the youth, who are the majority of the Ugandans. I am the Member of Parliament for Mityana Municipality. 

Very many things have been going on and the majority of Ugandans are looking on. There are very many things happening in terms of security. There are very many killings going on but nothing is being done. Perhaps we are being very hopeful in the current regime.

Let us not expect people of the previous generation to handle the current problems. Let us not just speak about matters but come out with solutions. Whatever is going to come out of what is happening these days is going to be brutal. 

I was once a culprit of beatings by unknown people in this House and you murmured the same way –(Interjections)– This can happen to any of us here. I said the same thing here and you murmured the same way and this is what is happening. Let us be serious and come out with various solutions to end these killings. It is very sad. Hon. Abiriga has been a friend. He was very honest, just the way I am - (Member timed out.)

1.08
MS LUCY AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Amuru): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. Allow me add my voice to others to pay tribute to a colleague. 

I was one of the few Members of Parliament who had a light moment with the honourable on Friday. I remember he came just at the time when we were about to take a photo. Everyone got excited as usual and we waited for him. When I reached home that Friday, just before I could sit, my sister told me, “There is breaking news; hon. Abiriga has died.” I said, “That is not true. I have just seen him today.” Well, the message was later confirmed.

My message to the family is that you will hear a lot of things – negative and positive – but my request to you is that you should take in the positive things that you loved about your father, husband and the person that you knew in Abiriga. That is all that you should take in and that should be your consolation.

Madam Speaker, even as we mourn today, I am forced to reflect on the first stanza of our anthem, “Oh Uganda”. Let us reflect on that stanza.

Finally, I have a very big burden that I have been carrying for many months. I had a dream about the Members of Parliament –(Interjection)– Well, you may take this as a joke but I had a dream about Members of Parliament who were involved in a very bad accident. The next day, the first Member of Parliament was involved in a tragic accident –(Interjection)– No, I am not a prophet. The next accident happened and it involved hon. Omony and the final case is our colleague here. 

I am not a prophet of doom but I feel this is a burden. I feel that God was showing me something but I have not done enough. The burden is on us; take it or leave it. For those of us who believe, let us believe and those who do not believe -

Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you because year in year out, you always hold prayer meetings in Parliament before we start our sessions. Let us go back to our roots and plead with our God. I thank you, honourable members. For those who have listened, may God bless you. Rest in peace, hon. Abiriga.

1.12
MS BETTY AOL (FDC, Woman Representative, Gulu): Madam Speaker, on behalf of the people of Gulu District, I would like to convey our heartfelt condolences to the family.

First of all, I would like to speak about generosity. On the fateful Friday, we were together with hon. Abiriga in the Conference Hall for the Parliamentary Pension Scheme’s Workshop; it was a very wonderful workshop. He sat very close to hon. Ssekikubo and they were talking. I wanted to go near him but I gave them an opportunity to talk without interfering and they went out together.

Madam Speaker, I came close to hon. Abiriga. In fact, at first, I did not like him but when we became close and we shared as elders, he told me about his passion for His Excellency the President of the Republic of Uganda, especially how he rescued him when he was stuck. When the President wanted to deploy him, everywhere people said, “No” until he pushed him to the people of Arua as the Resident District Commissioner (RDC). The President told the people of Arua, “Leave him to me”. That is how he worked with the President and that explains why he loved him very much. 

Indeed one good turn, deserves another. If the President was a Pope, Abiriga would be one of the cardinals and if he was God, he would be one of the Popes. I congratulated him and I told him I had given him a big tick.

Madam Speaker, many of us are not very close to our drivers. However, hon. Abiriga was down to earth. He interacted with the drivers; he would greet them. When we pass the drivers, we move without greeting the drivers but hon. Abiriga would greet them and if he got to know that some of them had not eaten lunch, he would donate to them - (Member timed out.)

1.14 
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR DEFENCE AND VETERAN AFFAIRS (VETERAN AFFAIRS) (Lt Col (Rtd) Bright Rwamirama): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I support the motion to pay tribute to my fallen comrade, the honourable Col Ibrahim Abiriga. My condolences go to the bereaved family. I condemn the act of these murderers and I think we should all condemn what they have done and invest in stopping it.

Hon. Abiriga has done a lot for this country. He was a statesman, a freedom fighter and he died an honourable member. However, there are many things we need to address as leaders. The first one is the way we talk. I have seen very good posts and very ugly posts on social media. It is very sad that there are some people who celebrate and actually post those ugly posts when we lose people like hon. Abiriga.

The Government has a responsibility to protect citizens and their property. However, we need to be very vigilant. The security agencies and whoever is involved in investigation need information. Otherwise, if you do not have information, it is a tall order to apprehend criminals. I would like to salute some people who are very vigilant because on that very scene, there were some few people who recorded what took place. 

I would like to say that we, in defence, are taking these matters very seriously. I would like to assure Members that of late, they must have seen the involvement of the Chieftaincy of Military Intelligence and other security agencies working together to bring this fracas to an end. I pray that all leaders here cooperate in availing information and encourage citizens to give information to the investigators. 

Hon. Abiriga, rest in peace. We shall find you there. Thank you.

1.17
THE MINISTER OF STATE, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (RELIEF, DISASTER PREPAREDNESS AND REFUGEES) (Mr Musa Ecweru): Madam Speaker, I rise to pay my last respects to a colleague. 

On Thursday morning, I was expecting visitors in my humble office only to be told by my secretary that hon. Abiriga was waiting for me outside. I stayed the meeting of the other visitors and asked the secretary to usher him in. Usually, before he comes, he would have made a call saying, “I want to come and discuss something to do with Arua Municipality”. However, this time he did not call. 

When I ushered him in the office, he told me there was nothing important bringing him to my office but he wanted to greet me because it had been long. We exchanged pleasantries and I bid him goodbye. We then met again during the State of the Nation Address. As a colleague, I do not know what that meant. 

We were Resident District Commissioners (RDCs). Members have described him as a very honest person and I confirm that. I will leave my description to other Members. 

However, Madam Speaker, what informed hon. Abiriga’s way of doing things was exile, and I would like to share this with those of you who have never been to exile. Hon. Abiriga suffered in exile; he was traumatised and humiliated in exile. As a result, he promised that as long as he lived, no group of people in this country should be forced into exile again –(Applause)– and as long as he lived, he wanted to die in this country. That was hon. Abiriga.

Why did he love the President very much? Hon. Abiriga saw the President as the only cement that holds this country together. He felt Museveni held the country together and he used to talk about it. He would say, “In the event that this man goes, Mr Ecweru, do you know that we can easily run into problems again.” That is what informed his love for President Museveni as a person and the party that President Museveni chairs. Madam Speaker, can we resolve here and now that whatever, it takes, we may have differences but we should not create any situation that could drive any group of people to exile. (Applause) 

To those who have killed this gallant man for demonstrating what he believed in - I would like to say to my NRM people that hon. Abiriga did a lot for the NRM. He was diligent to NRM but he did not have any sense of entitlement. There are many of us in the NRM who, when they do something small, think they should be treated as a special person. (Applause) There are many of us in NRM who have accumulated unnecessary wealth because we think we are entitled. Abiriga did what he did but remained humble. (Applause) 

We need to humble ourselves. As NRM, we need to humble ourselves. If we keep this sense of entitlement, we will ruin the country. In lying hon. Abiriga to rest, we must emulate what he did. People can say anything - that he was this and that – but he was what he was because he believed in what he believed in. 

Madam Speaker, this country must never be allowed to degenerate. We should all stand together and make sure that we move as one country. May the soul of the late Abiriga rest in eternal peace.

1.22
THE MINISTER FOR LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (Ms Betty Amongi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I interacted with hon. Abiriga on two issues. The first issue was when hon. Abiriga led a delegation of Sheikhs from Arua to come to my office because the land where the mosque in Arua is situated had a title, which the District Land Board had issued to a private person and yet the land belonged to the mosque. 

He came thrice to my office. The last time was three weeks ago when he came again with the mayor and a team. That is when I knew that hon. Abiriga, as a Member of Parliament, was somebody who was very meticulous on issues to do with his constituency. There are many times that Members of Parliament would have issues in their constituency but you only hear it on the Floor of Parliament. However, hon. Abiriga, like the Rt Hon. Prime Minister and hon. Musa Ecweru stated, would walk to the offices of the ministers to try and ask them to solve the problems in his constituency.

The second time I interacted with hon. Abiriga was about two weeks ago, again when he came to my office to assure me. He told me, “You are three senior ministers from the north; yourself, hon. Hillary Onek and Gen. Moses Ali. I have come here to tell you that I will stand with you. We shall stand with you.” Hon. Abiriga put me on phone with one of the Opposition Members from West Nile – (Mr Nandala-Mafabi rose_) - I would like to inform hon. Nandala-Mafabi that in my office, hon. Abiriga put me on phone with one Opposition MP from West Nile on that matter. Therefore, I would like to agree with hon. Reagan Okumu that hon. Abiriga was someone who stood firm and knew that he needed to support people from the northern region. 

I would like to conclude by saying that as a Catholic, we have just celebrated martyrdom. Hon. Abiriga has died a martyr and in this world of martyrdom, when somebody dies for their cause, history shows that the cause does not die. Hon. Abiriga has died for his cause; let the people who have remained not be blackmailed and intimated. Let us continue where he has left. Rest in peace, hon. Abiriga.

1.25
MR MOSES BALYEKU (NRM, Jinja Municipality West, Jinja): Thank you, Madam Speaker. On behalf of the people of Jinja West Municipality, on behalf of the Busoga Parliamentary Group, on behalf of the Muslims in Jinja and on my own behalf, I would like to extend our condolences to both the families of hon. Abiriga and the family of the bodyguard. Many of us have not talked about the bodyguard. This is a clear signal to all of us in this House who have drivers and bodyguards that these are people who die for us and we should treat them very well.

Madam Speaker, on the NRM side, hon. Abiriga has demonstrated true ideology and true love for the NRM party. We should not be weakened by his assassination but be strengthened to believe in what we think is right. To the Members in this House, it is very important that we know that in this House, we are not permanent. If you look at the pictures of the First Parliament up to the Seventh Parliament, you will see that there are different faces. We are not here as permanent people but we are here as seasoned people. 

An attack on hon. Abiriga is an attack on the Parliament of Uganda. An attack on Parliament of Uganda is an attack on the country. We cannot sit here and keep watching these things happen. It is high time we set up a committee as Parliament to look into the security of this country. People out there have a lot of information to give but cannot approach the security agencies. 

Let this committee be instituted for the public to give information, which we can share with the security agencies. It would help us to get more information which is in the public domain. This will help us as Parliament to know that we are doing something for the people of Uganda. We cannot keep asking Government to give us a statement on the security situation in the country. Madam Speaker, choose Members in this House and let there be a small committee of Members to look into matters of security in this country. 

To the assassins of hon. Abiriga, this man was fasting and he was going to break his fast. It is the month of Ramadhan but you did not even have the compassion to know that this is a holy month for a Muslim like hon. Abiriga and you still assassinated him. In the eyes of God –(Member timed out)

THE SPEAKER: Half a minute to conclude. 

MR BALYEKU: We are sure that the people who assassinated hon. Abiriga are watching. In the country we live in today, hon. Abiriga was a friend to everybody. Our tears will not dry in vain for hon. Abiriga. We shall not rest as a country until we find justice. 

Madam Speaker, hon. Abiriga was a friend of Uganda and as Parliament, we shall greatly miss him. However, let his death unite the Opposition and the ruling side. In terms of security, let us be one team. For God and my country. May hon. Abiriga rest in peace.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Oscar Omony, you are welcome. We are delighted to see you.

1.25
MR OSCAR OMONY (NRM, Youth Representative, Northern): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Honourable members, I thank you for your prayers. The person I am going to talk about is not only a colleague but was a father and an uncle to me. I share a very serious relationship with the people of West Nile.

The last time I was with hon. Abiriga, we were chatting outside on Thursday. The last thing I remember Uncle Abiriga telling me - he seemed a little disturbed – was, “My son, I am broke.” I told him that if I had some money, I would give him, but things were not okay then.

I left for Gulu on Friday and when I was coming back on Monday, we got this accident. A Uganda National Roads Authority (UNRA) vehicle came, left its lane and drove directly into us and knocked us. I thank God because if it was not for Him, I would not have been here.

Madam Speaker, what I learnt from the late hon. Abiriga is honesty. Humility takes us places. Hon. Abiriga was so honest that I remember when it became a bit close on the issues of the age limit Bill and you told Abiriga that an MP has said something that is not in line with what he wanted, he would go straight to that Member and say, “Oscar said this and that”. That was how honest hon. Abiriga was. He would not lie.
	
Madam Speaker, these cowards that have taken hon. Abiriga’s life, the good Lord will pay them and their time will come as well. As the youth of northern Uganda, we have lost a father and an uncle. Hon. Abiriga, rest in peace. I will not be there because I cannot make it. However, I remember you said you were broke and so, I will make a personal contribution to your family of Shs 2 million. Thank you very much. (Applause) 

1.32
MS REHEMA WATONGOLA (NRM, Kamuli Municipality, Kamuli): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity. I bring condolences from the people and the Muslim Community of Kamuli Municipality and Busoga at large.

On Friday, as some of my colleagues have already mentioned, we saw hon. Abiriga. Actually, we had our last minutes with hon. Abiriga at around 2.00 p.m. He joined us for a group photo; the facilitator requested all Members to take a group photo at the workshop organised by the Parliamentary Pension Scheme. The facilitator emphasised a point regarding male Members of Parliament not adhering to the requirement to submit beneficiaries to the pension office. He continued to emphasise that among the Members of Parliament, the women Members of Parliament are very active in submitting their beneficiaries. He shared a story that they encounter problems, especially when male Members of Parliament pass on, not knowing that the same day hon. Abiriga was going to pass on.

Madam Speaker, some people out there are celebrating the death of hon. Abiriga because he accepted to amend Article 102 of the Constitution. Remember, where hon. Abiriga is, we shall go and where we are, he was. Therefore, let us - (Member timed out.)

1.34
MS JESCA ABABIKU (NRM, Woman Representative, Adjumani): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity. I convey a condolence message from the people of Madi sub-region, which is part of West Nile. We received the message with a lot of shock and we are still in shock. The late hon. Abiriga was a golden asset for West Nile. As he is lying here, our lead flag, in support of this country, has been lowered. 

Madam Speaker, hon. Abiriga was a nationalistic and patriotic person and we, the people of West Nile, love peace and security. Therefore, whatever he was doing, he did it on behalf of the people of West Nile. Indeed, his death has robbed us and the country.

Madam Speaker, on the issue of the security of this country, if people can be killed, especially those who have guns, without defending themselves by even shooting one bullet, then the issue of the security of this country is very big. To me, we cannot underrate it. We are representatives of our people. If we cannot say this somewhere, Madam Speaker, convene a meeting and we sit. As we sit here, we cannot bury our heads in the sand and say we are stable. Many people have died without defending themselves. We cannot, therefore, bury the security situation in this country. (Member timed out.)

1.36
DR KEEFA KIWANUKA (NRM, Kiboga County East, Kiboga): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. On behalf of the people of Kiboga, I would like to convey condolences to the family of our fallen colleague, the NRM family and all peace loving Ugandans. I would like to also thank my fellow honourable members for turning up in such big numbers. This, I think, demonstrates a lot of solidarity and it is a sign that when somebody does good, you take note. 

Hon. Abiriga was an honest man, principled, straightforward, very jovial, kind and a national celebrity as a result of his brand as NRM. I had the honour earlier this year, in February, to welcome him in Kiboga to a thunderous welcome. Actually, right now, the people of Kiboga, as a result of his death, are more concerned about our security, probably more than I may be. 

Madam Speaker, the most important point I would like to make is that events like these are often defining moments in the history of a country. I have been following the presentations right from the death of our colleague but I have not heard something signalling a radical transformation in the security of our country and how security is managed in this country.

Hon. Abiriga for some time complained that there were people following him. The capability of a security system is in its ability to foil threats –(Member timed out.)

1.39
MR FREDRICK ANGURA (NRM, Tororo County South, Tororo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I also convey condolences from the people of Tororo to the family of hon. Abiriga and us here in Parliament. 

Yesterday, in Tororo, we were burying a senior citizen who was a former governor in this country by the name Alex Owori. Madam Speaker, at that burial, the concern of many of the people who turned up shifted to the death of hon. Abiriga; everyone was taken up and we were trying to find out what happened, what is going on and where we are heading to. 

As the representatives of our people, I would like to challenge us to talk to our people. Whereas we might be blaming the Government here and there, security starts with us. Let our people be very vigilant to understand and know who is within their surroundings. We are told - maybe we should be able to confirm this later - that these assassins went to that trading centre three times and even bought sodas there. If that is what happened, then maybe the vigilance amongst us and our people needs to be stepped up. 

Madam Speaker, hon. Abiriga has started a journey today which we shall all make. The only unfortunate question is: How has this journey started? It started in a very brutal way, which I think is not good for all of us. 

Finally, I would like to say that there are many conflicts that may be raging amongst many of us in different ways, but there is no conflict that cannot be resolved. If hon. Abiriga has gone because of an internal conflict here or an external conflict, wherever the conflict –(Member timed out.)

1.41
MS ROBINA RWAKOOJO (NRM, Gomba County West, Gomba): Madam Speaker, on behalf of the people of Gomba West, my family and on my own behalf, permit me to pass on our profound condolences to the widow and family of the late hon. Abiriga and to the nation. We condemn not only his killing but the brutal manner in which it was executed. It was severely callous. 

Hon. Abiriga loved his party to the dot and he exhibited it. We mourn him as members of the NRM party. Uganda Communications Commission (UCC) should take this as a wakeup call. Numerous unfriendly and leading messages are often reported; for example, there was a message saying that hon. Abiriga would die in the first week of June and that was just ignored. Our phones are continuously being hacked into, our SIM cards duplicated and colleagues and the general public continue to be duped and ripped of money. However, the mobile phone network companies are seated and lying there. 

Boda bodas should be registered, zoned and regulated. They have become notorious. We see that this is the same style in which Assistant Inspector General of Police (AIGP) Kaweesi was killed.
We would also like to call upon people to respect scenes of crime because they are often tampered with. This leaves the police helpless when they come to do their investigations. 

Let us plug all the loopholes that we have and save our country and its people. Hon. Abiriga, rest in peace.

THE SPEAKER: As I invite hon. Arinda, honourable members, I have here a message sent on 24 May at 21:43 hours - “Abiriga will die in the first week of June”. This was sent in May.

1.42
MR GORDON ARINDA (NRM, Ishaka-Bushenyi Municipality, Bushenyi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Allow me to bring condolences from the people of Ishaka-Bushenyi Municipality. I was with hon. Abiriga on Friday, like most of the people, and we left in a very good way.

The biggest challenge that we currently have in this country is the level of crime intelligence. Yesterday, I had a meeting with the District Police Commander (DPC) in Bushenyi and we talked about crimes in the country. He assured me that in the entire district of over 14 sub-counties, he just had three crime intelligence officers. They are very thin on the ground. The Ministry of Internal Affairs needs to increase on the number of crime intelligence officers on the ground because they are very thin on the ground and they cannot do much.

Much has been said about our colleague but as I conclude, I have a song for him and I want to sing for him as he goes to rest in peace: “Woke up this morning to hear the news read saying Col Abiriga is dead. Through the good times and the bad times, a good man had to go. Yes, I know we gonna miss you; yes, we do gonna miss you. You never know how much we loved you, yes we do; we love yoooooooooou.” 

Rest in peace my brother. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much.

1.45
MS SARAH NAJJUMA (NRM, Woman Representative, Nakaseke): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I bring a condolence message from the people of Nakaseke. I stay in Katalemwa near Mattuga and hon. Abiriga used to stay in Kirinyabigo. On Friday evening, I received a call from a lady in Kirinyabigo informing me about the incident. I asked her, “Are you drunk? Are you in a bar?” She told me, “Sarah, I am at the scene; hon. Abiriga has been gunned down.” I called the officer in charge of Wattuba and he told me, “It is true; I am at the scene and hon. Abiriga has been gunned down.” I called hon. Kahonda because he also stays in Katalemwa and he said, “Sarah, that is a lie; I have been with hon. Abiriga today evening.” I told hon. Kahonda that I was on my way to the scene.


When I reached the scene, I called hon. Nabakooba, the Chairperson of the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs, and the Chief Whip. When I reached Kirinyabigo, all the people were mourning - children, women and even the boda boda boys were mourning. You would think Kirinyabigo was in Arua.

It is true hon. Abiriga was down to earth. He was a man of the people. I am a Muslim and in Islam, we believe that if someone dies in the month of Ramadan and he has been doing good, he goes to Jannah. I am sure hon. Abiriga is going to Jannah. May his soul rest in eternal peace.

1.47
MS JUDITH NABAKOOBA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mityana): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Allow me join the rest of the colleagues to convey condolences from the people of Mityana. 

I had the opportunity to work with hon. Abiriga for the last two years. I knew hon. Abiriga as a straight forward and committed man who would stand for what he believed in. Even during committee deliberations, you would see hon. Abiriga defending his Government and NRM. As NRM, we have lost a true cadre, somebody who would be there day and night regardless of what was taking place. 

Madam Speaker, I request this Parliament to pass a resolution for the ministers to come up with statements on what is taking place. They should be given a timeframe to come and inform the public and this House about what is happening, what has been done, the arrests that have been made as a sign of reassurance that something is being done.

As we are mourning our colleague, hon. Abiriga, Members of Parliament and the public are in fear. They are getting threats on their phones through SMS messages and WhatsApp messages. Yesterday, we heard hon. Lillian Nakate and even hon. Sematimba say they got the same messages; people are threatening. 

We pray that the Minister of Information, Communication Technology and National Guidance will follow up these people who send and call members of the public and Members of Parliament threatening them that their breasts will be cut off, they will be killed in one way or –(Member timed out.)

1.49
MR JAMES BABA (NRM, Koboko County, Koboko): Madam Speaker, the people of Koboko mourn with the people of Arua Municipality and the country at large the death of our colleague, hon. Abiriga. There was absolutely no need to kill this innocent man who was always jovial, cheerful and a fun lover; absolutely no reason.

My concern is the manner of the killing, the anger, brutality and hatred showed in the killing. I want to agree with hon. Andrew Kaluya who asked what message is being sent. What is driving this manner of killing? It happened to AIGP Kaweesi, the late Joan Kagezi and Maj. Kiggundu; all killings were full of anger, hatred and absolute brutality.

We as a nation must do soul-searching. What is driving this anger in this country? Are there people hurting in this country? Are there people who are terribly disgruntled? Why shouldn’t we reach out to them and find out? 

I would like to agree with Gen. Moses Ali when he said in the mosque this morning that issues of security should not only be left to security services like the police and army; rather, they should concern all of us. I think we should take a cue from there.

Lastly, I would like to address this to my party, the NRM. Hon. Abiriga was a brand name. He was a live mobile billboard for the party and the Government. Hon. Ecweru said that there are some people who do something small and are rewarded big. Why don’t we reward the widow and the nine children, now that there is nobody to take care of them? I thank you.

1.52
THE MINISTER FOR PUBLIC SERVICE (Mr Wilson Muruli Mukasa): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. On behalf of the people of Budyebo in Nakasongola, I wish to convey our condolences to the family and the people of Arua Municipality for the tragic death of our colleague, Col Abiriga. I condemn the senseless murder of an innocent man. 

Madam Speaker, I interacted with Col Abiriga long before he became a Member of Parliament and I found him to be a man with a passion for this country. He was always focused and never got tired of working for the security of West Nile and the country as a whole. He did this, many times at great risk to his personal life. 

We, in Budyebo, will miss him greatly. He has been a darling to the people of Migeera Town in Budyebo. Just last week, when he was coming here, he promised the women vendors in Migeera market that when he goes back, he would give them yellow t-shirts. On top of that, he promised to contribute to their SACCO. He never missed a chance to encourage them to work hard so that they could have income and be loyal to the Government.

Such is the man that this terrible assassin has killed in cold blood. I pray that one day this assassin will pay for the act he has done. May the Lord rest Col Abiriga in eternal peace.

1.54
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (URBAN DEVELOPMENT) (Mr Isaac Musumba): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you for giving me an opportunity to say something about my friend and elder brother, hon. Abiriga.

I did not know him until June 2016 when we met here. We linked up at a time when we were trying to identify who would lead us in our legislative duties; the kakuyege that was going on led me to meet Col Abiriga. Eventually, when I had a function in July, which you, Madam Speaker, presided over, hon. Abiriga came to Buzaaya. On behalf to the people of Buzaaya, I would like to extend our condolences.

Madam Speaker, I have two questions. Is it the intention of the assassins to break our spirit? Is it that we, the Members of Parliament who identify with the billboard that Col Abiriga was, should be afraid? At the end of the day, the peace and comfort that we have had in this country can actually be affected by the measures that the Government may choose to put in place as a result of these very outrageous murders. We may be shooting ourselves in the foot, including the assassins, if the statement “to belong is to condemn oneself” is going to be the statement of our day.

Hon. Abiriga, you led a humble life. You died in the month of Ramadhan and on a Friday. May the good Lord reward you for all your labour.

1.57
THE MINISTER FOR TOURISM, WILDLIFE AND ANTIQUITIES (Prof. Ephraim Kamuntu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. How I wish hon. Abiriga would rise up from the coffin and see the respect that this House has given him. On a Sunday, Members of Parliament, from Nimule to Kisoro, from Bundibugyo to Buvuma, have come to pay respect to this great man.

The country has lost a great leader; a man who loved his country so dearly. He loved his people so profoundly. He was committed to his party. He loved the President for the stability he has achieved in this country.

Allow me to be personal because hon. Abiriga was a friend of many people. One day I was standing with him outside this Parliament and hon. Nambooze, who unfortunately is not here, came in a cheeky manner and removed hon. Abiriga’s hat. He looked at this lady and said, “If I followed her and gave her a kick in the buttocks, they will accuse me of sexual harassment”. We laughed. He took it in good faith and it did not matter to him when most of us were shocked about such uncalled-for provocation.

The second time we saw him as a man with an honest heart was when he was put under pressure by the call of nature and he eased himself outside designated areas. He was taken to court and with a very sincere heart, he admitted and said, “Kampala City Council Authority (KCCA) does not take care of planning and I suffer from diabetes, so I did what I did.” The judge fined him Shs 40,000. We protested because we felt that the judge should have set him free because of his honesty; he did not argue about it. We teased him saying we could contribute the Shs 40,000 he paid. This is how open minded he was; a man with a good heart who can even go to the extent of accepting something, which others would have denied.

We pray that the long hand of God will enable the security forces to arrest those who have committed this crime. May his soul rest in eternal peace. Thank you very much.
 
2.01
MR ATKINS KATUSABE (FDC, Bukonjo County West, Kasese): Madam Speaker, I bring heartfelt condolences and deepest sympathies, first of all from my family, from Kasese District, from the Rwenzururu Kingdom and from people who value life. 

As a country, I think we have gotten to a point where we have to put our foot down and say, enough is enough. This is not time to play politics; this is the time to have a national reflection. You and I have a role to play and all we need right now is collective thought and action to do two things. First, we need to identify and address the fundamental problems that could be driving this trend. It is sad that it has been upgraded from a trend to a pattern. 

Because of time, Madam Speaker, if it pleases you, after the Budget Speech, can you please allocate two or three specific sittings to focus on what we, as Parliament, can do to keep all Ugandans safe? That is my only contribution because we cannot exhaust it all. This is a national crisis and it is upon this Parliament to provide leadership together with the Government. 

I pass my condolences to the family and to my brothers and sisters from Arua and the NRM party. I also bring condolences from Najjanankumbi, from my Forum for Democratic Change (FDC) party headquarters. We are in mourning because our brother was the glue in this House that was holding us together. As a country, we should rise to the occasion that I am my brother and my sister’s keeper. There is no FDC or NRM; there is a family called Uganda. That is the value system that all of us need to pledge total allegiance to the flag of Uganda. For God and my country. Thank you.
 
THE SPEAKER: Can I ask the parliamentary caucuses that have not yet brought their money to do so? I need the money before we close. (Laughter)

2.04
MS ZAITUN DRIWARU (Independent, Woman Representative, Yumbe): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to join other Ugandans in paying tribute to our fallen brother and friend. Our fallen brother was a man who nobody could have doubt in, if you were told something about him. I only have three issues that I would like to put across. 

It is good that most of us got an opportunity to see the family of our beloved brother who is lying before us. He has got a very young family; the children are very small. I am worried about what is going to happen after his burial. I would like to urge Members of Parliament to join efforts and bring somebody to this Parliament that can support the family that is left behind, like we did in Soroti. (Applause)
 
Secondly, when you go to the spot where the honourable was assassinated, there is no nearby security post where he could have probably gotten help. In other countries, there are very close security points so that the communities are protected. Why don’t we do that in Uganda? Taxpayers are paying money that helps the army who are staying in barracks. Why can’t we bring them out to come and provide security for Ugandans who are living in agony? Let them come and support the police. We appreciate the work that the security is doing but we need additional support to what they are already providing.

Another thing I would like to tell the country is that people said that our fallen friend was not educated, but he knew group dynamics. During the time of campaigns, he was the only person I knew of who gave out all the money that President Museveni gave him to go and campaign. He organised women and youth in groups. Now he has fallen; the women, youth and the other groups will live to remember him. All Ugandans will live to remember him.

May you allow me to say in Arabic, Inna lillahi wa inna ilayhi raji'un. May his soul rest in eternal peace.

2.07
MR ODRIA ALIONI (Independent, Aringa County South, Yumbe): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank your office and the Office of the Prime Minister who have been with us since Friday. I would also like to thank Members of Parliament on the committee, who have been with us since Friday and in particular, hon. Tinkasiimire, who left us around 10.00 p.m. yesterday. 

Madam Speaker, yesterday the committee gave me the opportunity to go to A-plus Funeral Services, pick the two caskets and go to Mulago National Referral Hospital and pick the bodies. I went and picked the bodies but it was not a normal killing. If Members are given the opportunity to view this body, you will not believe; it is so sad. 

The question is: How many more are in the line-up? We are born once and we die once. When you die, there must be a cause of that death. We are going to the Madi who are going to ask Government what the cause of his shooting was. We should be prepared to give answers to the people. 

I know that Abiriga was picked by this Government from Arua Park where he was jobless and had nothing. If you got such an opportunity to be picked from the dust and appointed Resident District Commissioner from where you are lifted to become a Member of Parliament, what reason would you have not to support the person who has lifted you from nowhere? (Applause) May his soul rest in eternal peace.

2.10
MR GILBERT OLANYA (FDC, Kilak South County, Amuru): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to pick up from where my colleagues ended. As Government, we need to ask ourselves questions and at this time, we need to sit down and find lasting solutions to the unnecessary killings going on in this country. 

The first concern we need to raise is: Why are the killings happening at this particular time? For the last two or three years, we have had massive killings yet ever since Uganda got her independence in 1962, we had never experienced such kinds of killings. Why at this particular time – (Interjections) - I mean killings where an individual is gunned down in broad daylight.

The second question we need to ask is: Why are the killers so daring and bold? If you look at it critically, the killers do not fear those who have escorts or guns. They are so bold and daring and come straight and kill, mostly in broad daylight. Our brother, Abiriga, was killed at around 6.30 p.m. when it was still clear. The AIGP Kaweesi was killed in the morning hours. Why are they so bold and daring and they do not fear death? There must be something wrong, Madam Speaker.

Thirdly, we need to find out how many people have guns in this country and where those guns are. We need to take serious stock of where those guns are. Right now, we have so many trained people and the Government does not know exactly who owns a gun and where these guns are.

Madam Speaker, we need to check our borders. I come from Amuru and we share a border with South Sudan. Within the South Sudanese camps, very many of them were found with guns and we do not know how the guns were sneaked inside this country.

Madam Speaker, at this time we need to find a lasting solution - (Member timed out.)

2.13
MR SILAS AOGON (Independent, Kumi Municipality, Kumi): Madam Speaker, on behalf of the people of Kumi Municipality and on my own behalf, I would like to convey my condolences to the family of the late hon. Abiriga. I also want to convey condolences to H.E. the President of the Republic of Uganda because hon. Abiriga was indeed his highest and greatest supporter in the land. I also want to convey my condolences to NRM as a party; the party has lost and what a loss.

Madam Speaker, hon. Abiriga was so much in love with the yellow colour. To me, you could equate that to a will written in spiritual ink and paper. That is the man we have lost.

Members have discussed various issues and said the same words, but I would like to say something too. Madam Speaker, we need prayers for this Parliament. Let us declare a day of prayer for us in Parliament. We should go to the Conference Hall and pray to God. We should have ecumenical prayers.

I would also like to request Members that we should not agree to discuss any matter in this House unless it is first about security. That should be the way to go. We should not accept any business to be brought to the House unless we first handle security matters so that we get solutions. We should listen from the people concerned and hear what they are about to do or what they are doing. It is time for us to stop stories so that we move on as a country.

In Namugongo, I hear whispers that somebody dropped a note that they want 120 heads from children, men and women - (Member timed out.)

2.15
MR PAUL MWIRU (FDC, Jinja Municipality East, Jinja): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to pay tribute to our fallen colleague, hon. Ibrahim Abiriga. 

Madam Speaker, those who were seeing hon. Abiriga from a distance would not know what he was. I joined this House about four months ago and met hon. Abiriga, who I found to be very amiable. I cracked a joke with him saying, “You seem to be the epitome of branding in this House; can you take me to your designer?” He kept on reminding me how he was supposed to take me to his designer and asked if he could give me the number of his designer until I said I was actually cracking a joke.

Madam Speaker, when I got the news about the demise of our colleague, I remembered that in the Ninth Parliament, we talked about gun control in this country. It is very saddening that the Minister of Internal Affairs did not tell us about the measures, because it is the duty of the police to detect and prevent crime.

Secondly and most importantly, the Fire Arms Act gives a duty to the minister to control the use of firearms in this country. However, it is lamentable that if you went to washing bays - for those who leave your vehicles at washing bays - you find people who are not uniformed but having more than one gun in their cars.

Madam Speaker, at the scene of crime, you could see very many security people who were not uniformed. People are putting on civilian clothes but carrying guns. In most instances –(Member timed out.)

2.17
MR ROLAND MUGUME (FDC, Rukungiri Municipality, Rukungiri): Thank you, Madam Speaker. On behalf of the people of Rukungiri Municipality and the district as a whole, I would like to convey my condolences to the family of the late hon. Abiriga and the people of Arua Municipality.

Madam Speaker, I would like to start where hon. Okumu stopped. He raised a very important point about crime preventers. We know that these people were recruited in this country but as of now, we do not know where they are and what they are doing. This is the time for the Minister of Security to tell us where these people are because some of them were armed and they are in our communities. Before you accuse any other person, you should accuse those people because when they were recruited, they knew they were employed. However, right now, they are in our communities.

Madam Speaker, as a person from the Opposition, I demand to know how many crime preventers there are and what they are doing. We should get a statement from the minister in charge of security.

Secondly, there is the issue of Local Councils (LCs). We have a problem in our communities because you cannot identify a person who has just come to the community or who has been there and for how long. This is the time; I would like to appeal to the Government not to postpone LC elections again. We want LCs and village security groups in place. We want these people in our communities; otherwise, we have a problem of identification of new and old people.

Madam Speaker, back to my colleague, the late hon. Abiriga, I wish to once again convey my condolences to the NRM party. My colleagues have spoken and I would like to add my voice by saying that he was a real NRM cadre who was friendly across the board. I can assure you, Madam Speaker, that all of us have been friendly to our colleague, hon. Abiriga.

2.30
MR JIMMY AKENA (UPC, Lira Municipality, Lira): Thank you, Madam Speaker. On my own behalf and on behalf of the people of Lira Municipality, the Uganda People’s Congress and by extension the President-General of the Democratic Party, we send our sincere condolences to the family, the people of Arua Municipality and the NRM as a whole.

All of us who came to know hon. Abiriga on a personal level knew him as an amiable gentleman. Those at a distance may not have appreciated that nature of Abiriga. I can state quite clearly that no citizen of Uganda deserves what hon. Abiriga got. Not only a Member of Parliament but any citizen of Uganda does not deserve to be murdered in such a brutal and inhumane way.

Much has been said about the possible motives of his killers and for that we can only speculate. However, I wish to state clearly that from the position of Uganda People’s Congress, we have opted for constructive engagement. We have opted to discuss the difficult political issues on the table. We are not hiding behind the scene but doing it openly in the hope that we can build a new consensus for the citizens of Uganda. 

Over the years, many Ugandans have lost their lives in a brutal fashion and we may never know their killers. At this moment, when the nation is actually polarised, it is important that those avenues for constructive dialogue across party lines are –(Member timed out.)

2.22
MR NATHAN NANDALA-MAFABI (FDC, Budadiri County West, Sironko): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. On behalf of FDC, I send condolences to the NRM party, the family of my brother, hon. Abiriga, and the people of Uganda.

Madam Speaker, on Thursday, I came to Parliament and at the security checkpoint, I met my brother, Abiriga. I told the security personnel, “Check him better”. He said, “Nandala, you are not a security person to tell them to check and as you know, I am a security person.” I said, “You know I am a private general.” We started laughing and we were going in together, but it was only hon. Joshua Anywarach who made him go away.

Madam Speaker, I would like to tell the people of NRM that for us, you are not our enemies. We are just opponents in the struggle. You have different views from ours. 

I have been joking with my brother here for long. One of the things I have been joking with him about, and I have proved it today, was his education. I would ask him, “How did you finish P.7 when you were 11 years old? That means you went to school when you were four years old and yet those days they used to make your hands cross over your head and if they did not touch the ear, you would not go to class. How did you manage to make your hand cross over your head to touch your ear at four years old?” He would laugh, saying for them they grew up while in their mother’s wombs. (Laughter)

I want to tell –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I know everybody wants to contribute, but you know there is another body outside in the sun. I think we need to let them go because they are travelling together.

2.24
MR ROBERT KASULE (NRM, Nansana Municipality, Wakiso): Madam Speaker, I have to testify that I have never spoken when fallen Members are brought here because I would remember when my father was brought here and people said all sorts of things, even those who were haunting him. However, for Abiriga, it is a special case. He stayed in my constituency and I would like to salute him for bringing joy and happiness to that area, which I represent. (Applause)

I talked to him two weeks ago here when we were discussing the budget and he seemed to be “in the air”; he was not himself. I walked over to him and said, “You are my voter” and he said, “Yes, I know”. I said, “I have not visited my Member for a while, but I will visit you soon.” He said that it was okay; I could go and see him because he stays in a good place. I told him that I knew the place. The chairman of that area is called “Haji Movement” because he is a fanatic supporter of the National Resistance Movement and that is why he blended in very well with them.

Hon. Abiriga was not only loved in my constituency but also in Bwaise. I once followed him from Bwaise, as I was going to the constituency and we went together; he was greeting everybody, with his hands out of the car, up to Kawanda. Some people made fun of him and others abused him, but he blended in well –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Half a minute to conclude.

MR KASULE: Somebody abused him saying that he peed in the city and he told him off - “You are also drunk; you are going to pee in your bed.” He blended in well. We salute you, hon. Abiriga.

However, at the moment, what I would like to say is that people have information; the thugs were seen. There is information with the population and we pray that the police will pick up this information. They should put a toll-free number and I think at the end of the day, we shall find these thugs. 

We salute hon. Abiriga and the people of Arua. I know they loved the man and I pray that they keep calm until we finish the burial. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, 51 Members have contributed to this motion. I now put the question that the question be put.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: I now put the question that this House do pay tribute to hon. Ibrahim Abiriga, Member of Parliament for Arua Municipality.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, there will be a bus leaving here at 3.00 p.m. Contact Ms Matuwa, who is in charge of transport. Tomorrow, there will be a plane that can take 15 people. It is leaving at 11 o’clock. Those who would like to go by air, contact hon. Elijah Okupa. They will come back at 4.00 p.m. 

I ask the Clerk to extract the tribute so that it is given to the family of our late colleague. Thank you very much.  

The East African Community Anthem

The National Anthem 

(Exit of the late Col (Rtd) Ibrahim Abiriga)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I would like to thank you very much for coming to pay tribute to someone who gave us so much joy and laughter in this House. 

I would like to announce that the Lango Parliamentary Group has increased their contribution by another Shs 300,000. Ankole has also improved by Shs 400,000 and are now at Shs 1,500,000. I am still waiting for the other Members to bring the money so that we can give it to the family. 

House adjourned to Budget Day. Thank you very much for coming.

(The House rose at 2.38 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 14 June 2018.) 
