


Wednesday, 21 June 2017

Parliament met at 2.54 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this afternoon’s sitting. We have some bad news from Padyere County. Our colleague, hon. Carter Anywarach, has lost his father. He died on 19 June 2017 and burial is today at Padolo Village in Erussi Sub county in Nebbi District. I just request Members to stand up in memory for Mzee Jungera Donasiano. 

(Members rose and observed a moment of silence.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I would like to commiserate with the members who are still undergoing by-elections and we pray that they come out of it safely with victory. 

However, in the meantime, I think we need to congratulate our members, who have been able to fight the election petitions and have come back. Accordingly, I congratulate hon. Annet Nyakecho. Please stand up. I also congratulate hon. Joseph Kakooza, hon. Violet Adome and Eng. Lillian Nakate, the Vice Chairperson of the Committee on Physical Infrastructure. Let us pray for those who are still hanging in the balance. (Applause)

Hon. Stephen Mukitale had something to say, please use only three minutes.

2.58
MR STEPHEN MUKITALE (Independent, Buliisa County, Buliisa): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I would like to first of all thank you for the institutional memory and the good culture of saving the work of the previous Parliament for continuity. 

Madam Speaker, during the closure of the Ninth Parliament, the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs made a presentation to the Floor of Parliament to the effect that we did not have time in the last months of the Ninth Parliament to deal with the many constitutional amendments. 

The Government then made commitment that we needed a fresh mandate of a new Parliament to deal with that very important subject matter. Indeed, Madam Speaker, at the beginning of this Parliament, we had an attempt of piece meal constitutional amendments, that were however, stopped due to the minister’s assurance that the Constitutional Review Commission was about to be named and that it would deal with the various constitutional amendments. 

Madam Speaker, in the presentation we have had, this business seems to be fizzling out. My concern is that the last two Parliaments have seen the last months of a Parliament attempting to deal with such gigantic work. I thought it would not be prudent this time round to repeat the same mistake of having this business is introduced late. 

We have already lost one year of the Tenth Parliament. How I wish the Constitutional Review Commission would be put in place to deal with the various constitutional amendments looming around. Many of us have a number of constitutional amendments we would not want to introduce in piece meals. We have had maximum restraint waiting for a comprehensive arrangement as assured by the Minister of Constitutional Affairs, Madam Speaker. I wish we would get the time when this will be done. 

3.00
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank hon. Stephen Mukitale for having raised this constitutional matter. I would like to begin by conveying apologies from the hon. Kahinda Otafiire. We have been with him in Cabinet and right now, he is meeting H.E, the President at Nakasero. 

However, I have information, which I got from him one week ago while I was also making an inquiry on the constitutional amendments and he told me that he had submitted 18 names to H.E the President for consideration of appointment. Out of the 18, I think membership to the Constitutional Review Commission is supposed to be 12. However, he submitted 18 names to the President to go through and finally appoint the Constitutional Review Commission. 

I am, therefore, sure that the minister will keep us updated. I agree with you that matters concerning constitutional amendments should be handled in the earlier days of Parliament because obviously as we move towards elections, things tend to be untenable. 

MR SSEWUNGU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for at least relaying information in relation to what the hon. Stephen Mukitale raised. However, it is known that there was a case in court of hon. Amama Mbabazi, the presidential candidate for TDA vs. Yoweri Kaguta Museveni. 

In delivering judgement, the Supreme Court directed that there should be amendments or we should change and look at the recommendations they made within a period of two years. Still, those issues that were raised in that case actually have a connection to what the hon. Stephen Mukitale is stating. 

So, Government Chief Whip, could you also help us know when we are going to have these amendments because those amendments will not only affect the presidential candidates, they will also affect us as Members of Parliament. I do not want to go to the specifics because I hope you read that judgement and you know that the directives in there are pertinent - the Supreme Court gave a directive of two years and already one year has elapsed. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Thank you for your point of information and clarification as well. I agree with you and I am aware of the requirement for two years. I also know that one year has elapsed and so we are remaining with one year. Your question will be very relevant at the end of the two years. I know –(Interruption) 

MR SSEWUNGU: Madam Speaker, it is unfortunate that I am now contemplating withdrawing my statement, yet I was praising the minister at the beginning. 

It is on record that during the Ninth Parliament, Madam Speaker, you used - in most of your remarks at the State of the Nation Address - to ask Cabinet to bring business and mentioning those specific areas where Cabinet or the Executive had failed to bring these issues yet that Parliament was almost getting to its end –(Interjections)– but you see I am on the Floor and as an old Member of Parliament, you should be aware that the Speaker directed that no member is supposed to heckle at the other while in the House and while the President is around. So please behave because you might be suspended. 

Madam Speaker, the point of order I am raising is: is it in order, the Speaker having given a number of directives to the Executive to bring business to the Ninth Parliament as well as to this Parliament and this Parliament having moved almost eight months without having such business from the Cabinet, for the minister to continue saying that she has known that there is still a year, yet I am raising a very pertinent issue, which caused wars and fights during elections? Is she in order, Madam Speaker?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, none of you should address key issues in anticipation. When the review comes, we shall deal with it. (Laughter) 

MR MUKITALE: Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you. The other urgent matter is that we are celebrated as the best host of refugees and I am proud we are. I am also happy that we are hosting a summit, which should give us dividends, in terms of the UN support, unlike the loan I opposed in regard to borrowing to deal with refugee challenges.

I am raising this point to do with numbers. The numbers which I see of 1.2 million do not reflect the real number of refugees and the gravity of the matter. The 1.2 million refugees are those received in registered refugee camps like Nakivale, Rukinga, Rhino Camp and Pakele.

However, we people living at the border with Democratic Republic of Congo, we have people right from Arua in West Nile like the Alur of Congo and those in Uganda and the people in Kasese, where people in Uganda have relatives in neighbouring DRC; such refugees are not registered in the camps because such people bond easily. Such refugees are in our schools and health centres, depleting our lakes and finishing our forests yet their numbers are not being reflected.

My request to the Leader of Government Business is, can we get the true picture of foreign immigrants? I can see the summit only talking about refugees and not the alien immigrants. We have more alien immigrants, four times more than the registered refugees you are now fundraising for in the summit.

So, the pressure on the host community is beyond just what Government is talking about in the registered refugee camps. Can this matter be brought to light so that when we are fundraising from the UN, we look at the bigger picture and not the one portrayed in the refugee camps. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. I hope the Government will address that. However, in connection with that, I am happy to see the Minister of Internal Affairs – I have been writing to you about the Maragoli Community in Bunyoro. They came to Uganda during the construction of the railway, but when we were registering for the national IDs, they could not be registered. I wrote to your predecessor, he died before he could handle that issue but they have kept on writing. The Maragoli of Bunyoro have lived in Uganda for now four generations yet they do not have a status in this country. I would, therefore, like you to address this issue when you go back to your office. 

Okay, honourable members, I would like to adjust the Order Paper to permit the first reading of the Local Government (Amendment) Bill, 2017. Let the minister lay his papers first before presenting the Bill for first reading.

LAYING OF PAPERS

3.08
THE MINISTER OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Gen. Abubakhar Jeje Odong): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the following instruments in accordance with Section 85 of the Registration of Persons Act, 2015: The first is the Registration of Persons Statutory Instrument No.67 of 2015 and the second is the Registration of Persons, Births and Deaths Regulations, Statutory Instrument No.68 of 2015. I beg to lay, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, they are now available for use in this House and for the public.

MR KASIBANTE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. About two weeks ago, Parliament instructed the Secretary to the Treasury to come and make a public apology. Mr Keith Muhakanizi had to come and make a public apology for his misconduct as far as financial issues to do with his office are concerned but we have not heard from him since then. Now that Government is not saying anything about it, are we proceeding well, Madam Speaker?

When a civil servant, who is supposed to come to apologise to the public is not saying anything with Government keeping quiet - the Government Chief Whip is comfortably seated as if there is nothing wrong and as if Parliament never summoned that civil servant. Are we proceeding well? (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I will study the Hansard and update you on how we shall move.

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE LOCAL GOVERNMENT (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2017

3.11
MS ROSE MUTONYI (NRM, Bubulo County West, Manafwa): Madam Speaker and honorable members, I beg to present a Bill entitled “Local Government (Amendment) Bill, 2017” to be read for the first time.

THE SPEAKER: Is it seconded? Okay, it has been seconded –(Interjections)– honourable members, it is this House that gave authority to the Member to move the Bill so it is fine and it has been seconded by a number of members. Do you have the certificate of financial implications?

MS MUTONYI: Madam Speaker, I beg to lay the certificate of the financial implications for this Bill.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, the Bill is sent to the Committee on Public Service and Local Government for perusal and report back, and it may require expeditious handling, taking into account that there are new local governments being formed in the very near future.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON APAA LAND CONFLICT AND THE CLASHES THAT LED TO THE LOSS OF LIFE

THE SPEAKER: Yes, Minister of Internal Affairs. Okay, it is supposed to be Minister of Lands. But do you have a problem, hon. Kenneth Lubogo?

MR LUBOGO: Madam Speaker, on the Order Paper we have the item titled, “Ministerial Statement on Apaa” but there is another item No.5 titled, “Ministerial Statement on Apaa by a Member of Parliament.” The order is that there will be a statement first by the minister and then the Member later. However, would it be right, Madam Speaker, if the Member first made his statement before we get the minister’s statement presented? 

THE SPEAKER: No, let us first receive the Ministerial Statement; the Member will present his statement before we debate.

3.13
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (Dr Chris Baryomunsi): Thank you, Madam Speaker and honourable members. I wish to make a statement as Minister of State for Lands, Housing and Urban Development, but which has been jointly prepared with the ministries of tourism, internal affairs, as well as the Office of the Prime Minister, particularly the Department of Disaster Preparedness.

Madam Speaker and honourable members, I wish to present a statement on the Amuru-Adjumani boundary land conflict, which recently resulted in clashes, leading to loss of lives and property, injuries and displacement of people. The statement has been uploaded on our iPads.
 
I am going to give the chronology of events that gave rise to the recent clashes so that Members can understand and appreciate why there is that conflict in the northern part of this country. 

Madam Speaker, both the Madi and Acholi people have lived peacefully in the area without conflict until after the return of the internally displaced persons from the camps to their homes. 

Some of the people in the Acholi area consider River Zoka as the boundary between Amuru and Adjumani districts. They claim that this boundary was agreed upon between the chiefs of the two communities many years ago after they had a tribal conflict. Because the warring parties were separated by the rivers, some people believed that, that river became the boundary. 

Madam Speaker, I have come with a map, which I will display electronically although I also have a physical map. I hope we shall get a point where Members will be able to see the land, which is in dispute.  

The river referred to above separated the two fighting parties and has since then been erroneously considered to be the boundary between the two communities. Apaa area has also been falsely considered by the Acholi community to be part of Amuru, but the colonial demarcations place it in Adjumani District. 

At this point, Madam Speaker, allow me to refer you and the House to the map from our Department of Surveys and Mapping. Unfortunately, the pointer cannot show on a television screen – (Interjections)– that is technology. That is simple technology. This pointer cannot show on the screen. Maybe if the staff could help me hold this physical one, then I can show. 

Basically, that map shows the boundary between Adjumani where the Madi Community lives and Amuru where the Acholi community lives. The contest is basically on the East Madi Wildlife Reserve, which I will make reference to in my presentation. Could you scroll it up a bit? 

The Madi and the Acholi (or Adjumani and Amuru) are largely separated by rivers. On those boundaries, there is no contest. The contest is on that red line – that straight line, which is 27 kilometres, from River Choro to that other game reserve, which is in green on the right. The fight is on that boundary – on the red line. 

As you can note, the Apaa area, which is the place of contest is that red dot shown up there on the map. Our surveyors, as I will indicate, have opened the boundaries and they clearly show that Apaa is eight kilometres inside Adjumani and I will demonstrate from my presentation –(Interruption)

MR GILBERT OLANYA: Madam Speaker, I rise on a point of procedure. I do not know where the minister got the map which he is showing. However, we also have a map extracted from the Uganda Atlas –

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, take your seat. You will speak after the minister has completed.

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. For the record, I introduced myself as the Minister of State, Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development where the Department of Surveys and Mapping responsible for defining boundaries lies. Therefore, I speak as the minister responsible for the surveying function of Government.

Madam Speaker and honourable members, as I was saying, East Madi Wildlife Reserve – which I indicated – covers an area of about 827 square kilometres and it is located in Adjumani District. 

This reserve was curved out of the former East Madi controlled hunting area. The reserve remained the virgin protected area with minimal human interference, except from the fishermen camping along the Nile with isolated cases of poaching and illegal pit-sawing in Zoka Central Forest Reserve.

The gazettement of the East Madi Wildlife Reserve followed consultative meetings with the district leadership of Adjumani in 2000, which approved the upgrading of the area to a wildlife status. 

At the same time, Gulu District, from which Amuru District was curved and from which Nwoya District emerged, was consulted on the possibility of upgrading the Aswa Lolim controlled hunting area to provide for a corridor that would connect Murchison Falls National Park to the East Madi Wildlife Reserve. This request was rejected by the then Gulu District Local Government. This was in 2002 - this reserve was curved out of the hunting area and gazetted by Parliament and it is in Adjumani. 

Gulu District leadership did not grant the request for the part which Government wanted to create as a reserve, which is the current Nwoya District.

The boundary of East Madi Wildlife Reserve is described in most areas by physical features like River Zoka that forms the northern boundary, River Gorobi/Omuu that forms the eastern boundary of the reserve, rivers Choro and Nile that form the southern and western boundaries respectively. That is the map I had shown. The boundaries are marked by rivers. 

However, a 27 kilometre portion of the south where the boundary does not take the course of any river is located between River Choro and Wicheri Central Forest Reserve – that is the straight line, which I was showing you. It is the southern boundary of the game reserve, which also serves as a boundary between Adjumani and Amuru districts.

The Uganda Wildlife Authority in 2006 hired consultants – Geomaps Uganda Limited – who conducted a boundary survey in this area. This was to be followed by a physical placement of concrete boundary pillars in 2007. This was, however, not done since the southern boundary of the game reserve also happens to be the boundary between Adjumani and Amuru districts – the 27 kilometre stretch of a straight line. There was a dispute by the Amuru people and they consequently chased away the pillar contractors who had been hired by Uganda Wildlife Authority.

Following the rejection of the boundary, Uganda Wildlife Authority engaged both Adjumani and Amuru leaders to sort out the problem. A 14-member committee was constituted by the two districts and my brother, hon. Gilbert Olanya, was a member of that committee. I think by then he was serving as a councillor as well as the secretary for education in the Amuru District Council. 

That committee was to investigate whether the game reserve was legally gazetted and whether it was located in Adjumani or Amuru. That was the term of reference of that committee. These facts were resolved in 2009 when the committee confirmed that the game reserve existed and was in Adjumani District. 

The committee, therefore, recommended that both districts obtain maps from the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development and bring them on the ground for interpretation of the border between Amuru and Adjumani to ascertain the location of Apaa.

This however never happened and efforts to convene other meetings failed as leaders from Amuru District withdrew from the exercise and the Acholi community became hostile. The rejection of the game reserve continued until 2011 when a case was filed in the Gulu High Court by Dr Michael Abongomera, Dr Philip Nyeko, hon. Gilbert Olanya and others (High Court Civil Suit No.0062/2011) claiming that the land in Apaa, Lakang in Amuru and Pabbo is customary land owned by the plaintiffs. The plaintiffs claimed that the Apaa and Lakang land comprised part of the Kilak hunting area which was de-gazetted in 1972 and subsequently owned by the community.

In 2009, the Uganda Wildlife Authority (UWA) signed a Tripartite Collaborative Management Agreement with Adjumani District and Lake Albert Safaris Limited. In most cases, honourable members, you have heard some leaders referring to that Lake Albert Safaris Limited as the Muzungu  who has been brought by hon. Moses Ali to take away the land, which is not true –(Interjections)- I am on page 3. This is written, just check your statement. The reason for this concession agreement for the reserve was to help improve its management and generate revenue for both the country and surrounding communities through tourism development.

Madam Speaker, I would like to say that this was just a concession and there is no lease or any other form of land acquisition that has been done on that land and we are the ones who supervened over the land acquisition at the lands ministry. It was just a concession between this company, Uganda Wildlife Authority and Adjumani District to manage the game reserve.

In June 2010, the then Minister of Trade, Tourism and Industry,  Maj. Gen. Kahinda Otafiire, directed that all encroachers in wildlife protected areas with emphasis on the East Madi Wildlife Reserve and the Mount Elgon Reserve should be evicted to preserve the integrity of the protected areas. The communities were sensitised and a number of families were peacefully evicted while others left on their own will.

This exercise was again halted after political leaders from Amuru District petitioned the new Minister of Tourism, Wildlife and Heritage, Prof. Ephraim Kamuntu, who is in the House. They requested him to intervene and stop UWA from evicting residents of Apaa from their ancestral areas claiming they are encroaching on the East Madi Wildlife Reserve.

The minister held meetings with the leaders and made field trips to Amuru and Adjumani to understand the problem before taking a decision. The minister was thereafter taken on a field tour of the disputed area and using the Global Position System and topographic maps, he was shown where the disputed areas are located on both the map and on the ground. They clearly showed they were in the reserve located in Adjumani District.

The minister’s entourage survived being lynched by the communities in Apaa during the field trip as the residents at Apaa inside East Madi Wildlife Reserve pelted the minister’s convoy with stones in the presence of the Adjumani District chairperson, the RDC and DPC among other leaders.

Madam Speaker, consequently the RDC of Amuru petitioned the Minister for the Presidency and also later on Cabinet sitting on 1 February 2012 deliberated on this matter and formed a Cabinet subcommittee comprising the ministers of Defence, Internal Affairs, Disaster Preparedness, Security, Presidency, Tourism, Lands as well as Local Government under the chairmanship of the then Third Deputy Prime Minister to handle this matter.

This subcommittee resolved that:

    a) The encroachment on the East Madi Game Reserve was an illegal act and should be stopped immediately.
    b) That the ferrying of people from Amuru District to be given land in Adjumani District was wrong since the two districts had clearly marked boundaries.
    c)  The UWA together with the security agencies immediately move to stop the encroachment and protect the game reserve.
    d) That the ministries of Local Government and Lands as well as the Presidency together with the technical staff and security personal immediately go to the site and hold a meeting with the people of the two communities and inform them about the existence of the boundaries between the two districts.
 
On 15 February 2012, the High Court in Gulu granted a temporary court injunction prohibiting any further eviction, destruction, confiscation or conversion and all interference with the land rights, occupation and usage of land in the areas of Apaa, Lankang and Pabo pending the determination of the main suit. This was in reference to the case which had been lodged in 2011 by hon. Gilbert Olanya and others.

The first attempt to open up and monument the 27 kilometre stretch by surveyors from the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development was made on 16 August 2012. This attempt by the technical officers followed a recommendation issued by Parliament’s Committee on Physical Infrastructure after the House had debated the petition to the Speaker by the leaders in Acholi in April 2012.

For those who were in the House in the last Parliament, you may recall that the Members of Parliament from Acholi brought a petition which was sent to the Committee on Physical Infrastructure. The committee travelled to the area and recommended that surveyors from the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development move together with technical staff from Parliament to carry out the survey. 

Despite the sensitisation drives that were conducted before the commencement of the exercise - because when our surveyors went with clerks from Parliament on the recommendation of the Committee on Physical Infrastructure, they started with sensitisation. Despite the sensitisation, the boundary opening exercise was halted due to the violent actions of hon. Gilbert Olanya the then Member of Parliament for Kilak County South who led a team of rowdy male youths.

The residents accused the team of Government surveyors of monumenting the disputed boundary without adequate consultation despite the fact that the offices of the RDCs of Amuru and Adjumani together with the LC V chairpersons had carried out massive joint sensitisation in the area. 

This event was widely covered by television especially NTV where my brother, hon. Gilbert Olanya, was tearing the maps and destroying some of the equipment from our ministry. It was widely telecasted. Therefore the exercise was halted then –(Interjections)- in July 2014, the Gulu High Court ordered that the reopening of the administrative boundary in dispute located at Apaa be carried out by the Commissioner for Surveys and Mapping in the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development and that findings of the reopening be placed before the court mediator to enable the disposal of the suit. In other words, court ordered that our ministry should open the boundaries to facilitate the court process that was on.

Pursuant to that SAFERWORLD an international NGO working to prevent violent conflicts and build safer lives partnered with the two local governments of Adjumani and Amuru to carry out the sensitisation to foster social cohesion, reconciliation and assist the local population to understand the dynamics and arrive at an agreeable district boundary solution. 

In March 2015, the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs, Maj. Gen. Kahinda Otafiire together with the late Gen. Aronda Nyakairima, the then Minister of Internal Affairs and hon. Daudi Migereko, the then Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Development and a technical team from the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development met with the leadership and community elders of both districts in Gulu and resolved that the boundary should be reopened.

On 30 March, 2015 the late Gen. Aronda Nyakairima chaired an extra-ordinary regional security meeting which resolved and agreed upon an immediate time frame of three days to start the reopening.

Security to support the exercise was deployed but this was later called off because the local community was mobilised to block the exercise.

On 16 April 2015, the minister of Internal Affairs, the late Gen. Aronda Nyakairima, and the Minister for Lands, Housing and Urban Development, hon. Daudi Migereko, met and addressed the Apaa community in the presence of MPs and other Acholi leaders amidst protests from the community.

The boundary opening exercise was supposed to begin that day but was called off to allow for more consultations. You recall that that is when some women undressed before a delegation from Government.

On 6 May 2015, the Prime Minister, Dr Ruhakana Rugunda, met the Acholi and West Nile Parliamentary Groups who committed to work together to open up the boundaries between the two districts and the Uganda Wildlife Authority land. The members also committed themselves to desist from politicising the land dispute.

Madam Speaker and honourable members, from the 13th to 18th of September 2015, a team of Government surveyors successfully carried out the boundary opening and monumentation exercise using the East Africa 1:50,000 topographical map series Y732 Ome sheet 21/1, and wiceri sheet 21/2 with sheet history as a first edition by the Directorate of Oversees Surveys 1958, the second edition by the Department of Lands and Survey Uganda, 1960 communication revised and sheet converted to East Africa 1:50,000 series by the Department of Lands and Surveys Uganda 1971, as the data source. 

The boundary opening limits of this section of the Amuru - Adjumani district boundary extend 27 kilometres starting from the source of River Choro thence in a straight line in an easterly direction to the source of the River Apaa thence in a straight line in the north easterly direction to the source of River Ceri. For clarity, the boundary that was supposed to be opened is the dry surface stretch connecting the sources of River Choro and River Apaa in a straight line and the sources of rivers Apaa and Ceri in a straight line. 

Let me also add that we are using the boundaries as clearly defined at Independence and these are captured very well in the Independence Constitution, which clearly gives out the different districts and their boundaries. For example, on page 36, the Acholi District boundaries are clearly identified in that constitution. 

On page 41, Madi District boundaries are clearly articulated and marked and likewise for Ankole, Kigezi, Bukedi, Bugisu. Madam Speaker, this document is available -

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, take your seat.

DR BARYOMUNSI: The Parliament has a library which is well stocked with these books. Our surveyors interpret what is in this Independence constitution and put it in maps and other drawings. They do not invent anything else.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, may I add that we issued every member with a constitution. That information is in the Constitution of Uganda. Please get your copy and check out those boundaries.

DR BAYOMUNSI: Madam Speaker and honourable members, as I try to wind up let me come now to the recent clashes. 


THE SPEAKER: Order members, this matter caused death. Please listen.

DR BARYOMUNSI: I have given a chronology of how the events have been occurring and I am now leading you to the recent clashes. 

Madam Speaker, the information we have is that the recent clashes were sparked off on 2 June 2017 when eight members of the Madi community were held hostage in a market in Apaa. They were later released with a serious warning never to return. 

On the 3rd and 5th of June, there were attacks in Zoka which left two people hospitalised. According to the Ministry of Internal Affairs, on 8 June 2017, the Acholi community burnt huts in Itirikwa in Adjumani. 

The Madi also retaliated and a total of 57 huts were burnt and this resulted in the clashes that you have been hearing of. Following these clashes, eight people have so far been confirmed dead. Post mortem examinations have been done and I also have looked through the reports that the Minister of Health has. They opened the body of one of the members who was killed and took away their liver. They also cut one of the legs and went away with it. For what? I do not know but all that was in the post mortem report.

Eleven people are reportedly missing. However, this morning I received information that one person returned yesterday evening thus putting the number at 10. Twenty three are hospitalised but I also received information this morning through the Minister of Health that 15 people had been discharged.

Two thousand seven hundred and thirty four persons mainly Madi have been displaced and are camped at Zoka Primary School as of this morning. Whereas 1,924 people mainly of Acholi origin are also displaced at Apaa but this number is as of Friday last week and is solely for adults. We captured the numbers of adults receiving food. The numbers do not include children.

Madam Speaker and honourable members, Government conveys its condolences to the bereaved families and strongly condemns the violence that led to death, injuries, displacement of people and loss of property. This kind of dispute should not result in Ugandans dying senselessly the way they died. 

So far, some of the steps taken by Government include:

    1. The Rt. Hon. Prime Minister accompanied by ministers and technocrats from the various ministries visited the area and met with the local leaders from Adjumani and Amuru districts.

    2. Government has provided security by deploying police in the affected areas of Apaa and Itirikwa. In Apaa, there is a platoon strength distributed in Zoka while Itirikwa has strength distributed in Ajeri Subcounty and Zoka central. The deployment is supported by motorcycles and vehicles for patrol and a police stations have been opened at Apaa and at Itirikwa. 

	There is now stability and security has been deployed in the affected areas and we do not expect anybody to successfully cause any fracas because security is now in charge.

    3. Community mobilisation and encouragement of the people to go back to their respective areas is under way, especially those who have homes because some of the victims, their huts were burnt down and they have nowhere to go. However, for those who have homes because there is now security, they are being encouraged and supported to go back to their respective homes. 

We would like to thank the political, cultural and religious leaders in the area for the peace building and reconciliation efforts which they are spearheading. I am sure we have all seen the cultural leaders from both sides meeting and performing some ceremonies in public to show that the two people are together and would like to coexist peacefully.

Government has instituted investigations to establish who incited the people to have these clashes and the perpetrators will be brought to book irrespective of the status of the person who will be found outside the law.

Government has also provided relief food which has been taken to both camps at Apaa and Itirikwa. Beans, posho and rice have been supplied to the people who have been displaced. 

It was unfortunate that some political leaders were saying that the food was poisoned and it had to take the guarantee of leaders to taste the food and eat together with the communities before the communities would accept the food.

However, I would like to make it clear that the Government of Uganda cannot in anyway attempt to poison its own people and this does not make sense. Therefore, we should desist from that kind of gossip and reckless statements which we give to our people. 

An assessment of the damages is still ongoing to ascertain what properties have been destroyed during the clashes. 

In conclusion, Madam Speaker, the Government surveyors demarcated the administrative boundaries of Amuru and Adjumani for administrative purposes. This has been done and the boundaries are clearly known. 

The demarcation is to guide the population on which district they belong and where to go and seek Government services. The demarcation has nothing to do with grabbing land of the locals or chasing anybody from the land as has been claimed in the public sphere because citizens of Uganda can own land and settle anywhere as long as it is lawfully done. 

The coordinates of the boundary are available to the public and for any vandalisation that has been done - because Madam Speaker, when our surveyors put the mark stones, people were again mobilised to uproot some of these stones. However, we urge and promise to support the two districts to use their technical staff to replace the mark stones which had been destroyed.

Without loss of clarity, it also needs to be emphasised that the standard maps for the boundary delineation are the ones of 1:50,000 topographical maps archived in the Department of Surveys and Mapping and these boundaries are backed by the 1962 Constitution as I have already explained. 

For emphasis, it is not the responsibility of anybody to show where the boundaries are. This is a technical service that is done by the surveyors and Government has that responsibility of showing where the boundaries are guided by instruments and documents which we have including the Constitution which we had at Independence.

Madam Speaker and honourable members, the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development needs to be assisted to secure funding to open boundaries of all the district local governments instead of working as crisis managers. (Applause)

Much as we are handling Adjumani and Amuru now, there are many districts which are conflicting. For example, the people from Butaleja and Budaka are always fighting every day. I have seen people from Budaka whose hands have been cut. When you look at Napak and Katakwi, they are fighting over the border – (Interjections) - in Kanungu we are coexisting peacefully with our neighbours and we do not have any boundary disputes.

We would like to be assisted as a ministry to get resources so as to open all the boundaries and minimise the conflicts between districts. The total cost of all the district boundaries opening exercises shall be presented to this House for consideration and I hope the House will approve it. 

In addition, the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development will continue to work with the Ministry of Local Government to ensure that before announcing of any new district, the boundaries should be agreed upon and if possible demarcated so that we reduce on future conflicts.

Lastly, Madam Speaker, community mobilisation, reconciliation and peace building efforts shall continue to be supported by Government. We call upon the leaders including Members of Parliament to reconcile and work together from both sides of the conflicts so that we can be able to support our people to have peace and live together without these conflicts.

We further call upon the affected communities to remain calm as there is adequate security. We encourage those who are in camps to go back to their homes for those who have homes because the rains have started so that they get ready to plant crops in their gardens and continue with normal life. 

I thank you very much, Madam Speaker and honourable members and I do hope that this statement now clarifies the issue of Amuru and Adjumani and has also given a chronology of events that have made us reach where we are. Thank you very much. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable minister. Honourable members, as I indicated earlier, this matter involves many stakeholders. I would like to now invite hon. Anthony Akol to make his statement and then we can have a debate after.

3.53
MR ANTHONY AKOL (FDC, Kilak County North, Amuru): Madam Speaker, I have been praying that God helps me to be clam while delivering this statement. 

The statement of national importance is on the unrest and killings in Apaa subparish, Pabbo Subcounty in Amuru District. 

I rise on a matter of urgent national importance on the attack on the people of Apaa Sub parish in Labala parish, Pabbo Sub county in Amuru District which happened between the 4th and 7th of June 2017. The attack led to loss of lives, injuring of people, destruction of property and crops, burning of huts and leaving people that are harmless internally displaced in Apaa Trading Centre. 

Madam Speaker, the community of Apaa sub parish, Labala Parish, Pabbo Subcounty, Amuru District, have been subjected to untold suffering since 2012. 

The most recent barbaric attack happened between the 4th and 7th of June 2017 in which 11 people were confirmed dead. The last victim was found decomposing in the bush yesterday. Eight people are still missing, 28 people are severely injured of which 21 are admitted to Lacor Hospital, five in Pabo Health Centre and two admitted to Adjumani Hospital but later referred to Lacor Hospital; 142 huts and two community schools burnt down and over 7,000 pupils displaced.

Madam Speaker, at this point, I would like to stress to the minister that facts need to be put right. You can ask the Minister of State for Health in charge of Primary Health Care who was in Apaa - but you come here and tell this august House that there are over 1,000 people displaced, some of us would shed tears. 

Many pupils sustained minor injuries and were not referred to the health centres. The attackers were armed with machetes locally known as pangas, axes, knives, bows and arrows. They also killed goats, chicken and any other domestic animal found in people’s homes. 

When some of the dead goats and chicken were eaten by the dogs, the dogs also died. We suspect that the arrows, the machetes and the axes used by the attackers were poisonous.

Madam Speaker, these barbaric attacks started on the 4th of June 2017 when the community of Apaa living in Rwot Oromo Village were attacked in their gardens. In these attacks, four people were injured; a man by the name of Venasio Oweka sustained deep wounds in the head and others were shot on their chests with arrows and were taken to hospital for treatment. 

Madam Speaker, the attackers who were well organised with bows and arrows, axes and machetes again attacked our people in Koro Village on 5 June 2017. Twelve people were severely injured and two people, Mr Jackson Otema Akena and Mr Richard Obalo were abducted. The community of Apaa received reports that they were finally killed by the attackers. 

On 6 June 2017, the community waited for the two people who had been abducted but they were nowhere to be seen. Members of the community decided on 7 June 2017 to go into the bushes around the areas they were abducted to search for their dead bodies in case they had been killed. They did not want their bodies to be left to decompose.

The information from the victims I talked to from St Mary’s Hospital Lacor, Pabbo Hospital and those in the community is that they were attacked by over 200 people armed with arrows and bows, machetes and axes. 

According to the victims, the situation became worse when they saw armed UPDF and police guarding the attackers. On seeing them, the community members ran in disarray while the attackers shot them with arrows and hacked them with axes and pangas. 

The most barbaric killing was the death of Isaac Okori Otto aged 40 – may his soul rest in peace. His stomach was opened and his liver and eye balls were removed. There was also a ritual act involving the chopping of his right leg and raw cassava tied on the other leg. 

Madam Speaker, it is regrettable that all these attacks between the 4th to 7th of June took place when there is a Police post in Apaa deployed by Adjumani District. 

The attackers came from Adjumani District where there is a functional government with parish internal security offices, GISOs, the District Intelligence Security Officers, the police investigating team and all other security agents. However, the attackers or suspects have never been arrested to date. 

The total number of people killed since 2012 from our community in Apaa now stands at 14 people. In March 2017, a group of people from Adjumani District crossed Juka stream and not a river. Juka loosely translated in Acholi means stop rebellion or conflict. This group staged a sudden attack on the residents of Apaa claiming that the land belonged to them because it was allocated to them in September 2015. 

During the attack, one person was shot in the chest with arrows and died instantly. Twelve people were injured and 111 huts burnt with all the property destroyed leaving the people of Apaa without food and shelter. 

I raised this on the Floor of Parliament on 5 April 2017 and the Office of the Prime Minister was tasked through the First Deputy Prime Minister to provide security and relief items to the community of Apaa. However, no action was taken at all. 

Madam Speaker, we reported this incident to the police with all the details of these attacks including the national identity cards and minutes of the meeting to plan the attack which had dropped from the attackers. No suspect has been arrested to date. 

The LC V Chairman of Adjumani District, Mr James Piri Leku personally came to Apaa Village on 13 August 2016 to evict the residents of Apaa under claims that the area has been allocated to them by the Government of Uganda. In the process, they seriously wounded Bosco Atube, the local leader of the village, who is also a Sub county Chairman of the NRM. 

This case was reported to the police and the LC V Chairman agreed to take care of the medical bills of the victim. The LC V Chairman and the team that wounded the community have never been investigated by the police to date. 

Furthermore, there were violent activities by the Uganda Police Force and the UPDF. They came with armed armoured vehicles on 7 September 2015 in these areas.

They came under the pretext that there was the activity of boundary demarcation or reopening between the districts of Amuru and Adjumani where over 10 people are still unaccounted for and over 86 people were injured. Among the injured, two boys lost their right arms as a result of the bullet wounds. 

This exercise was in contravention of the High Court order in Miscellaneous Application of No. 004 of 2012 that issued an injunction against the Uganda Wildlife Authority and the Attorney-General and their agents or servants from any eviction, destruction, confiscation or conversion or interfering with the land rights, occupation and uses of the land belonging to the applicants in the areas of Lakang, Pabo and Apaa in Amuru District. 

To our surprise, the leadership and the technical team from Amuru was not represented during the purported border demarcation or reopening exercise. 

In February 2012, the Uganda Wildlife Authority, the UPDF, and the Police went to Apaa to evict the people. In the process, two people, Patrick Olanya and Okot Alaba were killed. Six people were stripped naked by the Police and locked in a grass thatched house and several families were displaced when their huts were burned down. 

Madam Speaker, we have no problem with the reopening of the boundary but it should be done in the open, when the leadership and technical staff of Amuru are present. Take into consideration the rampant complaints all over the country on the Ministry of Lands and the surveyors. It should also be noted that the activity can only take place after the court has pronounced itself on the court injunction.

Efforts have been made to resolve this issue. In June 2015, the Office of the Prime Minister held a mediation meeting after a group of women in Apaa sub-parish staged a nude protest, before the then Minister of Internal Affairs and the Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Development. The Acholi Parliamentary Group, Amuru District leadership, West Nile Parliamentary Group and Adjumani District leadership came out with key resolutions to be implemented in settling this border conflict, but have never been effected.

A meeting was held on the 27th of March in the Office of the Prime Minister between the leaders of Amuru and Gen. Moses Ali, and it was mediated by the Prime Minister. There were key resolutions made, including that Government should form a commission of inquiry to investigate this land conflict, but no action has been taken to date.

The issue has been raised several times on the Floor of Parliament and the most recent being 5 April 2017, whereby the presiding officer ruled that the problem in Apaa is not a border problem. This is because the boundary does not affect the land rights of the land owners. He ruled that the problem is that the land was gazetted as a wildlife game reserve and advised the Prime Minister as a person and the people in control that it would be best to find a solution to this problem. If there is need to re-visit the issue of the gazette which was given in 2002, then they should bring it back to Parliament, so that we remove the gazette so that the community can sort themselves out.

This is because there is the community of Adjumani and Amuru, but then there is also the Uganda Wildlife Authority that is a factor in this whole thing. We need to find a better way to deal with this thing. 

He also instructed the Prime Minister to take appropriate steps to see how this matter can be handled in terms of both the humanitarian issue and finding a solution to other aspects bringing further tension between the two communities that have lived together, for many years.

On 12 June 2017, the Prime Minister met the leadership of Amuru District, the religious leaders, the cultural leaders and the members of the Acholi Parliamentary Group in Gulu, on a fact-finding mission on the event that happened in Apaa. The Office of the Prime Minister delivered food items that included: 100 kilogrammes of beans and 960 bags of maize flour and; 1,002 bags of rice of 50 kilogrammes each, to the displaced people.

Our prayer is that this Parliament resolves as follows:

    i) Parliament should condemn in the strongest terms the violation of human rights of the people of Apaa and the culprits must be investigated, brought to book and punished by the law.
    ii) As ruled by the Deputy Speaker during the Parliamentary sitting on the 5 April 2017, the process for de-gazetting the land should start immediately, since this land has been used for human settlement since 1973.
    iii) Government should implement the recommendations of the Committee on Physical Infrastructure in 2012, that the official boundary of the two districts be demarcated using the official maps and boundary description that was given at the time of Independence. That adequate sensitisation should be done to the community and that all the political and technical staff of the two districts should be involved in the boundary opening.
    iv) Government should respect the court injunction stopping the activities to be undertaken on the contested land in Apaa, pending the determination of the court judgment on the civil suit No.0062 of 2011.
    v) The police and the army should provide adequate security to the people of Apaa for them to return in the villages and settle in their homes peacefully. The security should be neutral in nature and it should not be the police from Adjumani District, since the community has lost trust in them
    vi) The Office of the Prime Minister should continue with the provision of humanitarian or relief assistance to the people of Apaa and urgently provide non-food items including sanitary materials during the rainy season.

Madam Speaker, before I conclude, I would like to say that I personally object to the report from the Minister, and I would like to say that for this matter to be concluded amicably, we should make sure that the First Deputy Prime Minister should step out of office. Otherwise, these ministers are supervised by him and his name has been mentioned several times in this conflict. Therefore, we do not trust any report that comes from the ministers. 

In conclusion, Article 22(1) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda 1995, as amended reads, “No person shall be deprived of life intentionally, except in execution of a sentence passed in a fair trial by a court of competent jurisdiction, irrespective of the criminal offence under the laws of Uganda and the conviction of the sentence will have been confirmed by the higher Appellant Court.”

Madam Speaker, Article 24 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda of 1995, as amended, reads: “No person shall be subjected to any form of torture or cruel inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment.” What have our people done to deserve all this suffering with impunity? All these things are done when the leaders in government are looking on.

Madam Speaker, we all have blood and we fear death. We all feel pain on us and our family members and we also do not want our children to die. The inhuman treatment of our people must stop. I beg to move. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable members. I think we have heard the facts. I think the debate should focus on finding solutions. Let us just address what we need to do. We know that the problems are there. What do we do?

4.12
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (PRIMARY HEALTH CARE) (Dr Joyce Moriku): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand to give facts about the incident that occurred and a way forward. Lucky enough, I crossed to Gulu and from that time, I was between Gulu, Amuru and Adjumani. On Wednesday, 14 June 2017, I was in Zoka, but before that on Tuesday, I visited people that were injured and were in Lacor Hospital.

When I went to Lacor Hospital, I was received by the Executive Director and the facts on the ground from Lacor were: 

    i) All the people that were admitted injured were male patients.
    ii) There were 17 people, not 21, that were admitted. I have the list and what they suffered from. Out of the 17, by Tuesday last week, 15 were discharged in fair general conditions and two were still in the hospital; one was in the intensive care unit, in a critical condition. I visited that person. The second patient was in surgery ward. By the time I left Lacor, there were two patients in the hospital.
    iii) I was informed that some people that were injured were admitted in Atiak Health Centre IV and Pabo Health Centre III, but I have not reached there. 
    iv) The third place where some patients were admitted was Adjumani Hospital. I was told that two people were admitted there but because they were Acholi, the health workers refused to attend to them. I went to the hospital and demanded for a report on those two people if it was true. I am yet to get a report from Adjumani Hospital about the two people.

Madam Speaker, it is on record that Lacor Hospital admitted 17, not 21 people. I represented the government the whole week. On Thursday, I went to Apaa in the company of the Woman Member of Parliament for Amuru, the religious leaders in Acholi as well as the Acholi paramount chief. When we reached Apaa, my first question to the LC V chairperson and my colleague was: “Where are the people?” We went to Apaa trading centre and people were not as many as it was initially portrayed. Those are my people. 

I was told the people had gone back to their homes. I asked: “Why can’t we go to the school where they are displaced so that we have them there?” I was told, “No, they will come.” Therefore, we did not go to that school, but I was informed that the school was burnt. As a result, we first went with everybody to the place where food was but they refused to get the food, saying it had poison. The bishops requested that since the Minister of Health was there she should prove to us that this food is okay. Indeed, I directed the food to be cooked. Everybody ate that food in the presence of my sister here. Indeed, as we were waiting for the food to cook, we went under the tree and people started coming. People came from their homes, but of course there were some who were within the trading centre. 

To me who was there as a witness, much as they were displaced, most of them went back home, but came for the meeting. Indeed the meeting was peaceful and at the end of it, they accepted to receive the food.

Madam Speaker, on Friday, I kept in touch. They were registering people for the food and of course the food was little. We had only 50 bags and we all accepted that we needed to add more food. I had to keep on calling the districts leaders – the Resident District Commissioner and the District Police Commander – and by Friday evening the total number of people who had registered for food was 1,924 adults. These are the facts where I was on the ground.

Madam Speaker, something that was very clear is that people told us who were there that they did not refuse the food, but the food was little. We said let them bring more food and Government cannot poison its food. The following day, they started the distribution of food and we are happy they have received the food. In regard to entering inside, I had wanted to go but because time was not available, I could not go. We remained at the trading centre and people joined us there. 

Madam Speaker I was in Zoka. I also witnessed what was there. By the time I went to Zoka on Wednesday in the company of the Archbishop, there was no food but we –

THE SPEAKER: Archbishop Ntagali? Which archbishop?

DR MORIKU: Archbishop John Baptist Odama, the archbishop of Gulu Archdiocese.

Madam Speaker, having seen the two areas, at the end of it all, the people requested that they want a peaceful resolution of conflict and indeed the two cultural leaders met on Saturday – the cultural leader of the Acholi went to Madi and I was there. 

One of the ways forward is that the cultural leaders, religious leaders and government – as my colleague has said – should get a way of reconciling the people in a peaceful manner so that we resolve this issue peacefully and not separate the people. People have lived together for many years – the Madi and Acholi – without conflict. If you go to Bibia, which is Acholi-land, the Madi are the ones living there. Even when we went to Apaa, the Acholi talked of the same thing. When we went to Adjumani, we found the Acholi who have lived there for over 30 years. Let us resolve this issue in a peaceful manner without pointing fingers and counter accusations. (Applause) That is what I witnessed the whole week. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

4.20
MS JESCA ABABIKU (NRM, Woman Representative, Adjumani): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity. We send our condolences to all those who lost their dear ones. What happened is regrettable and as the people of Adjumani, we condemn it. 

Madam Speaker, one of my proposals is that this conflict should come to an end; we need peace. We who are seated here have enjoyed it, but when you reflect back to what has been relayed here by the minister and hon. Joyce Moriku, the innocent people have lost their lives. I believe they are more innocent than others.

Madam Speaker, we have lived as two communities for long; this is not a tribal conflict. What we have requested is the re-affirmation of these boundaries for those who do not know. Otherwise, these things are clear in the Constitution and we have the map. We have the Government as the custodian of all our assets. Therefore, I would like to thank the minister for this report. I would like to say that all the attacks as we see here took place in Adjumani District. That is what I know.

Madam Speaker, Apaa – which in my language means “playing of a guitar” – is eight kilometres inside Adjumani. Zoka is 18 kilometres inside Adjumani. We have evidence to prove that those who went on the attack were well prepared. There were two people who were injured and admitted in our hospital. I even have their medical card numbers. For the sake of time I will not go into that detail. There was one who went with a modified jerrycan to provide a shield. We still have that – [HON. OLANYA: “Order.”]- that can be obtained from the district.

Madam Speaker, I would like to provide more information on what my colleague said – the attack in March. On the attack in March, four people from my side all of them Lugbara – and I have their pictures here – were seriously injured –(Member time out.)

THE SPEAKER: Two more minutes.

MS ABABIKU: I lay it on the Table.

Madam Speaker, we need to get answers to these questions. If people went to attack others and only men were injured or killed, where were the women and children? Where were they buried? There is need for us as leaders to speak the truth. There is need for us as leaders to cherish those people who have made us leaders. There is need for us to protect them by speaking the truth.

Madam Speaker, the Ninth Parliament did its work and I have a copy of the report here. Page 15 reflected clearly how Members of this House in the Ninth Parliament were literary beaten by colleagues in this House. Honourable members, when we bring issues on the Floor of Parliament and we pray for justice, can we respect the decisions made?

Hon. Gilbert Olanya, as you are looking at me, on page 15, this is where it has been reflected that you interfered. I would like to lay this on the Table. It is the report of the Sectoral Committee on Physical Infrastructure on the boundary dispute between Amuru and Adjumani dated March 2013. I lay it on the Table.

I would like to say that we need to be exemplary, and for Government to conclude its work, we also need to provide space. I would like to thank the Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Development for availing the survey report. I would like to say that after the committee presented its report in this House, action was taken by Government. There was also a survey report that the Government produced. I beg to lay a copy here. This is a public document and I believe all sides, as leaders in this country, can access it and I believe some people have it.

Madam Speaker, I would like to say that when the First Deputy Premier, Gen. Moses Ali, has been blamed for selling our land, it was a total lie. If he did it, we would have disowned him because as the people of Adjumani, we cannot allow our land to be sold by an individual. No land was sold. Here is the copy of the agreement between Adjumani District Local Government, Uganda Wildlife Authority and the third party. (Applause) I would like to officially lay this document on the Table of Parliament, and it is entitled - 

THE SPEAKER: Order, Members! 

MS ABABIKU: I would like to lay this on the Table. This is about the concession agreement between Adjumani District Local Government, UWA and Mr Bruce, Lake Albert Safaris Limited Trading and Nile River Outfitters. I beg to lay it on the Table.

Madam Speaker, I would like to conclude. Our prayer is that this issue of the border conflict should be put to rest. If we are saying that we should go for talks, it will postpone these issues but they will still reappear. When they reappear, often we have seen loss of life and other property. Therefore, I beg that the Government and all stakeholders come to a conclusion on this matter. We have been living together and we shall continue to live together with the people of Amuru. We shall never promote tribal sentiments. Thank you.

4.28
MS BEATRICE ANYWAR (Independent, Kitgum Municipality, Kitgum): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The issue before the House and fellow countrymen is not a laughing matter and I hope we can handle it with sober minds so that we save lives. We have lived with our brothers and sisters from Madi since time immemorial. We have intermarried and even fought wars alongside each other during Amin’s regime. Therefore, Madam Speaker, we have been together. I wonder what has gone wrong.

I want to take this on not from the boundary, as presented, but I hope common sense prevails here. Even if there is a border conflict, must people be killed? That should be the bottom line of our argument, fellow countrymen. We have lived on Buganda land and nobody has killed us. We know it is Buganda land. Our people of Acholi have lived in Bweyale, the Banyoro have not killed them. Our people from Madi have lived in Atiak, nobody has killed them. What is the problem with Apaa land?

Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, I pray that we get probably an independent inquiry in this matter, with the religious and cultural leaders, minus the politicians. We can then see how to proceed and have a logical conclusion to this problem. 

I have seen the minister presenting a map, which is contested. I have an elder who is 90 years old in Kitgum and today he sent me some map and asked what the boundary in question is. Personally, as young as I am, I am not sure of the exact boundary. As a way forward, Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, can we have these boundaries critically reviewed? If there is any other, let it also be brought on board so that the technocrats guide us properly in line with the Constitution, which the honourable minister was referring to. However, we need to read it out and let our people be in the know, so that we all know precisely which borders we are talking about. (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Okay, use one minute to conclude.

MS ANYWAR: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for the time. Honourable colleagues, what I would like to say on this Floor, as I conclude, is that we must protect the people living in Apaa so that they carry out their activities. The information which is coming in, and I must say it on the Floor of Parliament, is that there are already other preparations to commit atrocities. The security must take this information very critically and prevent any further killing from today.

Madam Speaker, there is already information that the people living in Madi are in fear and need to be protected. If we do not take this seriously, we shall hear of people being killed again even after we, Members of Parliament, have discussed this issue today. I suggest that there should be an avenue for people to secretly give information. Some people are not able to come out to give information but there is silent information. If people come and talk to you, even in your office, you will be shocked about the information on the ground.

I pray that they are protected even if they live in Madi or wherever they are. We are all Ugandans and we need each other during peaceful and bad times. We were with our brothers and sisters all the way. I do not know what has gone wrong. I hope sense prevails. I pray that Members of Parliament really help these two communities not to continue fuelling clashes. When we drum it up as if we are supporting each other – For all the sides, whether Acholi or Madi, blood should be protected. We do not need to drum this up for each other. (Member timed out.)

4.33
MS LUCY AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Amuru): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I would like to thank my colleague, hon. Akol, for stating the facts right. Like the minister, hon. Moriku, said, we were together and the fact is that the food was not only eaten by you but by all the leaders who were present. 

Madam Speaker, it saddens me to see Members laugh when we have lost lives. It saddens me when people take this as a joke. I pray this does not reach where you are; some of us have cried enough and we do not want anyone to cry anymore.

This whole thing started with Uganda Wildlife Authority; when it did not work, it went to the National Forestry Authority; when it did not work, they said it is for Adjumani. So, which is which? I heard the Minister of Lands saying, and it pains me, that people were peacefully evicted. Does peaceful eviction entail women and children plus their property being ferried on a lorry and dumped in Pabbo centre in the rain? Some of the children died due to the cold; is that a peaceful eviction? I am leaving this to you and I hope that the people in Apaa are in Uganda. 

Finally, hon. Akol stated that there were four consecutive attacks with no single arrest. I would like to emphasise that up to now, no one has been arrested but we have lost lives and there are people fighting for their lives in the hospital. I hope that we are being sincere to ourselves. If we want peace, let us work for justice. Thank you.

4.36
MR GILBERT OLANYA (FDC, Kilak South County, Amuru): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I will not respond to all the allegations against me but I have to say that they are baseless. In all those acts, we were following the law of this country.

Madam Speaker, when the honourable minister was presenting the report, he was emphasising the report from the Cabinet sub-committee, which was chaired by Gen. Moses Ali, the First Deputy Prime Minister, yet Gen. Moses Ali is the first suspect in this matter. (Laughter) It is very difficult to trust a lion with your meat; therefore, you cannot 100 per cent base your argument on the report shared by Gen. Moses Ali. 

Madam Speaker, I would like to say that there is no conflict between the Madi and Acholi; my colleagues are very right. The only problem is that we have some greedy people who are here and are conniving with investors. They want to sell that land to deprive our people of their land rights.

Madam Speaker, there is nothing like a problem between the boundary of Adjumani and Amuru; the people who are there are very happy and they know their boundary. After all, the Constitution of Uganda is very clear; it says that any citizen is free to live in any part of this country. If you are talking of the boundary between the Madi and Acholi, why do you go and kill the people who are living in Apaa?

The way forward is: first of all, we need to respect the land rights of an individual. I am happy that when we held a meeting before His Excellency the President, we resolved and the President agreed that land rights of an individual must be respected. Why do we go chasing people away from their customary land? Even if they are in Adjumani, Moyo or Gulu, that is their land.

Secondly, we need to investigate this matter thoroughly, and as the investigation is going on, we request Government to relieve Gen. Moses Ali of his duties because he is the first suspect to be investigated. If he continues holding his office as the First Deputy Prime Minister, he will interfere, jeopardise –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, what should I do with the Members who have been named and are also in this House; should I also suspend them?

4.40
MR ODONGA OTTO (FDC, Aruu County, Pader): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Apaa is where it is. In case you would like to know where Apaa is, it is where it is. (Laughter) 

This issue cannot be resolved on the Floor of this House. This is because in 1980, Apaa was under Gulu. There were campaigns in Apaa in the 1980 elections under Gulu District; even the signposts indicate “Gulu District Education Committee.” The national identity cards of people in Apaa were issued under Amuru District. The health centres, teachers’ salaries, doctors’ salaries are being paid by Amuru District Local Government and the polling stations fall under Amuru.

Hon. Ababiku Jesca and Gen. Moses Ali know very well that they do not come and campaign there because they know that it is in another district. This House must correct a historical injustice, because since the 1970s, 80s and 90s everyone knows that that was the side of Gulu. However, if you go on the Global Positioning System (GPS) on your phone right now and just click Apaa, it will show that it is in Adjumani. These are the facts that we must live with. How do we correct historical injustices and perceptions that the society has lived with for over 70 years? We have people who have lived in Apaa for 70 years. 

The challenge is that when the Acholi ran to the Internally Displaced Persons (IDP) camps, Adjumani District Local Government found this as a golden opportunity to claim the land that the Acholi were settled in. They sat in the district council and resolved to give it to Uganda Wildlife Authority. When the war ended and the Acholi were leaving the camps, they came back to a new land which was now given to UWA by the bona fide owners, Adjumani District Local Government.

On paper and on the map, it is Adjumani District Local Government, but by settlement, 98 per cent of the people there are Acholi. Do you think that we can come to this House and support that 28,000 people leave Apaa for UWA, and go where? Even Government cannot evict our people from there. You cannot expect an Acholi MP to come and say that that is UWA land; it can attract a civil war, not a usual war like that of Joseph Kony, because we have to defend the rights of our people. (Applause)

Madam Speaker, in Kapchorwa - I led a delegation of the Committee on Government Assurances to Kween District - we de-gazetted 30 kilometres of Mt Elgon National Park and allowed some space for human settlement. This East Madi Wildlife Reserve is bigger than Wakiso and Kampala districts in size. If we could get 30 kilometres off to allow human settlement and then we give the other part to UWA, we would have solved a problem. 

I would like to assure you that you will never evict our people from there. The land is in Adjumani - that is fine - but our people are settled there. Just like the Deputy Speaker, hon. Jacob Oulanyah, is a Langi but their land is in Acholi and we have not evicted them. (Laughter) We cannot disturb them. In my constituency, two subcounties are full of the Langi but their land is in Acholi and we cannot move to evict them. 

I pray to this House not to joke with Apaa. Some people came with tankers and mambas and they have gone but Apaa still exists. This is a warning to you people. Honourable minister, I agree with your report; we de-gazette –(interjections)- I cannot incite violence. In any case, my wife comes from West Nile. I am only looking for solutions.

I would like to propose, Madam Speaker, that you have a breakfast meeting with Members of Parliament from Madi and Acholi, because I met Gen. Moses Ali here in the lobby and when I extended my hand to greet him, he refused. (Laughter) There is a problem in this House and if some people meet in the elevator, they can even harm each other. Therefore, you should call a breakfast meeting. I was in law school with Gen. Ali and we share legal ideas. I have no problem with hon. Ababiku but there is simmering tension, Madam Speaker. Let your office call closed door meetings such that we talk and make peace. Thank you so much, Madam Speaker.

4.46
MR FRANCIS MWIJUKYE (FDC, Buhweju County, Buhweju): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Speaking after hon. Odonga Otto is very difficult, but I would like to request this House to take this matter very seriously, and we should stop pointing fingers. It has been said that there are very many people and ministries involved in this and at some stage, you hear the police is also suspected. 

I would like to buy the idea of hon. Anywar that there is need for an independent body to look into this, so that you do not have to say the police should go and investigate when there is suspicion that they are behind this. You do not have to say the UPDF should investigate, yet somebody is saying the UPDF is behind it. 

I would like to request this House to treat this matter as a matter of national importance so that we stop pointing fingers and we get a body guided by you, Madam Speaker, which can investigate this matter and we get a thorough report. I would like to submit.

4.47
MR HASSAN FUNGAROO (FDC, Obongi County, Moyo): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you for this opportunity. I find myself at crossroads for two reasons; the honourable members Olanya, Akol and Odonga Otto are all my close friends and we belong to the same party, FDC. On the other hand, Gen. Moses Ali and Ababiku, who come from Adjumani, are my people because we come from the same region. When these people accuse each other here, the people in Madi expect me to speak and when I speak, the Acholi also expect me to speak and support them just like the Madi would also expect me to support them. 

I have been involved in some subtle diplomacy but people ignored my advice, including my brother here, hon. Olanya. This problem cannot be solved from here. You can talk, send delegations and bring reports but this problem will not be solved in this House. There is need to visit the ground.

I would like to express my condolences to the families that have lost their dear ones from both sides of the divide. Statistics have captured fairly well people who were killed on the side of Acholi but statistics have not captured the people who were killed on the side of the Madi. I live in the immediate west of Adjumani and therefore further west of Amuru - Itirikwa and Zoka. There were people who originally lived in the areas around Zoka but they were evicted and taken to Obongi. The Alipii clan, before Madi wildlife clan was created, the original people who owned that land, live in Obongi.

Therefore, Madam Speaker, I would like to propose a way forward. There is a difference between land ownership and district boundaries. This should be very clear. Secondly, the Greater North Parliamentary Forum, which brings all of us together, should come up and try to implement what we suggested quietly, to bring the two leaders together. 

I would like to further appeal to my brothers from Acholi; as you saw in the pictures, as you implore in your private conversations, you ever refer to war and to Joseph Kony. However, remember in Madi, there is a General called Joseph Lagu; he was also a rebel leader but from South Sudan. These are the same Madi. If it is violence, you know that you cannot win, Madi cannot win, we cannot win. We should all appeal to each other that if it is violence, we cannot win – (Interruption)

MR AKOL: Madam Speaker, I avoided a lot of information but I would like to state on the Floor of Parliament that about two people called me from Adjumani and they were accusing my brother, hon. Fungaroo, of ferrying some people from his constituency using a pick-up car with some bows and arrows with his colleagues from Adjumani. When I listen to his statement about war, Madam Speaker, I begin to confirm this. 

Is it in order, at a time when we are talking peace, for the honourable member to try to see – We have never praised Kony as a good General but he is praising another General in Madi, as if we should try to see which one among the two tribes is stronger than the other. Is that in order? 

THE SPEAKER: No, honourable members, we have agreed that there is a problem, let us find a solution. There are people there waiting for solutions from this House.

4.52
MS FRANCA AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Agago): Thank you, Madam Speaker. As we find a solution to this problem, I would like this House to understand that there are some facts that we cannot run away from. I represent Agago District, which is in Acholi subregion, but I have three subcounties that are fully occupied by Langi. They speak Langi and I have lived with them and we have co-existed for years. They live in Acholiland but they are Langi yet they belong to Agago District. We have not chased them away from Acholiland. 

Therefore, the question of district boundaries should not spoil this debate. We should understand the fact that our people have got to live where they are and they must live peacefully, and that is the solution we have to find today. I further think that the people of Madi and Acholi, especially those that live in Adjumani and Amuru, are able to solve this problem. I know that this problem would be sorted if politicians like us did not exaggerate the issues.

Madam Speaker, I felt hurt when I heard my colleague, hon. Ababiku, my daughter, and Minister of State for Health, asking here, “Why are only men killed?” That means that there were instructions that Acholi men should be killed. Yes, because why would they want the women also to be killed? That is the reason I want us as leaders -                                    

THE SPEAKER: Way forward. 

MS FRANCA AKELLO: I would like to request that as a way forward, as leaders we must mind the language we use. The language we speak in this process of finding solutions must be harmonious and must be something that will bring a solution to the problem. Thank you. 

4.55
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Ms Winfred Kiiza): Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, at a time like this, some of us fail to get words to use. My condolences, first of all, to the families of those people whose dear ones died in this unfortunate incident. We condemn, in the strongest terms, those who participated in the barbaric and violent actions that culminated into the loss of lives, property and of course, people’s way of living getting disrupted. 

What we are discussing here leads me to remember what Reverend Niemöller said during the World War II, that they came for the Jews; I did not speak because I was not a Jew. They came for the Catholics; I did not speak because I was not a Catholic. They came for the Protestants; I did not speak because I considered myself not a Protestant. Finally they came for me and there was nobody to speak. 

When the incidences of Rwenzori happened here, they were referred to as tribal conflicts. I remember telling the House that colleagues needed to know what the people of Rwenzori were going through to be able to understand. I also said that I pray it does not happen anywhere else because this matter touches the real lives and souls of people. I am sad that this is happening again and we are coming back here in circles. 

Madam Speaker, as we look for medicine and possibly ways of averting this situation, we should first ask ourselves what has happened to this country called Uganda. Why are brothers and sisters who have lived for ages now killing each other? Is there anybody or a hidden hand that is inciting brothers against each other? 

The Acholi have lived for a long time with the Madi and they say they have never fought. According to them, it is not a tribal conflict but the media will paint it a tribal conflict. When it happened in Rwenzori, the issue was said to be tribal clashes in Rwenzori until we clarified it, Madam Speaker, that we were seeing people dying and the killers are the army and police. On whose behalf were they killing, if it was tribal killings? 

Here we come again on the borders of Madi and the Acholi. Last year, I happened to go to the region. I was coming from Zoka Forest and I managed to go to Apaa. Probably, even before that, I participated in supervising an election where hon. Lucy Akello came to Parliament after a by-election. I remember going to Apaa Health Centre II and there was a polling station, where hon. Akello received votes and she actually won there. I also went to Apaa Market and there was a polling station where hon. Akello and I supervised. I went to Apaa Primary School and it also had a polling station where hon. Akello won. 

In my opinion, when I heard that there was a problem of boundaries and that the Madi were saying that this was their boundary, I started asking myself: when I was part of that campaign, this was under Amuru; could it be a problem of the boundary? If it is a problem of the boundary, then what happened? I recollected what I was told by the locals when I went to West Nile for the oversight trip. We went deep into the forest and I found some homes deserted; some people had been chased out of their homes. Madam Speaker, I will want to have some little time to give this kind of history. People had been chased away from the homes because they were told that they were living in a game reserve and a forest. 

When I reached the town, I found some few rebellious ones who had refused to come out of the forest. They told me they are Acholi and they used to stay there until the war broke out. That is when they were told that land was de-gazetted while they were in the IDPs. That is what I was told. I just want to be told whether it was right or wrong, but that is the information I got. When I went there, my mission was to see the deforestation that was taking place in the forest. I did not want to concentrate on the displacements of the people but those voices were there.

Madam Speaker, when we went for the outreach in Arua, the other day I heard people coming up to say that all along, they had thought that the Zoka River was the boundary between Madi and Acholi. They said that there were even signposts on both sides of the river and the bridge - “Welcome to Madi”, “Madi wishes you a safe journey” and then “Acholi wishes you a safe journey”. Those signposts were clear on both sides of River Zoka. 

I can still remember that when we had gone for that outreach, voices of alteration of boundaries also started coming up. This calls for us to again go back to the drawing table. As we want to sort the problem once and for all, before our brothers continue killing themselves, can we look for a team that will be independent of the Acholi and the Madi? We need a team that will look at this problem as well as the actors. 

I may not suggest a parliamentary committee this time. The reason I am not emphasising a parliamentary committee is because there have been three committees on the issue of Kasese from here, which have never reported. I, therefore, do not think a parliamentary committee will bring us a solution to this matter. Let us look for a committee outside this Parliament and let it be funded. The committee should be an independent one, Madam Speaker. We need a national committee that will be free from the Madi and the Acholi, which we think will be able to critically look at the boundaries. It should possibly look at the boundaries right from the colonial times - the colonial boundaries, boundaries they think have been altered and the current boundaries. Thereafter, we will see whether we can put this matter to rest.

However, in the interim, I would probably call upon all our leaders, both from Madi and Acholi, to consider the lives of our people as very important. The only unfortunate bit is that each one of us will want to be seen to defend their people. We should all look at being fair and just. Ugandans are Ugandans whether they are Madi, Acholi or Bakonzo. 

I believe in the aspect of one Uganda, one people, and if we are to believe in that aspect and we think that we are to work towards having a common agenda of prosperity for all, let us avoid conflict. Conflicts are bad. Let us embrace the aspect of truth and justice. Thereafter, we shall be able to bring our country together and then we can go out and market Uganda as the Pearl of Africa, where there are no wars and violence. Madam Speaker, I beg to submit. 

5.04
THE FIRST DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND DEPUTY LEADER OF GOVERNMNET BUSINESS (Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali): Madam Speaker, I would like to convey my condolences to those who lost their lives on both sides of the conflict. Secondly, I would like to thank the Government for coming out – (Interruption)

MR ODONGA OTTO: Madam Speaker, I rise on a point of order. Three weeks ago, when I put on spectacles, I sought permission from your office because I had sight problems. The First Deputy Prime Minister, Gen. Moses Ali, just got up now without shades and even now he is not putting on shades. The moment he started talking, facing hon. Gilbert Olanya, he put on those glasses (Laughter).  We feel scared. Is it in order for us to be scared by the looks of Gen. Moses Ali, with those spectacles? (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, rule 73 deals with dress code and shoes; it does not deal with sun glasses. (Laughter) Please, proceed. 

GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: Madam Speaker, my eyes are being affected by that bright light. That is the reason I put on the sun glasses. I have a problem with my eyes; it is not because of hon. Olanya.

THE SPEAKER: I have allowed you, General; go on and make your submission.

GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: Madam Speaker, I also would like to thank the Government for coming out clearly today. Sadly, allegations have been made against me but I am not going to comment on them because I know that the investigating departments are doing their work. I believe that whoever they find involved, including me – I am ready to go to Luzira or anywhere else. That should not only be for Moses Ali; it should be for anybody who is involved, including hon. Olanya and hon. Akol. (Laughter)  We must be ready to carry our cross if we are found guilty –(Interjections)- Okay, we will go to Nalufenya. (Laughter)

You cannot just go around as if you are not an involved party. Who is going to be wet if you are the one taking a bath? It is you, the person taking the bath. Do not expect anybody else to get wet on your behalf if you are taking a bath; you must be wet. (Interruption)

MR OLANYA: Madam Speaker, I am quite scared. When the Rt Hon. First Deputy Prime Minister was talking, he was pointing at me and saying, “You must be wet”. I am so intimated and scared. I do not know the intention of the Rt Hon. Prime Minister. Is he in order to intimidate me and to point in the eyes of someone, uttering all those words? Is he in order to say that I am wet yet he is the first suspect? Is he in order?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, since the Rt Hon. Prime Minister must speak from that podium, I invite you to leave that side and move to the other side so that you are not in the middle. You move. Prime Minister, go on and complete your submission. (Laughter)

GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: Madam Speaker, let me go to the way forward. I think that for the rest of the matters, let the police investigate and find the truth. I am going to the way forward.

One, in my view, since time immemorial we have had borders –(Interjections)- I am speaking English (Laughter) I do not know the other language. Since time immemorial, we have had borders, where are they? Let us accept that border supported by the Constitution. That is the true border; let us accept it. 

Two, we have game reserves and forest reserves but they have been heavily encroached illegally. They must be vacated. That is my way forward. It may sound bad to you but let me say it.

Three, those who had settled in the gazetted areas should be settled elsewhere, having left the gazetted areas. 

Four, Government must follow up the perpetrators and they must be brought to book – (Interjections) What English must I speak if you do not understand what I am saying? I am saying that those who are involved in this conflict, the investigation department should follow them up and bring them to book.

I rest my case, Madam Speaker.

5.13
THE DEPUTY ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Mwesigwa Rukutana): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Honourable members, I looked at gruesome photographs of injured people, bleeding people and the dead. The question that came to my mind was: why should this happen in today’s Uganda? I would like us to be sober and handle this issue in a sober manner. 

In my view, the cause of the conflict between the Acholi and the Madi communities cannot be the border. This is because when I look at this Independence Constitution, the border issue was resolved and it is well known. It is also a well-known principle that the language, tribe or ethnicity does not in any way determine district borders. (Applause) I have heard Members from both sides saying that the Acholi and the Madi communities have for time immemorial lived together in peace. We must appreciate that there have been Acholi in areas that fall under the Madi region and there have been Madi in areas that fall within the Acholi region and they have lived together. Therefore, the question is, why should we have this conflict at this point in time?

Assuming, by some stretch of imagination, that somebody thought the border was the cause, the minister has told us that there has been some boundary opening and it is now clear where each district passes. If that were to be the case, why do we still see conflicts? Why do we see honourable members even in this House, as people die and are bleeding, still exchanging bitter words? (Mr Akol rose_)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, you had 30 minutes to speak. The Attorney-General is well informed.

MR RUKUTANA: If I concluded that the cause of the conflict is failure in local leadership, would I be wrong? This is because as far as the boundaries are concerned, it is no longer an issue; there was boundary opening and the district boundaries are known. As I said earlier, it does not matter that this tribe or the other resides on either side of the boundaries – (Interruption)

MR NZOGHU: Madam Speaker, I was a member of the Committee on Physical Infrastructure in the Ninth Parliament and as far as I know, the exercise of demarcating the boundaries was done before 2016. This means that by law, the community in Apaa should have actually voted in Adjumani. The Attorney-General should, therefore, be telling this House why even after opening the boundaries, the Apaa community voted in Amuru District? (Applause) 

Would the Attorney-General, therefore, be in order to insinuate that the issue of the boundaries was solved yet by law, each community is supposed to vote in their own district and constituency?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I will need to look at the polling stations under the Electoral Commission. I do not have the information now. Please, conclude.

MR RUKUTANA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for that very wise ruling. In my view, since boundaries are not the issue, what we need to do – (Interruption)

MS FRANCA AKELLO: Thank you, hon. Attorney-General. Your advice is legal advice for the country and that is why I insist that you clarify to me this matter. The area Member of Parliament in his presentation alluded to the fact that when the boundary opening was being done, this other side of Amuru was not involved. That means the neighbourhood was not actually involved. That is why up to now, they are not very certain whether the boundaries that were later confirmed by the boundary opening, which was carried out, could have been biased or it is the actual boundary. 

Could you clarify why this activity was done without involving the neighbourhood?

MR RUKUTANA: Madam Speaker, the exercise of boundary opening does not necessarily require the involvement of any of the communities. It is a technical exercise where people who are technically competent look at the coordinates, mark stones and show whoever is interested where the coordinates pass. It is not a question of – (Interruption)

MR OYET: Madam Speaker, I rise on a point of clarification. Last Friday, we were meeting H.E the President, Gen. Yoweri Kaguta Museveni, and ministries and heads of departments were invited. We were informed by the Government surveyor that Apaa is 10 kilometres inside Adjumani. Today, the minister who is presiding over the same surveyor is telling us that Apaa is eight kilometres inside Adjumani. That is a difference of two kilometres, and two kilometres is not a simple size of land. We would like to be clarified by the Attorney-General on the exact position of Apaa – the contested land.

MR RUKUTANA: Boundaries were opened. There were mark stones. The exercise of boundary opening is a scientific exercise that goes in accordance with coordinates and mark stones that were laid long ago. That is why I said that this can never be the issue. Boundary opening is only saying that according to the instruments we have, scientifically this is the mark stone, this is another one and this is another one. It does not matter who resides on whichever side of the boundary –(Interruption)

MR FUNGAROO: Madam Speaker, the minister is actually giving us some kind of education. He is telling us how it is done, with mark stones and things like that. This is what he has been doing.

Madam Speaker, I have the same problem, which requires that kind of knowledge. However, in Uganda there was a school for surveying and mapping in Entebbe. Because of this problem we have in Acholi and in West Nile between Yumbe and Moyo, I wanted to get this knowledge and I went to that school in Entebbe. 

The point of clarification I am seeking here is: can’t the Government make this school available to teach all of us mapping –(Interjection)- It is true! Science must be understood. When you are speaking to people, they must understand you. Many of us do not understand what the surveyors are saying, even when they go to the ground.

We are requesting for the expansion of that school. For the record of Parliament, that school has been destroyed. Since this Government came into power, they have taken away land and the school is dying. There is need for knowledge –(Interruption)-

MR ODONGA OTTO: Madam Speaker, I rise on point of order. I am a graduate of three degrees and I am not interested in learning anything else. (Laughter) Is hon. Fungaroo in order to suggest that we be compulsorily recruited to study surveys and mapping which is of no interest to me?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Fungaroo, if you want to go and study surveying, you can pay for yourself and go and study but do not drag everybody into it.

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Maybe with respect to what he is raising, I would like to assure the House that the school of surveying does exist in Entebbe and Ugandans from all corners of the country are being admitted and trained. However, we can take your special request, hon. Fungaroo, and we admit you to get some skills. (Laughter)

MR RUKUTANA: In conclusion, what do we have to do in order to stop these barbaric, gruesome and unbecoming manners of our communities clashing in our modern and peaceful country? Let the leaders on both sides, since the boundaries are now known, go back home and show the people the boundaries. Tell them that it is the right of any Ugandan to reside anywhere in Uganda irrespective of whether it is in this or that district.

As far as I am concerned, once the communities are sensitised and know the boundaries, then we do not have to look for a technical team because the technical work has already been done. It is a matter of mobilising, sensitising, educating and informing the communities and telling them that they have to live together. That is all.

However, if you overstretch it and say the boundaries of Madi were these and these were the boundaries of Acholi, you may compound the problem. Show them the boundaries, now that they are opened, and tell them that it is the right of every Ugandan to reside wherever he is, was or wants to be, and ask them to be peaceful. In my view, that will solve the problem. 

I really felt so sad and I rarely shed tears but when I saw the pictures here, I almost shed tears. This is a modern Uganda. We boast of over 30 years of peace; how can we allow this to happen? I rest my case.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, I know this an important matter, but what we need to do is to find a solution. 

I would like to propose the following general areas: one is that security should be guaranteed to all the citizens in that part of the country to do their work and go about their lives. I do not know when the minister is coming for funding. There are too many conflicts in West Nile concerning boundaries. Every district has a conflict with its neighbour in west Nile. When are you bringing the request - we can give it to you tomorrow - so that we solve this problem? 

We are also proposing that there should be sensitisation and reaffirmation of the boundaries, and this time it should include the cultural leaders of all those communities so that they are part of the agreement. The perpetrators should be brought to book. 

However, honourable minister, I think there is a fundamental error in our operations. I have been looking at the polling stations in Pabbo Subcounty of Amuru District and Okalochan polling station is in Pabbo in Amuru; Apaa Market is in Amuru; Apaa Health Centre is in Amuru; Olet Valley polling station is in Amuru. Are they in Amuru or Adjumani? You must solve this. These polling stations are registered under Amuru by the Electoral Commission. So, you need to tell us whether they remain in Amuru or they are in Adjumani.

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you very much Madam Speaker. Like my statement clearly stated or expressed, this is a game reserve which was gazetted in 2002, cut off from the wider hunting area. In the statement, I was clear that by then there were no settlements. However, during the time of return of the IDPs-(Interruption)-

MR OYET: Madam Speaker, I rise on a point of order. This statement about East Madi Game Reserve has been repeated time and again. We are aware that all the gazetted places are guarded and protected by arms of Government. The situation that happened in Apaa, which led to the killing of innocent people in Amuru, was done by civilians mobilised in militia form. 

Is it in order for gangs or militia to organise themselves to kill in the name of trying to evict people who are in a gazetted place? Is the Minister of Lands and Housing in order to insinuate that these people who were killed were being evicted from the game reserve?

MR ODONGA OTTO: Further, you see that is why we are in this House. It is not easy to win four elections. It means there is something which we have and others do not. 

The point I would like to raise is, when LRA displaced our people, they were in Pabbo camp. The people of Apaa moved to Pabbo camp. That is when Adjumani District Local Government, in bad faith, used that opportunity to give that land to Uganda Wildlife Authority. In law, the properties did not pass because they said that now that these people are not there, let us come with a district council resolution.

When the war ended, the Government of Gen. Yoweri Kaguta said, “Go back to where you came from” and the people went back to Apaa. They were even escorted by UPDF and protected there. Therefore, the point we are making, honourable minister, is that on the issue of a wildlife reserve, leave it alone. You cannot enforce it because people have lived there for 70 years. Unless you provide them with alternative settlement, please do not talk about the wildlife reserve. (Applause)

DR BARYOMUSI: Madam Speaker, the long and short of it is that the boundaries were not clear in the beginning. However, after clarifying on the boundaries, now Apaa falls in Adjumani. Redefining the location in terms of where to vote from will be rectified because the boundaries are very clear. However, it is true because the boundaries were vague, that area was voting in Amuru. However, with clear boundaries, it has to be rectified.

MS SANTA ALUM: Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I have listened to the ongoing debate and to the Government side, and ministers including the Attorney-General have spoken. We have lost lives but I have not heard anything about the use of the military weapons to kill those people. 

My concern is that our people have settled in many areas in Uganda, which is okay by law, but if we encourage our people to keep using rudimentary weapons, if Government is aware that there are many rudimentary weapons but it keeps quiet, are we really proceeding right? I believe that the Government should come up and tell us something about the use of rudimentary weapons. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, when I was summing up, I said that the Government should facilitate sensitisation and reaffirmation of the boundaries but this time involve the cultural leaders so that they can influence their people. 

5.35
THE MINISTER OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Gen. (Rtd) Jeje Odongo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I just want to add a little to what you have advised us to take on. Allegations have been raised here that the army and the police were in support of the attackers; that is very inconceivable. 

I would also like to state that allegations or statements were made saying, “deploy policemen we agree with”. It is tantamount to saying, “Jeje, I do not like your face; therefore, do not be deployed here”. If everybody says that, where will we deploy this policeman? It is therefore not fair neither is it correct for us to choose which personnel should be deployed where. 

I would like to tell you, colleagues, that I moved very quietly. Many of you do not know that I have been to these places and I would like to assure you today that whereas you are suggesting that no arrests have taken place, it is because we would like to be sure. Indeed, we will arrest people who are culpable in this situation. I want you to stand warned.

Finally, as the Speaker has stated, security has been deployed in this place. Leaders, encourage the people to go back because nobody will risk attacking another person. We will be there and we will take responsibility. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, can we ask the Government to give us an update about the status - whether they are settled and what is happening. We would like a report in one month. Thank you. 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT 

5.38
THE MINISTER OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Gen. (Rtd) Jeje Odongo): Thank you, Madam Speaker and honourable members. I am making a statement on an issue which appeared in the press in relation to the shortage of machine readable passports which we normally call ordinary passports.

Madam Speaker and honourable members, it is true that the Ministry of Internal Affairs is experiencing low stock levels of ordinary passports and I regret to inform Members of Parliament and the country about this challenge, which was announced in a press release on 13th June this year. However, it will be addressed. This is therefore to explain that situation.

In line with the regional requirement to migrate to the electronic passport by 3 April 2017, the plan was to phase out the current machine readable passports and replace them with a new generation of electronic passports. Since we were not able to meet that deadline, member states of the East African Community have now extended it to December 2017 when we should be issuing the e-passport. 

In view of the requirement to migrate to the e-passport, it was logical to procure only reasonable quantities in order to avoid financial loss due to over stocking of a passport that was, after all, due to be phased out.

Unfortunately, the process of procuring a provider for the e-passport involved many stakeholders and it is still ongoing. Therefore, we have not been able to issue the e-passport and the levels we had anticipated are going low.

In addition, the ministry is experiencing an unprecedented increase in demand for ordinary passports, especially from those seeking employment abroad. Initially, we were receiving about 450 applications on a daily basis for the ordinary passport. However, due to the increased demand, we are now receiving about 700 applications on a daily basis. This is almost double the previous average demand that we were experiencing.

To mitigate the likely adverse effects, the ministry is already taking the necessary steps to ensure that the required stock levels are replenished. In the interim, the ministry has put in place criteria to regulate the current stock levels to ensure that stocks last up to the time we expect delivery of the next consignment. These steps include the following: 

    a) We will now issue ordinary passports on the basis of proven medical cases. If there is a medical case that requires travelling outside the country, passports will be availed. 
    b) Certified applicants proceeding on Government business. If there is a new applicant who did not have a passport and is going for Government business, then a passport will be made available. 
    c) Students proceeding on scholarships will continue to receive passports. 
    d) Any emergency cases will also be considered.

I wish to add that there are other categories of passports such as the East African passports, official and diplomatic passports that are available in adequate quantities to those who qualify to get them.

Further, the ministry facilitates citizens with other documents valid for travel within East Africa and the COMESA member states. These include, as I have already mentioned, the East African passport for travel within East Africa; the national identity card for travel of Ugandans to Rwanda and Kenya; a certificate of identity for travel within the COMESA region; and temporary movement permits are also available. These documents will be issued at our immigration regional offices as well as points of entry and exit. 

In the meantime, I would like to discourage citizens from paying for express passport processing services. As I said, we are going slow.

Madam Speaker and honourable members, I wish to inform the public that the ministry shall continue to receive applications even if we may not issue the passports, so that when the passport stocks are received, we will continue to issue these passports. I apologise, colleagues, for this inconvenience caused to the public as a result of what I have just mentioned, which occasioned these low levels of the stocks of the ordinary passports. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. 

5.45
MS JOVAH KAMATEEKA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mitooma): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the honourable minister for such an open and candid statement. 

Since our lack of preparedness curtails the freedom of Ugandans from moving freely wherever they want to in this world and outside this nation, the Minister should tell us how long it will take for the stocks to be renewed so that Ugandans know how long they will have to wait? Thank you.

5.46
MS MARGARET BABA DIRI (NRM, Woman Representative, Koboko): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity. I would like to also thank the minister for his explanation. Good enough, the minister knows exactly how many people apply for passports in a day - between 400 to 700 people. Can the minister multiply this with the days from now up to December so that you order the passports accordingly? That is simple mathematics. (Laughter) You can order for the right number of passports; they can be excess or less by a few.

It is a right to have a passport. People go out not for fun but because they have to. They may be going to see their patients in London or in other places; they may be going to work in Geneva and other places. However, they are now being denied because they are waiting for the machines to be imported.

I would like to know whether the passports will expire after the Ministry of Internal Affairs acquires the machine. If they do not, why don’t you order for enough passports for Ugandans? Madam Speaker, I am not happy with the minister and let him tell the House the truth. Thank you very much.

5.48
MR JOHN BAPTIST NAMBESHE (NRM, Manjiya County, Bududa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. For the minister to attribute the shortage of passports to the impending plans to switch from the machine readable ones, or rather analogue, to electronic ones is not reason enough to justify the shortage. 

They have no stopgap measures in place for patients who were traveling abroad to secure treatment and a number of them were in shock. The minister has only said that students who were to go for scholarships have been provided for; what about patients and officials who have urgent business? The minister is even laughing openly not knowing that –

THE SPEAKER: He is laughing because all that you have mentioned is included in his statement - medical cases, certified applicants on Government business, students on scholarships and any other case of emergency nature.     

MR NAMBESHE: On that note, I rest my case. (Laughter)

5.49
MR ERIC MUSANA (NRM, Buyaga East County, Kibaale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to also thank the minister for his statement about this noble reason to have ordinary Ugandans access passports. Failure to provide passports to Ugandans is very absurd of Government. 

The Government has no capacity to manage e-services. I have studied a number of countries like Kenya and access to e-services is much easier for them. For us here we have to agonise and say that we had not anticipated that it is possible, otherwise we would have had this and the other. Now we are looking at Ugandans who would have this travel document, which is very critical but the Government is in one way creating challenges for itself. We are going to have more criminals and forgeries because it is very hard now to access a Government service.

We will have more corruption cases because it is much more difficult to receive a Government service, which is not free anyway; it is even at a cost. This is more income for Government, but the ministry is frustrating service delivery and then they come here to give us a funny excuse that it is because they want to adopt the e-services – (Member timed out)

5.51
MR BARNABAS TINKASIIMIRE (NRM, Buyaga West County, Kibaale): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for his attempt to quell the anger of Ugandans. At the beginning of this term, NRM declared that this is kisanja hakuna mchezo. 

People who are seeking passports, Madam Speaker, are doing so as an emergency in most cases. Somebody may have trained for a number of years in Uganda and graduated and then they get an opportunity to get a job. However, you are now saying it is only those going for further studies, those who are sick and Government officials who will be given priority. How are you providing for this other urgent case?

Honourable minister, are you aware that in human life there is what we call opportunity and time;	 when this young Ugandan misses his opportunity to unlock his potential, you will not tell him that you were holding kisanja hakuna mchezo. 

We would therefore like the honourable minister to tell us exactly when you will fix this problem. This matter of meandering on e-passports, the sick only - we would like to have all Ugandans treated equally and be given equal opportunity.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, would I be stopped from leaving the country with my old passport? Would you stop me from using my old passport when it is still valid before I change to the e-system? If not, then you should provide for these ones until you roll out.

5.54
MR DENIS OGUZU (FDC, Maracha County, Maracha): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have keenly listened to the statement the minister has made about problems in issuance of passports. I think there is a much bigger problem than he is telling us. Even before the media highlighted this issue, we already had a problem because it was not easy to access passports in the ministry; someone had to find a way of having their processes expedited. 

Just this morning, I received a call and a message from one person in my constituency. He told me that he needs to travel to Germany on Monday and it is an emergency because he has to join a university there. However, he is still suffering and he is failing to access a passport. He therefore contacted me to help him, as a Member of Parliament. I wanted the minister to clarify how quick it is for one to access this passport, when they have this emergency he mentioned. 

Secondly, acquiring a passport is a right; if I am going to suffer damages as a result of the ministry’s failure to issue me a passport, am I entitled to redress? I wanted you to highlight that to the nation. Is everyone who is going to suffer damages as a result of your failure entitled to redress? This is because you would have caused that redress, without any justifiable reason. 

There have been allocations for producing passports and there are many reasons to justify the ministry’s failure to process new passports. Even if it is phasing to the electronic one, that should have been gradually done in the way I.T operations are run. Thank you. 

5.56
MS ANNET NYAKECHO (Independent, Tororo North County, Tororo): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity. I would have loved to begin by thanking the minister but unfortunately on this very occasion, I am a bit constrained to do so. 

Madam Speaker, this is a country and in the recent pronouncement of the President, they said that this is Kisanja Hakuna Mchwezo meaning you are moving Uganda to a middle income status, without jokes. 

First of all, these passports are also a source of NTR to Government. Economically, you are going to lose revenue. Have you thought about that? We should also not always be thrown into a state of panic all the time and also lack of proper planning. These are things that you should be able to forecast, as the people in charge of running this country. You should know that by 2018, you want to phase out the old passports, introduce the e-passports and therefore have a method of doing so. Now you are going to actually infringe on the rights of Ugandans. We have a right to this document.

To add on what I want to say about the students; you have only mentioned those on scholarship. How about those who genuinely have admission in universities and may get affected because of this? Have you thought about that? I think you need to include them as students generally without only closing off and saying those on scholarships such that all the students at least will not be denied the opportunity to go and get better chances of education abroad.

Could this have been a way of Government wanting to fire brigade the issue of so many people going abroad to look for jobs? From the minister’s explanation, in the recent past, the number of people applying for passports has increased from 400 to 600. Could it be Government’s way of controlling people from going abroad through stopping the issuance of passports?  This is because the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development has been struggling with the issue of people going out of the country and probably there is no proper way of Government stopping  this. 

Finally, I think this is a wrong approach, honourable minister, with all due respect. You need to revise your strategy –(Member timed out.) 

5.59
MR PAUL AKAMBA (Independent, Busiki County, Namutumba): I thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I am very disappointed with the statement that has just been given for it promotes discrimination. By doing that, the ministry offends Article 21 of the Constitution. This is because there is no way you can say that you can issue a passport to a student with a scholarship and you do not issue to that one who has obtained an admission for private sponsorship. 

In the recent State of the Nation Address by H.E the President, he acknowledged that there is a problem of unemployment in the country. This is a fact that has even been acknowledged by the minister, who said that the demand for passports shoots high because of those that seek to go out for employment. Therefore, by denying them passports, the minister is promoting unemployment. 

I am of the view that passports should be issued without discrimination. Once they are exhausted, then all Ugandans will know that there are no passports and then special measures can always be made. Otherwise, this is total violation of our Constitution. All Ugandans must be treated equally. I beg to move. 

6.01
MR ROBERT NTENDE (Independent, Bunya County South, Mayuge): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. Honourable minister, we thank you for such a precise and short statement but I would like to say that in this country, we have had a number of scenarios switching from a manual system to an I.T system. Usually, the experience is that institutions run two systems to avoid challenges; you maintain the manual system in place as you test the I.T system because you do not know if the e-documents may work out as planned. 

I would actually request you as a ministry to operate two systems; maintain the manual system in place as you try the new system that you are bringing on board. 

Two, I would also request you to copy and paste from Uganda Revenue Authority (URA). When URA was trying to introduce e-tax number plates and at the same time the issuance of vehicle log books online, they actually maintained two systems for some period of time. However, when you gradually block and say that you are launching a new system and block out new people, it is very dangerous. 

Honourable minister, there is also a challenge of income. You have mentioned this in your report; that this country earns 100 million a day in applications and that is a total of 500 million a week. As a minister probably the money you are paid as emoluments and salary comes from this? Therefore, you are blocking your own income - (Interruption) 

MS MUTONYI: Madam Speaker, I would like to give information to my colleague. On top of losing revenue for Government, there are companies that have been licensed to find jobs for our Ugandans and they are being taxed. At the end of the year, will they stop asking for money from these companies? They are going to stop sending people out of the country. What is going to happen? Even issuing the national ID has a problem, now the whole thing is compounded. We really have a problem. Honourable minister, please wake up. Thank you. (Laughter)

MR NTENDE: Madam Speaker, lastly, on the issue of medical cases – honourable minister, which kind of parameters are you going to put in place to differentiate an emergency situation from what is not? There are individuals in this country who have their money and they need to go for medical check-up and take a flight to South Africa or even to India.

You are now saying that you cannot issue a passport to a person who has his money to go for medical attention. Honourable minister, this is a very big challenge. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

6.05
MR ATKINS KATUSABE (FDC, Bukonjo West County, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to join these wide forces on what they have mentioned here before. The greatest challenge of this country is none other than leadership. We are faced with a leadership crisis in this country; and unfortunately, this is addressed to the minister. The greatest challenge of leadership, honourable minister, is the ability to detect and solve a problem before it becomes a crisis. That is what leadership is all about.

You saw this coming honourable minister; incidentally, this is the same thing which happened with the cancer machine. Fellow citizens are dying right there at the cancer institute on a daily basis. There is another challenge facing our country; the hunger problem. People are starving and this is as a result of being unprepared. Here we are, stuck with the challenge.

My request is that before they can translate or transit to the e-version, they should stay the old one. Otherwise, how are you going to account to the Ugandans that are losing so many opportunities as a result of your ministry’s recklessness? I thank you, Madam Speaker.

6.08
MR MATHIAS MPUUGA (DP, Masaka Municipality, Masaka): Thank you, Madam Speaker. It is the very first time I listened to a general making a confession to incompetence in this House. Emergencies should never have been expected in this kind of matters. What became of the planning function in the Ministry of Internal Affairs?

In the Ninth Parliament, the issue of passports was a matter of debate on the Floor of Parliament, especially with Members raising concern over foreigners getting Ugandan passports. Could it be speaking to the saga of the passport they were giving out to the foreigners, and therefore caused a shortage at the ministry? Could the minister explain how this shortage came around?

We never got a report on how many passports incidentally landed in the hands of foreigners and now we are into an emergency? The minister also alluded to the fear that they would cost Government if they ordered for big stocks. The cost is to the owner; the seeker of the passport and it is paid for. The minister is spot-on, on the projections. Will you follow your projections and procure the passports; the old type to fit within your system?

Otherwise, I pray that Parliament rejects your proposals and instead advise you to go and procure passports in ordinary form that will fit within the timeline of your need. Otherwise, would you like to tell Parliament why you would not be a subject of Article 118 (b) and (e)? Why should we not indict you for incompetence and mismanagement? How can you come here to lament about your inability to do your job? The minister is actually telling us that he has failed in executing his duty and he is here to apologise.

Madam Speaker, I am sorry to tell the minister that Ugandans who are desperate will not listen to apologies. They will actually come for you. Better go and take our advice and procure enough passports in the period as you get your trucks rights. I thank you.

6.10
MR DEOGRATIUS KIYINGI (DP, Bukomansimbi South County, Bukomansimbi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for his statement, that indeed it is unfortunate. The matter of passports is very important. I am a member of the committee on trade in this Parliament. I know very well that one of the people that travel a lot are the traders of this country.

It is unfortunate that the minister has intentionally and stubbornly excluded traders well knowing that these people travel almost every three days, and they are the ones whose passports get used up very fast. I, therefore, would like you honourable minister, to tell us how long it is going to take this Government to provide us with passports - well knowing that in a few days from now, we are going to begin the new financial year? How do we expect revenue to be collected when our traders cannot move out of this country to do business? I do not know whether there is a department of planning in the Ministry of Internal Affairs? If we are moving from the ordinary passports to the digital passports, did you think about the time it is going to take for you to move from the old system to the new system? Did you ensure that you put enough stock in place so that every Ugandan can be able to access passports?

I, therefore, would like you to tell the country when we are likely to get new passports so that this country can move forward? Thank you, Madam Speaker.

MR SSEWUNGU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Through you, I would like to caution the Members of this august House that they need to be very careful with Gen. Jeje Odong, my good friend. When he comes to give answers on matters of national importance, he is very articulate and you might be taken unaware that he is giving you something that is not true and misleading.

I have just heard from him about Amuru, but I pray – let me tell you this honourable members. When someone speaks good English like me, you stop listening to him seriously. The issue of sick people and those going to school cannot arise as misleading information. Honourable members, how often have you applied for passports and have got them at the right time? You go to the Ministry of Internal Affairs, people apply for these passports and they bank the money, but take weeks without getting them. First of all, these passports are of poor quality. They cost us a lot of money and they delay.

Now, if you are giving me poor quality - look at my officials passport; all the words have been erased and the quality is so poor and you are getting money from me.  How are you going to pay for all those damages of having paid you in time and you failed to get me the passport in time? This has been happening and it is a weakness of Government. The minister will always come in to sugar-coat. 

Okay, my mother is suffering from flu now. Can I get a passport tomorrow? I am asking the minister. My mother is sick. I want a passport tomorrow. She must travel on Friday. Can I get it? The answer is “no”. You are getting money in time – Ssewungu and others are giving you money in advance. This is not a cost, but an income to Government. 

Hon. Karuhanga is my vice-chairperson on the Committee on Public Accounts and the chairperson is here. They can testify that we had issues about passports and that was under the Auditor-General’s recommendations in his report and this matter is still coming up. 

Gen. Jeje Odongo, kindly as you get that kind of information from your technocrats sieve out the misleading information they are giving you. As you are a hajji and a Muslim, sometimes come here and say that “sincerely, the problem is on us and we shall correct the mistake” other than giving us misleading information to make us happy so that Ugandans can go happy because Gen. Jeje Odongo was very articulate, smart and slow -(Laughter)- and everybody thought that what he was saying was true. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

6.16
MR CHRISTOPHER KIPTERIT (Independent, Upe County, Amudat): Madam Speaker, I am really disappointed with the statement of the minister concerning the issue of shortage of passports. Why? This is because a passport is a necessary document for all Ugandans to have. It is not only for few people. The Constitution says you should not discriminate. Most people want to go abroad for studies and to work. How will they get the passports when you have categorised it to sick people or people who have got scholarships only? 

I think it is very important for the Ministry of Internal Affairs to actually plan because you have not planned well. You would have known how many passports are issued every year. You do not plan it. In addition, you are encouraging corruption. If I want to go abroad now, for example, I will use shortcuts. You are encouraging bribery because if I want to get it, I will go and pay those workers of internal affairs some money. Therefore, it is very imperative that the Ministry of Internal Affairs plans well so that we will not get this kind of embarrassment as a country. Thank you.

6.18
MR GERALD KARUHANGA (Independent, Ntungamo Municipality, Ntungamo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Listening to the minister, you keep wondering whether there was any planning or even immediate imagination. When new technology is acquired almost anywhere however simple, difficult or complex or small, there is foresight that there is a possibility of this technology not functioning for six months, a year or even two years. Is there an imagination on your side that even for this e-passport you are talking about, you may acquire the technology and it actually does not function for two years? It appears you woke up and said we need an e-passport and started the process. 

Madam Speaker, assuming this was being run by a private company – say Toyota or any other company – I do not know at this point what would be happening to the CEO or the other immediate managers. By now I am sure some people would have been fired. I think we should begin engaging and encouraging our Government to improve on the level of diligence and efficiency. Otherwise, you really set the entire country to suffer by the inaction of some few individuals who are paid by the very taxpayers and you throw the entire country into a pandemonium. Everybody is panicking and people are calling. 

In fact, Members of Parliament, I do not know whether we all get the same calls. People now call and think we can help process these passports. We cannot. They call every time asking: how do we get it? This is because some people just sat back. Procurement is planning. Madam Speaker, going forward, surely we can do better, plan better and procure better. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: I would like to know whether we got this information in the last financial year that we are going to change passports. Did we?

6.20
MR KENNETH LUBOGO (NRM, Bulamogi County, Kaliro): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Like some colleagues have observed, it is very hard to thank the minister for this statement. Honourable minister, I had expected you to acknowledge that there is a high level of inefficiency in your ministry. This is because stock outs are calculable. They are mathematical and you can project and know that at this time I will be in need of such a number of passports. Therefore, you need to acknowledge on record that actually there is inefficiency in your ministry.

Madam Speaker, I would like to agree with hon. Mpuuga. Yesterday we rejected a statement here, which was not serious from the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries. I think today we need to do the same with this particular statement. (Applause)

I am saying this because when you read points five and six – point five says: “To mitigate the likely adverse effects, the ministry is already taking necessary steps to ensure the required stock levels are replenished.” In point six, he is giving other options that are available. The minister is not committal on when we are getting these passports. He is not quoting it here for him to be held accountable on his own statement. 

Therefore, I think this statement should be rejected by the House and the minister should go and come back to bring another statement clearly indicating when we are going to receive these passports.

Madam Speaker, I do not think we need three or four months to get these passports. I infer from the statement of the minister that they might even not be in the process of procuring other passports. They want to pass time until we get to a certain point around December and then they try the new technology. Therefore, I think this statement should not be bought.

Secondly, the minister told us about the likely losses. He said they feared that probably Government is going to lose a lot of money and so on. It has already been intimated by my colleague: do you know how much loss this country is going to suffer in terms of loss of business - (Member timed out.)

6.23
MS AGNES AMEEDE (NRM, Woman Representative, Pallisa): Madam Speaker, with exception, I would like to thank the minister for giving a timely statement about the shortage of passports. (Laughter) Yes, it was timely –(Interruption)

MR LUBOGO: Madam Speaker, I am surprised by my sister here, moreover we even border in our constituencies. We are talking about a serious issue. We are talking about a minister who has come and told you that you cannot travel out of the country unless you are critically sick or are on sponsorship and you are telling the House that this is a timely statement. (Laughter) 

Madam Speaker, is the honourable member in order to indicate to the nation that this is a timely statement when we are in a crisis? Is she in order?

THE SPEAKER: No, she is just acknowledging that it has come at the right time to be notified that you cannot travel. That is what she is saying. (Laughter)

MS AMEEDE: On the contrary, I was going to explain that issues of passports sometimes are not predictable. For example, we have so many passports that people have applied for and not utilised. If you go the airport and get statistics of applications against that of passports, it does not tally. 

When I was walking in, one of my constituents asked if she could see me. I asked, why? She said, “I have something very urgent; I need a passport.” I asked her, “What are you going to use the passport for? Are you going to travel?” She said, “No, I just need to have it.” 

Therefore, whereas it is a right for this person to have a passport, there is an administrative shortage and Members of Parliament, as responsible leaders, have to educate the masses that the available passports are for very critical issues: the sick, students and the categories that the minister -(Interruption)

MS KAMATEEKA: Madam Speaker, Article 29(2)(c) of the Constitution clearly says that every Ugandan shall be provided with a passport or any travel document. Regardless of what they want to use it for, it is a right so that at any one time they want to travel or are given an opportunity to travel, they are able to do so. 

Is the honourable member in order to sanctify the minister’s statement, which has actually abrogated our Constitution to say that passports are sometimes misused and it is not clear as to what purpose they are going to be used for? Is the honourable member in order?

THE SPEAKER: No, she is out of order. The passport is a right.

MS AMEEDE: Continuing the justification, there are critical instances where a passport must be given. We should be debating the way forward and giving the minister an ultimatum – (Interruption)

MR MWIJUKYE: Madam Speaker, the honourable member used to work in immigration and these are their inefficiencies. Therefore, is she in order to come here and defend their serious – (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, I think you need to temper your speech and address the interest of the population.

MS AMEEDE: Madam Speaker, it is very critical that we take this information, as presented by the minister, to the population until the passports are provided. Thank you.

6.28
MR KEEFA KIWANUKA (NRM, Kiboga East County, Kiboga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. In view of the fact that it has been determined that a passport is a right, I wonder where the minister is getting the powers to deny Ugandans passports. If it is a fundamental right, where is the minister getting the powers to refuse Ugandans passports? This is an entitlement to them.

Looking at the list you have given of the people who will be able to get a passport, I wonder whether you even have the right to get into the reasons why a Ugandan is applying for a passport. Your responsibility is to issue a passport as and when I require it. What we have here can be likened to the saying, “Power corrupts and absolute power corrupts absolutely.” You think you can do anything you want, which is very unfortunate. 

This is just an example of the inefficiencies of Government departments. You have not awakened to the modern world. How can you deny Ugandans passports in this global era? I can assure you that this is going to hit international headlines; that Uganda is unable to issue passports to its citizens. It is laughable and you are going to make us a laughing stalk.

Madam Speaker, this is not something new. The e-passport has been in circulation and available for quite a while now. Didn’t you know that countries are migrating to e-passports? 

Secondly, I am not aware of any country at the moment, which is denying anybody entrance into its territory because they do not hold an e-passport. Other passports are being accepted. Therefore, I do not know why you are saying you cannot issue them because you are running short of them.

Madam Speaker, my prayer is that Government or the ministry be compelled to continue issuing these passports until it has sorted out its mess and is able to issue the more appropriate passport. Thank you.

6.31
MR GEOFFREY MACHO (NRM, Busia Municipality, Busia): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you for this golden opportunity. I am calling it a golden opportunity because I am the most affected, being a Member of Parliament on the border. Before I begin submitting, I request you, Madam Speaker, to cause the Clerk to ring the bell for the Rt hon. Prime Minister to awaken so that he hears what I am going to say. 

THE SPEAKER: He is watching you. (Laughter)

MR MACHO: Madam Speaker, the other day I spoke here on the Floor of Parliament and I said we have a problem in this country. I am so happy that our Head of State, who is the chairperson of my ruling party NRM, brought a very good message of Kisanja hakuna mchezo. 

In fact, he has done a lot but there is a problem that I keep talking about and it is with our ministers. That is why as I speak, the honourable Minister of State for Lands is asking me, which problem. Just look at the attendance of the Front Bench and you will see that there is a problem. 

Yesterday, we had here a workshop paper, which they called a report. Today we are having a circular, which is called a report. I would like Government to know that every September, labour companies recruit people to go and work in various countries. When the time approaches, we say we do not have passports. Moreover, labour companies have signed agreements with many foreign companies. What do you want those people to do? Those contracts have a time limit.

In future, this Parliament must propose that we act like our neighbours in Kenya have done. We should help the President to vet people who sit on the Front Bench. The problem of ministries in this country is political responsibility. I do not know whether ministers also go for benchmarking so that they see how their colleagues work in other countries. I was laughed at when I crossed to Kenya to eat Nyama Choma in Busia. They said, how can a country lack passports? 

Many times we operate a “fire brigade system”; as if we are in a crisis, as if we have just ended war - (Interruption)  

MR OUMA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The issue is very serious and Gen. Odongo is carefully listening. As a man of the people, the best I urge him to do is to withdraw. That statement is injurious to this country and when it is known that a whole General who commanded the army, with a lot of respect, is saying that he is not managing his ministry and there are no passports - I know that things move out systematically. If we are migrating from manual to e-passports, there would be a time frame and the Parliament would be informed that this is how we are moving and by the end of this time, we would have gone this level. However, when we appear to be running this country on emergencies; every now and then, things come up abruptly, we are causing panic for no reason. 

There is panic in Uganda; Parliament is discussing that there are no passports and there is a panic. We are closing schools and there is a panic. Madam Speaker, Gen. Jeje Odongo should withdraw the statement. Thank you very much. 

MR MACHO: Madam Speaker, as I conclude, I would like to propose to my good friend, Gen. Jeje, one of the people who made me join politics because I thought they were doing their best, to withdraw this circular so that he goes and reorganises himself. We also request the President to hold a workshop for the ministers because this is a shame that a ruling party of 30 years - (Laughter) 

MR KAFUUZI: I rise on a point of information. A few months ago, our minister in charge of disaster preparedness was here presenting a paper when we were all crying of hunger in the country. One of the biggest issues was where this ministry for disaster preparedness has been all along.

Yesterday, our Minister of Agriculture in charge of Animal Husbandry was here telling us that she had got 600 litres of acaricides for a country that has 15 million heads of cattle. Where is the planning sector within that ministry?
 
Today, our Minister of Internal Affairs is telling us that as a country, we have no passports. After assuring us that he knows what he is doing, he moves incognito. That is what he said earlier: “You may not understand me but I move incognito, I know a lot.” 

After assuring us of all that, he tells us that he has no passports. My question goes to the Prime Minister who is the chief whip of the ministers. What is happening?

6.38
MR DAVID ABALA (NRM, Ngora County, Ngora): Thank you, Madam Speaker. When you are coming from outside the Parliament gate, you must have an electronic card. Short of that, you cannot get in, unless somebody helps you. That is why these days we must move with the card.

Secondly, when you are going anywhere and they ask for your identity card, you must present it. A passport is an identity card that you present when you cross the border. In that case, it becomes a bit challenging to me and many Ugandans to hear that there are no passports. 

Madam Speaker, our motto in this country says, For God and My Country. I do not know a God who is so confused and who cannot help us in this arrangement. I am a bit disappointed. Remember that there are so many reports about corruption and bribery in that Department of Immigration when they are issuing some of these passports. This could be the source of the problem - (Interruption)

MR AOGON: Thank you, my good colleague, for giving way. Madam Speaker, I would like to inform my honourable friend that while Parliament was migrating from manual registration to this auto machine that reads the thumbprint, we took it systematically. When I came here for the first time and found that the book was absent, I thought Parliament was ceasing operations. However, on checking, I was told that now we just use the thumb. Thank you. 

MS ADDA: Thank you, hon. Abala. Madam Speaker, passports are not only for crossing borders. Even when you go to the bank, they ask you for a photocopy of your passport. You can either use your identity card or a passport but in most cases, a passport is more trustworthy than any other identity card. Therefore, a passport is not just for going outside the country. In fact, everyone, including our children, should have a passport. 

6.42
MS ESTHER ANYAKUN (NRM, Woman Representative, Nakapiripirit): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Just as my colleagues have spoken about the validity of having a passport in this country - (Interruption)

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, looking at the way the Prime Minister is seated, it is not parliamentary. Is the minister in order to sit like he is in his sitting room? (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: The Prime Minister has very long legs so I think he was adjusting himself.

MS ANYAKUN: Thank you, Madam Speaker. A passport is a very important document for an individual, not only at a mature level but even to a child who is not a voter. If a family wants to travel out of this country and you deny them a passport, that means you are trying to tell them that they cannot get out of this country because of this issue. 

My question is, was it realistic for a country like Uganda to deny people - I would like to give you a scenario. My uncle came from South Sudan and pressurised me to write for him an introductory letter to the immigration office. I said, I have never done this before. He said, if you do not help me, it will be a very big problem for me because I am going to lose my job. I wrote for him a letter and in two days, he got a passport. 

When I got my first ordinary passport, I went through the main system of going through the RDC’s office and the LC I of my village. However, people have started using shortcuts of using technical know who. What if I was not in Parliament? Was my uncle going to get - (Interruption)

MR ANGURA: Thank you very much, my sister, for giving way. The information I would like to give from the border is that a passport is a very sensitive document that our people need to enable them to trade. A few months ago, we had a challenge with the yellow fever cards and that disturbed us so much. The people at the border were forced to buy these cards at exorbitant prices. To acquire a yellow fever card, one would part with Shs 500,000. 

Therefore, it means that with the passports that are being restricted and with the many agencies that are recruiting, we will acquire passports under the guise of belonging to the groups that have been designated at about Shs 1 million. This will lead to corruption and many other aspects. 

Therefore, I would like to beg the minister, in the meantime, to release these passports for every category. You need 700 passports per week. Multiply that by the remaining weeks up to December so that people get these passports and the country continues to run. I thank you very much. 

6.46
MR HAMSON OBUA (NRM, Ajuri County, Alebtong): I thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to start on a point of clarification about this topic of passports. May I seek clarification from the honourable minister as to why Members of Parliament, who are number 17 in the protocol of the Government of the Republic of Uganda, are not entitled to diplomatic passports and yet spouses of ministers, cultural and traditional leaders, ambassadors, heads of Government institutions like universities are among the people who get diplomatic passports?

Secondly, Madam Speaker, we may beg to differ in opinion but allow me to salute hon. Gen. Jeje Odongo for telling us the truth and admitting the fact that this country has run short of passports. He had the option of lying to this temple of legislation, like other ministers do, by saying, “We have the passports, these are rumours, everything is under control, we are in charge.” He has stated the truth. If we are crucifying him as a Parliament, let us crucify him while knowing that he has conceded and stated the truth.

Madam Speaker, I did some due diligence about this issue of passports. I have found about three pieces of information that tally with what I had researched on. One is the question of the consumption rate of passports by Ugandan citizens. On a daily basis, my statistics indicate about 600 passports but the minister has indicated 700. That is factual. I had done due diligence and I was waiting for him to say something contrary to that.

On the question of graduating from ordinary to e-passports, he has provided information, even within the region. I am aware that Kenya and Rwanda are already on the path but the deadline has been extended to December and that is part of the challenge that we are facing.

Thirdly, this Parliament must help the minister. This issue is about bureaucracy in our public sector management. The question of no service contract for e-passports for the service provider must be fast tracked because that is where we are heading. I also find that factual regarding what I had researched. 

Honourable minister, if you are going to be crucified, I must salute you because you will be crucified for telling us the truth. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think I reported when we came back that once a child is born in the UAE, there are three things that are issued: a birth certificate, a national identity card and a passport. It is automatic. 

6.50
MR DESALES OKELLO (NRM, Kole North County, Kole): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for exposing the problem in his ministry. One of our colleagues who is a General once said, if you see a General running, you should just start running without asking why they are running. The problem is not only limited to passports. 

Madam Speaker, I sit on the Committee on Foreign Affairs. When we went to Egypt, the foreign service officer there said, it is very difficult for them to get visa forms from the ministry. When they come here, they go to the ministry and are tossed around for two weeks. Even if their time for going back elapses, they have to remain at their own cost to get the visa forms from the ministry. 

I know that as a country, we have set records in extending deadlines. We started with digital migration; it took us very many years to migrate. We moved to national identity cards and it took us decades. We came to SIM card registration, which is going on forever. Today, we are faced with the challenge of passports. 

I think that the minister should take control of his ministry. We have always seen your junior minister coming here but now that you are present as Gen. Jeje –(Interruption) 

MR MULINDWA: Thank you, my brother, for giving way. I am a procurement professional and the information I would like to give you is that the minister already knows the number of passports required per day, which is 700. In procurement planning and according to the Public Finance Management Act and the PPDA Act, a procurement person of the ministry must have the plan properly outlined. This is not an emergency where we have a natural disaster. It is all about competence. The person in the planning section must plan accordingly. That is the information I would like to give you.         

MR DESALES OKELLO: Madam Speaker, the General should know that issues concerning passports are very serious and we will not allow this to continue. Tomorrow, I will come with my family for passports and you should be able to provide us with them. Your failure to plan in your ministry should not cause an emergency on our side, as a country. Thank you.

6.53
MR RICHARD GAFABUSA (NRM, Bwamba County, Bundibugyo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I used to have a lot of respect for soldiers for being very organised and strategic. However, today I am disappointed with our Minister, Gen. Jeje Odongo, because on Monday this week, I was forced to go to the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development to secure a list of licenced companies that take our people abroad for jobs. 

I have a lot of pressure from my people in the constituency who want to go and secure jobs abroad. I am actually taking this list to my constituency tomorrow or on Friday and I am sure hundreds of them would like to come and visit these companies. The next step will be looking for passports.

Moreover, from the minister’s statement, that category of people who are looking for employment abroad is not provided for among those who will get passports. What should we tell them? Someone who gets a chance of acquiring a job abroad is limited because there are no passports. The minister also informed us in his statement that one of the challenges of migration from the current one to the digital one is the procurement of the machinery for the e-passports. He is not sure. Yes, I heard it. 

From experience, every system we go adopt in this country is delayed by procurement or inefficiency. As we talk, even some local governments are still struggling with the IMFS system after a long time. Therefore, how sure are we that this time migration from this one to the e-passport is going to be very smooth? (Interruption)

MR MUKITALE: Thank you, honourable member, for giving way. Madam Speaker, I would like to inform the House that the Public Accounts Committee has just come from Asia and discovered that we have prisoners in China with Ugandan passports, yet they are not citizens of Uganda. They include Nigerians as well as nationals from other countries in possession of Ugandan passports and they have used them for wrong things. There are also people in possession of our diplomatic passports.

The information I am giving is to the effect that two years ago, when we were desperately looking for money for the national identification cards, we agreed that since the botched German technology had not worked, we would, when getting money for the national Ids, integrate the e-passports with the national Ids. I am, therefore, surprised that two years after, we are talking of a procurement delay. If we do not give these passports only to citizens, then we have a bigger problem. 

I would like the minister to confirm this; are you procuring e-passport technology, which reads the national Id so that you synchronise and can only get a passport when you have a national Id? 

MR GAFABUSA: Thank you for the information. Although there are categories provided for like the minister said, for instance, people who want to seek medical attention abroad, the problem is that they will not know who is going to fall sick and therefore require to go abroad. Some of the sicknesses may be abrupt and urgent; someone may get an attack today and in hours, they need to be taken abroad for medical attention. The minister has not guaranteed to us that in that case, his ministry will be able to process that passport in those hours that one needs to be taken abroad for treatment. 

Finally, I envisage a lot of corruption that is going to take place at the passport office because the minister is not going to sit there and verify the categories he has identified. He is not going to sit there and confirm whether a particular person is going on Government business or medical attention. That means the people in the passport office are going to use that situation to deny even those genuine cases that will need a passport and begin extorting money from desperate people, who want to travel or use the passport. 

In conclusion, Madam Speaker, I suggest that the minister stops this here and assumes that they had not even thought of it. After all, the cost of these passports is borne by Ugandans and they are people who want them and not Government. In fact, if you –(Member timed out.)

6.59
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Ms Winfred Kiiza): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank the minister for bringing the statement, although in a way, as he was trying to report, you realise that he is also not sure of the statement he is making because midway, he makes contradictions in his own statement. 

In his statement, he begins by saying they wanted to migrate from the machine readable passports to have them replaced with the e-passport, which is okay. However, under bullet 2, he says that they, therefore, wanted to make reasonable quantities to avoid loss. 

Again, when you go to bullet 5, he says that they are mitigating the likely effect by taking necessary steps to ensure that the required stock levels are replenished; and he has already told you that the quantities required on a daily basis are from 450 to 700 and that actually, there is an increase in the demand for passports.

When we compute the amount of money that we have lost even when we think we are trying to avoid loss in as far as the current situation is concerned - for example, let us take the lower limit of 450 passports applied for and possibly supplied in a day times the Shs 150,000. If you add the Shs. 2,000, which is also an income to us, and you multiply by the 30 days in a month, you find that we have lost close to Shs 2 billion in a month. If you took the upper limit that he talked about of 700, we are losing Shs 3.2 billion in a month, as a country. 

This is money that we are losing as a country and if this was a personal business to the General, I am sure he would not have allowed this to happen because he knows that this is a lot of money and the demand is high anyway. It is not that we are lacking people to take the passports. 

Madam Speaker, when you read the statement of the minister, you realise that he has created a crisis in the ministry and opening it for abuse. This alone is susceptible to corrupt officials to use for purposes of fleecing money from Ugandans. When Ugandans know there is a shortage and there are few categories of people who can only acquire passports, they will use all available means, including corruption, to get passports. 

Possibly, through the same system, you will find them dealing with the people that hon. Mukitale talked about. These people with Ugandan passports are even reported in the Arab Emirates. They have Ugandan passports but when you ask them their Ugandan origin, they do not even know any village in Uganda. They do not know the Kabaka, the Kyabazinga or the Omusinga and they call themselves Ugandans. Then you wonder what calibre of Ugandans they are. 

Madam Speaker, as we conclude this matter, we request that the Ugandans deserve better. Can our dear brother and colleague just withdraw this statement because it is misleading and calls the country to even possibly use all available means, including corruption, to get passports. 

It is also a statement that shows that his department is incompetent because they are not just waking up to a migration from the readable passports to an e-passport. This is something they were prepared for and if they were ready for the e-passports by April - we are almost coming to the end of June and we are only lucky that the dates have been moved ahead. We should have migrated already from the readable passports to the e-passports and, therefore, there would even be no crisis. 

Therefore, can you fine-tune your department? Can you ensure that Uganda gets money? This is money that is even in the budget. If they used these figures to compute the revenue that is supposed to accrue from the procurement of passports by Ugandans – the country is losing money. So, General, kindly and humbly go and bring the passports, ensure that Ugandans get them so that the country gets money. Otherwise, you are causing a financial loss to the country. I beg to submit.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, other than one member of this House, no one supports your proposals. (Laughter) They are financially unviable and unattractive, but also they are an infringement on the rights of the people of Uganda. We do not know when you will be able to get the passports – it means that you are closing off the rest of those that are not in those categories from going anywhere. They can go to school, they cannot go to work and they cannot go to visit and cannot do anything. You had better come up with a solution. This one – uhmm – sorry, I am speaking Lusoga (Laughter)

7.06
THE MINISTER OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Gen. Jeje Odongo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank my colleagues for the responses, opinions and concerns they have raised. I have listened to 24 colleagues in the course of this afternoon in response to my statement.

I have basically picked three important areas.

    i) Gen. Jeje is a swerve liar –(Interjections)- He is a liar
    ii) That there is no element of planning and, therefore, this has caused this crisis.
    iii)  That there is incompetence  

Those are three points I have picked. I would like to say this: One, I could have really decided to keep quiet and you would have not known about this, but I wanted to share with you and be honest, that there is something that is coming out.

Two, it is not correct to say that there are no passports. I am saying that the levels are low, that is all I am saying –(Interjections) - you spoke and I listened. Can I also speak? Could you please listen to me also? I have not said that there are no passports. I am simply saying that the the stocks for the ordinary passport are lower than our expectations. I am raising this on the understanding that since we went into this ministry, we insisted that every Ugandan that applies for a passport should get it within three days. We have not yet achieved that but we are improving. I wanted you to know that this is only temporary as I said.

When we recognised that we were supposed to migrate to the e-passport, and on the basis of our calculation, if that had been achieved, the level of passports we had stocked, 150,000 per year, were going to be enough. Unfortunately, that period shifted. The quantities we had stocked were beginning to run low, that is what I am saying.

Interestingly, we expect a new stock of ordinary passports to arrive in this country within a month. However, I wanted you to know that there is this temporary problem.

THE SPEAKER: You should have told us that earlier.

GEN.ODONGO: I said that in paragraph five that procedures are being put in place. You asked me the time we expect to receive new passports? I am now telling you that the Attorney-General has cleared a new agreement for delivery of new passports and we expect them within a month.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, if you had told us that before, we would not be debating. You should have pointed out that in one month, I will replenish.

MR MACHO: Madam Speaker, with all the information given from the minister’s circular, is the minister in order to smuggle in new information into his statement and waste time of this august House? We would have not wasted that time debating. Is the minister in order?

THE SPEAKER: If we had that information, we would have acknowledged it and gone home. I would have allowed you to go and break your fast. Is there anything else you would like us to hear, honourable minister?

GEN. ODONGO: In paragraph five of the statement, I had said that there are measures being taken to mitigate. It is unfortunate and I apologise that I did not go specific but this is the fact. As I said, there are measures being taken. I am, therefore, amplified to say that within a month, as a result of this mitigation measures, we should have re-stocked our ordinary passports.

MR KATUSHABE: Madam Speaker, this is in the interest of our country. It is extremely disturbing and I have seen this coming a lot from the Front Bench. Madam Speaker, I think it is critical that we explore the possibility of not allowing stories on this Floor, especially coming from the Front Bench.

Every intervention must have three clusters; short term what we call immediate term, number two the medium term, and then the long term. This is a crisis, Mr Minister. What is it that we have in the immediate term? Are we proceeding well, Madam Speaker? If we allow the minister to continue with his stories yet the country wants immediate measures of interventions -

There is a problem, what is the ministry planning to save the situation? What are the immediate terms? Do not talk about the medium measures; we would like you to talk about the immediate interventions. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think he has said that within one month – by the 21 July 2017 he would have the passports here. That is what he is saying, is it not so? That becomes Government assurance. Please note it down in the Committee of Government Assurance that is what the Minister of Internal Affairs has said. Please complete your statement.

GEN. ODONGO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Finally, colleagues have raised the question of non-Ugandans holding Ugandan passports. They have also raised the question of loss of revenue. Let me say this; it is true that indeed Uganda passports are being held by non-Ugandans. These have been issued erroneously or deliberately as a result of corruption. You will recollect – I think in March, there was a matter that was raised in relation with the immigration department. The question was asked to the Prime Minister. I was supposed to respond but I have not responded because I am investigating those issues that colleagues raised on matters of corruption in as a far as revenue collection and usage is concerned, as well as matters of corruption in relation to the issue of these passports. 

I promise that I will eventually come with a statement when I have done sufficient investigations, and I am satisfied that I will be responding to the questions asked rather than giving you window dressing responses.

I reject, in the final analysis, the accusations of being a liar, the accusations of being incompetent and the accusations of not planning. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, you did not touch on the issue of diplomatic passports. Who has a right to a diplomatic passport?

GEN. ODONGO: Hon. Obua raised the question of why Members of Parliament are not entitled to diplomatic passports yet other categories of people are. There is a law that indicates categories of people who are entitled to the diplomatic passports. However, if we are not satisfied, it is within our right and purview to review that law and I will be very happy indeed – (Interruption)

MR MPUUGA: Madam Speaker, it is very simple. The honourable minister should come clean. This is Parliament and Parliament makes these laws. Quote the law. We travel and meet permanent secretaries and under-secretaries who have diplomatic passports but Members of Parliament do not have. Which law is that, honourable minister? (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we are infringing on the rights of the Muslim community. They should be breaking their fast now. 

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, I have not spoken today, apart from raising a point of order to Gen. Ali. (Laughter) 

Madam Speaker, if the law or criterion is there, the most important thing – following from what hon. Obua has said – is that it is not being followed. This is because you will find people who do not fall under that category of diplomatic passports having those passports. 

I was shocked at one point at the airport when Aya – this man who caused a problem – could have a diplomatic passport of Uganda. Under what category does he fall? 

Secondly, we have seen some pastors with those passports. Under what category do we put the pastors? They do not fall under the category of people who are entitled to the diplomatic passports that is known to us. I think you need to deal with those or make us know under what circumstances they are having the diplomatic passports. 

I know that the children of the first family are entitled but I have travelled with the children of some ministers here who also have the diplomatic passports. Under what circumstances do those get these passports? That is what you need to clarify to us. The law is there but you are not strict on following the law. 

The other contradiction is that according to the hierarchy which is given under who is a VIP and who is not; you find those at the lower ranks of that VIP list such as numbers 40 or 50 having the diplomatic passport while those at numbers 10 do not have diplomatic passports. That is what you need to explain. Under what circumstances do they get the passports?

THE SPEAKER: Are you explaining or will you bring an amendment?

GEN. ODONGO: Madam Speaker, on the matter of diplomatic passports, as I said, I am guided by the regulation which is in place. I would like to share it with you if you so wish and you will advise me accordingly. I am available.

THE SPEAKER: Okay. Honourable members, the House is adjourned to tomorrow at 2.00 p.m. Thank you very much.

(The House rose at 7.19 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 22 June 2017 at 2.00 p.m.) 
