Wednesday, 26 June 2013

Parliament met at 2.58 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this afternoon’s sitting. I do not have much to communicate but just to say that we have started slightly late. However, we will try to work very fast and ensure that all the items on the agenda for today are handled. Thank you very much.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE DISAGREEMENTS BETWEEN THE BUSINESS COMMUNITY AND THE MINISTRY OF TRADE AND INDUSTRY ON THE PRE-IMPORT VERIFICATION OF CONFORMITY TO STANDARDS PROGRAMME (PIVOC)

3.02
THE MINISTER OF TRADE, INDUSTRY AND COOPERATIVES (Ms Amelia Kyambadde): Madam Speaker –(Interruption)

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: Madam Speaker, on a matter of great importance like the one, which is going to be presented by the hon. Minister of Trade, I am seeking your guidance. How can she begin talking about a matter as important as it is in the absence of a written statement as dictated by the Rules of Procedure?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I understand the copies are being run but you know this statement is coming because of your agitation. I know that yesterday, you wanted to discuss without a statement. Why don’t we listen as we receive the copies - because you wanted it to be discussed today! I would appeal to you to listen and receive the copies later. Clerk, please, hurry up but the minister should present the statement.

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: Most obliged, Madam Speaker.

MRS KYAMBADDE: Madam Speaker, as you are all aware, the country has been experiencing a strike by members of our trading community concerning Government’s efforts to eliminate substandard products from our markets and the country. This strike has happened in spite of our numerous and persistent efforts over the last six months, after I had suspended the programme to enable the business community to fully appreciate the importance of ensuring the safety of the lives of all Ugandans.

During the six months period, we have been engaging with all the key stakeholders including Uganda Manufacturers Association, Private Sector Foundation, KACITA and Chamber of Commerce in a committee, which I established to iron out outstanding issues that might not have been clarified regarding the problem.

Madam Speaker, allow me to emphasise the dangers of substandard goods. There is a public outcry over the quality and safety of products on the Ugandan market. Substandard goods have a huge impact on the health and safety of Ugandan consumers. There have been incidents of fires in schools and homes, collapsing buildings and increased cases of cancer from radiation as a result of consuming substandard goods.

The industrialisation programme is being threatened by the influx of fake, shoddy and substandard goods that continue to come into the country. Local manufacturers and investors are worried about the loss in business and jobs since they are required to produce quality products, and yet they have to compete with cheap substandard goods. 

Our regional partners are also concerned about the level of re-exportation of substandard goods into their countries from Uganda. Investors that include manufacturers as well as importers of genuine products have been complaining in different fora, including the Presidential Investments Forum, about counterfeit and substandard goods being imported into the country and crippling their businesses.

The Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives has also been receiving concerns from various sectors of the community including one from ISO Coordination Office, Prime Minister’s Office and among others, His Excellency, the President who tasked the PM’s office to devise ways of addressing issues of counterfeits and substandard goods.

We are all fully aware that substandard goods have been an issue for discussion in this august House. Government has a duty of protecting its citizens from dangerous and harmful products entering the market place.

According to UNBS Act Section 21, “No person shall import, distribute, manufacture, sell or have in his possession or control for sale or distribution, any commodity for which a compulsory standards specification has been declared unless such commodity conforms to the compulsory standards specification.”

What is this monster PIVOC? Madam Speaker, that is on page four. PIVOC is an inspection and verification procedure applied to specific goods that affect public health, safety and the environment. The inspection is undertaken before shipment of targeted goods into the country to ensure compliance with the applicable national standards.

This programme should not be confused with the previous government programme of Pre-Shipment Inspection (PSI) which was inspection for purposes of tax assessment and was abolished worldwide. This is different; PIVOC is different from PSI.

The Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives through UNBS is taking measures to address the quality of imported goods through this programme. This programme requires that all goods falling under Uganda Compulsory Standards are inspected in the country of origin by Government of Uganda’s contracted international inspection agents. These are goods that endanger the public health safety and the environment.

To state the background to this PIVOC, there have been a number of distortions in the media and the public. In 2007, UNBS developed a concept note to introduce PIVOC that would help the country control substandard imported goods. In June 2008, Cabinet approved the programme under Cabinet decision Minute 54 of 2008. After the approval, a procurement process was undertaken to obtain service providers using an open international bidding method. This was advertised in The New Vision newspaper on 6 October 2008.

The programme for used motor vehicles was separated from general goods because of the uniqueness in terms of operations and sources of the product. The programme for vehicles commenced in September 2009, while that of the general goods commenced in June 2010.

PIVOC then halted for comprehensive review following concerns raised by the traders on the increased cost of doing business. During the review consultations with the business community and consumers were carried out. In addition, the Ministry of Trade organised a study tour for MPs to familiarise themselves with the programme. The countries visited where PIVOC was being implemented included China, Japan, the United Arab Emirates and Kenya.

In May 2012, there was a renegotiation with the service providers – 

THE SPEAKER: I will instruct the Clerk to Parliament to produce more copies of that page. You just listen. Yes, hon. Ken-Lukyamuzi, I know that pages 6, 7 and 8 are missing in some of your copies, but as I have said, I will instruct the Clerk to Parliament to produce them. Minister, please proceed.

MRS KYAMBADDE: In May 2012, there was a renegotiation with the service providers on the terms of the contract including the reduction of the inspection fees. For example, the maximum fee was reduced from $ 7,000 to $ 2,375 and the minimum from $ 250 to $ 235.

The objective of the programme is to protect the public against substandard products that can endanger public health safety and the environment. Substandard goods cause diseases, loss of lives, road accidents, unexplained fire outbreaks that we have experienced in all the schools that have been using substandard electrical wires, and collapsing buildings recently because of the substandard iron bars.

The others are: to increase the confidence of consumers on the quality of imported goods on the domestic market and to promote a quality culture in our country, which is supposed to the Pearl of Africa; prohibit the entry, into the country, of substandard and counterfeit products; protect the local manufacturers against unfair competition from imported products, which do not comply to national standards; establish quality import inspection regime that is in harmony with that of the member states of the East African Community; and reduce on clearance of imported goods at the entry points in Uganda.

The inspection agencies for the general goods are three: SGS, Intertek International and Bureau Veritas and as far as used  cars are concerned, Japan Export Vehicle Inspection Centre, Jabal Kilimanjaro Auto Mechanic, East Africa Auto Mobile Services located in Japan and UAE.

How was this scheme reintroduced?

Madam Speaker, in August 2012, the Parliament Sessional Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry recommended to Parliament that Government lifts the ban on PIVOC. This recommendation was adopted under UNBS Vote 154, which was approved. Thereafter, the ministry wrote to Cabinet to seek clearance for the reintroduction of the programme. This was approved under Cabinet Minute 339 of 2012.

My ministry continued to receive complaints from KACITA and other traders on the operations of the programme, and more specifically the issue of small volume traders, grouped cargo and the affordability of the cost involved. Therefore, I suspended this programme on 19 December 2012 to allow for further review, consultation and sensitisation.
 
I instituted a committee comprising of KACITA members, representatives from the Uganda Chamber of Commerce, manufacturers, Ministry of Trade and the Private Sector Foundation. But the omission was on the consumers who were not included yet I should have done that.

The committee has in the past months addressed most of the issues. Although there are still minor areas of contention, all parties agreed that PIVOC is welcome to combating substandard imports in Uganda. But we have been dialoguing on the areas of  contention in which I advised our traders that we would talk to our service providers whom we have instructed to come in on 1st to be able to resolve the charges, that I also feel could be slightly higher.

Current agitation by KACITA

Madam Speaker, the ministry held two meetings with KACITA representatives on 20 June 2013, that was last week and a follow up meeting on Monday, 24 June 2013. In those meetings, KACITA made the following proposals:
    1. A standardised flat fee of $ 250 and $ 150 for inspection for a 40ft and 20ft container respectively as compared to the current inspection fee based on FOB.
    2. The other proposal was a four percent CIF penalty as compared to 15 percent CIF penalty.

    3. The programme be halted for three months as they review the contract and that during that time KACITA would fully participate in the sensitisation of its members.

    4. That they were willing to pay the inspection fees as outlined in their proposal, but were opposed to presenting their invoices to the service providers as a basis for inspection fees.

The meeting reviewed the proposals in light of the objectives of the programme and the general outcry from the industry and consumers, and we concluded as follows:
    • The ministry is committed to open dialogue in resolving all outstanding issues and requested KACITA to allow the programme to continue so such issues are addressed.
    • The ministry agreed to convene a meeting on 1st with the service providers for a further review of the charges, which we also felt needed to be reviewed because they are a bit on the high side.
    • We jointly and aggressively resolved to work together on continued sensitisation of all stakeholders including traders and consumers.
    • A review process by the stakeholders should be undertaken every three months and if we realise there are problems, we should be able to address them.
    • We also agreed that the ministry ensures that Anti-Counterfeit Goods Bill is discussed and passed by Parliament and extra measures against substandard goods so that at the end of three years – the contract of these service providers is three – we are able to empower our UNBS team and ourselves for us to be self-reliant.

What are the misconceptions about PIVOC? Madam Speaker, the misconceptions are tax versus charge. As seen in the media, people are saying there is a tax. The PIVOC charges are not a tax as portrayed by the traders but is a professional fee for inspection. Taxes are passed and approved by Parliament and the Ministry of Finance. So, these are charges. 

Madam Speaker, another one is administrative costs versus commission. The PIVOC agreement provides for administrative costs to cater for monitoring and auditing of the programme by UNBS and is not a commission paid to UNBS. Please, note that under the World Trade Organisation technical barriers to trade agreement, PIVOC is not supposed to be a profit-making activity. 

Who pays the inspection fees? 
The safety and quality of the product is the responsibility of the exporter. Therefore, the exporter pays the inspection fees. Ultimately, it is the consumer who pays – (Interjections) – so, it should have been the consumer to complain and not the traders. 

The other misconception is, why doesn’t Government pay for the programme? This is a question KACITA has been asking us a number of times. There have been allegations that Government has paid the service providers of this programme to the tune of $30 million. This is a false allegation. This is a private sector led economy and, therefore, the business community is supposed to pay. And in this case, the exporter is supposed to pay for the cost or bills associated with his goods. 

Madam Speaker, the other issue has been the cost of doing business. The interest fees are based on a percentage of FOB price with a minimum of $235 and a maximum of $2,375. This will ensure quality goods are imported. The cost involved is much lower than what a trader would pay if the goods were to be inspected at the Uganda entry points. I have a dossier of Ugandans who imported substandard goods into the country, which were later destroyed. 

A number of traders have come to me to allow their goods enter into the market. But they are substandard goods and we have rejected them. So, think about that cost against the $235. If you are paying that much – imagine you have brought the goods all the way, and you lose them because they are substandard. Who is meeting that cost? 

The trader would be safe from the cost of demurrage because when you bring goods here, there is demurrage and those attached to destruction of goods that do not meet the standard. The cost should be further compared to health costs and at times, death resulting from consumption of imported substandard goods. 

I would like to state the comparative cost of PIVOC in the East African Community. In Uganda, the AFBC is 0.5 percent, the minimum is $235, and the maximum is $2,375. Tanzania is the highest at 0.53 percent and $250, where we were before, but we negotiated lower, but we can negotiate even lower. And imagine, maximum is $7,000; Kenya 0.5 percent, like us. Minimum is $220 and maximum $2,375 and they are very comfortable with those costs. 

Madam Speaker, the position of Government on groupage cargo – the reason I went ahead and halted that scheme for six months is because I realised that we have not catered for the groupage cargo. So, during that period, we addressed the groupage cargo accordingly. This is consolidated cargo in small volumes and different importers. 

This programme has recognised the challenge of inspection of this kind of cargo and agreed to inspect cargo from PIVOC for the time being. So, we allow them to have their goods inspected on entry. Groupage cargo has been allowed to have their goods inspected on entry except for food, cosmetics and electrical goods. So, we should allow them to do that until we find a better mechanism, because we realise that there are many traders with goods in one container and the goods are different. So, we allow them to bring them up to the entry point. 

On sensitisation of stakeholders - what we have done and how we will continue doing that. What has emerged is that we admit we have not done sufficient sensitisation; that is an admission. But it will continue to be undertaken with all the stakeholders; consumers, the business community and my brothers and sisters the honourable members Parliament in order to further this programme. 

A PIVOC desk has been set up at UNBS to resolve outstanding issues on the programme. A toll-free telephone (0800133133) has been set up for this purpose. 

The other complaint is the list of high risk products. We must admit that our list was too long. There was no way we could implement that long list. So, we went back and reviewed and decided to start with a few items that are high risk products. The list of products has been reviewed to allow the business community to appreciate and familiarise themselves with the programme. 

The product groups that are being inspected effective from 1st June are food products. I have a tin of Cerelac –(Interjections)– I lay it on the Table –(Laughter)– food and food products, electrical and electronic products, cosmetics and mosquito nets. There are times when all of you have entered into a mosquito net and you feel as if you are suffocating. Have you had that feeling – (The minister displays all mentioned products) Mind you, they are toxic! Mind you, you are inhaling poison – (Interjections) – toys use motor vehicles radiation –(Interjections)– Madam Speaker, please, protect me – 

THE SPEAKER:  Order, honourable members. Please, listen to the minister. 

MRS KYAMBADDE: Protect me, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Order, honourable members. You wanted the statement, the minister has brought it. Please, listen. They are just being displayed, they are not being laid, she will explain.

MRS KYAMBADDE: Madam Speaker, used motor vehicles, I have been laying emphasis on this because we are in danger. Look at the carnage on the roads; any little impact and the car is squeezed like a paper ball because it is fully radiated. We are subjecting our children to these cars. Recently, in Mulago, Thyroid Cancer is very common; it is a result of radiation. We have no factories that remit radiation from the accident in Japan.

You the elites, you buy toys for your children but these are the most dangerous products because they are made from dangerous and toxic products: the kids eat, they sleep with them and what you are doing is killing your second generation. All other goods will be subject to destination inspection after being permitted entry into the Ugandan market.

I appeal to you that this scheme continues and as it continues we will be able to detect the gaps that are in that scheme, and we agreed that every three months we will be able to review all those gaps.

If we find that it is not working, we close it off. The current capacity of UNBS is inadequate and not commensurate with its mandate. Government is not yet in position to provide the requisite resources and hence the need for innovative ways such as public/private partnership for inspection of imports.
 
Other measures and strategies such as certification of locally produced products are being prioritised. 

Goods exempted from PIVOC

Goods whose FOB value does not exceed $2,000 are exempted. Prohibited goods according to East African Customs Management Act; others in East African standard quality assurance, metrology and testing are exempted.

Good projects specific goods. We are sure that they will not be able to import substandard goods. Industry raw materials are exempted, drugs and pharmaceuticals, those are through NDA, personal effects you can bring them in, you do not have to subject them to this.

Goods that are not covered by compulsory standards are: goods that bear the Uganda standard certificate mark; goods originating from the East African Community region.

The war of eliminating substandard goods is a fight for the health and safety of all Ugandans. Uganda is part of East African Community and you must ensure that Uganda is not a dumping ground for substandard goods. We the consumers pay the ultimate price for the substandard goods. Therefore, it is not true that is the importers. It is the duty of Government to ensure that citizens are protected and to enable the society to have healthy and productive citizens.

Regulating and enforcing standards, therefore, is a cardinal and a responsibility we cannot shy away from or be blackmailed to abandoning. This is a cardinal duty for which we must stand together as a country, a region, as leaders and as MPs.

Regulating and enforcing standards is a statutory duty of UNBS. The UNBS has continued to operate under budget deficit; it suffered a budget cut of 10 percent. Therefore, it is critical that UNBS be fully supported to enable it perform its statutory duties. It is our conviction that a strengthened UNBS will be able to undertake all inspection and verifications without resorting to foreign firms. We are resorting to foreign firms because we are desperate at our country which is Pearl of Africa; which is a food basket. It has become a dumping ground for sub-standards! My brothers and sisters, do you allow this? 

It is our prayer that by the end of this contract, UNBS will handle all inspections. Any efforts to derail this programme will have enormous financial, economic and health consequences in our country.

Without a delay, I implore that the scheme could be fully supported and operationalised. Our doors are open so we pledge to review it every three months for effectiveness.

We pledge to address these concerns with the service providers. We appeal to this nation, we appeal to the business community not to extend the suffering to the people. Let us come back discuss and resolve this problem so that we curb and fight the substandard goods off the market. I say all this for God and My Country.

But before I leave, allow me to explain, I think all of us are aware of this facility. These are sanitary pads, do you know the purpose? Women are suffering from some of these substandard goods. They develop a lot of complications, discharge, eruptions of all sorts. You might accuse them thinking that they have been somewhere else but it is this.

We have shoe polish here. Look at this - shoe polish. Proper shoe polish should not be like this but you go to the shop and buy it in this form. (Interjections) And this is brand new from a shop but you know there is a note at the bottom of the list that, “Goods once sold are not returned.” So, you have spent money on this and it will not go back. 

Cerelac - most of you are mothers or you are grandparents. This Cerelac has been on the market and has no expiry date. They tested this product and they found a lot of poisonous toxins. This is very dangerous for your babies - 

THE SPEAKER: Point of Procedure.

MR WAFULA OGUTTU: I thank you very much, Madam Speaker and thank you very much honourable minister for giving way. We have a lot of goods that you are displaying here. I am not sure whether you are laying them on Table but if you are, please, read the name, the item, the manufacturer and where it comes from so that it is on record.

MRS KYAMBADDE: I thank you very much. Madam Speaker, I wish to lay on Table some of these products. There is this Cerelac but it does not even indicate where it is coming from. It has got Arabic, English and all that. I wish to lay it on Table. Sanitary towels, I lay on Table. These are pampers for your baby. [Hon. Members: “From where?”] But they avoid it. You just see Arabic letters and cannot even see where it is manufactured. These pampers for your baby are counterfeit. Your babies will develop rash and all sorts of things and for especially boys, it destroys their systems so be aware. These tiles look very beautiful and we buy them on the market but within a month or two, they would have cracked. I wish to lay them on Table.

These are shoes and can you imagine that people from Congo buy and take them. We are known as a den of substandard goods. They sell them on their market and within a day, they have gone to this level. All these are shoes and I wish to lay them on Table. There are too many goods and I pray that – (Interjections) - the flask; it is beautiful but if you put in hot stuff, it will not last. Within 15 minutes, it is cold and on top of that, it cracks. Is it what we want on our market? The electricals; we have been suffering from the electricals. Can you see what kind of cables these are? We all know - we are all scientists – at least we know, basically, that they should be three wires but look at this, where some are half wires. So, really, is this what we want on the market? The list is endless.

How many of you have bought about four irons in two months? [Hon. Members: “In one week.”] In one week? This iron within a day the thermostat is gone; the flat part is gone and burnt. Why are we subjecting our children and ourselves to this kind of environment! The list is endless and I will not be able to finish all this.

So, I wish to lay all these goods on Table. I want to show you another one – how can you have only two wires and they are so thin? Really! [Hon. Member: “Where did you get them from?”] They do not even show where they are made from. So, Madam Speaker, I do agree that some of the costs are high. I do agree that we will renegotiate some of these costs with the service providers when they come in. I seek the support of this august House. I wish to state this. For God and My Country. I wish to lay my statement on Table.

THE SPEAKER: I thank you very much, Minister for Trade and your team for the speed and efficiency with which you have responded to our directive. No. She has come, as we agreed. I wanted to say something; one, she said that it was limited duration and application but I want to remind the Members that this very House enacted a law to increase support to the Uganda National Bureau of Standards to do this job but most importantly, we took a decision as a House. Our committee, according to this report, brought the recommendation here and it was adopted by this House and the minister took it to Cabinet.

So, as you contribute, we are part of this. Yes. Since we debated when we were doing the budget, I think we shall just have limited – because we debated it in the – You have a motion? I do not say what he wants to say.

MR TIM LWANGA: Madam Speaker, I have listened very carefully for the last one and a half hours and everything that has been said is factually evidenced by what has been laid on Table.

So, in view of that, I beg to move that we adopt the report without debate. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Kwagala, two minutes, please.

MS KABAALE: I thank you, Madam Speaker. I am rising on a procedural matter. Hon. Lwanga was moving a motion, which I know that maybe most of the honourable members would be in support of. But the procedure that I am seeking is that, the minister has fully presented the situation, which has happened and on-going in the country but at the end of her report, she did not put the prayers and on another note, the traders are still on strike. So, we seek that through a procedural matter, the minister should at least give us her prayer as a way forward because we also do not want the traders to keep the shops closed. Thank you, Madam Speaker.   

3.52
MR JOHN MULIMBA (NRM, Samia-Bugwe County North, Busia): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I think all of us are in support of this programme of pre-inspection of imports or verification for conformity but I speak as a Member of the Committee on Trade and Industry. We did handle this matter and we also interacted with stakeholders namely: KACITA, Uganda Revenue Authority, the Uganda National Chamber of Commerce and other stakeholders. The enforcement of standards does not take UNBS alone. It takes other agencies, among others, the Uganda Revenue Authority. 

When we interacted with the Uganda Revenue Authority, they expressed scepticism about enforcement of standards for conformity. We also did take a trip to South Africa and to Kenya, to benchmark and pick best practise. We made a report and our report was given to the minister. The whole programme design, as it were, did not contain all that was supposed to have been done. There were a few issues that need to be patched up but because of limited time, my concern is that yesterday, what led the minister to bring this statement is because of the impasse that now subsists between the traders and UNBS. 

Shops are closed, we are losing. If the programme does not go on, we are losing. But we can also evaluate the loss of their action. What will we lose, if we continue with the impasse? Shops are closed and if Government wants to implement the programme – I know that there are a few loopholes in the procedures, which I thought Government could have patched up before the reinforcement. I think that today, we should be thinking of what we can do in the circumstances, to solve the impasse and also ensure that the programme also runs, with all stakeholders on board. We have issues of capacity of UNBS and like I told you, Madam Speaker, URA expressed scepticism. 

I have seen most of these goods, which have been laid here; all of them I suppose have been picked from our market but at every entry point in Uganda, including at the airport, we have the presence of the UNBS. How did these items come onto the market? So, my concern is how we deal with the capacity of the UNBS in order to cope with other agencies in enforcement of standards because right now, URA has gone into tax collection. As we speak, I know out of the 65 border points, UNBS is only present at 17 – (Interruption)

MR KAKOOZA: Thank you, hon. Colleague, for giving way. That is a very critical point, Madam Speaker. Some countries have fought counterfeit products. For instance, in the US, they wait for imports from China at the point of entry because they have built the capacity of testing those goods entering into the American market. The moment you are at the point of entry, they test those goods and if they find that they are fake, they send them back to the country of origin. 

Borrow a leaf from a body like the National Drug Authority; they do not inspect the drugs from the country of origin but wait for them at the point of entry. They test those drugs from the Ministry of Health. The moment they find that those drugs are not good for consumption they are rejected. We are not saying that counterfeit goods are wanted in this country but we are saying, “Build the capacity of the people.” If I buy a vehicle from Germany, and you are going to inspect it when you do not have capacity to know whether the vehicle is genuine or not - Why do you add that charge of inspection for a foreign company and not build capacity yourself to create jobs within your country so that you can inspect and verify? 

THE SPEAKER: But, honourable members, I think let us be consistent. When we were debating the amendment to the UNBS Act, the minister told us that she wanted our very serious support, to ensure that she has people at all the border posts. She has only 17 and she wants support for that; now the money has been cut. I think we should support her to get to the money and we will get it for them. 

MR MULIMBA: Madam Speaker, having received this information, I want to concur with what you have said. It is the issue of capacity and that one touches the issue of the budget. We should really focus on that. My prayer is that we should have balance of circumstance because it is estimated by the Uganda Revenue Authority that each day, in terms of domestic taxes, with this kind of strike going on, we are losing about Shs 4.5 billion. How much are we losing in terms of revenue, if the programme is not running?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, before hon. Sebunya and hon. Ruhunda come in, I want to introduce Mr Gill Epash, a Senior Analyst in the Cabinet Office of the Government of Ontario in Canada. He has come with Mr Simon Mayende, Director, Information and National Guidance, Office of the Prime Minister. We welcome them. He is our former colleague. 

I also welcome students and teachers of St Noah, Kabulamuliro Mityana, represented by hon. Kiwanda and hon. Namabidde. You are welcome. (Applause)

3.58
MR ROBERT KASULE SEBUNYA (NRM, Kyadondo County North, Wakiso): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for a very good report. This is what they call situation analysis and he has been on the front of the problem we have been facing over the years. We can no longer afford to gloss over a big problem of dumping on the Ugandan market in the name of raising taxes. The same traders in the same Committee on Finance came and defended their business of manufacturing “buveera”. Up to today, there has not been any measure for us, which they promised three years ago. They promised that they were going to put measures not to allow us enter the “buveera” into the country. 

I am surprised even ministers supported “buveera” to be manufactured here in the name of business. Now, it seems we are haphazard citizens. They want us to put soldiers in the middle of Kampala and wait for Kony to enter and then you fight him off. We cannot allow substandard goods like threads in form of wires to come to Kampala and then put UNBS to fight them off. At the same time, well knowing the level of corruption in Uganda, that you wait for the garbage to come and then either allow or not allow - who can refuse $10,000 in front of him? I think very few people. 

So, Madam Speaker, if we made a decision, let it be laid on Table and we send this matter to a committee; they review it as far as what is happening in Uganda. If we made a mistake, we can change it. A small charge – and nobody has told us the amount of money that will be added on the cost of the wires or other items. Let us be shown the additional costs. If you fear that we are going to more expensive goods, show us the cost – by how much will the prices increase? Then we can debate and say, we cannot afford it because of the cost vis-à-vis the price. But for us to gloss over big issues – if we made a wrong decision, we can review it; we can talk to the traders so that instead of them bringing 20 tonnes, let them bring 10 so that we buy quality instead of quantity. 

4.00
MR ALEX RUHUNDA (NRM, Fort Portal Municipality, Kabarole): Thank you, Madam Speaker. It is very true, as evidenced on the Table, that some companies purposely manufacture substandard goods for the African market. I visited one of the radio manufacturing companies in China and when I asked about the prices, they showed me the price and quality for European markets. Then they said, “If you want to make money, take this type but it can only last three to six months.” This is a real fact and I felt very bad seeing Africans cheating each other to this level, by getting substandard goods for our own people and making money off them. This is more or less colonialism, extortion or slavery because fellow Africans are the ones encouraging this kind of practice. 

Just imagine how many people have died out of consuming these fake products. There are very many accidents we have experienced and it is high time that Government - I salute the minister for being very firm on this decision. The problem we have here is that whenever Government takes a stand on such matters, people rise up and then you make a U-turn. You have accepted to be intimidated; you are not leading and this is very dangerous. 

And this is why we want Government to be firm; we do not want to hear that now a politician is coming up to say, “Now, leave these things.” If these rules are attached, let us follow them because this bad behaviour is being encouraged by the way we handle our people; they do not want to follow the rules. 

Look at the traffic rules. When the Inspector-General of Police issued a new rule, I saw a cartoon showing the seatbelts gone to the dustbin. The speed governors are also in the dustbin and now the new one – (Member timed out_)

4.05
MR MAJEGERE WAIRA (NRM, Bunya County East, Mayuge): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister and commend her for this good work. As Uganda, we are really tired of these substandard goods and we lose a lot. I recently bought jump-starters – for people who have unreliable vehicles – and they could not work and yet they were very new. So, Government has the duty to protect Ugandans. But, Madam Speaker, we have a problem at hand. Traders are on strike. We need to have a win-win situation. (Interjections) Madam Speaker, I beg that you – 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, order, please. I know it is exciting but allow hon. Waira to speak.

MR WAIRA: We need to have a win-win situation so that Government is able to implement its policy and the traders – because people already have old stocks. We could give them a timeframe. We can even give them three or six months. After all, we have been with these things here. Let them sell off the old stock then as Government –(Member timed out_)

4.08
MR HENRY MUSASIZI (NRM, Rubanda County East, Kabale): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity. I would like to thank the honourable minister for the statement. The statement of fact is that we are shifting responsibility, which we would be performing ourselves, to the exporting countries. Why we are doing this is because UNBS does not have the capacity and as a result, the business community is complaining that they are being overcharged. 

So, what do we need to do? My question to the minister is one, are there any attempts that her ministry is making to ensure that in future, this responsibility is brought back to us, by enhancing and strengthening the capacity of UNBS?

Two, to what extent do we place reliability on these same exporters to control quality of our goods? These same counterfeits and sub standard products are coming from their countries. Now, what level of reliance can we put to control the quality of goods in our markets?

That is a matter we need to think about as we work out mechanisms of ensuring that we have quality goods. Also, we need to think about the risks involved in entrusting people from abroad with doing – (Interruption)

MR WADRI: Thank you very much, hon. Member, for giving way. The information I would like to give you is that, while we are looking to Government to strengthen the capacity of UNBS, it is the same Government, which in 2010 through a Cabinet decision decided to reduce the budget to 10 percent. Let Government go back to the drawing board and know what the priority is to this country so that we do not receive such instructions of a cut down because Parliament cannot cut down budgets. It is the Executive to do so through MTEF.

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: Madam Speaker, I thank the honourable member for giving way. The information I want to give him is as follows. Is he aware that Government of Uganda has signed and ratified a number of environment-related protocols, which should have been used and if operationalised, would have caused sanity by way of doing away with counterfeit goods? If so, what is Government doing about that catastrophe?

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Speaker, I would like to conclude this way. My Chairman of PAC has raised very important information. Hon. Minister, what we need is for you to reinstate the budget in order to strengthen UNBS to do its work –(Member timed out.)

4.11
MR FELIX OKOT OGONG (NRM, Dokolo County, Dokolo): Madam Speaker, as I said yesterday, this is a very serious problem that we are addressing and I said yesterday that as Members of Parliament, we are bound by the Constitution to make laws and policies for the good of our people. Therefore, what we are discussing today is to benefit the people we represent.

It has been declared and I hope Members are aware that Uganda has the highest rate of cancer in the whole world. It is on record and if you want, I can give you the information. You can also go to the Cancer Institute and find out from there. We must get to the root of this. What is causing cancer in this country?

It is clear, by the presentation of the minister today on the Floor, that we have fake products in our markets. Therefore, as Ugandans and as Members of Parliament, we should support the minister. Hon. Members of Parliament, yesterday, I told you that we are representing the poor, the consumers. If traders are on strike, then the consumers must also go on strike because what they are getting is not the right quality products that they should get. Traders are benefitting from the ignorance of consumers and, therefore, as Members of Parliament, we need to defend and protect them. (Interruption)

MR ODONGA OTTO: The information I am giving is, in Economics, a product either has an elastic demand or inelastic demand. If there is an additional levy on a flat iron, the shop owners can include the price on the final price they are selling to the consumers. So, actually, it should be us the consumers to strike and not even the traders. That is the information I wanted to give.

MR OKOT OGONG: Madam Speaker, I would like to give you some information. We have buildings in Kampala here, which you see coming up day after day and this is because of traders looting consumers. They buy cheap quality goods, come here and raise the prices thus gaining from that. Today, we want to get on to them and now they are on strike –(Member timed out.)

4.14
MR ALEX NDEEZI (NRM, PWD Representative): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I think it is important to confess that this has been one of the most convincing and dramatic ministerial statements ever to be presented in this august House. It comes with an impressive amount of articles being laid on Table as evidence. I place on record my appreciation to the minister and declare my full support in this important endeavour but I am worried.

We are coming back to the old system where we send thieves to catch thieves. On page 7, there is a list of agencies. Many Members here will recall that some of these agencies have been mentioned in shoddy deals and unprofessional conduct in business. I do not want to mention the specific company or agency but I hope the minister understands me. Shoddy deals, corrupt, insensitive to poor people - So Madam Speaker, a point of caution; how did the minister or whoever selected, obtain this list? How were these companies or agencies selected?

Secondly, since some of these companies are amorphous, who are the shareholders and where are they? Lastly, how much money are we paying to these agencies? Thank you.

4.17
MR HATWIB KATOTO (NRM, Katerera County, Rubirizi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The whole House remembers vividly that I am the one who brought this issue here. I had several concerns. In psychology, we know that when someone wants to threaten you or if you want to make a child adhere to something, you first bring something to scare her and then you bring something to make her succumb.

Madam Minister, you are the one who has been handling UNBS and these things have been entering the country with UNBS. What did you do? You remember very well that we were opposing “buveera” in the Committee of Finance but it was you who said, “no, buveera should stay” when actually there were people who were able to manufacture cheap envelops from paper, which cannot damage the environment.

Therefore, Madam Speaker, this paper is very nice. We all want to protect the country but we do not want someone to pretend as if you want to protect your country when you have something hidden behind. Madam Speaker, I know that when we make investigations, we are going to get to know that those companies employed to inspect goods are from within and we shall be amazed. They are not going to do all the work as we expect.

These companies are not there in several countries. They talk of Japan and China but there are several countries where Ugandans go to buy items. Are Ugandans going to be protected when not in South Africa and Singapore? (Interruption)

DR BITEKYEREZO: Thank you very much, my colleague, for giving way. Madam Speaker, the information I wanted to give is that if we say, let us go to Kikuubo now and we inspect the items in the shops they have closed, there will be counterfeits. So, I was suggesting that we go there possibly and inspect and see. (Laughter)

MR KATOTO: Thank you for your information. Madam Speaker, not all traders are opposed to the inspection but they are saying, “how much is the fee?”

This paper was good but there are some lies. How can you tell us that when you include $ 2700 on a container, you are not remitting the cost to the consumers? (Member timed out.)

4.19
MR JOHN SSIMBWA (NRM, Makindye Division East, Kampala): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. We are debating the issue of traders and I want to say that the voices of these traders will be heard through me. Today, I had a meeting with the executive of the traders and what I got to know is that these traders are not against PIVOC as a programme. That is the first information I want to give to this Parliament. 

One of the reasons the traders closed their shops is that last year, in December, when the minister met them, there was a committee set up. But before the committee finalised its work in regard to its terms of reference, the ministry went behind it to reinstate PIVOC.

The other reason relates to the issue of threshold. When you read the statement by the minister, you realise that it says that threshold is $2,000, but I am also in position –(Interjections)- Let me take the information.

MAJ. GEN. KAHINDA OTAFIIRE: Madam Speaker, I thank the hon. Member for giving way. I think my friends in KACITA have not told the hon. Member the whole truth. I am saying this because when I was steward of the Ministry of Tourism, Trade and Industry, that PIVOC programme was already on. And when we were about to launch the programme, after consultation with all stakeholders – (Interjections) - of course, I also import sugar – (Laughter) – because I do not want to be like some of you who do not want to sell sugar because you rely on other things. I rely on hard work and my own sweat. (Laughter) This matter was discussed and agreed upon although there were just a few things to iron out. Every stakeholder, including KACITA, had agreed that PIVOC was good.

There was the argument about strengthening UNBS to make things okay. I want to inform the House that UNBS cannot do this work because the catchment area for importation of goods is so wide that you need battalions, high taxes and so on. 

The cost of inspection is very small compared to goods being turned away. I am saying this because if one has a container inspected at $ 200 and accepted or rejected at source, that is cheaper than when one has to transport that container up to Malaba before they are told it is rejected or not. Remember at that point, you will have paid the costs for insurance and so on.

Two, the importer having become desperate without the capacity to return that container of goods will abandon it at Malaba, which is environmentally hazardous. That is why we agreed that inspection be done at source, at that small fee. The importer should know whether the goods have been accepted into the country or not.

If anybody imports goods into the country that have been inspected and falsely approved, the inspecting agency pays the cost and the penalty.
 
MR SSIMBWA: I thank you, honourable member for that information. But I want to say that I was still talking about a matter of fact. Yes, he has given me the information, but I want to still say that I was still talking about the threshold of $2,000 as indicated in the minister’s presentation.

Here with me is a copy of one of the contract agreements, which shows that threshold is $1,000 and not $2,000. What does this mean? It means that even the small scale trader who uses $1,000 is also affected by PIVOC. I have it here with me and I can lay it on Table. It is a contract between the Uganda National Bureau of Standards and Bureau Veritas for provision of service for pre-export verification of conformity to standards. I can also read the relevant provision, which 7.0 –

THE SPEAKER: No, honourable member, I think you should lay that document and since we already have a committee, we can give it time to look at it so that they can give us a report. 

MR SSIMBWA: Yes, I can lay it on Table, but that is a fact. Secondly, when we talk about the costs involved, we only look at the cost of inspection; we do not look at other costs. The agreement shows that the percentage that has been put in the presentation by the minister is only for inspection and verification of documents. But in the contract, verification of documents and verification is only about opening the container and seeing what is inside - (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Okay, half a minute for you to complete.

MR SSIMBWA: The other cost that is involved, which the traders are talking about is the laboratory cost. If you are to test these goods, then one has to pay an extra fee, which is not part of the inspection costs. That is an extra cost in doing business.

Madam Speaker, the other issue being raised by the traders relates to availability of these companies where traders do business from. In places where these companies have no presence, the traders have to pay an extra fee outside this cost to access transport for traders to the areas where the goods are – so, when you add all these costs, you realise they affect businesses for these traders. So, when traders talk about all this, there are issues that we must consider. 

In reacting to the information given to me by the former Minister of Trade, I want to say that even when we go to the issue of procurement of these companies, you realise there was a problem. This means the programme has never been good from the start. That is why the current Minister of Trade had to suspend this programme to sort such problems for it to be implemented properly. Otherwise, as of now, these problems have not been solved though the programme has been reinstated.

On behalf of the traders, I request that the minister considers the issue that traders are raising so that we can come out with a win-win situation for business to resume in town.

4.29
MR STEPHEN OCHOLA (FDC, Serere County, Serere): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I have read the minister’s speech. However, my challenge is about guarantee. Many times, we have had reports presented here by Government, but when it comes to implementation, you find there is no guarantee. I do not know whether this time the minister is saying that counterfeited goods will get eliminated. I am saying this because while we are going to have these regulations in place, tomorrow we might have counterfeited goods getting into the country.

When Members said that the traders should not have been the ones to strike and that it should have been the consumers to do that, I got shocked. The traders deal directly with the consumers and they feel it whenever any amount is increased on a commodity. If the price, for example, has gone high, the consumers will definitely complain to the traders and sometimes, they stop buying some goods. That is why the traders have come up to help the consumers strike so that Government can know that the consumers are not happy with what is happening. So, I support the traders for going on strike for Government to know that there is a problem on the ground. 

I think the minister should, first of all, sit down with the traders knowing that what the traders are saying is the position of the consumers because they are on the ground. It is not easy for the consumers to talk with Government. When will a poor consumer in my village meet with the minister to talk about – (Interruption)

MR OLANYA: I thank hon. Ochola for giving way. I would like to inform hon. Ochola that we need to know the source of these goods. When the minister was reading, she did not tell us the source of these goods. We know, for example, we have shoe polish. On it, they normally indicate that it is made in China, India or Kenya. But we need to know the source of these goods. 

After knowing the origin of those goods, Government can move ahead to either blacklist those countries where the goods are coming from or take another serious step. Unless we know the sources, it might be very difficult to take a serious step to stop those goods. 

4.32
MR TANNA SANJAY (Independent, Tororo Municipality, Tororo): Madam Speaker, I thank the minister for such a passionate presentation. I would like to acknowledge three points in her presentation: One, is the administration that there was not sufficient sensitisation. Secondly, she repeatedly talked about negotiating to bring down the rate from $2,750 downwards like they brought down the one of $250 to 235. The third is the relief to the groupage cargo, which I raised here yesterday. 

Many traders here combine cargo to bring it to Uganda. If I have brought shirts, she brought trousers and she brought shoes, SGS would charge them individually and that sealing that hon. Ssimbwa has talked about becomes very important and let us hold the minister accountable to the $2,000. My information correlates what hon. Ssimbwa said that the current negotiation with these companies is $1,000. 

I would like to take this opportunity to ask the minister to reassure us that those agreements are going to be re-awarded. But there is something that I do not think that honourable members appreciated in this presentation. Figures like a minimum of $2,000 FOB – then you come ahead and say, $2,000 CIF which means Cost Insurance and Freight.  Now, the cost of transporting a container from Dubai or India is already $2,500 so, you do not qualify for the minimum. 

The other issue raised by honourable members is, SGS was used on the dam and we received substandard products. What guarantee can the ministry give us that the same SGS and the same Intertek shall guarantee safety and quality of products to the Ugandan market?

Further, what hon. Ssimbwa said was valid; this $2,750 is only inspection of documents and inspection of visible goods. Now, if you are at the port of loading – Mumbai and laboratories in Delhi - I must pay for the cargo to go to Delhi, I must pay for the laboratory and I must pay for it to come back. These are all additional costs. 

On the way forward, I appreciate and agree entirely with the honourable minister, like the traders do that we cannot be a dumping ground for these fake products produced in foreign countries. But the impasse we are in today, the traders are requesting that the $2,750 be negotiated to include any subsidiary costs, like testing. 

Furthermore, the guarantees are needed – SGS china employs Chinese and the goods that we are importing are verified by the National Bureau of Standards of China. Now, SGS cannot easily tell their national bureau that their goods are fake; they can be subjected to court and we will have the same goods coming here - (Member times out.)

THE SPEAKER: Okay, I give you half a minute to conclude. 

MR TANNA: Madam Speaker, these locals have their national interests. And as hon. Olanya said – I would like to ask the minister that a standard format be presented to this House. Issues like place of manufacture, weightage, the contents and so on, be put clearly so that they can serve as benchmarks for the inspection agencies. For example, why should we have goods with instructions on how to make spaghetti in Arabic or Hindi coming on our market?

I would like to urge the minister that some of these inspection agencies need to be given that working paper as per our local requirements. Therefore, goods will be standardised in a particular format; especially use of language, content and weightage. 

Lastly, as we support the honourable minister on this, the shops are closed out. We would like to encourage that as the minister stated in her report, she should continue engaging these people because they are saying that some of the goods, which were shipped before are going to be subjected to the penalty that they are talking about, which is 15 percent of CFI value. So, if you have a container worth $4,000 shipped last month, the PIVOC was put in place this month, yet you will be charged 15 percent penalty of those goods on the sea already. So, the smoothness with which the transition is done should be handled properly so that there is a gentle situation and the traders and consumers are not hurt. 

4.39
MS FRANCA AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Agago): Thank you, Madam Speaker. When we have the will, all of us will be able to fight counterfeit products. Like hon. Tanna said, last year, I was in China, and I posed a question in one of the meetings that we held, in regard to production and export. I asked, “Why do you Chinese produce fake products and send them to Africa? You make poor quality products and low standard products and send to Africa.”

The answer I was given is that for them, it does not matter whether the products are fake or not, as long as there is market for them. So, because there is ready market for such products in Africa, in Uganda, they will continue producing them.
 
I would like this Parliament to agree that we must strengthen our systems. We must make sure we strengthen the systems at UNBS. Our borders are very porous. Who knows if we can implement all the minister is asking for here? Who knows if these products are not being made within here like the shoe polish I saw here? It is also possible that we have factories within Uganda that will be able to make these fake products. Which other inspections will they be subjected to?

4.41
MR BENJAMIN CADET (Independent, Bunyaruguru County, Rubirizi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I wanted to take this opportunity to thank the Minister of Trade for coming up with these statements, and to support the stance that the Government is taking. I think this is not the time for us to subject reason and quality to equations of sensitisation as well as issues of profit.

We have all seen what has been presented here. We have always talked about fires in schools, hotels and homes. They are all caused by these electricity circuits that are not working or breaking down.

Before we even begin saying the cost is high, let us look at the cost that we incur when we are sick. Most of these things are making us sick and the costs of the sicknesses are too high.
All these neighbouring countries in the world are doing the PIVOC and I believe that there are some costs that are involved. How come that their traders are not suffering? I believe that it is us the consumers that should make noise.

The companies that they are talking about like Intertek are international companies, the way you see KPMG. So, you cannot say because it is in China, the Chinese might collude with them. That cannot arise. What we should be looking at is, are the costs involved too high for traders? If they are not so high and the neighbouring countries are all paying it, why should our traders be exempted.

This is a time Parliament should take a stand and then we stop anything to do with counterfeits. This is not a dumping place and it is high time we pushed counterfeit products out. Even in farming, you bring in hoes which are counterfeit, you dig just one day or two days and they break.

If the traders are not operating, they should not hold the country at ransom, we have to look at the cost but not questions to do with pre-inspection as well as quality. Let us not compromise on those.

4.44
MR JAMES AKENA (UPC, Lira Municipality, Lira): Thank you, Madam Speaker. On the question of standardisation, I hope the minister can give us more light in the sense that goods coming from China, which appear to be the major culprits for a lot of substandard goods - If you go to a Chinese manufacturer and ask for goods, which are cleared for the European market or the American Market, you get a quality product. But are the Chinese manufacturers aware of what a Ugandan standard is or an East African standard is or an African standard? 

This is because I may go and buy goods and if there is no standardisation process between the East African or the Ugandan market, I can still get substandard goods without the intent of bringing substandard goods. The Chinese have become the world’s factory but they do produce quality products. What ends up in Uganda in many cases is substandard but how are we going to address it?

Secondly, supposing I am to import goods, which have an ISO rating on the International Organisational Standardisation. Do I still need to go through inspection for goods, which have already been passed and have a standard, which is fit for consumption?

Lastly, I wish to correct the minister on one small matter, which she raised and this is on the question of vehicles that are crumpled after accidents. It is not the radiation, which has caused damage to the vehicle. Radiation is not going to affect the structural aspects of the vehicle. The damage to those vehicles is flat damage from the salt water - (Member timed out.)

4.48
MS CHRISTINE ABIA (FDC, Woman Representative, Arua): Thank you, Madam Speaker. When the honourable minister laid the itinerary of goods here, I was really worried. The question that I ask then is; who is safe from babies’ food to adult goods, sanitary pads, our girls in schools! It should worry Government and it must worry the country, that this is the state of affairs. I would like to implore the minister and Government to seriously look into matters of politics as politics and matters of governance as governance.

On page 5, you realise that there was a halt to this whole process because the following year was going to be an election year. Otherwise, if Government prudently enforced this, we would not be debating this matter right now. Therefore, I am imploring Government to set politics aside but set standards and protect Ugandans. I would want to appeal to Government to do one thing; we have embassies, at least, in most of the countries in the world. It would be prudent to station technical people who should be able to advise Government on who the major manufacturers are and the consumption of goods in our country.

Ideally, if we were sensitive, we would then ask who is stationed in China. And what is our embassy in China or wherever doing to provide information to our traders as to what quality of goods and at what rate? This would, in a way, salvage the situation. 

That said, I think this is a serious governance deficit –(Member timed out.) 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we had planned to take only 30 minutes but the statement took 45 minutes. We wanted to give people opportunity but we need to close.

4.49
MR ODONGA OTTO (FDC, Aruu County, Pader): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. This is a time when we need to offer leadership because if we send wrong signals to people watching TV now, then we are not being good leaders. So, I am of the view that the minister’s effort should be supported fully and those of us who are not under elective pressures, I think it is a good opportunity to tell the traders out there that we do not need counterfeit goods in Uganda.

If the minister is still delaying, we may bring a private Members’ Bill that can even give a modest sentence of 50 years to anyone found selling counterfeit goods; because we should find any means possible on planet earth to make sure that people do not sell counterfeit goods to others. I think there is no politicking here. (Interruption)

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: I thank you, Madam Speaker and hon. Odonga-Otto, for giving way. The question that we should ask is, “Why do we keep cheap items and fake things on our market?” Hon. Wafula-Oguttu asked a question on where these products, which the minister was laying on the Table, are found. Some of these items are manufactured here in Kampala. [HON. MEMBERS: “Yes.”] We have seen cement and sand mixed here in Kampala. Now how are you going to detect that? That is quite important.

The tiles that you are showing here are because of our business people. When they go to China, they go and buy the cheap ones. The Chinese produce some of the best items I have ever seen; high class, middle class and low class. It is only your price that puts you out. Why do our traders buy cheap items? They buy cheap items because of the taxes. The taxes are very high.

But let me tell you, Madam Minister and honourable colleagues, even if you put SGS in Guangzhou – to go and inspect these goods, they will never inspect the whole container. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, I think you are submitting rather than informing. (Laughter)

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: I am giving information.

MR ODONGA-OTTO: Thank you so much for that submission. Madam Speaker, we must support the minister. In fact, there is no Government that likes votes like the NRM Government – (Member timed out_)

THE SPEAKER: Half a minute to conclude.

MR ODONGA-OTTO: I thank you. So, I do not think that the minister is out of her mind to start destabilising the voters. There must be a reason that they are fighting. So, it is my humble submission that as Parliament, we should support the minister and we appeal to the minister to also raise the ban on Kaveera because Parliament resolved on Kaveera five years ago and then the ministers made a U-turn. 

On simcard registration, we put a deadline, we made a U-turn. Every day you put a deadline, we make a U-turn. So, we have to be firm. If you want to be a trader and you cannot afford those costs, go and do fishing. I thank you so much. (Laughter)

4.42
MR WAFULA OGUTTU (FDC, Bukooli County Central, Bugiri): I thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I think that there is nobody in this House who wants substandard or counterfeit goods for Uganda. All of us want the best for our country and for ourselves. 

But there are two issues: We have the issue of the strike and the issue of substandard products in our country. This – because the minister must get out of this place with an answer so that we end the strike and if we can assist the minister to arrive at that, so be it. But we should not sentence all the traders as there are some bad traders who go to China with levels of quality products from Europe and they manufacture deliberately substandard products – actually counterfeits because there is a difference between substandard products and counterfeits. 

Counterfeit is criminal and substandard is just substandard. When people go to the shops in Uganda, some of them leave the good product and buy the substandard - so even buyers in Uganda encourage substandard products. We have had SGS for a long time. In the 80s, there was a lot of emphasis on SGS but it collapsed. We should be asking the Minister for Commerce why that collapsed – (Interjections)- yes the Minister for Commerce should tell us why did we stop using SGS – [HON. MEMBER: “Information.”] I do not want information. I thank you very much -(Laughter)- because I think that for counterfeits, which are products that damage our health, we should make a law that allows a consumer to sue where he has bought the product. That would be good protection because Government has failed to protect the consumer because Government also imports substandard products. Recently, they imported 21 million nets that are substandard or counterfeit - the Government of Uganda. 

So, we have a problem with everybody who imports in this country. We should empower the consumer to sue people who sell us counterfeit and dangerous products. There are many factories flourishing in this country making counterfeit and substandard products made in Uganda and the minister and UNBS know that. The other day, there was substandard water in the market. Nobody has closed those factories and nobody has removed that water from the market. So, we should be empowering UNBS so that they check inside here otherwise why does Government allow counterfeits and substandard products to enter Uganda? Put a high tax and we shall vote with our feet from the traders.

The minister should have helped us to identify where these products come from –(Member timed out_)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Kabakumba, hon. Kiboijana and then we close with hon. Ssimbwa.

4.46
MS KABAKUMBA MASIKO (NRM, Bujenje County, Hoima): I thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for her statement. Madam Speaker, as Ugandans, I am glad that we have all agreed that we do not need substandard goods on our market and even the traders are not against this PIVOC.

Let Uganda set its standards. Hon. Minister, some people are complaining that they do not know the standards that you want. You have talked so much about China. China has products for everybody from the first world to the last world or call it third world. It is up to you to pick what you want. So, it is not China that is really on the wrong side. It is us who go there to shop. Can we put measures into place to make it very expensive to import the counterfeit goods?

As we talk now, actually those who are importing counterfeits and cheap products are paying less than those who are importing standard and valuable goods or original goods. My suggestion is that let the minister make it very expensive to import counterfeits. I see hon. Ssimbwa looking at me – counterfeit and substandard goods. [HON. MEMBER: “Information.”]

Madam Speaker, I want to encourage the minister that the Kaveera saga should not be encouraged in counterfeit goods. The issue of Kaveera started in 1993 and time and again the Kaveera dealers would come and ask for more time –(Member timed out_)

THE SPEAKER: Half a minute.

MRS KABAKUMBA MASIKO: I thank you very much. When they asked for more time, they would even make heavy investments in Kaveera and eventually now there is no debate about Kaveera. Honourable minister, the might that you have come out with to fight counterfeit products should also be applied in fighting Kaveera. I thank you very much.  

4.59
MS MARGARET KIBOIJANA (NRM, Woman Representative, Ibanda): Madam Speaker, I would want to appreciate the effort of the minister in trying to come up with a harmonised position much as we are a bit far from –(Interjections)- I want to speak on behalf of the business people, the traders and especially the stationery traders on Nkrumah Road. 

I have been sent to inform this House that the business people are not opposed to PIVOC per se; they are equally sick of the substandard goods. Having said this, I see, from the presentation of the minister on page 12 and 13, where she compares the rates in the region. Whereas the rates for example for Uganda and Kenya seem to be the same, what is obtaining on the ground is not so. The traders in Uganda have a high cost of borrowing which is not obtaining in Kenya. 

Secondly, there are prohibitive rental charges downtown. These traders are saying - if you look in all these shopping arcades, most of them are empty. They occupy them for about three months; they fail to pay rent and move on. As the ED, Uganda Revenue Authority announces that she has hit the target, I want this House to know that over 20 traders will be out of business. 

In addition to the above, the taxes imposed are very prohibitive. What are the traders saying? They are saying that the PIVOC should not be imposed on the volume of the container. They have 20-feet containers and 40-feet containers and when this tax is imposed - of course they pray that it is not a tax on the volume of the goods in the container because that becomes another tax - like you said, the first tax for each item on the container will make you pay double tax on a container.

This SGS had been blacklisted – why? It used to collude with these big business people like the Chinese at the expense of the locals. They would not inspect the goods of the locals; they would inspect the goods of the big people such that somebody is in business at the expense of another one who does not import within the same time. When we talk about goods from China, I want this House to know that even the US and the UK have their goods made in China due to cheap reliable labour – (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: I invite hon. Ssimbwa to lay that document and then the minister will respond. 

5.03
MR JOHN SSIMBWA (NRM, Makindye Division East, Kampala): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I beg to lay on Table the contract between the Uganda National Bureau of Standards and the Bureau Veritus for provision of services for the Pre-Export Verification of Conformity to Standards. I beg to lay. This is a contract between Veritus and UNBS but the content of this contract is the content of all contracts of other companies that do pre-export verification. It is only a change of names in all contracts but the contract remains the same.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. So that document will be sent to the Committee on Trade, Tourism and Industry for further examination together with the minister’s statement. Honourable minister, give us your final word on the way forward in just a few minutes. 

5.04
THE MINISTER OF TRADE AND INDUSTRY (Mrs Amelia Kyambadde): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and honourable Members of Parliament. I thank you all for your contributions and advice. I do appreciate that there is need and also importance to review some of the issues that have been listed here and others in your contributions. 

I also admit that there have been challenges in the manner in which we would be able to enforce this contract, but I promise that when we review, or when we discuss with the service providers, we will be able to reach a consensus especially on the costs.

Madam Speaker, I did pledge that we shall continue to engage and dialogue with the traders to address some of the concerns raised. Let me –(Interruption)

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: Madam Speaker, I am standing on a point of order pursuant to Article 79(1) of the Constitution of Uganda and I would like to read it verbatim: “As a function of Parliament, subject to the provisions of this Constitution, Parliament shall have power to make laws on any matter for the peace, order, development and good governance of Uganda.” 

As we speak, Uganda is at crossroads. There is tension everywhere. It has also been reported internationally that Kampala is at a standstill. Is the hon. Minister in charge of trade in order to come here, after listening to the concerns of honourable members over what is happening, to read the statement, listen to the members of Parliament and end with no solution as a way forward?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Lukyamuzi, I think you are abusing the Rules of Procedure. There is no order in what you are raising. She was giving you her closing remarks and she has not completed. 

MRS KYAMBADDE: Madam Speaker and honourable members, my prayer is that I continue to engage the traders and dialogue with them and address some of the concerns raised. My prayer is that I continue with the previous arrangement of meeting the service providers on the 1st of July as pre-arranged so that we discuss the issues especially affecting the cost and arrive at a win-win situation with the traders as far as reduction of costs is concerned. I am confident that we shall reach a consensus with the service providers. 

We shall continue with the sensitisation programme in conjunction with all the stakeholders and especially the consumers so that they are also aware of the substandard markets and fake products that are on the market –(Interruption) 

MR SSEWUNGU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am happy with the hon. Minister. First of all, we have concentrated very much on imported goods and forgotten some goods in Uganda. I want to be very specific on Bata Uganda. When you go to Bata, which was privatised, and you look at the quality of shoes there, you will ask yourself questions about them. These are shoes not made in Uganda.

Secondly, when these people went to China to get goods, they first brought good goods. They were bringing good items but incidentally, the Chinese also came to Uganda to bring the same goods that the Ugandans were importing from China and as a result, most of our Ugandans have got machines from there and have established companies here which are licenced by the hon. Minister and as a result, we are getting counterfeit goods, such as the Always sanitary pads and the rest. These are made in Uganda. What have you done? Who is licensing? 

When you talk about UNBS, there is something very important. I was once called by a member of the UNBS and I rang hon. Wadri - unfortunately he is not around. When Fuelex, a company in Uganda selling fuel, was adulterating petrol, they rung me. UNBS had closed the petrol station but people with guns went and opened the seals and they continued selling fuel. These are things that are happening but the Minister is not telling us about all these things.

Secondly, how are you building the mind-set of Ugandans? Madam Speaker, if we were to line up Members of Parliament as they are walking out, you will discover that some of us have counterfeit shoes and other items, including maybe the Minister with her necklace – (Laughter) - you may find such things happening. So we need to know – we have pieces of chalk; chalk is not mainly imported but made in Uganda. Who is licensing these companies? Why don’t we look at all these things? 

Finally, Madam Speaker, when a company is established in Uganda, like Bata, it sells counterfeit goods at a higher price. Then other people will bring the same style and fashion but selling at a lower price. What is the problem? The Minister –

THE SPEAKER: Let us hear the point of order from hon. Bagoole.

MR BAGOOLE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Much as the honourable member is alleging that he has already sat down, I want to assure him that not all counterfeit goods are bad –(Interjections)– Yes, some counterfeit goods are good.

THE SPEAKER: Order, Members!

MR BAGOOLE: Madam Speaker, when you read what the word “counterfeit” means, you will agree with me that some counterfeit goods are not bad. Is the honourable member, therefore, in order to allege that some members are wearing counterfeit items, while directly looking at my shoes? (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Unfortunately, I cannot see your shoes. Minister please, conclude. (Laughter)

MRS KYAMBADDE: Madam Speaker and honourable members, I continue with my prayer that we shall undertake to review the programme every three months. But I hereby appeal to the traders to embrace this national programme which has been widely supported by the honourable members of Parliament. And I will continue to improve on it as we move. 

MR WAFULA OGUTTU: Thank you, Madam Speaker and thank you, honourable minister for giving way. I have listened to KACITA’s arguments in the media and it seems the minister is not on the same page with the traders on the question of importer and exporter. In the contract it says that those to pay this fee are the exporters, and the Ugandan traders are saying they are importers and not exporters to Uganda. This matter needs to be clarified because it looks like when a trader goes to China or Malaysia to bring things to Uganda, then you call him an “exporter”. But is he an exporter or an importer?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we need to end this matter because we have other business on the Order Paper. Please respond to that point.

MR MUTENDE: On the issue of that cost that the Member is raising, what should happen is that when you are going to import from China, for instance, that cost of inspection should be invoiced from source and is actually borne, at the end of the day, by the consumer. That cost has nothing to do with the importer. I wanted to make that clear; that notion that the trader is incurring an extra cost does not arise because it will be invoiced at source from the manufacturer and that is the exporter. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Minister, please close.

MRS KYAMBADDE: Madam Speaker and honourable members, my mandate is to promote trade but I will also struggle to promote this PIVOC programme. However, as far this matter is concerned, allow me to go back to the traders and appeal to them to reopen their businesses. (Interjections) Yes, I will go back with the contributions made by the members of Parliament and I hope we will be able to reach a consensus. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, Minister. Of course our committee will get back to us on the issues we have sent to them. Let us go to the next item.

MOTION THAT THE HOUSE RESOLVES ITSELF INTO A COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY TO CONSIDER SUPPLEMENTARY SCHEDULE NO.2 FOR FINANCIAL YEAR 2012/2013

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, yesterday we had a lengthy debate but I think we got stuck on the issue of what constitutes consultation. Maybe I will ask the minister to re-state the position and then we will move.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, there is a procedural issue. Yesterday, before we left, you recall that the scenario here was very bad. A full Army-General, who is respected, got up and violently pushed a Member of Parliament and nearly threw him down. In fact if this gentleman was not from Kabale – in the mountains where people are strong, he would have landed down. So the procedural issue is: We all know how Members of Parliament should conduct themselves and this is a very dangerous scenario which could continue. We must take action on this. Is it therefore procedurally right for us to continue without sending this General to the disciplinary committee so that he answers for his crime or at least apologises.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, yesterday, I thought I ruled that he had just stumbled and knocked the other Member. Let us have the Minister of Finance.

5.18
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Permit me to start with the issue that was raised in the minority report by hon. Barbara Cecilia Ogwal in regard to Supplementary Schedule No.3, which was brought as addendum to Supplementary Schedule No.2. This was corrected and Supplementary Schedule No.3 was presented by the Minister of Finance. And if there was any offence, we apologise.

The second issue, Madam Speaker, is on the issue of the Budget Act Chapter 12 (3), which says, “Any re-allocation of funds shall be made in consultation with all the affected ministries, departments, institutions or organisations.” And this was raised by hon. Niwagaba and hon. Cecilia Ogwal.

Madam Speaker, my submission yesterday, which is also my submission now, is that ministers bring ministerial policy statements, which include the ministries, departments and agencies under the respective ministries, and when the budget is appropriated, it becomes the ownership of the ministries and when we are making any suppression, the consultation is done with the Cabinet, which consists of all the ministers, under which all these ministries, departments and agencies are concerned. As far as we are concerned, we believe rightfully so that this constitutes the consultation in this re-allocation. However, should this not be sufficient, we will request the Attorney-General to give further guidance. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, on page 17 of the statement presented by the Minister of Trade, she is complaining of 10 percent cuts from UNBS. She is a Cabinet minister. The reason was that UNBS itself was not consulted. But under the Public Finance and Accountability Act Section 8 sub-clause 2, it says, “An accounting officer shall control and be personally accountable to Parliament for the irregularity and impropriety of the expenditure of money applied by an expenditure vote.” 

That means we carry Shs 1 billion and give it to the CAO of Rukungiri who is the accounting officer. Then you come and say, you have suppressed it without consulting the CAO of Rukungiri but you consult hon. Adolf Mwesige, the Minister of Local Government who is not the accounting officer and yet the accounting officer will be personally –(Interruption)

MR NIWAGABA: Thank you, the Leader of the Opposition, for giving way and thank you, Madam Speaker. In addition to those specific accounting officers, we need to be clear on two things. Who does the re-allocation? It is definitely this Parliament not the ministry. 

Two, when you look at the Constitution, particularly Article 155 sub-article 2, there are statutory bodies whose budget- Actually you can read Article 155(2) and (3) together - whose budget, both recurrent - and in the Constitution it is mentioned as administrative and development cannot be revised.

Now when you look at this supplementary budget, you have a number of statutory bodies whose budgets have been suppressed and yet the government cannot revise those budgets as it is only Parliament that has the final authority on re-allocation. 

The question and information I wanted to give you is, did the committee of Parliament consult these statutory bodies and those other districts, and do we have information to that effect that, that consultation was done?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, it is very important that we should have consulted. I will give you a simple example on the attachment on page 4. Look at Iganga and I do not know if there are MPs from Iganga here. In Iganga Municipality, Shs 1.5 billion was deducted from primary teachers. Did they consult the accounting officers of Iganga Municipality? I imagine you can call immediately and find out if they were consulted.

If we are talking about who should have been consulted, it is those ones. So we would like to ask the chairman of the committee, did you consult? Did you get evidence that these accounting officers of local governments, self-accounting bodies or ministries were consulted and are there minutes?

Madam Speaker, if you look through this, this is just suppressing the budget but they have not consulted these accounting officers and that means this supplementary is illegal.

5.26
MRS CECILIA OGWAL (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. First of all, I would like to appreciate the apology, which the minister has given but unfortunately that apology was only for trying to sneak an addendum, which has now been unveiled as Schedule NO.3. I think you should have amplified so that Parliament is fully aware of what happened but I do appreciate that you have been able to apologise.

The second thing, Madam Speaker, I want to draw your attention to two questions you put to the ministry yesterday. You asked twice, can you explain to me or to the House what constitutes consultations? I remember you asked that question twice and you did not get a reply.

I expected the chairman of the committee to give you a reply but since the chairman did not do it and neither did the minister, I want to offer a reply. In last year’s submission of the budget, there was a statement made by the Budget Committee and it was put in writing that from then on, any consultation must go beyond Cabinet. It is in writing and it is with the Committee on Budget, which means it had to be done in compliance with the Public Finance and Accountability Act, clause 8, which actually requires the accounting officers to be primarily involved, consulted and in control of any expenditure under their vote.

Further, Madam Speaker, I want to say that the suppression exercise today - I think the ministry did admit that it was an error and an apology was made by the Deputy Prime Minister. I expected him or the substantive Prime Minister since he is here, to apologise openly that actually that process is not being followed.

I want to plead with the House; my submission yesterday was not a critic of the report. I was trying to save the image of Parliament because we are being made to carry the cross of some other people and at the end of the day - I thought they would bring it to Parliament but I will give all the facts. If you look at Schedule 3, which is coming, you will find that they are trying to say that they want to pay the teachers but it is Parliament, which has refused. Blackmail!

If you look at Schedule 2 and scan through the figures given, you can tell how much lies we are being told. So really it is true that Members of Parliament are too crowded. It is also true that some of us fear figures but these people are playing on our mind-sets and they are making us pass these things. When they came to us today, all members of the committee were angry. Look at the issue of Escrow Account, which has an agreement attached to it. That agreement says that money would be automatically paid for the UMEME Bill of the Police. Now why bring the supplementary on that Bill.

Madam Speaker, we must tell the truth because it is that truth that will set this country free. The truth is that there is double payment – the one from Escrow and the direct payment. In fact the Budget Committee must also tell us – when we tried to ask this question – you were given invoices or demand notices, which were manufactured because they have the same date when they came from Shell, Umeme – please tell Parliament the truth –(Applause)– thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

5.31
THE DEPUTY ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Fredrick Ruhindi): Madam Speaker, I stand to comment purely on the issue of consultation from a legal perspective. If in one way or another, an error was committed, we are all human beings – to err is human and to forgive is divine. Anyway, from the legal point of view, matters of government – because when we all studied civics in schools, we were told that there are three basic organs of Government – Parliament, the Judiciary and the Executive. How do these function? Parliament functions through this plenary, the Executive functions through the Cabinet and so forth –(Interjections)– I am submitting, Madam Speaker. So, I am surprised that hon. Ibrahim Nganda has not yet realised that I am actually up to the task.

Crosscutting issues in institutions of government ministries, departments and other statutory bodies and commissions function through Cabinet, because it is those technical people that we are referring to, for example, the accounting officers that feed Cabinet in order for it to reach a decision. So, to say that consultation is without Cabinet is not a realistic position as far as Government functioning is concerned. If the minister is giving information that Cabinet sat and considered these matters, certainly that constitutes consultation, from the legal point of view. Thank you so much.

5.34
MS JOSHUA ANYWARACH (INDEPENDENT, Padyere County, Nebbi): Madam Speaker, thank you very much, for this opportunity. The issue we are handling now could be an indicator of a very serious underlying factor. Yesterday, Minister Jacan Omach said in his statement that the passing of this Budget is permission for Government to spend. That is a very humble way of saying that it is just a mere permission. That is my understanding. So, whether Government prioritises a specific vote or not; whether it suppresses the vote or not; and whether it reallocates that vote or not, it is not the business of Parliament; that is business of the Executive. That is my observation on this issue one.

The second one is, when you look at a district like Nebbi where I come from and referring to what hon. Cecilia Ogwal has just submitted, you realise that we are being blackmailed. Let me give you an example. Last year, we made a return of unspent monies from that district, both committed and non-committed. When the committed monies were returned, the Executive kept telling us that that money was supposed to be re-appropriated by Parliament. They also told us that it was Parliament that was taking long to re-appropriate even the committed monies. The implication was that most districts were almost being dragged to courts of law. And worse for Nebbi District, there is what we call IPMES, which is actually a way of colluding to ensure that districts return unused money. As we talk, at the system point in Nebbi, the network is okay, but the connection between Nebbi and the centre is off. So, in places where IFMS is being piloted, you can never sign a cheque because all transactions are now done electronically.

But that comes down to whether it is a ministerial consultation or not. It is good to do consultations because it is provided for under Section 12 (3) of the Budget Act. But I would think that the good way to do this – much as you are the minister, remember you have political interests – is to consult with the accounting officers who are always at the service delivery point. This is important because it is these people who know the interests of the districts better. The worst thing is for you to suppress the budget of a district forgetting that at the time of remitting this money, you tax it at 18 percent. If the district is set to receive, for example, Shs 100 million, it will receive less; and when you do late releases, the districts again lose money. We are being very unkind. It is in good faith for us to be honest by embracing budgetary discipline.

Finally, is it true that that money is still there or you just want us to act retrospectively? If that money is still there, then Government should apologise and we pass this supplementary. I am saying this because whether we pass it or not, these people have already abused their powers. Thank you very much.

5.39
MS IBI EKWAU (FDC, Woman Representative, Kaberamaido): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I implore the indulgence of the House on the question of the Escrow Account. Since I joined this House, we have been struggling with Umeme over the abuse of the Escrow Account. You will recall that Umeme failed to recover debts for this account. The law that led to agreements being signed between Umeme and the Government of Uganda was such a bad law; whenever they fail to follow up on their money, they just dip their hands into the Escrow Accounts to pay themselves. So, they virtually put no effort to recover this money. 

So Parliament should be the last institution – the custodian of the resources of Uganda to give such a bad recommendation that we allow Umeme- on top of the energy losses and their bad agreement that we cannot buy ourselves out of - to allow Umeme to dip its hands into the Escrow Account. For this matter, I request that we expunge item three; I know this report is going to be adopted by this House – (Interjections) – it would be very bad if this report got adopted with this resolution and we allow Umeme to continue with the bad habit of failing to make collections and continue dipping its bad hands into the Escrow Account. 

Secondly, if the question of the item under National Forestry Authority – 

THE SPEAKER: But, honourable members, I do not know whether you are solving the problem because the committee was saying that after we do approve this money, whatever is outstanding will be supplied out of the extra account. Now if it is withdrawn, where will the balance come from?

MS IBI EKWAU: Madam Speaker, the Police is an institution whose Vote is always increasing every financial year. When will we have the Escrow account cater for the debts of the Police? And the amount is exorbitant; it is an abuse –(Member timed out.)

MS FRANCA AKELLO: Madam Speaker, as a committee, we instructed the ministry that this money being demanded for power and water bills of the Police - because we are paying for only 40 percent of the police officers that live in the barracks – imagine that big amount of money. I think it is up to a tune of Shs 54 billion, in the name of power and water bills, yet only 40 percent of the police officers live in the barracks and benefit from it. 

So instead of wasting this money taking it to Umeme and National Water, why don’t we split the money among the officers of this country who do not benefit? There are those who live outside the barracks and do not benefit from that at all. So if there is a way, all officers should benefit from this money instead of just taking it to Umeme. 

5.43
MR XAVIER KYOMA (NRM, Ibanda County North, Ibanda): Thank you, Madam Speaker. From the onset, I agree with the committee on its observations. However I want to disagree with it on the recommendations. 

When you read the observations of the committee and the recommendations, you might think that the recommendations were made by a different committee from that which made the observations. (Laughter)

We are raising questions, for example, were these officers consulted? The committee is clear; when you read observation four on page 6, the committee quotes sections 12(3) and it says actually that they did not see any evidence that they were consulted. But when you read on, the committee recommends that there should be commitment, transparency and discipline in the budget progress and they further recommend that Government should raise the MTEF series of the sectors that continuously ask – in other words, the committee was not convinced with the request for the supplementary. 

Madam Speaker, why should the committee hold us at ransom? I beg my colleagues that whenever work is before a committee, bring it to plenary only when you are convinced that plenary should just give it a go ahead. 

At this point we need a solution. What is happening to salaries cannot be solved by what we are doing here. On Friday, I was in an local council meeting in Ibanda; some teachers have not got their salaries for over six months; others are getting half payments and others who have arrears, the arrears appeared on the payroll but did not appear on the payslip. What does that mean? So I suspect that the problem is more than we think –(Interruption) 

MR SSEWUNGU: Thank you, Madam Speaker and honourable member, for giving way. I took time to go to the Budget Committee on the issue of the teachers. I actually had to look for the technical staff in Parliament to check through the policy statements. I am a member of the Education Committee; the explanation which was given about the funds sent to districts for BTVET and the teachers was that the funds never reached them. There is no will for Ministry of Education to pay teachers from their own funds when they send funds to the districts. 

Secondly, the PS, Mr Lubanga wrote a letter to the PS of Finance and never copied any of his letters to the ministers – that is with me and I showed it to hon. Tim Lwanga during the committee sitting. When the Minister of Public Service came here asking for a supplementary, she said that she had recruited new teachers who were supposed to get money yet in the committee they told us about funds which were sent to the districts; so which is which?. And as hon. Xavier has said, if Government or Ministry of Finance manages to give some teachers less and others more money, where does that money come from? We also know that salaries are always kept in the consolidated fund. Thank you.

MR KYOMA: Thank you, hon. Ssewungu, for that information and I think it adds on what I had already said. So I want to be assured by the minister that should we pass this supplementary today, the problem of arrears will be sorted out. 

I am also seeking technical guidance. We have about two working days to the end of the financial year; we even have development expenditure budgets here. Will that money be utilised? What is wrong with adding these amounts on the figures for the forthcoming financial year so that we start spending from that financial year?

I raise this matter as an authority in this field because I do not believe that in the remaining time, we can pass this supplementary budget and have these figures utilised. 

5.49
MR JOHN BAPTIST LOKII (NRM, Matheniko County, Moroto): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Supplementary is a problem and this is not the first time we are complaining about supplementary budgets. So I am suggesting that we put supplementary on the Order Paper, so that we discuss supplementary budgets as a problem; even if it takes us a whole day – (Laughter) – yes, we discuss the problems of supplementary budgets. 

But for now, Madam Speaker, I pray to the Members, looking at page 4 of the report, the request for the supplementary. The purpose of these funds such as the salaries of the teachers and referral hospitals, I appeal to the Members that we give this money to the teachers and hospitals. I want to compare this to a child - when your child gets an accident, you do not punish the child but first of all caution him then punish him later.
Seeing that people are going without salaries and money, I appeal to you, Members that let us pass this supplementary but then later discuss supplementary budgets as a problem.

When we talk about the problem of policemen, we are the people who talked here about the condition of the policemen when hon. Fungaroo brought a matter of national importance talking about the security status in the country. We all observed the problem of policemen and it is the same as today. We are the same people today who are saying that these people should not be given the money – (Member timed out.)

5.51
MR BANARBAS TINKASIIMIRE (MP, Buyaga County, Kibaale): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to sympathise with one of my colleagues who has read the report and thinks that the supplementary being brought by Government is sympathy to the teachers. It is not sympathy to the teachers nor the health workers. When we were debating to enhance the budget of the health sector requiring Shs 260 billion the same Article 155 was used by the chairperson when we were in Entebbe trying to look for the money to give the health sector. Now his hands are tied, the same argument was made here by the Prime Minister of the Republic of Uganda that our hands are tied as Parliament. Now you want to play your politics and you are saying we can do away with the Article. Why do you want to blackmail Parliament? Confess that you have no money and we take a path that was proposed by my colleague that in the new financial year, the two remaining days, we put the entire money to cover the health workers and the teachers.

I want to raise a matter of asking for evidence of consultation. In my district, they are cutting Shs 34 million. They are calling left, right and centre that money is already committed -(Interruption)

MS AOL: Thank you, colleague, for giving way. I think the people who discussed this paper thought that those of us who will say no to the supplementary paper now are going to be properly fought by the people. I would like to inform my colleagues that here I have in my hand names of teachers whose names are not on the payroll but they are from the district. This supplementary vote that you need for the Ministry of Education is to be brought to the centre, but here I have names of teachers from Gulu and I am laying on the Table names of 68 teachers. One of them died without receiving his pay for a complete year. These are teachers from Gulu District with salary problems.

Most of the salary problems are from July 2012 to date and here we are busy talking. Let us give to education but we must know the details and what the money is going to do. We are just left with three days. This is the information that I wanted to give to my colleague that we have a problem. I lay this on the Table.

MR NANDALA MAFABI: Madam Speaker, I want some guidance from the minister; the heading of this document is saying “Wage bill expenditure performance”. It means Government has saved Shs 86 billion on the wage bill. That means that we have saved Shs 86 on wage bill. So what are you asking for when you have saved Shs 86 billion on wage bill? It is a serious matter; and worse still the figures are clear. So why are you asking for money?

MR TINKASIIMIRE: Madam Speaker, allow me to emphasise the constitutional requirement. Article 155(2) says that a head of any self-accounting department - my district Kibaale has a vote; it has an accounting officer who is appointed every financial year. Clause 3 says without revision – even when we are here and some of these self-accounting bodies - you have no evidence that these people have been consulted and you want to reallocate their money when even the constitution is stopping you because it is saying administrative and development expenditure.

MR LWANGA: Thank you very, much honourable, for giving way. The information that I want to give you is that Article 155 of the constitution talks about financial year estimates. We are not talking about financial year estimates here but we are talking about supplementary.

The section that you are quoting is about an accounting officer preparing estimates and taking them to the President and the President laying them before Parliament with recommendations. When they do that, then Parliament discusses, considers the recommendations and it becomes a budget. I do not know whether we are talking about the same thing.

MR TINKASIIMIRE: I really sympathise with my chairperson because the law has caught him in the neck and he cannot get out –(Interjections) - when you say that a supplementary is not a budget estimate, what are you trying to tell us? You are requiring additional funds and my accounting officer is protesting in the strongest terms possible - bring evidence that you met my CAO and I will say yes, I am under instructions from my constituency that immediately you want to reallocate these funds, I protest and move out of this House.

5.59
DR LULUME BAYIGGA (DP, Buikwe South, Buikwe): Madam Speaker, the more time you give this Parliament to scrutinise this supplementary expenditure, the more you discover glaring problems that have been put to Parliament so that we pass and then we cannot know what that money is going to do. Actually, the Budget Committee needed even more time for further scrutiny. 

The Deputy Attorney-General has categorically stated what constitutes consultation but the Leader of the Opposition also stated categorically that the Minister for Trade, Tourism and Industry in her own submission here said that the budget of the UNBS was not something that she should have supported if at all she was consulted. So, she was not consulted; if she was consulted, she would have negated that. Therefore, even at Cabinet level, there are no consultations but directions that “This is what we have, budget within that or this is what we have removed.” That does not constitute any kind of consultation. 

This Parliament appropriates on the basis of the work plans laid before us and we appropriate for the service of the people and not the service of any ministry and the authorities closest to those people are the ones from who we need information that these suppressions are not going to affect our people for whom we appropriate. This is the argument.

Therefore, the Hon. Deputy Attorney-General to come and say that it is unreasonable or unrealistic for consultation to be made –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Let us hear hon. Baba Diri and then I want to ask the minister to answer a technical question. Let hon. Baba Diri speak first.

6.02
MS MARGARET BABA DIRI (NRM, Woman Representative, Koboko): Okay. I thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Madam Speaker and honourable members, we have been discussing this supplementary budget for the last two weeks and I am sure that when the minister brings the supplementary here, there is a desperate need for that money and that is why it is brought here. The need is definitely the Police who are now in darkness without power, they do not have water and having no water means cholera and that means death – (Interjections) - that is why we need that money.

The teachers and health workers need that money. As we discuss, their children are dying of hunger. People, let us be serious. I know that mistakes have been committed but we must pass this money. (Interjections) On this money, the minister is using the right procedure – we are using the same Budget Act that we passed because they cannot get more than 5 percent and that is why they say, “Let us look here and there so that we solve this problem that is really very bad.” We need to solve the problem.

When you talk about consultation, I do not know what kind of consultation you are talking about. With this dot.com era, online you can even consult the accounting officer. There is reliable information and that is what they discussed in the Cabinet. This very report has been brought here to our own Members of Parliament who are here and we believe in them – they were given two weeks, why don’t they consult these accounting officers? What is wrong with them? They never did their work and they are giving us shame here. If they had consulted, this information would be there and it would not be necessary to have these arguments.

For the sake of our people, I want us to pass this supplementary. I stand to support the supplementary. Please people, if you are human and you think you are working for your people, let us pass this supplementary. I thank you very much. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Awuru, honourable - 

MS CECILIA OGWAL: Procedure, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Yes, hon. Ogwal.

MRS OGWAL: Madam Speaker, I want to give this House very important information. 

This morning, the Budget Committee met under the chairmanship of the vice-chair and we scanned through and looked at the Auditor-General’s report on salaries and wages and this was a forensic audit. We found that the issues raised by the Auditor-General are so fundamental and also legal because the opinion of the Auditor-General must have an impact and must be implemented. So we agreed and actually, thank God that the vice-chairperson is here. 

We agreed that he would come and let you know that the committee would tactfully withdraw this report so that we first meet the Auditor-General tomorrow – (Interjections) - because, Madam Speaker, I want to explain why. This was because we asked this morning – (Interjections) - can I continue? We asked this morning that they bring to us the Vote-On-Account, this Schedule Two and Third Schedule because we know that there is nothing that the Government would do between now and the next three days but they are waiting for the Vote-On-Account -[MR LWANGA: “Order.”] - for the first quarter and in order to make it appear that it is this money – 

THE SPEAKER: Point of order.

MR LWANGA: Madam Speaker, yes, we did meet this morning. Yes, the meeting was chaired by the vice-chair. Yes, we did discuss the Third Schedule that was brought to the House yesterday. 

So, Madam Speaker, is hon. Cecilia Ogwal in order to come to this House and tell the House that we were discussing the Second Schedule and we agreed to withdraw the Second Schedule? We were discussing the Third Schedule, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Can I hear from the Vice-Chairperson who chaired that meeting because we were not there – you were there?

6.07
THE VICE-CHAIPERSON OF THE COMMITTEE ON BUDGET (Mr Remigio Achia): Madam Speaker, my Chair was there but these were issues to do with the Third Schedule and had nothing to do with Second Schedule. 

Further than that, even in Third Schedule, we have got letters indicating that the Ministry of Finance and Ministry of Public Service always consult these accounting officers. For example, in the Third Schedule, when we ask for this information with respect of salaries, only a few of them have replied. 

THE SPEAKER: Third Schedule is not before this House yet and we cannot discuss it. It is still before the committee. 

MR LWANGA: Is she in order to come and –

THE SPEAKER: We cannot discuss the Third Schedule because it is not before this House.

MRS OGWAL: Madam Speaker, that is why I am saying that I am giving you information. Yesterday, we stumbled over some issues and the Minster for Finance was supposed to come and clarify on the Second Schedule. If you remember yesterday, there were fundamental issues and the Minister came to clarify some of them, including the Escrow Account.

Can the Chair and Vice-Chair disagree with me now that we never discussed the Escrow Account? So why are they lying to the House? I am telling you the truth. And we did discuss theescrow account and the danger of having double payments because of the Escrow Account and that is contained in the Second Schedule and not in Third Schedule?

We also discussed the issue of ghost teachers. The bulk of the requests as under the Second Schedule is for salaries and wages but the Auditor-General has said that over 7,000 teachers are ghost teachers. That is what we have been told under a forensic audit and that is why we said that we should have a further look at these figures so that we can help the House. Now some of you are saying that, “Let us pass. Let us pass.” 

Look, I am not interested in whether we pass or not. I am interested in that there are so many people in Dokolo who are suffering; many teachers have not been paid; the hospitals are in shambles but we are being told that this money is going for paying them. That is a lie. These people have waited for Vote-On-Account and that is the one that they will use for paying the teachers. This other money has already been used, Madam Speaker. I am telling you the truth and the Holy Spirit is my witness. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Minister.

6.10
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, yes we have the escrow account but this account is only to be used when ministries, departments and agencies deliberately fail to pay. So, it was a last resort that we used this to pay for the bills of Umeme and we would not want to go to that extent where you have to be forced to pay and that is why we are praying that this be handled under the supplementary schedule No.2.

Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, in regards to UNBS, in the previous financial year, yes there was some suppression but this financial year, we have given them Shs 11.22 billion and we propose in the budget for the next financial year, to enhance that by Shs 400 million to cater for issues that have been raised today. 

On the issues that are being raised by the hon. Leader of the Opposition, we have recognised that about Shs 80 billion, which is meant for payments of salary, has not been utilised and yet there are other areas where the money which was allocated for payment of salaries has already been exhausted and they need to get some more. So, for us to be able to move from where the salaries and wages are in excess and pay for the areas where there is shortage as recognised in this report, it requires Parliament to appropriate through this supplementary. If we had the power to do that, we would not have come here to ask for this authority.

The issue that was raised by the Member of Parliament from – (Interruption)

MS ABABIKU: Thank you, Madam Speaker and my brother, for giving way. I need clarification. Honourable Minister, you have just stated that there are some excesses in salaries. I want to understand how this comes into existence. 

Secondly, as you push on that we have to approve this supplementary, we vested our trust into the Budget Committee and now that their observations never matched their recommendations, have we resolved ourselves into a committee? Over what are you pursuing this to be approved because the challenges of the salary arrears or domestic arrears whether in salary or not, have been there. 

Personally, I would have loved that you come with specific strategies on how to move us away from these accumulated domestic arrears in a specific manner. The list you have provided here, if we charge you as a House to come with the details of what members of this country owe us, the figure you have put here will not be able to solve our problems. So, what are we going to solve? I need clarification over those areas.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Further clarification. 

MR OMACH: I gave way because you said she was my sister and a queen. So, I want to answer when it is still hot. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I am your brother. Madam Speaker, if it is true that these are wages, I have some document from the Auditor-General here which I am going to lay on the Table. I want to interest Members back to Iganga which is on page 4 and it says, “The budget was Shs 2.3 billion and they have reduced it by Shs 1.5 billion”. How did you budget for teachers in Iganga for Shs 2.3 billion now that you have reduced it by Shs1.5 billion? That means that the right budget was Shs800 million and you budgeted for Shs2.3 billion - (Interjections) - yes, they are saying wages. Please, it is for Iganga municipality and not the district. 

If you go on, you will discover that in a place called Bukwo, which is a one-county district, the salary allocation is more than that of Tororo District, which has four counties. I want you to look through that. So, my brother, that shows you that this document here is faulty. The clarification I want to seek from you – (Ms Tete rose_)

MS TETE: I want to give you information on why the salaries of teachers in Bukwo are a bit high. Bukwo is a very hard-to-reach area that is why they increased the salaries by 30 percent. There is a 30 percent increase in Bukwo District. So, please, do not compare Bukwo with any other district in this country – (Laughter) – a teacher in Bukwo who has to travel all the way from Kenya to come to Kapchorwa to pick salary will need more pay than even what you are saying.

THE SPEAKER: Let us try to conclude, hon. Nandala-Mafabi.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, I want you to agree with my sister that Bukwo is a hard-to-reach area. Let us look at Jinja Municipality, it is Shs10.4 million. If you go by the 30 percent increment – (Interjections) – listen, give me a chance. If there are about 300 schools and you increase by 30 percent, in Tororo, there are 1,002 primary schools and even if you doubled or tripled the salary of Bukwo, you cannot reach the one of Tororo. (Mr Nasasira rose_) - My bother Nasasira, relax. You have just come in; I know you are under heat. 

So, Madam Speaker, I seek clarification from my brother, hon. Fred Omach; there is column (a) and there is column (b); let us go to Ministry of Agriculture and that is number 10. I want you to run through it. It says Shs 5.46 billion, then revised Shs 5.4 billion and you have a saving of Shs 1.976 billion. Which one did you subtract from to get Shs 1.9 billion and yet these figures are the same? Go down and they are the same. Show us the difference which comes up with those figures. 

THE SPEAKER: Minister, please answer and we conclude.

MR OMACH: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. What the Leader of the Opposition is referring to is the total performance of the budget of that schedule on salaries and wages. We have given full explanation to the Budget Committee. For the reasons why salary shortfalls have been identified, we have given, one, that there was reinstatement of staff who were deleted from the payroll, arising out of the recommendation by the forensic audit on salaries and wages. Then there were issues of promotion that had not been captured during the budget process. 

Thirdly, there was a failure by the local government accounting officers to provide all the relevant information required for budgeting, leading to inadequate budgeting under some votes.

Now, Madam Speaker, there were also unspent balances, which some people are referring to as savings. These unspent balances arose out of:
    (i) Delays to submit recruitment plans by local governments and Ministry of Public Service, town councils and health workers.
    (ii) Delays by the District Service Commissions to conduct recruitment of staff.
    (iii) Delays in recruitment of critical staff in central government ministries. 

So when these people are not paid, the money that should have been paid to them is unspent. You can look at it as being a saving. But when there are areas where there is shortage, they need to be paid and we have to move from where there are unspent balances to areas where there are deficits. And to do this, we need a supplementary –(Interjections)– I will give you the opportunity; first allow me to finish the point I am making. So this can only be addressed through a supplementary – when we are moving funds from one vote item to another.

We also had the issue which was raised by the MP for Padyere, which was about the IFMS – (Interjections)– can you allow me to finish then you can come on? So we are trying to roll out in all ministries, departments and agencies, the IFMS that enables us to pay as fast as possible whatever is coming from the government. It is not meant to frustrate any district. And of course, when you talk about the suppression, we have mentioned to this House that this financial year, the budget that we are closing on 30th June, about Shs 740 billion, which was supposed to come as budget support by our development partners was not given and this definitely caused a bit of difficulty in the implementation of the budget.

So, Madam Speaker, I really urge this Parliament to pass this Supplementary Schedule No.2 to enable us to move forward with what we have presented. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: I think there were some three people who had burning issues: Honourable Kwagala, honourable Yaguma and honourable Odonga-Otto. Thereafter I will put the question.

MS KABAALE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I was hesitating very much when the Leader of the Opposition, on two occasions, referred to Iganga. I wanted to be diplomatic but I am raising a procedural point. I am a teacher by profession and that makes me to advocate for teachers. In the minister’s statement, he referred to unspent balances yet there are teachers who were on the payroll, especially in my district - much as Parliament does not encourage a person to refer to the district, but since they referred to Iganga, I will specifically talk about it. Many teachers have turned us into personnel officers to try to make them come back on the payroll. But in this circumstance, the minister said there were unspent balances. So is it procedurally right to make people advocate for a supplementary and yet teachers in my district, about 15 percent of them, were deleted from the payroll? Do you really expect me to support this supplementary demand? (Laughter)

MR YAGUMA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am seeking guidance from you; in many accounting agencies and districts, they are using a system called Integrated Financial Management System. When the financial year ends – that is 30th June, this system immediately closes down. We know that system and if we pass this budget, we have only two working days – tomorrow Thursday and Friday – and you know the way we work. If we give the Minister Shs 46 billion, how is he going to pay it out? What system is he going to use?

Secondly, the other issue I need guidance on is that part of the money which they call a saving was supposed to pay salaries for health workers. The explanation given by the minister is that these health workers were never recruited. The guidance I am seeking from you, Madam Speaker and the minister is that if we pass this supplementary, which includes money which was supposed to pay salaries for the recruited health workers, are we sure that in the Budget of the financial year 2013/14, this money is there, especially aware that you cannot budget for payroll when you have not recruited? Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: I had said that I wanted to ask the Minister a technical question; it was actually along the same line. I wanted to know that if we approved this money today, would the warrant be issued tomorrow in time for you to transmit the money to the recipient. 

MR OMACH: Madam Speaker, the issue of salaries has a fact charge on the consolidated fund and the moment this is passed these salaries will be immediately sent to the recipients. (Interjection) Our system will close all the other transactions, except the salaries. (Laughter) So all these salaries will be paid the moment this supplementary is passed.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, I want to help the Minister of Finance because although he works in the Ministry, he does not know - the moment the year comes to an end, that account is closed and the new account is opened; are you getting it? I hope you understand that. So the moment we send the money tomorrow to the districts, the districts will also have to send that money to the respective accounts –(Interjections)– Listen, you give us time.

So, Madam Speaker, the issue of money – I want you people to listen to me. If the issue is salary, let us isolate salary so that we deal with it because it looks like the urgent thing is salary. But for capital development, you cannot tell me that you are going to do procurement between now and Sunday. When are you going to advertise and evaluate the tender? So I do not think that they can spend this money even if we gave it to them tonight; the only thing they can do is to use Vote-on-Account. 

MR OMACH: Madam Speaker, through the IFMS, all salaries are now sent directly to individual beneficiary accounts. So the moment this is passed, we shall make sure that these salaries are sent to respective individual accounts electronically.

6.30
MS HUDA OLERU (NRM, Woman Representative, Yumbe): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I do not want to talk about the figures, but I want to talk about administration. I want to show my disappointment with the civil servants of this country who have put us in this critical problem, which we are facing. These are civil servants who are paid but they are not doing their work. This is poor planning. If there was proper planning from the beginning of the financial year, we would not suffer the way we are suffering in this House. 

Therefore, I want to warn these civil servants. I think the civil servants are tired of the ruling government and they are doing everything to disorganise the government. Therefore, the responsible supervisors must take charge.

I want to urge the Prime Minister who is responsible for monitoring all the departments in this country. All civil servants were supposed to have performance contracts, which are supposed to be evaluated yearly. If the Prime Minister has not been doing it, this is the time. We must evaluate these civil servants. Those who are letting us down must be fired. Those who are interested in working for the country must work for this country because we want to go forward.

With all the pain that we are going through because of the teachers, I may painfully at the last minute say that we pass it, but this will be the last warning for those people who are responsible and who are supposed to monitor and supervise. Take charge. If you are tired, resign and get other people who can do the work. Thank you.

6.33
MR SAMUEL ODONGA-OTTO (FDC, Aruu County, Pader): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I just have two quick concerns. One is we are in a difficult situation because we need to get a way out. No amount of explanation from any minister can change the status of things, which have been messed up by ministers in the Front Bench. Even if we spend seven hours or up to midnight - in fact the more hon. Omach speaks, the more I lose my sense of persuasion. So it may be in the interest of the side you represent that some of you should just probably keep quiet in this difficult situation because you can worsen things.

Having said that, as I was coming down here right now, I talked to an accounting officer who reliably informed me that the Integrated Financial Management System (IFMS) has been closed. Therefore, no one should come to tell this House that we need two days. It has actually been closed – (Interruption)

MR OKUPA: Thank you, hon. Otto. Madam Speaker, the last time we failed to pass this budget, this very minister told us, please let us pass it because if it reaches tomorrow 15th the system will close. So did they upgrade the system? What did they do? 

Two, I want to put it to hon. Fred Omach that you are a Christian. Tell us the truth. You are a Catholic like most of us here. Please do not carry other people’s crosses. We are not operating two systems here; the one for salaries and for the others. In the supplementary that you have presented here today, it is not only salaries; it is more than salaries. So if you are saying the system for salaries is still working, what about the other payments, which are not salaries like utilities, name them?

Today, when I walked out of here, Madam Speaker, I went to our Accounts Department and asked if anyone can be paid now. They said the system has closed and if you have not been paid, you have to wait until the next financial year. So it is not right to come and lie to us here. Some people want to steal the money.

Madam Speaker, they are eating their own words. They are the very people who told us about the Integrated Financial Management System and that is how they operate. We do not operate through more than one system in paying accounts. We are no longer in the system where we pay through cheques. So why can’t the government wait and bring this money in the next financial year in the Vote-on-Account? Thank you.

MR ODONGA-OTTO: Thank you so much for that information. Now that the system has been closed –(Hon. Kawooya rose_) - hon. Kawooya, the system is closed. I am a committee chairperson and as of now, we cannot draw fuel to run the parliamentary vehicles because the systems are closed. You do not need more evidence than what I am telling you.

Regarding the way forward, I would buy the suggestion given by the Leader of the Opposition because we have to offer leadership. If the minister says that the system for sending salaries is different, which he must come and speak to a little more, and out of the Shs 46 billion they are asking for - we just need Shs 15 billion for salaries. If we are persuaded that the system can work and it can reach by tomorrow or the other day, then I would be one of the first to persuade Members that we can consider only the salaries and wages. But it all remains for the government to explain to us that the system is open because we have Police, teachers, doctors going without salaries.

Regarding other things like electricity, water, the operations of Police like tear gas, which requires procurement, you will not con us. Everyone here had an ‘A’ Level at least. So Madam Speaker – (Interruption)

MR LWANGA: Thank you, hon. Odonga-Otto, for giving way. Madam Speaker and hon. Members, what does it hurt if we pass this supplementary – (Interjections) - excuse me, if you could please listen to me. We do our job; we pass this supplementary; let them go and struggle with it – listen - (Interjections) - let me finish. We do our bit and leave them to do their bit. They will come back here and they will be accountable to us. It does not make any difference.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Thank you very much, hon. Tim Lwanga but in the current circumstances and at the current time, that kind of information is not useful to this House because it is me, a Member of the Opposition suggesting that we can debate on salaries if we can be persuaded that the salaries can be channelled by tomorrow. But for a whole chairperson of a committee - we are even doing your work in the House right now.  For a whole chairperson of a committee to come and tell us that we just play our role - we have to play our role and play it well. In fact, we need some fashion designer to tell us and monitor the dress code of both the vice chairperson and the chairperson of the committee because we are overwhelmed with the kind of yellow neck ties we are seeing. This is not going to help the House. (Laughter)

So, Madam Speaker, I would beg to formerly request the minister to stand up and persuade me that if we give the Shs 15 billion for salaries only - we are not going to debate about the other things. If the money can reach the people by tomorrow -(Interruption) - let me give way to hon. Yaguma.

THE SPEAKER: But the minister is already on the Floor.

MR MATIA KASAIJA: Madam Speaker and colleagues, can I inform this House as follows: it is quite true that the Secretary to the Treasury and Permanent Secretary of the Ministry of Finance has written a circular to all accounting officers to say that the system is going to close today. That circular has already gone out –(Interjections)– please listen to me, but as far as payment of salaries is concerned, the system is open and we shall remit the money –(Laughter)– there is no way –(Interjections)– colleagues, you know that I don’t always tell lies and I want to tell you what I know – for salaries, the system will – (Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Point of order, Madam Speaker. At least we know how computers and their systems work. Some of us also know something about that IFMS you are talking about because we were involved in its initiation. So, is the minister in order to tell us that the system that was programmed to close on a specific day has now been changed to operate for purposes of other activities? Haven’t you now destroyed the system we put in place? So, is the minister in order to change the system that we installed with controls to check the others as they operate?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think I am not in a position to rule on that because I don’t know how the system starts in one way and closes in another way or virtually it closes. I don’t know that. But honourable minister, please give us a solution.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Madam Speaker, as I conclude, there is even a new development. Even if we decided to think about the plight of the teachers and release the Shs 15 billion for salaries, the Auditor-General’s report says – and remember this is an officer of Parliament – and I quote verbatim: “We noted 7,588 cases of employees who had died, absconded or left services due to various reasons but are still appearing on the payroll…”

Parliament should be the last institution to pass the money contrary to the advice of the Auditor-General who is a part of this institution. The moment we pass this money, 7,588 ghost teachers will be paid. But the Auditor-General’s report further says that this number also includes 6,554 employees who could not be traced physically or to the records from votes under which they were recorded. He says that Government lost Shs 33 billion through this kind of shoddy deals.

In the circumstances, I have no useful advice to give Government because everything seems to be wrong. Thank you so much.

THE SPEAKER: Minister, please give us a way forward.

MR OMACH: Madam Speaker, Members of Parliament have expressed concerns about the plight of a number of civil servants within districts, including teachers, which confirms what we are praying for now; we need to pay the teachers. Yes, we have issued a circular to all accounting officers on the closure of this financial year, but we have also said that however, salaries have been left open because they have to be paid once the supplementary is approved by this Parliament.

Madam Speaker, I think we should – my prayer is that notwithstanding –(Interruption)

MR NZOGHU: Procedure, Madam Speaker. Thank you so much. Yes, I have been listening to the minister and just realised a number of contradictions. One among those many is that one of the reasons why salaries were not paid to some of the employees is that some of the districts never submitted their recruitment plans early. But as far as I know – I observed this yesterday and today – for Kasese District, submissions were sent in early. This makes what the minister is fronting null and void. Kasese District sent its submissions on recruitment plans early –(Interjections) - please that is not the situation for Kasese District. It is only deliberate that they have not been paid.

The point of procedure that I want to raise is that we tend to be speculating as regards the content of the letter that the minister is talking about, which was originated to guide the system on when it should close. I want to ask your indulgence on whether it wouldn’t be possible for the Minister of Finance to lay that letter on Table for us to verify its content?

MR REMIGIO ACHIA: Madam Speaker and honourable members, I guess we are trying to know what will happen if we pass this money. However, what we should know is – most of us have just returned from our constituencies – that teachers have not been paid and that means their children too haven’t returned to school yet – (Interjections) – first listen.

Two, last year, it was I who read Supplementary Schedule No. 2 on 27th June, which was the same day we passed Vote-on-Account – (Interjections) – yes, it was that same day. Please check your records. I read Supplementary Schedule No. 2 and the budget – (Interruptions)

MR WAFULA OGUTTU: Thank you very much for giving way, honourable member. As the Vice Chairman of the Budget Committee, would you like to tell this House that after we passed this money, all the teachers who have arrears will be paid? –(Interjections)– yes, I am asking that because I know that – you said you have saved Shs 1 billion for my district, but when I talked to the accounting officer in my district, I was told lots of teachers haven’t been paid and most likely they are not going to be paid with this money. So, are you telling us that when we pass this money, teachers in all districts will be paid their arrears?

THE SPEAKER: But, honourable members, you need to know that there are areas that have not been affected by the Auditor-General’s Report, for example, salaries of the policemen. So, are you going to lock such salaries out?

MR WAMAI-MAMANGA: Madam Speaker, as a member of the Public Accounts Committee, I take the report of the Auditor-General very seriously and I hope hon. Tim Lwanga does the same. The Auditor-General has given us a report and I can read verbatim –(Interjections)– order on what when I haven’t made a point yet? (Interruption)

MR SEBUNYA: Madam Speaker, we have sat here and listened to each other for long. Is the honorable member in order to present a report of the Auditor-General to the Floor – in fact he is circumventing the process because that report is supposed to go to PAC from where a report is written to Parliament. That is the procedure. So, is the Member in order to smuggle a report from the Auditor-General to the Floor of Parliament when we are discussing the current budget?

THE SPEAKER: Which year is that, has it been considered by the Public Accounts Committee? Then that means we are moving ahead of the Public Accounts Committee. They have not had time to examine it and make their recommendations to us. 

MR TIM LWANGA: Madam Speaker, this morning, when we were looking at the Third Schedule, we wanted to know what exactly was happening with forensic report. That is when they gave us a copy, for which copy we have invited the Auditor-General to come tomorrow and discuss along with the Third Schedule. 

MR REMEGIO ACHIA: Madam Speaker, the third issue is, when we talk about closure of the system, it does not mean that they are literary going to switch off the computers. Secondly, I know what hon. Nandala said, that the system is programed to stop transactions on a specific date. But the same system has what we call administrators who can be directed to pay. If we direct them as Parliament, they will definitely go and pay. So it is not a system that runs by itself; it is run by people who have passwords and we can direct them to do what we want. If we say pay the teachers, they can be paid. 

So, Madam Speaker, my argument is, we should not bog ourselves down with the procedure on how the computer will work. Are we in agreement that we should pay teachers of this country or not? If yes, then pass the money and pay the teachers.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question to the motion that the House resolves itself into a committee of supply to consider supplementary Schedule No.2 for financial year 2012/13. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, we are now at committee stage. We have all these accounts; how are we going to proceed? Are we going to look at the entire block or are we going item by item so that we can see what we can deal with and what we cannot deal with. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Are you still thinking in terms of salary or no salary?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: You see, recurrent expenditure is Shs 36 billion. Of this, Shs 15.17 billion is salaries and wages, to which everybody agrees. Now, there is the non-wage which is Shs 21.8 billion. Down there is development expenditure; so my question is, how are we going to deal with it – (Interjections) – we cannot deal with the total. There are issues we have raised. There are areas where we are in agreement, like salaries and wages. Then there are areas where we have issues because they say the system can pay salaries immediately and we have accepted that they pay. But for the other one, the system cannot work. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Can I know from the Attorney-General whether it is possible to sever – meaning can it be separated; because it came as one whole. 

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: I understand the anxiety expressed about the timing in light of the information we got. But colleagues, you know very well that when we pass this money, any money that is not utilised cannot be lost. That is point number one. Point number two – (Interruption)

MR ODONGA-OTTO: The information I want to give you is that in our districts, the money which is not utilised is returned to the centre; but no one knows where the money goes. In fact, the technical people in Finance just eat that money. We have the information and we have been complaining year in and year out. We have even raised this to H.E the President. We know that money that is returned is used and people just tell us that it is put back in the Consolidated Fund. So anything other than the Shs 15 billion, we know someone will eat it. At least for the Shs 15 billion, we know it will pay salaries and wages. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I want to thank my brother the Prime Minister for giving way. As you are aware, we have been here for many years. I found you around and I have been here for 13 years. There is no budget I have seen with opening balance – I have never seen that for the 13 years I have been around. That applies also for the 27 years you have been around. So if there is no opening balance, my brother, don’t you think we are doing something dangerous? When we pass this, there are a few individuals who are going to benefit.

MR WAMANGA-WAMAYI: Thank you, Madam Chair. The information I want to give to the Prime Minister is on development. You need to do procurement yet we have only two days. How are these ministries and departments going to use that money for procurement – (Interjections) – I am waiting for the Prime Minister to listen. 

So on the issue of salaries, possibly we concede because it affects people. But development programmes involve procurement and we have only two days. So the best thing we should have done is to consider Vote-on-Account and we proceed. 

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: Madam Chair, we are attending to a very important subject in this Parliament and in light of that, I seek to know whether we can pronounce ourselves in the absence of quorum. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: The Members are here – you answer the question, Prime Minister.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: I want to say that if there is anything that threatens public funds that comes to our attention, obviously we must handle it as a Parliament; it is our duty to do so. To the best of my knowledge, the way we handle money that is not spent is that it automatically reverts to the Consolidated Fund – (Interjections) – that is the law; money unspent automatically reverts to the Consolidated Fund – (Interjections) – let me respond then I will give way.

So my simple appeal to all of you colleagues in this House is that we obviously have a problem at hand. I agree entirely with hon. Huda that there is a problem in Government on the management of these issues. There is no doubt about it and it is something we must pay attention to. The fact though is that we have teachers who are unpaid, the Police and so forth have not been paid for a very long time. If we do not pass this supplementary now, as we all know, we cannot load it on the Vote-on-Account. So we would have to wait for the next supplementary which would be after the Appropriation Bill has been passed. That means that you are condemning these people to no payment until after September which is unfair and yet – (Interruption)

MR AMURIAT: Madam Chair, I tried to restrain myself but I have been forced to proceed this way. Is the Prime Minister in order to come to this House and distort information.
The Prime Minister knows that there is a time when we pass Vote- on-Account. Nothing stops us whatsoever passing a vote and including matters that are of emergency in nature. Is the Prime Minister in order to come and misinform, distort facts deliberately in order to find his way and yet it has become clear here that MPs are hesitant to pass this particular supplementary when MPs have got their own reservations. Is he in order to force his ideas down our throats?

THE SPEAKER: But Members, I think you know that the Vote-on-Account is a particular quantum of the budget so I do not see how a supplementary can be added to the Vote-on-Account.

MR WAMANGA WAMAI: Madam Chair, in all ministries and government departments, there are arrears that are carried on to the new financial year and those arrears are paid. So if there are arrears they can be paid in the new financial year.

The Police are not asking for salaries, they want to pay electricity and water bills. But if you look at the new budget, your budget for the whole year June to June - this question of coming in and talking about salaries, the Parliament appropriates money for salaries and all costs of ministries. I want to raise the issue raised by the Auditor-General that people were paid in the names of teachers. That is irregular and it is a very serious one. But we have kept that one and we have agreed that we should only pay the salaries for teachers.

MR LUBOGO: Hon. Chair, I think the problem that we have is because we have not been having transparent accountability for the funds that have returned to the consolidated fund. We are now scared we cannot just agree that we pass the supplementary and the money will be returned to the consolidated fund because we are not very sure of how it is applied.

Madam Speaker, don’t you think it is right to guide us now that even if we are to go ahead and pass this supplementary, we should be banned from the schedule of all funds that have returned from the different corners of the country, and we should be able to guide this Parliament to follow up the application of those funds as other revenues because eventually it is not seen anywhere. We do not know where the money goes. So is it not right that a schedule be submitted to this House showing all the monies that have been returned from districts and other departments for this House to be able to trace the money and how it was applied?

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: So I really want to appeal to the good sense of all of us Members of this House. We are hearing from the Treasury that actually there is a surplus. It is the surplus which they are saying gives us an opportunity to pay those who have not been paid. How really can you say that we should not? You see you have to understand, hon. Odonga-Otto, that under our laws, it is only Parliament that can determine the moving of funds from one vote to another. It cannot be done by the Treasury or by the Executive and that this why we are coming here. It is the job of Parliament to do that. 

We have teachers and Police officers in my constituency who have not been paid just like hon. Cecelia Ogwal, hon. America Online (Aol). We have the problem of arrears of our people who have not been paid and Treasury has come to say there is some money, can we pay these people and you say “No”? I was amazed by hon. Ssewungu who is a teacher to say “No, do not pay teachers what is owed to them.”
My appeal to you is that may be a genuine fear that we give this money and it is not paid; there may be some fear but now that becomes an accountability question. When we pass money here in an Appropriation Bill, don’t we always have that fear? We always have the fear that is why we have systems in place. So, - (Interjections) - I would like to give way.

MR WAFULA: The clarification I want from the Prime Minister is whether he knows the total amount of money that is owned to people in arrears. That is to say teachers or all civil servants who are owed by Government, who have not been paid for months, whether he knows the total amount and whether the surplus you are talking about can pay all of them. This is because every time we go to the villages, people are asking us about their salaries and it is a menace to us.

So I would like to know from you, Sir, whether you know the total amount of money in salary arrears and whether the money we have which you have saved, I do not know from where, can pay all of them and we settle this matter once and for all.

MS WINIFRED KIIZA: I thank you, Madam Chair. In his submission, the Prime Minister kept mentioning Members on my side. He said hon. America on line and yet on this side, there isn’t any Member called America on line. I just wanted him to clarify on whether he has brought new Members in this House, one of whom is called “America on line” because being the whip of this side, I do not have any Member called “America on line”. Can I be clarified? –(Interjections) - no, there is nohon. America on line, especially on this side.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, we need to end this matter. Please conclude, Prime Minister.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: I thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: We have not yet gone to the figures yet.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: At any rate, I have not given way to him unless of course he changes and says Point of Order – (Interjections) - (Laughter) – which he is prone to do in abuse of rules.

Yes, hon. Wafula Oguttu asked whether I have the figures. Yes, of course; for the arrears which are both in Schedule Two and Schedule Three, the total amount is Shs 76.03 billion. This is salary shortfalls. 

Now on the approved wage bill, the savings that I talked about are Shs 80,255,000,000. 	So, that is the answer to your question.

Now hon. Kiiza, yes I said, “America on line” because you know I am very friendly to hon. Betty Aol and I usually exchange pleasantries – (Laughter) - [HON. MEMBER: “We can investigate you.”] I was doing it in that context and I am sure she would have no objection – no ill-will intended. 

My appeal to you colleagues, please, is that we pass this supplementary, let teachers and the Police be paid so that we bring to an end the suffering of these people – (Interjections)- just a second – because of obviously some error somewhere which we must find and correct. So that is my appeal to you and I would like to ask all of us to be in unison on this.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Now, honourable members, we have really debated for a long time. I just want to remind ourselves that it is only this House that has the authority to permit this expenditure. As long as we continue withholding that authority, I think we are perpetuating the suffering of those people.

What I would like to demand from the Government is that you give us an account of how the money has been used. Come back and give us a report on how this money has been used so that we know that it has not gone from Kiruhura to somebody’s account. I think we want to demand that you give us a report.

MR OKUPA: Madam Chair, I think that we had almost come to a compromise. I was trying to ask for clarification from the Prime Minister whether he is agreeing to what we are proposing – that all the salaries. If it is only salaries, we go ahead because the issue of development expenditure is a long process. So, if it is salaries, we have no problem.

THE CHAIRPERSON: But I don’t know. I asked whether we are allowed to sever a request. The Attorney-General?

MR RUHINDI: Madam Chairperson, I think the rule that may help us is Rule 143 of our Rules of Procedure. Severing, Madam Chairperson, I understand you to mean how best we can expedite the process. Is that what you mean?

THE CHAIRPERSON: No. There was a proposal that we only deal with the salaries. But this request came with other items and that is why I am asking; are we allowed to sever and deal with only salaries and leave the others?

MR RUHINDI: Well, I really don’t think that there is anything that would stop us from doing that. That is in the wisdom of Parliament and upon, of course the guidance of the Executive, the mover of the supplementary estimates because if the mover is in agreement with that, I do not think that there would be any problem. But I think that it is entirely in the hands of the House and the mover. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: But, Madam Chair –

THE CHAIRPERSON: Go to the microphone honourable -
 
MR OMACH: Madam Chair, the supplementary requests by ministries, departments and agencies were much higher than this and we had already done the severing. We are requesting that we pass this Supplementary Schedule No. 2 as requested. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chair, we have Shs 15.2 billion for salaries and we are even doing it painfully because if you look at the report of the committee on page 4, it says that even State House wants Shs 2.086 billion for salaries. I do not know what teachers are in State House. We are doing it painfully. You can imagine that even State House salaries – I hope you read the report – that State House needs Shs 2.086 billion to cater for a wage shortfall. 

So, that is State House and it is not teachers and we are saying that we are taking this painfully for purposes of teachers to allow even what we could not have accepted immediately to go through. 

Madam Chair, so in that regard, since the Attorney-General has said there is no problem, the Ministry of Finance is begging us - our proposal and systems of wages are the only ones working according to the Minister of State, Matia Kasaija. He said that for Finance, the system is operating – [HON. MEMBERS: “Salaries.”] - for salaries and it was only the one for recurrent that has not been closed. 

So, I would propose, Madam Chair, that we only allow the Prime Minister and his team Shs 15 billion to go and deal with salaries. [HON. MEMBERS: “Aye.”] And on that, we shall not even raise some procedural issues that you are aware of. (Laughter)

THE CHAIRPERSON: Final comments from -

MR SSEBUNYA: Madam Chairperson, I thank you so much for the opportunity. Now that we have had a head way, we have come to the Committee of Supply. 

In the comfort of this Parliament and the AC that we are enjoying here, you may not know that somebody working in a different office is suffering like any other person. It is not only teachers who are important to this nation. [MR WAFULA OGUTTU: “Order.”] What I am saying is that we can proceed - [MR WAFULA OGUTTU: “Order.”]- and pass this Bill [HON. MEMBER: “Order.”]- let us do our work - - [MR WAFULA OGUTTU: “Order.”]- let us not micro-manage - [MR WAFULA OGUTTU: “Order.”]- what the technical people would have done - [MR WAFULA OGUTTU: “Order.”]

MR WAFULA OGUTTU: Madam Chairperson, this Parliament appropriates; it does not pay. Any salary arrears are not the responsibility of this Parliament. So, is the honourable member in order to argue in a manner that puts blame on this House for the salary arrears and appealing to our emotions? Is he in order?

MR KAKOOZA: Madam Chairperson, I have listened carefully to all the concerns of Members but I want to appeal to the Leader of the Opposition that let us have a human face because take it or leave it, there are people who are suffering because of the policy shift. 

At the beginning of the financial year, some people were shifted from different accounts for instance in the Ministry of Local Government, people were brought to the centre to be paid and this is the money people are claiming for. In Gahinga Hospital, doctors went on strike for three days and they called some of us and said, “Please, we cannot be doctors in the health centres and in the hospitals and you tell us to help the citizens of this country.” 

The only idea I can buy, Madam Chairperson, is what you stated that at the beginning of the financial year, we should know the balances before we start another account or another financial year; so that we are sure that even if this money is returned at the end of the financial year, this Parliament itself can know that this is the money we appropriated and that this is the balance. We are beginning a financial year and it should be a lesson to the Minister of Finance that when we start another financial year, they are able to bring their balance sheet here and say please, this is the money that remained but not for the money that we have already allocated to go to some areas and it is found in the accounts of other areas – (Interjections)– may I finish my point? 

With that view, I think Parliament can, according to the submissions, amend the law and say that at the end of a financial year, the Ministry of Finance should bring its balance sheet to know the money which was returned. Every ministry should bring its returns at the end of the financial year but we should not constrain those people. 

I plead to Members from the other side that the teachers - and the wage component is an operational cost and these are needed to be met by people in offices. Even if we pass a Vote-on-Account, the offices won’t close; they will still operate. So, I agree with you, Madam Chairperson, - (Interruption)

MR GILBERT OLANYA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. When an officer is transferred from one department to another, that officer goes together with the budget line in that ministry and the salary. Is hon. Kakooza in order to mislead the House, to lie to the House that the shortfalls we have are because of the transfer of an officer from one department to another department? Is he in order?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Maybe he can substantiate.

MR KAKOOZA: I can clarify. Look at a referral hospital and a regional hospital. You may appropriate a vote to Jinja, let’s say vote 14 but the referral hospital of Iganga is not vote 14. So, if somebody is moved from that place, he cannot go with the money. It is only Parliament which can say that please, you transferred a person from a regional referral hospital to another referral hospital. That is when Parliament has the authority. Remember the money you appropriated to go to the district cannot come from there until the Minister of Finance comes here and says, these are the Members who were transferred from district so and so to another district. That is what the ministry is talking about and that is what I am saying. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I want to appeal to you. We have been saying that we want to improve the accountability process at the end of the financial year. We have been taking an interest in where the money goes after it goes to the consolidated fund at the end of the financial year. I want us to look at this as an opportunity to start a new system whereby the government has to come and report to us about where the money has been used before we give them other monies. I look at this as an opportunity. So, I appeal that we pass this money and require the Minister of Finance to come here and report where the money went. 

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Madam Chairperson, when you look at the details, when you add up this figure, the total figure is over Shs 46 billion and the wage bill component, if I can call it that, is about Shs 31 billion. When you look at these figures - I am talking about salary generally and not only for teachers - if you even look at State House which my brother, the Leader of the Opposition, was talking about, it is actually to cater for the salary shortfall. When you look at the vote for the Ministry of Finance, it is to cater for outstanding contractual obligations which arose when our development partners moved out and we took over and those things are listed there, including salaries for instance of some of the consultants and things like that.

The Ministry of Education’s wage shortfall, the Office of the Auditor-General, the Shs 2.2 billion is gratuity under the retirement scheme which in a way is related to salary. Then of course you have the Police, the teachers and so forth. When you have this vote 157 - National Forestry Authority, it is a wage shortfall. So, even what you call development expenditure, these outstanding contractual obligations are obligations which we have a responsibility, as Government, to handle because some of them were handled by our development partners before they withdrew. 

So, I really want to appeal to you again, colleagues, as the chairperson said, that we will produce the accountability for all this money. That is the system we use. You cannot refuse to pass a budget because you fear that there may be a “Kazinda” somewhere. What we should do is what I promised we will do; to make sure that those people are rooted out and our system is clean. But for us not to pass this supplementary budget when we have the money to meet this shortfall, I think will not be the right thing to do. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members - 


RECURRENT SUPPLEMENTARY EXPENDITURE FOR THE YEAR 2012/2013

Vote 002 - State House

THE SPEAKER: I propose the question that a total sum of Shs 2,086,122,000 for Vote 002, State House, be provided for as supplementary recurrent expenditure for the financial year 2012/2013. I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 2,086,122,000 for Vote 002, State House, be provided for as supplementary recurrent expenditure for the financial year 2012/2013.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 013 - Ministry of Education and Sports

MR LUKYAMUZI: Madam Chairperson, it is on record that in the year 2000, I made a point on the Floor of the House and remarked that there was no quorum when debate on the referendum was going on; the Speaker on the chair ignored it but a good Samaritan later went to court and the Speaker lost the case in court. In light of that, I seek to know whether we should proceed to pronounce ourselves on very fundamental and important figure points in terms of money without quorum.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I do not know whether our inefficiencies should be visited upon the Police, the teachers and the doctors; we are supposed to be here in this House. Yes, hon. Ogwal?

MRS CECILIA OGWAL: Madam Chair, I sympathise with what the Prime Minister, my relative, has said – (Laughter) – concerning some of the emergency demands in some areas, particularly salary. So I rise to propose a compromise motion. When I look at this schedule, I find that the bulk of it – like I actually stated in my minority report yesterday – the bulk of it is for salaries and wage shortfalls. And I do sympathise even when you talk about State House and you want me to approve it in an omnibus manner, my conscience will tell it is not right. 

However, if you tell me to look at the salary and wages component, Madam Speaker, I will do it wholeheartedly. And that is why I am standing here to move a motion that this Parliament considers, according to the explanation given to the House by the Minister of Finance – that the system will allow remittance of salary – that is on record and the Hansard has captured it. 

So Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the salary component of this report, which includes State House, Ministry of Education, Auditor-General’s Office, Gulu University, the National Forestry Authority and Butabika Hospital – (Interjections) – I have already mentioned State House. Madam Chair, State House is for salary and wage shortfalls, according to this report. I, therefore, wish to move that we approve the salary and wages component of this Bill. I beg to move. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Let us hear from the Minister of Internal Affairs.

MR JAMES BABA: Madam Chair and honourable members, I would like to let the House know the implication of not including the Police supplementary budget – because in the budget provisions on non-wage and operations, the Police was allocated only Shs 67 billion out of Shs 254 billion. So there is a huge shortfall - (Interjection) - we were given a supplementary of Shs 22 billion out of Shs 54 billion; we still have that problem and yet this is the sector that deals with maintaining law and order in this country. If we cannot be provided with this money, then the security of this country is at a great risk. 

So I wish to appeal to you, honourable members, that for the operational work of the Police – the fuel – (Interjections) - Even the electricity bill is for the months of April and May and evidence was given before the committee that these bills were not paid even under the Escrow Account. So if these things are not paid, you will greatly handicap the Police. We need maintenance of law and order; we need the Police to operate. If you deny them this money, then we shall be in serious problems. So I beg you to reconsider so that the Police budget can be included in this supplementary. Thank you.

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: Madam Chair, I have already pointed out that in the absence of quorum, when we are discussing very important and pertinent monetary matters – taxpayers’ money – should we continue without quorum? You have not pronounced yourself on that point.

MR ANYWARACH: Madam Chair, there is a point I request that we should not miss. Hon. Cecilia Ogwal made a point that the Auditor-General’s Office committed itself to bringing a report tomorrow – 

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, that is on Supplementary Schedule No.3 and not on this one.

MR ANYWARACH: Okay. Now, the other point of guidance I wish to seek from you, Madam Chair, is that there was already a motion moved by hon. Ogwal, I do not know whether we should first rise up in support of the motion or should it just get lost in the wind?

DR BITEKYEREZO: Madam Chair, we have got two scenarios here; where hon. Ken Lukyamuzi is pointing at an issue of quorum and then hon. Ogwal bringing a motion. My view is that for purposes of being on record for following constitutionalism in this country, let us stand over these things and we resume tomorrow because what will the motion be when there is a problem of quorum? Tomorrow they will be raising dust again.

MS AURU: Thank you, Madam Chair. I stand to support the motion moved by hon. Dr Bitekyerezo; the issue of quorum is very important and constitutional. And since we are also going to look at Schedule No.3 tomorrow, which is also on salaries, I feel we should pass everything together so that our people at the district level are also paid. Thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. minister, motion for the House to resume. Honourable members, if we have a technical problem, we cannot say it is there and also not there. So -

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

7.41
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Madam Chairperson and honourable colleagues, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of Supply reports thereto.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that the House do resume and the Committee of Supply do report thereto.

(Question put and agreed to.)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY

7.42
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, I beg to report that the Committee of Supply has considered Supplementary Schedule NO.2 budgets for financial year 2012/2013 and has passed the Vote for State House and stood over other votes. I beg to report.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY

7.43
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of Supply be adopted.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that the report of the Committee of Supply be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE ANTI-MONEY LAUNDERING BILL, 2009

THE SPEAKER: We can receive the report please.

7.44
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, I beg to move that a Bill entitled, “The Anti-Money Laundering Bill, 2009” be read for the second time.

THE SPEAKER: Is it seconded? Seconded.

MR OMACH: Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, this is an Act to provide for the prohibition and prevention of money laundering and financing of terrorism; establishment of a Financial Intelligence Authority and Financial Intelligence Authority Board in order to combat money laundering activities; to impose certain duties on institutions and other persons, businesses and professions who might be used for money laundering purposes; to make orders in relation to the proceeds of crime and properties of offenders and to provide for asset recovery; to provide for international cooperation in investigations, prosecution and other legal processes of prohibiting and preventing money laundering; to designate money laundering as an extraditable offence; to establish the Uganda Anti-Money Laundering Committee and to provide for other related matters. I beg to move.

7.46
THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Robert Sebunya): Thank you, Madam Speaker. We are supposed to have reports but I do not know why the men in white are not distributing them. Madam Speaker, this is the Anti-Money Laundering –(Interruption)

MRS CECILIA OGWAL: Madam Speaker, I know how determined you are to work for your country and I am also aware that it is now almost 8.00 p.m. and normally by 7.30 p.m. I serve my husband supper. I beg to move that considering the importance of this Bill, which has been read the second time, we should be given time to go and rest and for me to serve my husband so that tomorrow when I come back, I am fresh and strong and able to contribute effectively. I beg to move, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I do appreciate that hon. Cecilia has got to go and deal with Mr Ogwal but even before I prorogued the House, I informed you on more than one occasion that our country is in danger of being sanctioned for failure to pass this law. We now have only one day in which to do it. So at least listen and then go and handle Mr Ogwal. Present the report.

MR SEBUNYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. We do sympathise with hon. Ogwal but let us proceed. This is the Anti-Money Laundering Bill, 2009. It was read for the first time on 3 November 2009 and referred to the Committee on Finance. The committee has, in accordance with Rule 118 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament, scrutinised the Bill and now presents its findings.

Honourable members, because of time and the concerns of Members, I shall not read the methodology, the object of the Bill and the salient features. I will go direct to the observations as made by the committee.

On page 7; 6(1) Chain of responsibility by competent authorities. The committee learnt that the chain of responsibilities in the fight against money laundering is prevention, detection, investigation, prosecution, deterrence and confiscation. Prevention involves guidelines, compliance and regulatory sanctions to accountable persons. These are institutions involved in both banking and non-banking financial activities.

The Central Bank of Uganda regulates the activities of the banking sector and the non-banking financial institutions. The Central Bank of Uganda regulates activities of the banking sector and the non-banking financial institutions, the accounting persons submit transactional reports to the Financial Intelligence Unit (FIU) before disseminating report findings.

Detection involves investigative analysis and information exchange by the FIU. Investigations involve detailed gathering of evidence with intentions to persecute by the investigating bodies. After gathering evidence, the file is forwarded to DPP’s office for perusal and legal advice. Where the DPP is satisfied, that evidence gathered is sufficient, consent note is granted and the case is sanctioned for prosecution. Deterrents include judgements and penalties by the competent courts of Judicature. 

The committee noted that from the chain of responsibilities above, the fight against money laundering and terrorism financing is undertaken jointly involving many government departments and institutions and several legal frameworks. The success is greatly hinged on the commitment of Government and the efficiency on the part of the competent authorities responsible for the implementation of this Act. It is a multi-sectoral Bill or Act to be.

There is need for a multi-disciplinary task force - in order to effectively fight money laundering and terrorism financing and other associated offences – consisting of organisations responsible to fight these crimes. For the efficient functioning, it is important for the organisations in the task force to cooperate. 

The committee observes the need for institutional cooperation to streamline and strengthen the operations against money laundering. The regulations should provide for all the competent authorities to sign MOUs where members are obliged to provide and share information.

Composition of the Board

The current composition of the Board in the Bill – see clause 25 – includes representatives of supervisory and law enforcement agencies, among others. These agencies could be considered as peers to the FIU. It, therefore, implies that the FIU is being governed by these peers, which in effect could compromise the independence of this intelligence authority. 

The committee recommends for other categories of board members that are not considered to be at the same level with the ones in the FIU.

Renewal of appointments

The committee observes that the Bill be amended to ensure renewal or the appointment of the Director General is for only one term and not any additional term of office as stipulated in the Bill. The current provision in the Bill could give the Director General an opportunity to have endless appointments.

Declaration of Assets and confidentiality of the staff of the FIU

The committee noted that there is need for additional provision under clause 32 of the Anti Money Laundering Bill, 2009 that caters for the periodic declaration of assets by staff of the authority. This provision will ensure that the staff of the authority are being checked for possible abuse of their mandate, in which case appropriate measures can be undertaken, just in case some of them are involved in corruption.

Also, there is need to uphold the importance of confidentiality by all staff of the unit. Staff can take an oath of confidentiality. The committee recommends for this requirement, which should be extended to third parties who may have operational relations with the FIU.

Exceptions for accounting persons

The committee observes that the minister, at his/her discretion can exempt accounting persons from compliance with any or all the provisions of the Anti-Money Laundered Bill. This provision could be a loophole to undermine and weaken the effectiveness of the implementation of this law. This provision should therefore be deleted or reconsidered.

ML Policy Units and Focal Persons

The committee observed that for the effective implementation of this Bill or the Money Laundering Regime, all financial institutions must incorporate an Anti-Money Laundering policy in their units or have a focal person for the purpose of networking with the FIU. This will strengthen the monitoring and coordination roles of the FIU.

Confiscated Assets Fund

Clause 100 of the Anti- Money Laundering Bill establishes a Confiscated Assets Fund in which sales from property confiscated under this Act, are administered. This fund is managed by the Authority. The committee, however, proposes that this fund should be managed by a separate trustee body in order not to jeopardize its operations.

Courier Cash Transactions

The committee notes that Uganda is largely operating a cash-based economy, which is not currently being monitored and managed. The committee is further concerned that there is free unmonitored cash movements across borders without adequate monitoring controls.

The committee, therefore, recommends that to strengthen the monitoring mechanism against money laundering across borders and cash movements, more than 1,000 currency points be declared to the customs authority. This is just about Shs 20 million. This will ensure the monitoring of cash movements across borders.

The committee further recommends that all transactions over and above 1,000 currency points must be registered in a declaration form provided by the minister.

Regulations of tier for institutions 

The committee observed that there is no legal framework to regulate the financial institutions like microfinance institutions. Because of this, such institutions could be used as avenues for committing offences.

The committee urges Government to expedite the process of putting in place a legal framework to regulate this sector for effective implementation of this law.

Regulations of non-bank sectors

The committee is concerned about the lack of an institutional framework to regulate or supervise the non-banking like mobile money operators and SACCOs. These have turned out to be avenues for money laundering and related offences. The committee urges Government to put in place an institutional framework to oversee the operations of this non-banking sector.

In conclusion, the committee notes that the fight against crimes of money laundering and terrorism financing calls for concerted efforts by everyone. We have taken all the necessary considerations in scrutinizing this Bill, including benchmarking from some two countries. We have also proposed amendments that we shall be introducing at an appropriate time. I beg the House to adopt this report. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, chairperson of the committee.

MR SEBUNYA: Madam Speaker, sorry, but I beg the House to allow me lay the minutes and other related documents for the House to peruse.

MS WINIFRED KIIZA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the chairperson of the committee for presenting this good report. Now that the chairperson has been able to highlight to the House the recommendations and observations, I wish to propose that the entire report be captured on the Hansard of Parliament. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, the entire text will be reflected on the Hansard. Honourable members, the report has been signed. I want you to internalize it overnight and we start the debate tomorrow and also complete it tomorrow. 

I had issued a notice for the Committee on Business to meet tomorrow on the understanding that we would have completed the formation today which we have not been able to do. So, I suggest that we meet tomorrow in the plenary at 11 O’clock to complete the business which is outstanding. So we shall sit both in the morning and in the afternoon tomorrow. The House is adjourned to 11 O’clock in the morning.

(The House rose at 8.00 p.m. and was adjourned until Thursday, 27 June 2013 at 11 O’clock.)
