
Tuesday, 24 June 2014

Parliament met at 2.46 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I welcome you to this afternoon’s sitting. First, I want to announce that one of the Members of this House forgot their iPad in the Chamber at the last sitting. So, if anyone is missing their iPad since last week, please, go to the Sergeant-At-Arms’ Office; it is there.

Secondly, during the recess, I officiated at the Uganda Police Centenary Celebrations and one of the activities was to raise funds for acid victims. However, what came out was the absence of any law in this country on the sell, storage, importation, use or abuse of acid. Therefore, there are no provisions in our Penal Code Act.

So, I was requested to facilitate a private member’s motion on the issue. I attended that function with hon. Hon. Chris Baryomunsi, hon. Reagan Okumu and hon. Kenneth Omona. We agreed that one of them will be moving a motion so that we help our people and ourselves because any one can suffer from an acid attack.

Third, is the issue of security. Hon. Members, you are aware that we have enhanced security at Parliament. The reasons are clear and so, I would like to appeal to you to co-operate with the police in their bid to ensure that everybody is secure. I have a responsibility together with the Parliamentary Commission to ensure the security of the staff and Members of Parliament together with all those delegations including the young people who come to visit this House.

However, I have received some reports that some honourable members resist measures taken for their protection. I understand some of you do not permit anyone to check your cars – yes, and I have a written confession from one of the Members accepting this. This is what he said: “Police at Parliament respect honourable members and a good number of us appreciate the respect accorded to us. Under that accord, there are many occasions when we refuse stubbornly to be checked. There are other occasions when we refuse to have our cars checked. No police personnel would like to act with brutality when checking an MP….” This is from one of you.

I am also told that yesterday, when the police attempted to search a boot of one of the Members’ cars, that Member abandoned his car out there for five hours. (Laughter) Yes, I have got that information. Rather than being checked, he chose to abandon the car in the sun for five hours.

So, hon. Members, yes, you are VIPs but decide whether you want to be alive or dead VIPs. The issue of security should not be taken as a joke. I really would like to ask you to co-operate with the Parliamentary Police Service.

Hon. Members, we are also still following up the case on how those pigs came here. We shall be letting you know the outcome of the investigation. We are getting a few leads and we shall let you know what has transpired.

The fourth matter has to do with some magazine called “The Independent” in which the Ninth Parliament was described as one of those that have failed to deliver in this country. Hon. Members, I want to say that I am very proud of the Ninth Parliament for carrying out legislative, representation and oversight roles! (Applause)

On the legislative role, I want to say that the performance of the Ninth Parliament in the Third Session was the best in the history of Parliament. (Applause) I want to read for you some of the figures on how the other parliaments were at this point in time. In the Sixth Parliament, in the Third Session, they enacted 19 Bills; in the Seventh Parliament, they enacted 11; in the Eighth Parliament, they enacted 17 but in the Ninth Parliament we enacted 19. (Applause) We would have done actually more than that if we had not failed on the Public Private Partnership Bill, the Public Finance Bill, the Counterfeit Goods Bill, which was withdrawn, the Marriage and Divorce Bill, the Plant Protection Bill – yes, all these were ready!

So, no one can say that this Parliament has failed. I want those who write in those rags to take this into cognizance and do better research.

Hon. Members, there is also the issue of the complexity of the work. Some things are just complex. What is it that Parliament has failed to handle? For example, which Parliament has ever handled the Oil Bill in this country since 1985? How much time did we spend on the Oil Bill? How much time did we spend on the Public Order Management Bill, which I think spent the longest time in this House? (Applause)

So, I think the public and those who think that they are assessing should understand that some of the work we do is actually complex.

On the issue of representation, I think this House has done very well. Do they expect me to stop a Member from raising a question on the floods in Kasese when the river has flooded? Should I tell Members to wait for a month before they talk about the floods and hailstorms that destroy schools? Should I keep quiet and ask Members to bring such matters after one month? How about recruitment of health workers – it is this Parliament that solved that problem. How about salaries for teachers? All these have been done by this Parliament. That is our representation role and no one should down play our contribution.

And on the oversight role, really, hon. Members, haven’t we done a lot on the oversight role? Look at the accountability committees’ reports that have been debated here and the sanctions that have been issued.
So, I would like to assure you and to comfort you that this House has worked very well and no one should try to down play our contribution.

The last one has to do with committees. Hon. Members, our work has now stagnated because no one has the mandate to either convene or to participate in a committee meeting. So, I would like to appeal to the whips, if it is possible, we handle this matter today because nothing is moving.

I hope that before we close business today, we will have handled the committees. My worry is that once we go into the budget process, it means that any Bills that we have will have to move to the end of the queue; we shall not handle them until September. So, it is a very serious matter and I would like us to act quickly and see that this is put out of the way.

I have received some submissions from the NRM side and some from the Opposition. My coordinator of the independents has not yet come in. I hope he will come in by close of business today, so that we can do something about the committees. 

Thank you very much.


Hon. Members, in the VIP gallery, we have Members of Parliament and staff of the Public Accounts Committee of the National Assembly of Kenya. Please, stand up. They are led by hon. Ababu Namwamba and they are here to share experience with their counterparts. They are very welcome, Karibu Sana. (Applause) 

On this side, we have students from Gombe Secondary School in Mpigi District represented by hon. Muwanga Kivumbi and hon. Mariam Nalubega of Butambala. They are here to observe our proceedings. Thank you very much. [Honourable Members: “It is Butambala”] These clerks, they have written both Mpigi and Butambala. Okay, Butambala formerly of Mpigi. (Laughter)

2.58
GEN. JULIUS OKETA (UPDF Representative): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to add on the good information the Speaker has given to all of us. The regional terrorist situation is real and that is why some of the issues have been enhanced. Uganda, Kenya, Tanzania, Rwanda Burundi are all under threat and, therefore, the check-up is not to intimidate you or harass you. 

What we would like to request is that all of you should watch out and one of the target centres, as you have seen in Somalia, is the legislation, the executive and somehow the judiciary that is dealing with terrorism issues. So, what we request from all of us without political issues, let us co-operate! 

I know we are very stubborn but when it comes to security issues, we are all concerned. Let us keep it up; we pass information, we respect the check up at different levels so that we continue but we thank you very much for the co-operation up to now. Thank you. 

2.59
Mr ABDU KATUNTU (FDC, Bugweri County, Iganga): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Some time back, we were told that Parliament was going to procure an advanced security system for purposes of protecting the entire complex of Parliament and may be the neighbourhood, the President’s Office and the Office of the Prime Minister. 

Secondly, we spent a lot of money, billions of shillings, putting up the underground car park and its opening is awaiting the installation of that security system. May we now know at what stage has that procurement reached - because we just live by the mercy of God here. We do not even have a CCTV camera outside. Even small financial institutions have which we do not. Some of these issues where the pigs are coming from and so on would not be an issue. They would have been captured by the CCTV cameras. We are just depending on what the security officers call physical security. 
I thought if we had procured that system, I am sure it would have gone far to enhance our security system. That is the clarification I am seeking.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, you are absolutely right. Actually, if we had that system in place the 3D camera would have detected those pigs, long before they reached the steps. But they are not interested. But fortunately, they sit near here, they work here, if the building goes up they will also go up with it.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. On the same issue, I have seen on the order paper, item 5, the motion to resolve to pass a Vote-on-Account. That means Ministry of Finance cannot spend money without our authority. That means we have the authority to appropriate. 

The clarification I am seeking is; why should we pass money to the executive, yet we the ones passing, our lives are in danger?

THE SPEAKER: Well, hon. Members, it is up to you. When the matter comes on the agenda, you will tell us what to do. (Laughter)

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE INSECURITY IN THE DISTRICTS OF ACHOLI AND LANGO

3.02
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr James Baba): Madam Speaker, first, I want to thank you and sincerely commend you for the comments that you made about the security of this House. Yesterday, the Rt Hon. Prime Minister called a meeting of the top security agencies to see how best honourable members of Parliament can be protected better. 

So, the Inspector General of Police was tasked with some technical team to work out those details and they hope to report on Thursday, on the recommendations they are making. We are doing this in consultation with the Parliamentary Commission and Office of the Clerk. I am sure, Madam Speaker, you have been briefed about these developments but serious concerns have been taken to make sure Members of Parliament are secure while they do their business in this House. 

Coming to the statement, it is true there have been incidents of violent crimes including murders, aggravated robberies, rapes, defilements among others, in various parts of this country. These incidents have affected families and the community in general in various ways. 

Government is very sorry that these incidents have taken place. I wish to reassure the House of Government’s commitments and that of the Uganda Police Force and the sister security agencies that we shall do everything possible to protect the lives and property of all the people in Uganda. All the reported incidents have been investigated or are being investigated and measures have been taken to ensure logical conclusion of these cases. The following are some of the measures so far put in place:

    1. Strengthening investigations in all police units and rectifying all weaknesses in the police system.
    2. Rectification of identified management weaknesses at various police stations. For example, the former DPC in Lira was implicated in the murder of the business woman in Lira District. He was interdicted pending conclusion of the matter.
    3. Holding accountable any individual officer suspected to have neglected his or her duty.
    4. Holding community policing; where this has been done, the crime trends have greatly reduced. We intend to enhance community policing in all parts of the country as a measure of fighting crime. 

Coming to specific issues raised by hon. Gilbert Olanya on 17th June, the hon. Member of Parliament for Kilak County expressed concern that the current wave of murders was worrying and requested that the Ministry of Internal Affairs presents a status report on the situation of murder cases reported in Lira, Gulu, Nwoya and Amuru districts to Parliament. The investigations into these cases have been carried out; some are continuing to be done. Hon. Members, I wish to report the following:

1. The murder cases in Lira District

In Lira District, 12 cases of murder have been registered since January 2014 to-date. Twenty-four suspects have been arrested, out of whom 13 were charged to court; 14 persons were victims of crime by those suspects now under arrest. 

The causes of death registered included thefts/breakings (2); domestic violence (1); land wrangles (1); business rivalry (1); fire (1); robbery (1); aggravated assault (1); shooting where security personnel are victims (2); shooting where security personnel was involved in crime (1); and unknown (1).

The status of the investigations is summarised in annexure A. All the details of these murders, of these assaults and what has been done will be found in annexure 1A and what action is being taken to deal with them. These are all contained therein.

2. Murders in Gulu District

In Gulu District, eight cases of murder have been registered since January, 2014 to-date. Nine suspects were arrested, out of whom one has appeared in court.  Eight persons were victims of crime. 

The causes of death registered included rape (1); domestic violence (1); robbery (1); thefts (2); shooting where security personnel was involved in crime (1); and unknown (2).
 Again, the summary of investigations and the details and what action has been taken of those murders in Gulu are contained in Annexure B.

3. Murders in Nwoya District

In Nwoya District, six cases of murder have been registered since January, 2014 to-date. Four suspects were arrested and one was charged to court. Six persons were victims of their crime. 

The causes of death registered included domestic violence (3); assault (1); land wrangles (1); and shooting where security personnel were involved in crime (1). The status of the action taken, the details and the names are in Annexure C.

4. Murders in Amuru District

In Amuru District, nine cases were reported from January to-date. Eight persons were arrested, of whom six were charged to court and two are still at large. Nine persons were victims of their crime. 

The causes of death registered included death by shooting (1); domestic violence (3); assault (4); and land wrangles (1).  Details for Amuru are contained in Annexure D.

5. Murders involving security personnel in crime

Hon. Members, there have been a number of criminal incidents involving security personnel. For example, a total of two cases were reported: one in Gulu and the other in Nwoya, where two suspects were arrested and charged to court. Two persons were victims of crime; one is a UPDF soldier and the other is a private security guard. The status of the investigations of these two cases is contained in Annexure E.

6. Murders where security personnel have been the victims of crime

This time, it is the other way round. They were victims of crime. There have been a number of criminal incidents where security personnel have been victims. For example, a total of two cases were reported in Lira District where two suspects were arrested and charged to court. Two persons were victims of crime; one was a police officer and the other a private security guard. The status of the investigations is summarised in Annexure F.

Let me now summarise the murder categories as I explained above. There have been other cases of murder that do not fall in any of the categories specified above. These are indicated below:
    1. Death by mob action. In January, there were three cases of murder, in February two, in March two, in April five, in May three. So, in total, action by mob that led to death totalled to 15 since the beginning of the year.
    2. Death by poisoning. In January two, in February one, in March one, April one, May four, making a total of nine.
    3. Death by domestic violence. In January one, in February four, in March two, in April four, in May two, in June one. The total is 14.
    4. Death by fire was only one in April.
    5. Death by strangulation. Two in January, one in March. Total three.
    6. Death by hitting and cutting by blunt objects. In February, there were three, in March three, in April one, in June two. A total of nine.

So, since the beginning of the year, the various categories of murders totalled to about 51. 

Hon. Members will note that a total of 51 murders were reported from January to-date, where mob action was leading with 15 cases followed by domestic violence (14), hitting/cutting (9), poisoning (9), strangulation (3) and fire (1).

The months of February and April registered the highest deaths with 10 cases each, followed by March (9 cases) and May (8 cases).

So, what action has the police taken so far? Madam Speaker, as stated above, the police have taken action on the reported cases as follows: 
    1. The Inspector General of Police camped in Lira for some days and mobilised the police and the community to work together to combat the crimes in the district. The implicated police officers were all transferred and some were charged.

    2. The Criminal Intelligence and Investigations Headquarters have taken over investigations in Gulu, Lira and Nwoya districts in an effort to expedite and conclude investigations on the reported murders and to prevent further occurrence.

    3. There have been heightened patrols by the police and joint patrols with the military/Uganda Wild Life Authority (UWA) especially in Gulu, Lira, Amuru and Nwoya areas. In addition, the flying squad was dispatched from Kiryandongo District to mitigate violent crimes in Gulu and other parts of the region. The only flying squad we have in the region is based in Kiryadongo to ply the Gulu-Nimule Road. So, this is now being mobilised to assist in this monitoring.

    4. The Police will continue liaising and coordinating with the various stakeholders in the fight against crime in the country through enhanced community policing. The police are organising radio programmes and talk shows to sensitise the public, schools, boda-boda riders among others on how to protect themselves and to guard against being victims of crime.

    5. The police have also commenced very vigorous registration of resident aliens in Gulu, especially of foreigners like from South Sudan, Somalia and so forth. This exercise is done in liaison with the RDCs’ Office. The registration listing is done by location, activity or business among others so that we are sure what these people are doing and where they are.

    6. The District Security Committees have been instructed to meet more regularly to address the crime and security threats in the affected districts.

    7.  There is also enhanced intelligence on the ground and intelligence has conducted various operations where perpetrators have been arrested. A case in point is where two robbers by the names of Elim Andrew from Lira and Okello David from South Sudan in Juba were arrested on Saturday 21 June 2014 at Karuma and an AK-47 Riffle was recovered. Further operations resulted into the arrest of Odur Tony from Purongo and six others namely; Kidega Richard, Okwonga Jackson, Okot Eugene, Omony Julius Nyerere, Tabu and Omoo Lawrence. The suspects have been stealing motorcycles and since the operation commenced, so far, eight motorcycles have been recovered from around Apac District. 

In conclusion, Madam Speaker, you will note that the cases reported dealt mostly with mob action, domestic wrangles, land disputes, aggravated robberies of motorcycles, shops and houses and lastly, aggravated assault among others. All these have been investigated and investigations continue and action continues to be taken. 

On behalf of Government, I send condolences to all the bereaved families for the lives lost. May their souls rest in eternal peace.

I also wish to re-assure the general public of the commitment of the Uganda Police Force and all the security agencies to continue with the vigilance in protecting the lives and property of the citizens of this country, and all the people who live here. And I wish to state that we shall continue to strengthen the quality of intelligence, investigations and community policing so as to mitigate the new wave of violent crimes. 

We shall rectify weaknesses by strengthening police command and control at various stations and also hold individual officers found to have neglected duty responsible. 

Hon. Members, I wish to state that whoever will be engaged or try to engage in such heinous acts will face the full force of the law. 

I say this For God and my Country. I thank you. (Applause)
 
THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Hon. Members, I know that you brought the issue but my worry is that these matters are under investigation and I do not know how much we can discuss a matter that is under investigation without endangering the process. 

Okay, hon. Olanya, two minutes. But do not go into the merits.

3.22
MR GILBERT OLANYA (Independent, Kilak County, Amuru): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also raised the issue about the LC III Chairpersons who are allowed to move with guns in the community, and the youth groups so-called UJCC and operatives who are moving with guns in the community and the minister did not respond to that very important concern. I wanted the minister to respond.

Secondly, the university lecturer who was shot dead at his gate at night is called Rachkara Andrew and the name was not spelt correctly in this very important document. Those are the two clarifications that I wanted to get. I thank you very much.

3.24
MS JOY ONGOM (Independent, Woman Representative, Lira): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to appreciate the hon. Minister for giving the report. However, I saw the annex and there is some data that he left out or was not fed with the information. He only captured a few that happened in 2014 but by close of 2013, several incidences had taken place that needed capturing and Parliament made to know of the same. 

A number of the business community in Lira District were robbed of their money to the tune of more than Shs 1 billion. The suspects were arrested but the business community is wondering up to tomorrow where the money that is found with the suspect is put. They have already been charged to court and others remanded but such money is nowhere to be found. 

It is not only that but in their data, they have not stated a criminal investigation and intelligence officer who was killed in Lira District. The data is not captured here. 

Another incident was a security guard that was shot dead at a super market and that data has not been captured here. 

Another incident is a situation where a driver was shot dead and burnt in his own vehicle at Odokomit on the Lira–Gulu Highway and it has not been captured here. 

There is another incident where a security officer - even after Afande Kale Kayihura went to Lira - shot dead a businessman just two days after Kale Kayihura went there. The data has not been captured here. Then, it was just last week that a university student was hit and killed. It has not been captured here. 

Recently, a woman stabbed a female business colleague dead and the data has not been captured here and it is a serious matter.

I thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you for that enrichment. Let us hear from the Member from Butambala and then, we go to the Member for Otuke.

MS MARIAM NALUBEGA: Madam Speaker, I am raising to seek for guidance because the minister’s statement is only capturing the cases of the North and yet, it is worse in the central region especially in Kampala, Rakai, Mukono and Lyantonde. 

I do not know whether he should do another investigation or a national one to capture all the data that is in the country because yesterday, a woman was killed in Mukono, there were murders in Rakai, my neighbour in Lungujja was returning to his house with his wife and he was shot dead. So, there are very many cases of these murders in the central region but they are not reflected anywhere in the minister’s statement. So, I would like to be guided as to when we shall raise them and when the minister will be able to respond and give us a formal and detailed report on this matter. 

I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I think the minister responds to what he has been asked to do. I believe he must have been asked to talk about the insecurity in Lango and Acholi. But I know that in the last session, on the Floor of this House, we raised the issues of Rakai, the murders of the sheiks in Kampala – so, if you want a full statement, that is different. But let us first deal with Lango and Acholi; if you still want the other one, we shall ask him to do it. But for now, let him respond on Acholi and Lango, which were requested for.

3.28
MS ANNET OKWENYE (NRM, Woman Representative, Otuke): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to first thank the minister for this elaborate report but there are certain things he left out, which I would like him to capture. For instance, in Lango sub-region – and I will speak for Otuke District – the Police to civilian ratio is very low; you will find that there are may be 10 police officers in a station and they serve almost the whole district. This abets crime because it enables the criminals to move freely and do all that you are now hearing being discussed here.

And then, there is also another issue that the honourable minister did not capture, which is the continuous release of hard-core criminals. Someone commits a crime today – actually the criminals are happier when they are taken to police because they know that after two or three days they will be out. These same people come back and continue terrorising the residents. 

And because they know that – I am sorry hon. Minister to say that there is a bit of corruption in the police force. (Interjections) I wanted to use that word. (Laughter) There is corruption because you will find that these hard-core criminals, once they have committed crimes and are taken to Police, they pull out a few thousands or millions of shillings and they are released back on the street to terrorise and kill businessmen and other people.
Madam Speaker, I think the police force needs to be cautioned by this House that they should learn to discipline their officers because up to now, nothing much has been done.

And as I summarise, there are many firearms in the hands of civilians in the North. We appreciate the fact that we are just recovering from war but still Government has not done enough to disarm those with illegally acquired arms. And the South Sudan situation has not helped because there is free movement of these arms. People now come to exchange arms for cows and other things and go back to sell animals as those arms remain in Northern Uganda.

So, those are some of the issues I would have wanted to hear from the minister, which he did not capture. Thank you.

3.31
MR AMOS LUGOLOOBI (NRM, Ntenjeru County North, Kayunga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have a feeling that the whole thing has been terribly down played. Just last week, on Friday, I attended a burial of a close relative, who was murdered here in Munyonyo. At night just after dinner, he went out to serve the dog and he was killed with a machete, which was forced into his neck. And this was a student at Kampala International University. So, we had such a gruesome and brutal murder just here in Kampala. 

I also have my own testimony on what happened sometime back towards the end of last year; a thief entered my compound and drove away a vehicle, which I later found being driven by someone on the street after a month. With the assistance of the wanainchi, I managed to detain the culprit who was driving the vehicle who later led us to the people who sold that vehicle to him on Lumumba Avenue. The police prepared all the files but the DPP said that there was no case to answer, and so the matter could not be filed before the courts of law. And yet, we had all this overwhelming evidence against these people. 

So, we have a very serious problem in our hands. Investigations should go beyond what we have just received this afternoon. And I think the minister should pick interest in finding out the outcome of these cases that go to court – the people who are charged in court; what is the outcome? How many of these people have been incriminated? That is a very important statistic to find out. You might find that most of these thugs walk out scot-free and there is nothing that eventually happens. 

So, Madam Speaker, I thought the scope of these investigations should be widened. Thank you.

3.33
MS HUDA OLERU (NRM, Woman Representative, Yumbe): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I will begin by commenting that the minister should give us a nationwide statistic data on the issues of murder and other criminal cases. This is because when you talk about Lira and Gulu, it was just a sample; it might even be worse in other regions, especially West Nile. Like it is the case in my district; people are killing themselves like nothing. 

I am now wondering why people have decided to take the law in their hands. Could it mean that people have lost trust in the police force and the judiciary? This is because when you follow the law process, at the end of it, you may not get justice. That encourages people to use a shortcut by going to a home and torch houses and kill people unnecessarily. What is the problem now? All along we have been in this country and the situation had not been the way it is today. Can the minister tell us why people have all of a sudden turned hostile; they no longer respect the law?

Madam Speaker, another thing that I feel this country must take into consideration is the LCI system. Our LCs used to be helpful a lot in terms of reporting these issues before they got out of hands. Now that we do not have the LCIs, people plan things – like recently, in my district, there were two clans; they planned for long to kill. They organised their bows and arrows and went to attack a rival clan where a few people were killed and 140 houses were torched. But if the LCIs were in place, some of those things would have been reported.

The worst thing now is the honorarium that we have given to the LCI chairpersons; that has made the rest of the committee members to gang against the chairperson. We passed here that we should give Shs 120,000 for the LCI chairpersons and yet, the rest of the committee members were not given anything. That has worsened the situation and it is one of the things we must take into consideration. 

The worst now is gender violence, which is a big contribution to these murders. I hope our Government will help us so that we can have the Gender and Sexual based Bill from the Eighth Parliament - we should work on it and have this law in place. I know it may help us, although we may already have many laws that have not been implemented. I am hopeful that this one will work.

Another thing is land conflict and population pressure. It is good we are talking about a big population. But I have seen that the bigger population of Ugandans depends only on land. We are producing unnecessarily and yet, we are not getting more land. That makes it worse because everyone wants to acquire land because he knows that they have many people in their homesteads. Unless we begin looking at issues of family planning, we are sitting on a time bomb. 

Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have other work. We may want a comprehensive statement because everyone now wants to raise their issues. Let us hear from hon. Netalisire and the minister will respond and then we shall agree; if we want a comprehensive one, she will bring for the whole country. 

3.38
MS SARAH NETALISIRE KAYAGI (NRM, Woman Representative, Manafwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to start with the issue that hon. Huda has hinted on, and that is the issue of land. Many times we have raised the issue of boundaries in this Parliament, asking Government to ensure that boundaries are well demarcated. Throughout the country, people living near the national parks are fighting with UWA and are killing each other because each party says the land belongs to them. In the districts, it is the same issue. So, we want to ask the minister to intervene in the killings which come up as a result of these circumstances. 

I want to find out from the minister what happened to the community service where petty thieves would be judged. We used to have these cases where if someone was caught stealing chicken or a bunch of bananas, he would be sentenced there and then and he would serve say, six months so that the owner of the chicken or bananas would feel that justice is done. Today, someone is sent to the cells in the morning and by afternoon, he has been given bond and he is back at home. He then steals again, is imprisoned and the following day he will be out. So, people feel they are not being helped. 

Someone rears a cow and it is stolen in one day –(Interjections)– I have been given only two minutes, my brother. So, I want to find out from the minister what happened to the quick sentencing; what challenges did you face with it? 

Lastly, the minister in his statement says he wants to work with the RDCs. Some of our RDCs make very funny statements. They say, “If you catch a thief, kill them; do not wait for the Police to come and help you.” Before you work with them, please caution them on their statements because people see them as presidential representatives. So it is as if the President is talking and he is ordering them to kill people. Honourable minister, before you involve them in this issue, caution them to watch the words they tell the public. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: I do not know who is going to brief us, maybe the Prime Minister, but before you come up, we enacted the Domestic Violence Act in the Seventh Parliament; can anyone tell us its impact? Is it being implemented? We want to hear how far Government has gone in implementing the Domestic Violence Act because we made it. 

The second issue relates to what Members have said. In the statistics, it was clear that mob justice was the biggest component of those deaths, and that should be a matter of worry for the Government. They were the biggest component in that list which you read. 

3.40
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr James Baba): Madam Speaker, I want to thank the honourable members first for the compliments they made and secondly, and most importantly, for the issues they have raised. 

Hon. Olanya, if LC III chairpersons are moving with guns, that is illegal and such people should be arrested because they are not authorised to carry guns. If there are cases, please give us the information and we will do the needful. Even if they are licensed, they are not supposed to move around with the guns; those guns are supposed to be for personal protection. So, let the notice go out there that any LC chairperson moving around with guns and terrorising people in villages are doing it wrongly and they should stop it. The security agencies should address that. 

Hon. Olanya has gone; maybe we got the spelling of the name of the university lecturer who was killed wrong but I will go back and check for the correct spelling of the name. 

Hon. Atim, there are cases which I have not covered in this. Maybe our investigation team did not incorporate all the details but I would appreciate if you could give me some details so that I can follow them up. The monies that were recovered from criminals arising from robbery of shops and so forth are being kept as exhibits by the Police, to be shown in court. That money is there; at least I know of Shs 9.5 million somewhere, which was got from one of the robbers and it is with the Police – (Interjections) - She gave us information on all those victims whom I had not mentioned; I will include them in our investigations if they have not been captured. 

Hon. Nalubega, I was asked to answer specific questions about Gulu, Nwoya, Amuru and Lira. That is why I restricted myself to these places. Yes, there have been murders elsewhere and actually the Prime Minister, towards the end of last year, gave a very detailed report on the murders around the country to this House –(Interjections)– Well, murders will not stop so long as society exists, but what we must do is to make sure they are minimised or eliminated completely. That is why the Police is there and also other security agencies. 

Hon. Annet Okwenye, you very well know that the numbers in the Police are inadequate and that is why we keep coming to this House asking to recruit more. I want to thank the honourable members and the Speaker for the support they have given to increase the numbers in the Police. This year we have recruited over 3,000 cadets and about 5,000 constables. They are undergoing training and once they complete training at the end of the year, we shall deploy them and try to cover up the deficiencies. 

We do not deny that there is corruption in the Police but are we doing something about it? Obviously, we are. Corruption obviously exists and we have to fight it together. We must fight corruption in the Police, in civil service, in Parliament – we have to fight it together. 

Hon. Lugoloobi, I agree with you that we should expand the scope of investigations. Again, this is a matter of inadequacy of personnel. However, as you know, the Police are really trying their best. In the face of inadequacies and poor pay, they are trying their best to keep the peace and security of this country so that we are generally free –(Interruption)

MR OBOTH: Thank you, honourable minister, for giving way and I thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to seek clarification in reference to hon. Lugoloobi’s question. I think he raised a very pertinent issue that created the impression that after having overwhelming evidence, the DPP was not able to see the evidence. 

You might want to clarify why there are cases where the DPP may not see the evidence, which to us is overwhelming to us, as overwhelming. To hon. Amos Lugoloobi, he found a man driving his car and he expected the DPP to regard this man as a thief. Would you want to clarify if there are certain circumstances?

THE SPEAKER: I think that is unfair to the minister. You are asking him to speculate.

MR BABA: Very unfair, Madam Speaker, and coming from a prominent lawyer like hon. Jacob Oboth. You know the Police investigate and they take their raw data to the DPP. It is the DPP to decide whether there is a case or not and that office is independent. So, what more can I say? Leave my policemen to do their work and I am sure they are trying their best. That is all I am saying –(Interruptions)

MR KATUNTU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I do not know whether I got the question correctly, but I think that what hon. Jacob Oboth was trying to raise is that there are certain circumstances when a crime has been committed and on the face of it, somebody should be prosecuted. However, after analysing the evidence professionally, it is not possible to charge that particular person with that sort of offence. 

I come from that background of prosecution, Madam Speaker; if I can try to assist our colleagues because I have heard them talk over and over again about people getting arrested and are released. A criminal case is won at the point of investigation and it is also lost at that level. If you do not investigate a case professionally by assembling the required evidence, chances that you will not have a successful prosecution are so high, and that goes to the Police. Sometimes, there is an offence committed and the suspects have been arrested but in their over enthusiasm, they mess up the entire case.

I will end with one point from the history of the courts of this country. For the burden of proof, which was imposed by the law that was enacted by this House, the standard is beyond reasonable doubt. To achieve reasonable doubt is not easy. So, one judge, when acquitting some suspect, said this: “I am releasing this person but it is possible he is actually the criminal who committed the crime, but the standard with which I am obliged to hold somebody criminally responsible has not been achieved.” So, that is really the crisis. The burden goes to hon. James Baba’s officers to make sure that they investigate cases professionally. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

MR BABA: Hon. Abdu Katuntu, I could not agree with you more and if anybody wants a lawyer to pursue their case, please consider hon. Abdu Katuntu. (Laughter)

On mob justice, I would like to say that although it is happening, it is not rampant; and wherever there is mob justice and the Police appear at the scene, they have always salvaged the situation. Mob justice takes place where there are no security personnel present and once the Police appear, the mob disappears. So, hon. Oleru Huda, in most cases you will find people running to the Police or other security agencies for protection once they are being confronted.

Hon. Sarah Kayagi from Manafwa, I would like to inform you that community service is very much in place but that practice is usually done on the basis of a court order. It is the courts that order that such and such a person serves a sentence of community service, of course on the recommendation of the prosecution and the Police. This practice is very much in place and actually during these world cup matches, if you notice they very much popularize this practice.

On RDCs making reckless statements, I will convey this information to the Minister for the Presidency to ensure they toe the line. On the Domestic Violence Act, I believe the law is in place. Actually, in some of the cases that have occurred in Gulu and Lira, that law is being used to prosecute some of the people who murdered their wives or beat their spouses. The law is very much alive. It is in place and being implemented. I thank you very much, honourable members.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, minister. However, let me say something about what hon. Abdu Katuntu said. I do not think that all the time it is the investigations that are not complete or not done well. 

Last year I was involved with the Regional Police Commander of Busoga in following up thieves who were stealing electricity wires mainly from Kamuli. I made it my responsibility to follow up that matter. The thieves were arrested and the Police were taken to a warehouse full of electricity wires from all over Uganda. The Indians who were buying them were charged but within three months, the DPP withdrew the charges. So, what evidence do you want? I have taken you to the scene and the stores and suspects have confessed; what more do you want? No, I think the people of Uganda deserve better services than those.

LAYING OF PAPERS

3.55
THE CHAIRPERSON, LOCAL GOVERNMENT ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (Mr Stephen Ochola): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the financial statements for the year ended 30 June 2011 together with the report and opinion thereon by the Auditor-General for the following: 

i) 	Pece Division, Gulu Municipal Council 
ii) 	Koro Sub County, Gulu District 
iii) 	Lalogi Sub County, Gulu District
iv) 	Bungatira Sub County, Gulu District
v) 	Unyama Sub County, Gulu District
vi) 	Paimol Sub County, Agago District
vii) 	Wol Sub County, Agago District
viii)	Patongo Sub County, Agago District
ix) 	Lira Palwo Sub County, Agago District
x) 	Kotomor Sub County, Agago District
xi) 	Parabongo Sub County, Agago District
xii) 	Abyia Sub County, Alebtong District
xiii) 	Aloi Sub County, Alebtong District
xiv) 	Namasale Sub County, Amolatar District
xv) 	Etam Sub County, Amolatar District
xvi) 	Akwon Sub County, Amolatar District 
xvii) 	Agwingiri Sub County, Amolatar District
xviii) 	Muntu Sub County, Amolatar District
xix)	Barr Sub County, Lira District
xx) 	Agweng Sub County, Lira District
xxi) 	Aromo Sub County, Lira District

Madam Speaker, I beg to lay the financial statements for the year ended 30 June 2012 together with the report and opinion thereon by the Auditor-General for the following sub counties: 
i) 	Wol Sub County, Agago District 
ii) 	Paimol Sub County, Agago District
iii) 	Patongo Sub County, Agago District 
iv) 	Lokole Sub County, Agago District
v) 	Otwal Sub County, Oyam District
vi) 	Iceme Sub County, Oyam District
vii) 	Acaba Sub County, Oyam District
viii) 	Aber Sub County, Oyam District
ix) 	Ngai Sub County, Oyam District
x) 	Minakulu Sub County, Oyam District 

I beg to lay, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable chairperson. All those reports ending June 2011 and June 2012 as presented are sent to the Committee on Local Government Accounts for expeditious perusal and report back.

MOTION THAT THE HOUSE DISSOLVES ITSELF INTO A COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY TO CONSIDER THE VOTE ON ACCOUNT FOR THE FINANCIAL 2014/2015

4.06
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PRIVATISATION) (Mr Aston Kajara): Madam Speaker and honourable members, I beg to move that the House constitutes itself into a committee of supply for consideration and approval of a vote-on-account for the year 2014/2015. 

Madam Speaker, this motion is supported by the certificate of financial implications. I beg to lay on the Table.

THE SPEAKER: It is seconded.

MR KAJARA: Thank you, Madam Speaker.

“WHEREAS clause 4 of article 54 of the Constitution allows the President to authorise the issue of monies from the Consolidated Fund account for purposes of meeting expenditure necessary to carry on the services of Government until the expiration of four months from the beginning of the financial year or the coming into operation of the Appropriation Act, whichever is earlier; 

AND WHEREAS the government financial year will end on 30 June 2014 and it is the belief of the President that by that date, this House will not have approved the estimates of revenue and expenditure of government for the next financial year, 2014/2015; 

AND WHEREAS it is necessary that the President authorises issue of monies from the Consolidated Fund for purposes of meeting expenditures necessary to carry out the services of government until the budget is passed; 

AND WHEREAS clause 5(a) of article 154 of the Constitution provides that the authorisation of the issue of funds from the Consolidated Fund for purposes of clause 4 has to be approved by a resolution of Parliament;

I, therefore, propose that it be resolved that Parliament approves a vote-on-account allocated to the various votes attached to the resolution: recurrent expenditure of Shs 1,991,174,251,716 and development expenditure of Shs 2,477,175,415,264, all totalling to Shs 4,468,349,666,980.

In addition, that Parliament approves, for noting, Shs 2,547,812,732,000 which is the total requirement for the statutory charges on the Consolidated Fund and this should be noted by this honourable House.” I beg to move.

4.10
THE SHADOW MINISTER OF FINANCE (Mr Geoffrey Ekanya): Madam Speaker, I find the request by the minister in conflict with the rules and the Constitution. The practice and what is written is that the vote-on-account should not exceed what should enable Government to operate, as the minister has stated, for four months until the Appropriation Act comes into force.

Secondly, I have done analysis of several votes. If you look at the total request of the minister, it is Shs 7 trillion, which is almost half the budget because our total budget is Shs 9.5 trillion. How do we then come to Shs 15 trillion? About Shs 2.5 trillion is drawdown borrowing and the rest is from development partners. When you add, the total is Shs 15 trillion. Also, Shs 1 trillion of the Shs 15 trillion is for debt servicing. Therefore, the amount of money which is available is that. 

Madam Speaker, we even have a position from the Attorney-General regarding domestic borrowing that requires parliamentary approval first. We have it in writing. Therefore, the amount of money which we have available, excluding the Shs 2 trillion which we are going to borrow after parliamentary approval, is Shs 9.5 trillion. The Minister of Finance is requesting us to pass a vote-on-account of Shs 7 trillion. I am just giving you a summary before I go into the detailed votes. This violates the Constitution; it violates the Rules of Procedure and all the norms. 

The practice here is that the budget is submitted with the work plan and procurement plan, which means that after four months the civil servants and the entire operation will be idle because the money is going to be released and spent within four months. What are people going to do for the eight months? So it begs serious questions that the minister needs to clarify. If you want me to give you specific votes, I can do so. 

In addition to that, I am armed with another document here showing Shs 300 billion, which the Ministry of Finance released about a week ago, which is to come here as supplementary. This is also drawdown.

MR KAJARA: Madam Speaker, first of all regarding the issue of supplementary budgets, we have laid before this Parliament Supplementary Schedule No.1 and we have also laid before this Parliament Supplementary Schedule No.2 with its addendum, and it is pending Parliament approval. When we tried to bring this before, it was said that the committees are not in place to consider such supplementary budgets and that until the committees are formed, these cannot be passed. 

It is our desire that these supplementary budgets be passed. This is because, first of all, part of this money is supposed to pay salaries and the other part is supposed to go towards capitation grants for schools. 

Madam Speaker, it is true that the amount exceeds one-third. The reason is that the vote-on-account is computed on one-third of the total budget, and next financial year’s vote-on-account exceeds one-third due to frontloading for the following critical expenditure: One, we have the national census, which is due in August. If we do not frontload this money, it will not be – (Interruptions) - Why don’t I explain then you can -

THE SPEAKER: Let him explain and then I will give you an opportunity.

MR KAJARA: The second reason as to why the vote-on-account will exceed one-third is: we have to provide for thermal power and compensation for the oil refinery land, which was not covered under last year’s budget and which is very urgent for the oil industry to begin. The third reason is that we have to cater for the foot and mouth disease, which is an urgent matter. You cannot wait for the budget to be approved in order for you to intervene in that. Fourthly-

THE SPEAKER: Order, Members.

MR KAJARA: Madam Speaker, we have classified expenditure under State House. It is all budgeted for but we need to frontload it. We have the identity card project activities, which are going on and we cannot wait until the full budget is approved. Lastly, we have the East African single tourist visa and passports, which we need to cater for.

Madam Speaker, in any case, we are covered by the Constitution because Article 154 (4) of the Constitution, if I may read it, says, “If the President is satisfied that the Appropriation Act in respect of any financial year will not or has not come into operation by the beginning of that financial year, the President may, subject to the provisions of this article, authorise the issue of monies from the Consolidated Fund Account for the purposes of meeting expenditure necessary to carry on the services of the Government…” 

There is no limit. What he needs to do is to asses if this expenditure we are seeking approval of is necessary to carry out the activities of Government until we have the Appropriation Act or until the full budget is passed, or until the expiration of four months from the beginning of the financial year or the coming into operation of the Appropriation Act. So, there is no limit although ordinarily, we go for one-third of the budget. That is the reason why this appropriation-in-aid is exceeding a quarter of the budget as is provided for. I thank you.

4.43
MR NATHAN NANDALA-MAFABI (FDC, Budadiri County West, Sironko): Madam Speaker, thank you very much. First of all, the collection order that is out is for one-third. I hope you know what I am talking about – for the taxes. This means that you are supposed to collect one-third of the taxes to assist you during the period of the four months. 

Since the Constitution came into place, this is the first time that we see you ask for 50 per cent of the budget. One of the most interesting points is that you want to do classified expenditure, the single East African visa and the census. 

I think that you are failing in your duties. The best way is to first agree on one-third and when you finish the one-third - this is simple advice – (Interjections) – Please, listen to me; we are giving you free advice or technical advice not paid for, which your Ministry of Finance officials may have failed to tell you. 

As I was saying, just get your one-third and after that, come back and bring this either under emergency - if it is really an emergency - so that you can do the frontloading that you are talking about, or you can bring it under the Contingency Fund, which we have been telling you about. In this current state, if anybody passed this the way it is, we would be making a very big mistake and I can tell you that we shall be challenged. It is very unlawful. 

I will tell you, the Minister for Finance, even if we gave you Shs 7 trillion, you cannot spend it in these four months unless you want to use it for something else. The best you can spend in these four months is about Shs 2 trillion.

Madam Speaker, having said that, there are so many issues that we also want to raise, which we want the minister to agree on before we even give him the one-third. One, he wants to tax agricultural inputs like hoes, seeds and the like and the purpose is that he wants to collect money to help the agricultural sector. (Laughter) It is very interesting. You want to tax the person going into agriculture and you want to help him again in the same agriculture. The world over, agriculture is even subsidised. 

One of the proposals that I want to move at an appropriate time, when he first agrees to the one-third, is that if we know the amount from the expected tax from farm and agricultural inputs like seeds and hoes, we should immediately reduce that amount from the agriculture budget. This is because it is the same money; it is like pulling it from one’s pocket and putting it in the other pocket. So, it does not make sense for us as Parliament to tax farm inputs. We would be disadvantaging the already disadvantaged class or sector. 

Madam Speaker, I have never seen a statutory vote being passed 100 per cent. I have never seen it. I want the minister to also help me understand that. What is statutory? Salary is statutory. You are not telling me that you are going to pay the salaries of all staff in Uganda at once –(Member timed out.)

MR BAHATI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The former Leader of the Opposition has raised an important point that the Minister for Finance would probably have separated the vote-on-account and other additional requests. I thought that we should first resolve that. 

I do not know whether it is procedurally right to allow the former Leader of the Opposition to open discussion and go into debate before we agree whether we should go forward and how to go forward. Can’t we first sort out this issue rather than allowing him going deep into the debate of the subject matter?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, did you come for the vote-on-account or you came for additional expenditure?

MR KAJARA: Madam Speaker, the vote-on-account is the money that is required to carry out government activities in the first four months of the financial year before the approval of the Appropriation Act, whichever comes earlier. It includes what you call “additional expenditure”. These activities are required to be financed –(Interjection)– The Constitution does not refer to any percentage. What it does refer to is issue of money from the Consolidated Fund account for purposes of meeting expenditure necessary to carry on the services of Government. 

All the above activities we are talking about – the national census, the foot and mouth disease – are part and parcel of the budget and these activities will need to be funded in the first four months of this financial year. That is what we are saying, Madam Speaker. 

MR MUSASIZI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Today when I checked on my iPad, I saw the Order Paper and it had an item on the vote-on-account. The vote-on-account that I know is one-third of our national budget. We must separate issues. If we are here for emergencies, let us know that we are here for emergencies; if we are here for vote-on-account, let us know that we are here for vote-on-account and we do that. So, I want to disagree with the Minister.

It is true there could be emergencies here and there but the principle of vote-on-account should not be defeated to facilitate the minister to bring items which are not part of vote-on-account. I thank you.

MR KAKOOZA: Thank you. I think when you check our rules, it is the practice of this House that once the budget is read, in order to enable government activities to be dealt with the first item we deal with is the vote-on-account. How has it been done? For all the activities of the sectors, we appropriate one-third of the total budget, and this is what hon. Nandala-Mafabi was referring to – a quarter of the collection of the taxes which we estimated but have not yet collected. This is what we do as a practice in this House. 

The moment you mix other extra expenditure, – that is why you now have a total that the minister is requesting for, which is against the Budget Act, which accounts for 50 per cent and this cannot be. I find it very abnormal that the Minister of Finance is coming to request for a total percentage of Vote-on-Account of the total budget which is totalling to 50 percent. I think what Parliament is supposed to do is what we are doing. If the minister requests for a third of the total budget, we can sit and pass a Vote-on-Account but not a total expenditure which is beyond one third; it will be against the law.

MS LILLY ADONG: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to seek clarification from the minister on how much of the total budget for the next financial year –(Interjections)– please, allow me to ask my question. What will constitute 30 percent of that? Why have you asked for more than what is required? Thank you.

4.28
MR ABDU KATUNTU (FDC, Bugweri County, Iganga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. We should go back to the reason as to why the current legal regime allows a Vote-on-Account. The reason is that before we pass the National Budget, Government should be able to access – (Hon. Fred Mwesigye rose_)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Katuntu, please proceed.

MR KATUNTU: No, there was a point of order being raised. (Laughter) Actually, Madam Speaker, I know there was a lot of distraction of the chair but I think my colleague was having problems appreciating a legal regime and a government. (Laughter) Anyway, I am sure somebody whispered to him and his worries ended. So the reason is that Government activities must go on as Parliament deliberates on the budget.  what this House has always done is to give a blanket approval of 30 percent as the Budget Act requires; And we do not have any problem with that, Madam Speaker.

However, I am looking at the document from the Ministry of  Finance and this is Schedule No.2 for financial year 2014/15: Central Government Vote – the document was supplied by the Ministry of Finance. You will have to look at the last column; it clearly shows that it is one third of the vote. And when you do the total that is when it will give you Shs 7 trillion, which is far above the 30 percent - (Interjections)- anyway, it is beyond the 30 percent.

So when hon. Ekanya rightly raises the issue, the minister then says, “Actually it is true but then we need more money.” I do not want to use a bad word but the mild one I can find is “conning”. We were going to be conned that actually the money being requested for is one third because we have not had the opportunity to scrutinise the figures. Thanks to those who have done their homework and have read what is in the Budget and what is in the request on the Vote-on-Account.

Madam Speaker, should we go ahead and approve the 50 percent; there is no reason why we should even go through this budget process –(Interjection)– please, let me make my point and then I will allow you. You see, honourable colleagues, once you approve 50 percent, you would have committed literally the entire budget; there is no way you will even have any adjustment because most of the activities would have been committed. And some of them, if it is a contract, some money has already been expended on a particular activity. Hon. Mafabi is raising an issue, for example, which some of us find very pertinent about the agriculture sector. And we find some of the proposed taxes unacceptable. But should we pass this, we will not even raise those issues.

 I really appeal to colleagues both on the other side and this side; if you think there is an area of improvement within the budget, you cannot pass 50 percent of that budget. So we should go back to what hon. Kakooza is talking about - and that is the pertinent question, Madam Speaker, you have raised - we look at the Vote-on-Account – 30 percent – and if there is any other crisis which the minister is talking about, the President, under the Constitution will request for that money and we shall examine the request and allow it and so forth. But to pass 50 percent of the budget now – forget about the budgetary process, we rather pass 100 percent.

4.30
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY (Mr Xavier Kyooma): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to agree with the rest of my colleagues; anything over and above the 33.33 percent is illegal. And I do not know where the problem comes from because - hon. Minister, if you presented your Vote-on-Account and it is agreed upon by this House, the implication is that you will start spending within that limit; even the Foot-and-Mouth disease you are talking about will be within that amount. And what is important thereafter is for you to expedite the process of discussing the ministerial policy statement so that we actually approve the budget within time. And in this case, you will not need those exorbitant funds. I know the Leader of Government Business is also coming on board. But I also support the vote-on-account within its limit. 

4.36
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I think the confusion arises out of the presentation because what is being asked for is not Shs 7 trillion but Shs 4 trillion. Even without going into the argument about the legality of one third or 40 percent, which we can go into –(Interjections)– there is also the practice, yes, I agree. I would suggest that it is the presentation that has given the picture to which Members are responding. So, I would like to suggest, therefore, that we stand over this matter; we will present it tomorrow with clear figures and presentation so that the confusion which is here today does not cloud the clarity of the matter before the House. I so pray. Thank you. 

4.37
MR GEOFREY EKANYA (FDC, Tororo County, Tororo): Madam Speaker, I want to thank you and I want to thank the Prime Minister for that wisdom and for requesting that this matter be withdrawn. Thank you very much. But the other day, after the Minister of Finance had presented the Budget, you made a very strong statement that the country is waiting for. You said that you needed the names of the accounting officers. I hope that since I was delayed outside, this matter has been complied with. Otherwise, I thank you and I concede to your proposal. 

THE SPEAKER: Okay, we will stand over this matter, but I think we could handle the issue of the accounting officers, because there is a submission on the accounting officers; you are supposed to lay it here while we do other things. 

MR SSEBUNYA: Madam Speaker, I am glad that we stood over the matter. But I want to appeal to Members that this year, unlike other years, we have a special activity called census. UBOS had wanted this money to be front loaded in the previous year we are ending –(Interjections)– I want to appeal to Members to understand that we have a very important activity. So tomorrow, when we are considering the matter, we need to put into consideration the amount for census. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: But, honourable members, this House has been supportive of the census activities. We gave the money to start the process. Parliament actually is very supportive –(Interjections)– no, I do not want you to impute ill motives on this House. We defer the issue of the vote-on-account. But now, we go to the accounting officers. 

4.39
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PRIVATISATION) (Mr Aston Kajara): Madam Speaker, together with the vote-on-account, we had already submitted to Parliament the list of accounting officers with a certificate of financial implications; with the schedules on the total vote-on-account and also the amount required to be spent by the local government in the foreign missions and the development expenditure. I beg to lay on the Table the list of accounting officers. I beg to lay.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, honourable members, the list has been laid. It is available for you to scrutinise; it is now property of this House. 

MS ONGOM: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the Prime Minister for having stood over this issue. Last week, in this House, we realised that the different ministries that we have under the Office of the Prime Minister do not know the number of the people they pay. 

Ministry of Finance gets submission from the different ministries; Ministry of Education does not know the number of teachers; Minister of Health does not know the number of health workers; the Police do not know the number of policemen in this country. We have billions of shillings unspent. In the vote-on- account here, they are saying there are arrears. It is my opinion, Madam Speaker, that if we stood over this, wouldn’t it be procedurally right for the Minister of Finance and the Prime Minister to give a detailed account of the number of people Parliament paid so that we may avoid over appropriation. 

Last week, Mr Speaker, you were not in the House. Police had Shs 5 billion unspent and more over, we were giving supplementary in this House and the Shs 5 billion was being requested for from the Ministry of Finance to allow them go and construct a camp because the money had not been unspent, yet quite a number of policemen were still unpaid. So can we have the data on this House before we can appropriate?

4.43
MR NATHAN NANDALA-MAFABI (FDC, Budadiri County West, Sironko): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also want to thank the Prime Minister for accepting to stand over this matter. But before we can thank the Prime Minister fully, there is an attachment on the back of this document which they gave us. Colleagues, check the last page; there is where they said, “Interest payment”; special operations, Shs 2.547 trillion. The figures are on the last page. Interest payment is totalling to Shs 2.547 trillion and this is the same figure, if you check page 1. The Minister of Finance called it statutory payment; it is Shs 2.547 trillion. I don’t know if you have seen it. This figure is what we called interest payment.

Madam Speaker, if Uganda is paying interest per year of Shs 2.547 trillion, I do not know how much we borrowed. If you changed this to be 10 percent of – assuming the principle is X at 10 percent, this gives Shs 2.5 trillion which means we have borrowed Shs 25 trillion. So, before we thank that Prime Minister of ours –(Interruption) 

MS KAMATEEKA: Thank you, Madam Speaker and hon. colleague. I think the Shs 2.5 trillion which is put as interest payment is the budgetary allocation requested for vote-on-account for statutory bodies. If you check on page 1, the sub-total for everything else is Shs 4.4 billion. Then for statutory bodies, it is Shs 5 trillion; and it is this figure of Shs 2.54 trillion that is reflected at the back of the document. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, I went to Busoga College Mwiri and I did Physics, Chemistry and Maths (PCM). I want you to get the figures there and total them up; it will give you 2.54 trillion. That is why I said, I went to Mwiri. Before you can call me to order or give me information, please first cross check yourself. 

Madam Speaker, the issue I was trying to raise is that this interest payment – we want to know how much the principle is. We know that we borrow our money from the World Bank and IMF and the interest rate is about 1 percent. Now if we are going to pay Shs 2.5 trillion, that means we must have borrowed may be over Shs 100 trillion and we may need to know where this money is. Madam Speaker, I rest my case.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, it has been the practice in this House that we provide one third of the budget but I think there was – okay, I will not go into that. Let me ask the Government to withdraw their proposal and come back with a proper request complying with the Constitution, the Budget Act and the Rules of Procedure. Thank you.

MR SEMUGABA: Point of procedure, Madam Speaker. Thank you, Madam Speaker and I also thank the Prime Minister for presenting his proposal. However, I notice that the motion has not been procedurally withdrawn. At the same time, I would like to ask the Rt hon. Prime Minister to always check on his house to avoid shaming us as Ugandans. Who are those people at the Ministry of Finance giving out such data to confuse us? I would like to suggest that next time they do such a thing again, there should be some penalties meted out to such people because they seem to be incompetent. They have wasted our time with which we would be debating other important issue. So, Rt hon. Prime Minister, I urge you to check your house properly to avoid wastage of Parliament time. So, Madam Speaker, is it procedurally right for this motion to be casually withdrawn anyhow?

MR KAJARA: Madam Speaker, I hereby move that the motion for Parliament to consider the approval of vote-on-account for the financial year 2014/15 be withdrawn for further consultation and it be resubmitted to Parliament tomorrow. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that the motion be withdrawn.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Motion withdrawn.)

COMPOSITION OF SECTORAL COMMITTEES

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I now want us to deal with the issue of the composition of committees.

4.48
THE SECOND DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND DEPUTY LEADER OF GOVERNMET BUSINESS (GEN. MOSES ALI): Madam Speaker, the list of names of members who belong to sectoral committees has been submitted to your office in accordance with Rule 176 (2) of our Rules of Procedure. So, the Office of Government Chief Whip has designated names of committee chairpersons, vice chairpersons and members of the various committees. With your permission, I will ask the hon. David Bahati to come read the names accordingly.

4.50
MR DAVID BAHATI (NRM, Ndorwa County West, Kabale): Madam Speaker, as requested by the Deputy Leader of Government Business, I stand to read the names of members who have been designated to the various sectoral committees of this House.

Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development
    1. Hon. Margret Komuhangi	
    2. Hon. Arinaitwe Rwakajara
    3. Hon. William Nokrach
    4. Hon. Margret Baba Diri
    5. Hon. Rosemary Nauwat
    6. Hon. Sentongo Nabulya Teopista
    7. Hon. Nsanja Dorothy 
    8. Hon. Terence Achia 
    9. Hon. Abdu Kitata.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, can we have the proposals from the Leader of Opposition? 

MR KATUNTU: Madam Speaker, we request that you give us a few minutes as we get ready with the list.

THE SPEAKER: No, my problem is that I have to take into account the numbers. I must balance the numbers on each committee. So, if we just keep moving from committee to committee, we may lose track.

MR KATUNTU: Within the next two minutes, we shall have the list with us.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, go on to the next committee. We will come back to the Committee on Gender.

MR BAHATI: On the Committee on Natural Resources, we have the following members:
    1. Hon. Kafabusa Werikhe Michael
    2. Hon. Kwizera Eddie Wa Gahungu 
    3. Hon. Nankabirwa Anna Maria
    4. Hon. Wangolo Jacob
    5. Hon.  Ruhunda Alex
    6. Hon. Wamakuyu Mudimi
    7. Hon. Bangirana Kawooya Anifa
    8. Hon. Grace Byaruganba
    9. Hon. Maj. Gen. Jim Katugugu Muhwezi
    10. Hon. Kiwanda Godfrey 
    11. Hon. Bigirwa Julius Junjura 
    12. Hon. Bakaluba Mukasa
    13. Hon. Namirembe  Bbumba Syda
    14. Hon. Samsom Lokii
    15. Hon. Drito Martin Andi 
    16. Hon. Yorokamu Katwiremu
    17. Hon. Wilberforce Yaguma
    18. Hon. Mujuni Vincent Kyamadidi.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I have received a copy from the Opposition but I don’t know who is going to present it.

MR KATUNTU: Madam Speaker, which committee should I start with? Gender committee? Okay, for Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development, we have the following members from the Opposition: Hon. Winifred Kiiza and Hon. Christopher Acire.

Committee on Natural Resources
    1. Hon. Reagan Okumu
    2. Hon. Beatrice Anywar
    3. Hon. John Ken-Lukyamuzi
    4. Hon. Yokasi Bihande Bwambale
    5. Hon. Florence Ibi Ekwau
    6. Hon. Alice Alaso Asianut
    7. Hon. Florence Namayanja
    8. Hon. Jimmy Akena 
    9. Hon. Deogratious Kiyingi

THE SPEAKER:  Honourable member, the committee is supposed to have 25 members. Now if the Opposition is taking one half, then I don’t know what will happen to the Independents.

MR KATUNTU: Madam Speaker, this matter was forwarded to your office on 18 June 2014. May be your office should have reverted the document to the Office of Chief Opposition Whip to seek clarification.

THE SPEAKER: But they should know really. Anyway, honourable members, we still have a problem. When I looked at that list, I realised there is a member who has been nominated to five committees and another nominated to three committees and another to two and these are sessional committees.

MR KATUNTU: Madam Speaker, I am standing here because nature upholds a vacuum – (Laughter) – I am just trying to make parliamentary work progress. In the circumstances, can I seek that this matter is stood over until tomorrow to enable us do the necessary consultations with the office of the Opposition Chief Whip who currently is not in the country but we shall find a way of reconciling it.

THE SPEAKER: Do we have information from the Independents? There is a problem with that list. I have looked at it.

4.58
MR SAM OTADA (Independent, Kibanda County, Kibaale): Thank you Madam Speaker. I have just written a note to you, I don’t know whether you have read it. In accordance with our rules, I communicated to Independent Members of Parliament; as is always the practice, the Office of the Clerk is supposed to compile those names in accordance with the wishes of the members and I always follow that list to designate them. So I just confirmed with the clerk at Table here and they don’t seem to have the compiled list of those names. So I am equally in the same spot like my brother Abdu Katuntu. So, I beg your indulgence, Madam Speaker.

MS ADONG: Madam Speaker, I would propose that probably since Government side is ready, they read ours, we continue while we can take in theirs tomorrow. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: But how will they sit when they are not fully constituted. Would honourable members mind the Government side, the Leader of Opposition and the Independents sitting and harmonising so that –(Interjections)– no, you are ready but there is the issue of numbers.

GEN. MOSES ALI: Madam Speaker, we are not going to be held at a ransom because of some people’s failures. You directed us long time ago and it is not just this morning. Everybody is aware, so if you have two children and the other is more active than - I think the one who is ready should be given time to come instead of holding us at ransom.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, you can present but we shall not take a vote today. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I want to thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  The committees will be allocated to you don’t worry, they are not going anywhere. The procedural issue I am raising is; I heard you saying 25 members and I am reading the Rules, they are saying 30 maximum, have we reduced to 25 or 30?

THE SPEAKER: Present your nominees.

MR BAHATI: Thank you, Madam speaker. But also to confirm that we normally use the numerical strength in the House in terms of determining how many members we designate on different committee – so, while we can interact with Opposition and Independents, we are always cautious about that. 

Committee on Public Service and Local Government 
    1. Hon. Grace Kwiyichwiny Freedom 
    2. Hon. Bakeine Mabel Komugisha
    3. Hon. Kintu Florence 
    4. Hon. Magyezi Raphael 
    5. Hon. Besisira Ignatius 
    6. Hon. Mutyabule Florence 
    7. Hon. Kiiza Rwebembera James 
    8. Hon. Nanyondo Birungi Carolyn 
    9. Hon. Muhumuza David 
    10. Hon. Mubito John Bosco 
    11. Hon. Kafuda Boaz. 

Committee on Tourism Trade and Industry
    1. Hon. Kabahenda Flavia Rwabuhoro 
    2. Hon. James Mbahimba 
    3. Hon. Kasaija Steven Kagwera 
    4. Hon. Tete Evelyn Chelangat 
    5. Hon. Mugema Peter 
    6. Hon. Mpairwe Beatrice 
    7. Hon. Simbwa John 
    8. Hon. Mayende Stephen Dede 
    9. Hon. Okot Ogwong Felix
    10. Hon. Nakabaale Patrick 
    11. Hon. Kalungi Elizabeth 
    12. Hon. Mulimba John 
    13. Hon. Moses Balyeku Grace 
    14. Hon. Businge Rusoke Victoria
    15. Hon. Aleper Margaret Achilla 

Committee on Information, Communication & Technology 
    1. Hon. Bagiire Vincent 
    2. Hon. Kyewalabye Kabajo James 
    3. Hon.Turyahikayo Mary Paula
    4. Hon. Bahati David 
    5. Hon. Ssemuli Anthony 
    6. Hon.Amongin Jacquiline 
    7. Hon. Baliddawa Edward 
    8. Hon. Omara Geoffrey 
    9. Hon. Byamukama Nulu 
    10. Hon. Lolem Micah Akasale 

Committee on Physical Infrastructure
    1. Hon. Ephraim Biraro Ganshanga
    2. Hon. Aleper Simon Peter
    3. Hon. Balyejusa Sulaiman
    4. Hon. Dombo Emmanuel
    5. Hon. Migadde Robert
    6. Hon. Waira Kyewalabye Majegere
    7. Hon. Nabbanja Robinah
    8. Hon. Mandera Amos
    9. Hon. Ssemugaba Samuel
    10. Hon. Kaahwa Tophace
    11. Hon. Mukitale Stephen
    12. Hon. Isabirye Iddi 
    13. Hon. Kangwagye Stephen. 

Committee on Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries 
    1. Hon. Mathias Kasamba 
    2. Hon. Oleru  Huda 
    3. Hon. Lowila CD Oketayat 
    4. Hon. Bukenya Gilbert 
    5. Hon. Okot John Amos 
    6. Hon. Kusasira Peace Kanyesigye
    7. Hon. Bintu Jalia Lukumu 
    8. Hon. Mpima Dorothy 
    9. Hon. Namoe Stella 
    10. Hon. Kase-Mubanda Freda 
    11. Hon. Badda Fred 
    12. Hon. Kiboijana Margaret 
    13. Hon. Kasirivu Atwooki 

Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs 
    1. Hon. Namugwanya Benny 
    2. Hon. Eriaku Peter Emmanuel 
    3. Hon. Muwuma Milton 
    4. Hon. Mulongo Simon 
    5. Hon. Mulindwa Patrick 
    6. Hon. Mbaghadhi Fredrick Nkayi
    7. Hon. George Micheal Mukula
    8. Hon. Margaret Makhoha 
    9. Hon. Okeyo Peter
    10. Hon. Saleh Kamba 
    11. Hon. Nakawunde Sarah Temulanda
    12. Hon. Alengot Proscovia 
    13. Hon. Sam Lyomoki 

Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development 
    1. Hon. Kasule Robert Ssebunya 
    2. Hon. Okello Anthony  
    3. Hon. Kyomya Xavier Akampurira 
    4. Hon. Akol Rose 
    5. Hon. Ssejoba Isaac 
    6. Hon. Lwanga Timothy 
    7. Hon. Adong Lilly 
    8. Hon. Katoto Hatwib 
    9. Hon. Amos Lugoloobi 
    10. Hon. Emma Boona 
    11. Hon. Ayepa Michael 
    12. Hon. Kakooza James 
    13. Hon. Mugabi Muzaale Martin 

Committee on Presidential Affairs 
    1. Hon. Mwesigye Fred
    2. Hon. Ogwang Peter 
    3. Hon. Alero Tom Azaa, 
    4. Hon. Nabirye Agnes 
    5. Hon. Amoiti Judith Mary 
    6. Hon. Nebanda Florence 
    7. Hon. Ekuma George 
    8. Hon. Harriet Ntabazi 
    9. Hon. Kabule Naome 
    10. Hon. Kahunde Hellen 
    11. Hon. Mawanda Michael
    12. Hon. Lokii John Baptist. 

Committee on Foreign Affairs 
    1. Hon. Lokii Peter Abrahams 
    2. Hon. Auma Juliana Modest 
    3. Hon. Chemaswet Abdi Fadhil
    4. Hon. Ssempala Mbuga Edward 
    5. Hon. Kakoba Onyango 
    6. Hon. Ongola Obote 
    7. Hon. Omwonya Stanley 
    8. Hon. Asamo Hellen Grace 
    9. Hon. Awongo Ahmed 
    10. Hon. Asupasa Isiku 
    11. Hon. Hood Katuramu 
    12. Hon. Rose Mutonyi 

Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs 
    1. Hon. Stephen Tashobya 
    2. Hon. Baaka Stephen 
    3. Hon. Achia Remigio 
    4. Hon. Obua Denis Hamson 
    5. Hon. Tibigambwa Lindah 
    6. Hon. Musinguzi Yona 
    7. Hon. Kamateka Jovah 
    8. Hon. Kabakumba Masiko 
    9. Hon. Ndezi Alex 
    10. Hon. Nyakecho  Okwenyi Annet
    11. Hon. Byarugaba Alex
    12. Hon. Ochua David
    13. Hon. Nakayenze Connie
    14. Hon. Amoding Monicah
    15. Hon. Mbabazi Betty

Committee on East African Community Affairs
    1. Hon. Ayoo Tonny
    2. Hon. Sarah Nyirabashitsi Mateke
    3. Hon. Mwebaze Sarah
    4. Hon. Babirye Kadogo
    5. Hon. Sabila Nelson
    6. Hon. Kayagi Sarah
    7. Hon. Nakato Kyabangi
    8. Hon. Sofia Nalule
    9. Hon. Kabaale Olivia
    10. Hon. Nansubuga Rosemary Seninde
    11. Hon. Anna Auru
    12. Hon. Ssali Baker

Committee on Education and Sports
    1. Hon. Lanyero Sarah
    2. Hon. Ngabo William
    3. Hon. Ssinabulya Sylivia Namabidde
    4. Hon. Opolot Jacob
    5. Hon. Yahaya Gudoi
    6. Hon. Chekwel Lydia
    7. Hon. Khiddu Makubuya
    8. Hon. Acayo Christine
    9. Hon. Kamara John
    10. Hon. Susan Amero
    11. Hon. Nakabira Gertrude

Committee on Health 
    1. Hon. Omona Kenneth
    2. Hon. Lematia Ruth
    3. Hon. Iriama Margaret
    4. Hon. Anite Evenlyn
    5. Hon. Kabasharira Noame
    6. Hon. Dr Bitekyerezo Medard
    7. Hon. Dr Twa-Twa Mutwalante
    8. Hon. Khainza Justine
    9. Hon. Chris Baryomusi
    10. Hon. Rusaniya Barumba
    11. Hon. Egunyu Nantume Jennifer
    12. Hon. Dr Patrick Mutono Lodoi
    13. Hon. Oliver Katwesigye
  
Madam Speaker, these are proposals for the members of the committee. I also beg that I can make the proposal for the leadership. On the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development, the Chairperson is Hon. Margaret Komuhangi and the Vice Chairperson is hon. Arinaitwe Rwakajara.

Committee on Natural Resources; hon. Kafabusa Werikhe Micheal is the chairperson and the vice-chairperson is hon. Kwizera Eddie.

On the Committee on Public Service and Local Government, hon. Grace Kwiyucwiny Freedom is the chairperson and hon. Mabel Bakeine is the vice-chairperson.

On Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry, hon. Kabahenda Flavia Rwabuhoro is the chairperson and the vice chairperson is coming from somewhere else.

On the Committee on Information and Communication Technology, hon. Bagiire Vincent is chairperson and hon. Kyewalabye Kabajo James is vice-chairperson.

The Committee on Infrastructure; hon. Biraaro Ephraim is Chairperson and hon. Aleper Simon is vice-chairperson

On the Committee on Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries, the chairperson is hon. Mathias Kasamba and the vice-chairperson is hon. Oleru Huda.

On the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs, the chairperson is hon. Namugwanya Benny and the vice-chairperson is hon. Eriaku Peter Emmanuel.

On the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development, the Chairperson is hon. Kasule Robert Sebunya and the vice-Chairperson is hon. Okello Anthony.

On the Committee on Presidential Affairs, the chairperson is hon. Mwesigye Fred, and the vice-chairperson is hon. Ogwang Peter.

On the Committee on Foreign Affairs, the vice chairperson is hon. Lokii Peter Abrahams and the chairperson will be coming from somewhere else.

On the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs, the chairperson is hon. Stephen Tashobya and the vice-chairperson is hon. Bakka Stephen.

On the Committee on East African Community Affairs, the Chairperson is hon. Ayoo Tonny and the vice-chairperson is hon. Sarah Mateke.

On the Committee on Education, the Chairperson is hon. Lanyero Sarah and the vice-chairperson is hon. Ngabo William Kwemara.

On the Committee on Health, the chairperson is Dr Omona Kenneth and the vice-chairperson is hon. Lematia Ruth. These are the members and the leadership that has been designated for the sectoral committees for the fourth Session.

Madam Speaker, I beg to lay it on Table. We also have one communication to make in respect to the Parliamentary Pensions Board. Our side is designating hon. Mary Paula Turyahikayo to be a member of the Parliamentary Pensions Board. I beg to lay on Table. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have noted the proposals from the NRM side but I note that the UPDF, the Independents, and the Opposition have not made any submissions. So I want to urge all of you to work overnight so that we can complete the process tomorrow.

As for the pensions, the pensions should be okay because the Opposition at least still has members on the pension board, isn’t it?

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, I am not speaking for the Opposition but to the best of our knowledge, they have already designated a member.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, so I put the question that hon. Mary Paula Turyahikayo be approved as the representative for the NRM on the Parliamentary Pensions Board.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I want to give you enough time to go and organise yourselves and for the government to come back with a real Vote-on-Account, not smuggling. So I want to release you now. The House is adjourned to 2.00 O’clock tomorrow and we should finish that business very expeditiously. Thank you.

(The House rose at 5.15 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 25 June 2014 at 2.00 p.m.)
