

Tuesday, 6 June 2017

Parliament met at 3.32 p.m. in Serena Conference centre, Kampala.

National Anthem

East African Community Anthem

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

PROCLAMATION 

THE SPEAKER: “WHEREAS under Article 95(2) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, a session of Parliament shall be held at such place within Uganda and shall commence at a such time as the Speaker may, by proclamation, appoint and;

WHEREAS the First Session of the Tenth Parliament commenced on the 19 day of May 2016 and further;

WHEREAS the President of the Republic of Uganda is required, under Article 101(1) of the Constitution, to deliver to Parliament an address of the State of the Nation at the beginning of each session;

NOW, THEREFORE, in the exercise of the powers conferred upon the Speaker by Article 95(2) of the Constitution, I hereby proclaim that Parliament shall sit at the Kampala Serena Conference Centre on the 6th day of June 2017 at 14:00hours to receive the State of the Nation Address from the President;

And further, in exercise of the powers conferred upon the Speaker by the Constitution, the Parliament Powers and Privileges Act, Cap 258 and the Rules of Procedure of Parliament, it is hereby proclaimed and declared that the said Kampala Serena Conference Centre, including its forecourt, the yard and the gardens, be the precincts of the Parliament for the above mentioned purpose.

Given under my hand at Parliament House, Kampala on the 11th day of May 2017, 
Rebecca Kadaga 
Speaker.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Your Excellency President and Mrs Museveni, Your Excellency the Vice President, Mr Edward Sekandi, My Lord the Chief Justice, Mr Bart Katureebe, the Deputy Chief Justice, the Vice Chairperson of the NRM, Hajji Kigongo, the traditional leaders, Rt hon. Prime Minister and the deputy prime ministers, the ministers, hon. Leader of the Opposition, the ministers of state, judges of the Courts of Judicature, honourable members of Parliament, members of the diplomatic corps and all invited guests, I take this opportunity to welcome you to this important event, which marks the official opening of the Second Session of the Tenth Parliament.

Your Excellency, I have the honour to inform you that we have special guests in our midst this afternoon. First, I would like to recognise Mrs Esther Lungu, First Lady of the Republic of Zambia. We welcome you amidst us. (Applause)

I would also like to welcome Mr Michel Sidibe, the Executive Director of UNAIDS who is here to attend the launch of the Presidential Initiative to Fast-Track the Ending of HIV/AIDS in Uganda. This took place this morning and we thank Your Excellency for that activity. As Ugandans may recall, Mr Sidibe is not new to this country. He was here in the 1990s as the UNICEF representative and we are happy to see him in the country again.

Your Excellency and dear guests, from a sister nation, we have Rt hon. Ekwee Ethuro, Speaker of the Senate of Kenya. You are welcome. If you could, please stand up. (Applause) We would like to welcome the two senators she has come with; Senator Judith Sijeny and Senator George Kanini as well as hon. Cheruiyot and members of staff. 

We welcome the Speaker of the Legislative Assembly of South Sudan, the hon. Anthony Makana. He has come with hon. Odeng Tong and hon. Akwac Ayang and a member of staff. 

We welcome the deputy Speaker of the Federal Republic of Somalia, the hon. Mahad Abdalla Awad. He is accompanied by one Member of Parliament and three members of staff.


Your Excellency and members, we would like to congratulate the Federal House of Somalia; in their last election, the representation of women grew from 14 to 24 per cent. (Applause)

We also have the Clerk of the National Assembly of Kenya, Mr Michael Sialai and other members of staff. 

Further, we would like to recognise the contributions of hon. Kidega and hon. Margaret Zziwa. We have just completed our tenure of speakership at the East African Legislative Assembly. We thank them for what they have been doing there. And of course the hon. Dan Kidega has just completed his tenure. So, if there are rooms in your house, we hope that you will be able to do something about those members who have built capacity at the East African Legislative Assembly. 

Honourable members, the day is earmarked for His Excellency, the President to fulfil his constitutional obligation to deliver the State of the Nation Address under Clause 1 of Article 101 of the Constitution.

As you will note, this is the second State of the Nation Address delivered to the Tenth Parliament. Today the President is expected to review the activities and achievements of the Government during the previous year to present plans for the future and programmes and strategies that Government intends to pursue during the second session.

Your Excellency, I wish to report that since the last State of the Nation Address, held on 31 May 2016, the members have settled down, been inducted and equipped with the requisite knowledge and skills,  not only to carry out their work but also on how to conduct themselves as Members of Parliament.

The committees, which are the main vehicles executing our work, were constituted and are working in earnest and we have been able to do the following during this first session: we have enacted 18 laws; processed 18 loans for external borrowing; ratified two international protocols; adopted 24 motions for resolutions; and adopted 15 reports on ministerial policy statements on the budget framework estimates for 2017/2018 – and as you note this is the first budget of the Tenth Parliament. We have debated 57 ministerial statements; received eight statements from Members and some personal explanations; one question for oral answer has been answered; and 411 questions have been answered during the Prime Minister’s Question Time. We have also considered 17 motions to pay tribute to deceased distinguished members of our community.

Your Excellency and dear colleagues, during the last session, 825 meetings were held to consider various matters in the committees. These led to policy, administration, budget, accountability and good governance.

Three hundred eight five field visits have been undertaken by our committees to assess activities of the Government as well as attend to the grievances of communities and local governments.

At the international level, parliamentary delegations have attended statutory meetings of Parliament at the bodies like the Inter-Parliamentary Union, the Commonwealth Parliamentary Association, European Union, ACP joint assembly and many others. And Members of the Parliament of Uganda have been elected to various positions of leadership in these organisations. Your Excellency, I would like to thank the Government for the resources availed to the Parliament to carry out its operations. 

Despite this, we still have a few challenges. We have a dire shortage of space in the Parliamentary Chamber to accommodate the increased number, which now stands at 449.

However, I know that by the end of the Tenth Parliament, they will be many more. Similarly, parliamentary committees have a shortage of space and have to compete with one another to be able to use those rooms to do their work. We look forward to your support to improve on those facilities.

They also have conducted oversights over the ministries departments and agencies and they require adequate and timely information in order to make decisions and submit reports for their approval.  

Sadly, there are times when the entities are slow or take long to respond to the requests for information, while others deliberately submit inadequate information, which also hampers the work of our committees. This has a bearing on the Government and it renders us inefficient and ineffective. I urge the Prime Minister to ensure that this matter is attended to.

There has also been some poor attendance of plenary by the ministers - sometimes some business has not been handled due to the absence of ministers in some portfolios. We do appreciate that ministers have numerous responsibilities, but it is their responsibility to pass a word to the work in their respective ministries and prioritising the view of ensuring that at least one minister is available from each ministry to attend and carry-out parliamentary work. Many times the Government Chief Whip has to take the blame for the shortcomings. We hope that this will be remedied. 

Honourable members, since we are going to the second session, we expect that you will display more commitment to improve on our own attendance and focus on work. If we do not, there will be sanctions, as you know. 

On a sad note, your Excellency, we lost two of our members - the hon. Annie Logiel of Moroto and hon. Cyrus Amodoi, the MP for Toroma. The by-elections have been held and those positions have been filled. We have also paid tribute to six former members of the House and other distinguished Ugandans. 

However, Your Excellency, at this stage there are many senior people in the country who have held positions in the Government but who are departing at this time. Some of them may deserve recognition through official or state ceremonies, which may entail that their remains be brought to the Parliament. 

Unfortunately no clear policy exists to determine who should be accorded such recognition and therefore, at times there are complaints raised against Parliament for failing to bring such people to the House. I would like to request that we get a clear policy on who is entitled to be brought to Parliament so that we do not need to argue about it from time to time. 

Honourable members, the business before the House was saved at prorogation. Therefore, we have no shortage of work. I call upon the whips of the parties to expedite the process of assigning members to committees in case there are changes, in accordance with the Rules of Procedure, and as it the practice, I will assign the Independent members of Parliament to these committees. I would urge that as soon as we commence, please go quickly to do your work so that we can serve the nation. 

I welcome you again to this State of the Nation Address and thank you very much, for responding to our invitation. (Applause)

INVITATION BY THE RT. HON. SPEAKER TO H.E THE PRESIDENT TO DELIVER TO PARLIAMENT AN ADDRESS ON THE STATE OF THE NATION IN ACCORDANCE WITH CLAUSE (1) OF ARTICLE 101 OF THE CONSTITUTION

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, this is the invitation and it reads:
 
“WHEREAS under Article 101 (1) of the Constitution, the President has to deliver to the Parliament, an address on the State of the Nation at the beginning of every session; 

AND WHEREAS the Speaker has just proclaimed the commencement of the Second Session of the Tenth Parliament of Uganda;  

NOW, THEREFORE, as the Speaker of Parliament, I now invite His Excellency, the President to deliver to Parliament, an Address on the State of the Nation today the 6 June 2017. Your Excellency, you are welcome.” (Applause)

5.19
THE PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF UGANDA (Gen. Yoweri Kaguta Museveni): His Excellency, the Vice President; the Rt. hon. Speaker of Parliament; His Lordship, the Chief Justice; the Rt. hon. Prime Minister; the Deputy Prime Ministers; the honourable Leader of the Opposition; their Highnesses, the traditional leaders; honourable ministers; honourable Members of Parliament; honourable members of EALA; members of the diplomatic corps; distinguished guests; ladies and gentlemen.

As you heard, we have in our midst, the First Lady of Zambia, who has already been introduced. However, I would like to further recognise her again and thank her for coming to participate in our HIV/AIDS campaign. She is also a companion in Zambia. 

We also have the undersecretary General of the United Nations in charge of the fight against HIV/AIDS, Mr Michel Sidibé. You have also heard about the other guests from Kenya, South Sudan and Somalia and all were introduced.

Madam Speaker, in fulfilment of the constitutional requirements, under Article 101 (1) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, I am here to deliver the State of the Nation Address, 2017. 

Madam Speaker and honourable Members of Parliament, on the 8th day of June 2017, the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, will present to this august House and the entire nation, the Budget for the financial year 2017/2018. He will detail what has been achieved and what we intend to achieve in the coming financial year.

Since the last State of the Nation Address, a number of Ugandans, including former ministers and members of Parliament, have departed from this earth. I extend my condolences to their families and to the entire country. I do not know the rules of Parliament and how you recognise such people but I hope it is in order for us to stand up for a minute of silence in their memory.

THE SPEAKER: It is okay, we can stand up for a minute of silence.

GEN. MUSEVENI: Thank you, very much. I would not like to make mistakes.

(The House rose and observed a moment of silence.)

GEN. MUSEVENI: I am not hijacking the powers of the Speaker, but since I am the one who called the House to stand and observe the moment of silence, it was in order for me to conclude it. 

On this occasion of the State of the Nation Address, I will just summarize what the NRM was telling the population during the elections of last year. 

We told the country that in order to guarantee prosperity of our people, we needed to remember five issues and they include: peace; development of the infrastructure and the human resources; wealth creation; job creation and market access. Sometimes, we package them differently as the 10 strategic bottlenecks.
       
Peace means absence of war, but it must also include absence of lawlessness. The NRA/UPDF has ensured peace in the country by defeating Joseph Kony, the Allied Democratic Forces (ADF) and disarming the cattle rustlers in Karamoja. The UPDF has the capacity to ensure that nobody disturbs the peace of Uganda. (Applause)

However, as you saw recently, there has been a spike of lawlessness in the country involving the murder of AIGP Andrew Felix Kaweesi, the Muslim sheikhs, Maj. Kiggundu, Joan Kagezi, Chairman Okware in Namayingo, Rwamutwe in Bushenyi, the Town Clerk of Gulu, the Eritrean businessman and many others. 

There were also numerous break-ins in homes with some people throwing leaflets threatening violence. In Mukono, there was the increased stealing of vanilla from the gardens. Some people started panicking. When I went to the home of the late Andrew Kaweesi, I told you of the gaps that were unattended to until recently, not because they were not known, but because of lack of funding on account of competing demands. I am talking of the technical means for the police force and the counter-terrorism capacity of the country. Without going into details, I can point out to the honourable Members, the absence of cameras in the towns and on the highways. 

These gaps put a lot of burden on the CIIDs to discover the ones that committed the crimes and therefore depending on eye-witnesses and other clues. The cameras would hasten the identification of anybody who commits a crime in the towns or on the highways. This is a gap I have given instructions to close. 

We will acquire those cameras for the towns and for the “buryomwe nobwengye bwe”, translated to mean everybody has got their wisdom - we shall see how to handle it and I will come to the caucus first and then to you. (Laughter) The Speaker has given me permission to speak. 

Meanwhile, I call upon the rich businessmen and residents of the towns that can afford to install cameras around their businesses and residences - they greatly assist. 

The police will also acquire greater forensic technical capacity the details of which, I would not like to go into here.  

Using the limited means available to the police in the form of police dogs to detect explosives, scanners, metal detectors, etcetera, the police, backed by the UPDF, with good planning, can guarantee security against any lawless or terrorist actions.  The recent peaceful holding of the Martyrs Day, where an estimated 3 million people turned up, shows that the police and the UPDF already have good capacity, the gaps already mentioned notwithstanding. (Applause) 

In spite of those gaps, you find that a pre-publicized annual event, which attracts so many people with the terrorists hovering all over the place, if they could, they would have wanted to disrupt an event like that one. However, they cannot because of our capacity, in spite of the gaps. 

Nevertheless, the police and the intelligence services have been rightly criticised by the public for being lax in handling information given to them by the public, sometimes leaking this information, corruption in the form of extorting money from the public, high-handedness in dealing with the public and protecting criminals or allowing criminals to infiltrate the police.  The police leadership must, therefore, carefully listen to the public and clean up the few rotten elements.

Otherwise, I can inform the public that since 1980 when we started recruiting educated people into that force, the police has got a very large number of capable cadres. Those who taint their hands with hobnobbing with criminals will only let themselves down. The Uganda Police Force will continue to grow stronger as it was planned to do by the UNLF in 1980 of which we were part, and subsequently by the NRM since 1986.   

The police do not have to wait for a crime to be committed. Through good intelligence, most crimes can be prevented. Most of the suspects arrested after the murder of Kaweesi and others, even if they were not involved in the killing of Kaweesi, had committed other capital offences, many of which carry death sentences or life imprisonment. Why, then, were they still in circulation? That means somebody was not doing their work.

The attempt by the criminals to cause rural scare by throwing leaflets, stealing vanilla from the gardens, occasional murders and rape, is easier to deal with because the villages are not as congested as the towns.  Indeed, 78 suspects have been arrested for being involved in crime in the Masaka and Mpigi areas. Our massive security apparatus comprised of the police, the crime preventers and the UPDF; with very little mobilization, can easily handle that village thuggery.

Recently, I was in Kalerwe and the youth there complained of the police arresting them for being “idle and disorderly”.  This must stop completely. Some of the youth are idle because they do not have jobs. Why arrest them for that? The revolutionary should be like “fish in water”. A revolutionary should never be “fish in no water”. 

Otherwise, you should never talk harshly to the people. Always maintain a harmonious relationship with the people. I started relating with the youth in Kampala in 1968, in Katwe.  The NRM cadres in Kampala have not properly followed the earlier work of FRONASA in Kampala. Our first NRA Commander, Ahmed Seguya, was from Katwe. I trained him in Mozambique in 1971-1972.

I addressed the issue of alleged torture by the police in the usual NRM way. We always combine educational methods such as sensitisation and administrative methods such as punishments, demotions, etcetera. Of course some of the people have never heard such words so they do not know the difference between political methods and administrative methods. 
When these reports came up, I carried out an analysis of torture and how it actually impedes successful investigations.  That is a very powerful message because it addresses the whys and the why-nots of an issue. It addresses the “policeman of the mind” rather than just the “policeman of the body”. 

I saw some NGOs and some allied persons to NGOs pouring scorn on my methods and recommending only fascist methods of arrests and imprisonment without education. Could these “experts in-everything” tell us why the UPDF is able to operate in Somalia, Central African Republic, Congo, South Sudan, without complaining? Is it because of high pay or fear of imprisonment? You should be careful not to insult the UPDF even if you are a Member of Parliament. (Applause)

It is something I will not recommend. Do these “know-it-alls” remember that our army is a voluntary army? Do they know that one can make much more money in the private sector than in the army? Let the “know-it-alls” be informed that the UPDF does what it does because of conviction. (Applause) 

“Okunyonyola” (to explain, sensitise) has been the life and blood of FRONASA, the NRA and the UPDF. We address the mind; we do not just address the body. To end this point, be informed that Uganda is free of war and it will remain so. The spike in lawlessness is being defeated even before we fill all the gaps and will be totally defeated when the gaps are filled. (Applause) Uganda will be like in one old song of the Banyankole, which went as follows: “Muyogo na Muyuumbu ei abaana bariisa ente” ─ Muyogo and Muyuumbu (parts of present-day Ntungamo) were so peaceful that children were brave enough to look after cattle because there was no threat.  

When it comes to the development of infrastructure and human resource, I want to inform Ugandans that here, we are talking about physical infrastructure (roads, electricity, waterworks, the railway, the telephones, etcetera) and developing our human resource through education and improved health. The development of infrastructure is so crucial, as I have told you numerous times, because it lowers the costs of doing business in the economy and therefore maximises the profits of companies.  

Lower costs of electricity and transport, among others, means higher profits for the entrepreneurs. I want to salute the Parliament of 2006 and the subsequent parliaments. They saw and supported the logic of boosting expenditure on roads from Shs 398 billion in 2005/2006 to the proposed Shs 4,800 billion in the coming financial year. This year, this Parliament approved Shs 3,442 billion for roads. I thank you and I commend you for that. (Applause) 

On account of this, and in spite of the corruption – I am not like an ostrich like some people. I do not put my head in the sand when there is a problem. I am the one who deals with it. On account of this, and in spite of the corruption, just using Government of Uganda money, we have tarmacked the following roads: Kampala-Mityana; Kampala-Masaka - There was no borrowing. There was no borrowing for the ones I am reading here. 

I will read for you the ones for which we are borrowing but for these ones, if you want to hang yourself, you can do so. (Laughter) I repeat, Kampala-Mityana, - no borrowing; it is Government of Uganda money - Kampala-Masaka, Kampala-Kafu-Karuma-Gulu, Jinja-Kamuli, Iganga-Kaliro, Tororo-Mbale-Soroti, Ishaka-Kagamba, Mbarara-Kikagate, Matugga-Semuto. (Applause) These are roads that are already finished. 

In addition, solely using Uganda Government money, we are in the process of tarmacking the following roads: Mpigi-Kanoni-Sembabule-Villa Maria; Musita-Mayuge-Namayingo-Majanji-Busia; Soroti-Katakwi-Moroto; Olwiyo-Anaka-Gulu-Kitgum-Musingo; Nakapiripirit-Namalu-Muyembe; Mubende-Kakumiro-Kibaale-Kagadi-Ndaiga; Nyakahita-Ibanda-Kamwenge-Fort Portal. (Applause) 

All these and others not mentioned are being done solely with the Uganda Government money. There are other roads being done with the support from the international institutions but most of the time with co-funding from Government of Uganda. These are: Gulu-Atiak-Bibia, Kigumba-Masindi-Hoima-Kagadi-Kyenjojo; Ntungamo-Mirama Hill, Rukungiri-Kihihi-Ishasha-Kanungu-Rugyeyo-Nyakishenyi; Rwenkunyu-Masindi Port-Apac-Lira-Puranga-Acholibur; Kapchorwa-Suam; Mbale-Magale-Lwakhakha; Tirinyi-Pallisa-Kumi, etcetera.   

Some of the roads that were internationally funded are already finished and they include: Fort Portal-Bundibugyo; Mbarara-Kabale-Katuna; Kabale-Kisoro-Bunagana-Kyanika, etcetera. The World Bank wants to help us re-tarmac, strengthen and widen Tororo-Mbale-Soroti-Lira-Kamudini Road. (Applause) That road is still good because we did it not so long ago. However, when we did it, South Sudan was not yet independent and the traffic was not so heavy. Therefore, I would like to thank the World Bank, who have agreed to fund it, so that we widen and strengthen it because of the bigger volume of vehicles there. 

I am most grateful to the international partners for this solidarity. However, Ugandans financing their own projects gives me a lot of satisfaction. It is a good harbinger of the good things to come. What is happening in the sector of roads is replicated in the sector of electricity. Using the Uganda Government money from the Energy Fund, we have supported the expansion of generation of power, for example in Nyagak where the licensed developer could not complete the project, but especially in the area of building transmission lines. 

Using Uganda Government money, we have extended transmission lines to the following areas: Kakumiro, Kibaale, Kagadi, Muhoro–Muzizi Tea Factory to Kyenjojo, Kanungu-Rugyeyo Tea Factory, Rukungiri-Kanungu, Mpanga small hydro; Kamwenge-Kahungye and Kahungye substation, Buseruka small hydro-Hoima, Kyabugimbi-Buhweju Tea Factory - There are so many of them. You will read them. They are very many, you may collapse because of this long list. (Laughter)

Transmission is solely done by the Government of Uganda. There is none that is done by the private power developers; it is all Uganda Government. Because of these investments, the proportion of the population that now have electricity is 20.4 per cent compared to only 4 per cent in 1986. 

Transport, as already pointed out, in respect of roads, is another cost pusher when it comes to business. A 40-foot container costs US$ 3500 from Mombasa to Kampala by road compared to US$ 1,500 by rail when the standard gauge railway is ready and will only take one day.  A similar container on the Beijing-Shanghai line also costs $1,500 for transport.  That is why we are working for the standard gauge railway.  

The ICT issue has now been addressed since we completed the ICT backbone. The cost of telephones and internet use should go down compared to what it was when we were using satellites.  Therefore, I am here to inform Ugandans that the NRM has been working systematically to make Uganda a low-cost economy in terms of electricity, transport and ICT connections. Labour is also cheap.  

The only expensive element we need to deal with is the cost of money in terms of interest rates. This will be solved by capitalising the Uganda Development Bank (UDB).  This coming year, the Treasury put Shs 50 billion in the Uganda Development Bank. It will come as a proposal to Parliament. (Interjections) Fine, if you reject it, I will put it to a referendum. (Laughter) If you are not informed, you and I are here as delegates of other people; the real owners of the country are there - (Interjections) - If you are servants, you better be servants.

THE SPEAKER: Order!

THE PRESIDENT: Having dealt with the cost pushers on the infrastructure and the financial side, we need to report on what we have done on the human resource side. The population of Uganda was 14 million in 1986; it is now 40 million. I heard somebody worried about the population the other day but I am not worried. I am actually very happy when I see those grandchildren of mine. 

Why has the population grown so much and so quickly? The answer is peace and immunisation. I hope the new leadership in the Ministry of Health will at last implement the NRM strategy on health.  Our strategy has always been based on prevention rather than cure.  The measures of prevention, other than immunisation, include: nutrition, hygiene, clean water, behaviour change, anti-malaria measures and a responsible lifestyle. The medical people have been telling me that if you adhere to those, you eliminate 80 per cent of the sicknesses.

The literacy rate is already 75 per cent.  What we are going to work on is more and more skills.  The high literacy rate is from the expanded education system. We have got about 5,000 secondary schools (Government and private), about 20,000 primary schools (Government and private), a total number of 142 technical and other tertiary institutions (Government and private) and a total of 45 universities (Government and private). It is this infrastructure that has thrown out a huge number of educated children.

It is issue three that is still a problem. We still have a big proportion of people who are not engaged in wealth creation and those who are so engaged, are doing so sub-optimally - not fully utilizing the potential of their assets.  Two examples can show the magnitude of this under-utilization. Dr Muranga, at Nyaruziinga, is now harvesting 53 metric tonnes of bananas per hectare per year – (Interjection) - We thank you very much, but money is not bananas. Her neighbours, the Banyankole, are only harvesting five tonnes per hectare. There are one million Friesian cattle and crossbreeds in Uganda today. If each one was producing 20 litres of milk per day, our dairy production would stand at 6.5 billion litres per year, assuming 30 per cent of the Friesian herd would be milking at any given time. 

However, our total milk yield is still at two billion litres per annum. We are, of course, congratulating ourselves because it rose from 200 million litres in 1986. Yes, we are happy that our milk production has gone from 200 million litres in 1986 to two billion now, but this is not enough. It should be much more, given the number of cows we have. That is why we need to sensitise our people. When you go to the villages, please concentrate on this, along with the veterinary people. Having a cow which is producing only five litres and it is eating grass means you are wasting that grass. We should ensure that this cow produces at least 20 litres a day. The same goes for crops and any other activity; go for maximum returns because it is possible.

There are four sectors of wealth clusters: agriculture, industry, services and ICT. Uganda today has got a huge number of young people; how pleasing it is to see them. I do not know where you people pass, but when I travel around, I love to see our young people; they are very many and very nice. However, the only problem is that very many of them do not have either wealth or jobs - obugaga oba emirimu; lonyo koso tich. 

However, Uganda is enriching other countries by excessively importing products and services that your own children can produce if assisted by the state. I have already done my small experimentation. How much furniture does Uganda import from China and Dubai? How many pairs of shoes does Uganda import from outside? How many metres of textile does Uganda import? How many vaccines for humans and livestock does Uganda import? How much glass, fertilizers and steel; how many automobiles, motorcycles and even bicycles; how much processed coffee and processed fruits do we import? Is it a wonder, therefore, that many of our young people neither have jobs nor wealth? The answer is that we have donated both the wealth and jobs to outsiders. 

When I talk of imports, do not think that I am confining myself to import-substitution. I have never been in that category. Apart from the internal market, we must also target the regional and international markets. What I am saying is that Uganda is uniquely endowed to enjoy comparative advantages in many of these production lines.  

As I speak today, we already have good investors for steel, fertilizers, glass, coffee (coffee processing), cotton (processing for textiles), maize, milk, cooking oil et cetera. Amosi Dairies is exporting milk products to the United States of America; Mukwano Industries is exporting cooking oil to the European Union; and many factories were exporting fish before it was undermined by bad fishermen on the lake. However, for shoes, furniture, automobiles, motorcycles, computers etcetera, we are still depending on endless imports which cause so much haemorrhage, and yet we have the capacity to compete in these fields if everybody wakes up.  

Using only Shs 271 million through my State House Comptroller, I have bought common user machines for the furniture makers of Nsambya. If you want, you can go there and see because the Baganda say, “amaaso g’omuganda gali mungalo”, meaning the eyes of a muganda are not in the face, but in the hands. Therefore, you can go there and see. 

Using only Shs 271 million through my State House Comptroller, I have bought common user machines for the furniture makers of Nsambya. This is only one group with 2,000 members. I have given support to 105 groups in the Katwe area, with a membership of 1,570, and to 17 groups in the Najjera area with a membership of 510. (Applause) The Katwe and Najjera area groups deal mainly in metal cutting, bending etcetera. 

In Katwe, I used Shs 375 million and in Najjera I used Shs 337 million. I used this money to buy machinery and also put Shs 100 million for each of the groups into their SACCOs – (Interjection) - From Parliament – the President’s vote. Haven’t you heard of an official of state called “President”? (Laughter) If you read the Constitution, you will find that he is a very powerful officer in Uganda. (Laughter)

Apart from supporting groups that are already engaged in artisanal efforts, through my State House Comptroller, I am now supporting 711 young girls – (Applause) - to do baking, embroidery, textile weaving, shoe making, knitting, etcetera in Kampala. Every intake of six months costs us Shs 486 million, including giving them lunch and daily transport of Shs 2,000 per person. This is Kampala based; we now want to decentralise to Kampala divisions. 

Because we are doing the training centrally in Kampala, there is – (Interjection) - I will not tell you; if you want, come and I take you around because I do not know whether you may not work with Al-Shabaab and cause some problem there. (Laughter) When you do it centrally, there is a problem of transport. These children do not have money and they need transport to and fro. That is why I want to decentralise it to the divisions of Kampala, so that they can walk from their homes to study and easily go back. When they finish the course, then we can give them equipment to go and start work. (Applause)

This will mean that these youth are transformed from being idle and unemployed into wealth creators and job creators. Remember that one’s wealth in agriculture, industry, services or ICT creates jobs for many. When I am a farmer, the farm is my wealth. However, it also creates jobs for others. When I am a factory owner, the factory is my wealth but it also creates jobs for others. When I own a hotel, the hotel creates jobs for others. When I run a Business Process Outsourcing (BPO) business, that business creates jobs for others. 

The huge reservoir of the unemployed and property-less youth is actually a huge opportunity. That is what I am here to tell you. I have studied this; these children can be turned just like that. Instead of putting on shoes - I did not come with the shoes made by our children because I did not want to be unparliamentary. (Laughter). However, if you permit me, next time I will come wearing the shoes made by our children. 

Many of these are like my children, so I am now dealing with my grandchildren and not you, because you are already either caterers or – I am going to struggle for the grandchildren because the structure of our families is such that the property is owned by the parents. Until those parents die, the children remain there without anything, and some of them are even orphans. 

Therefore, these huge numbers of children do not have jobs and wealth yet they are consuming. However, we, their parents, are buying shoes from places like Dubai, where you people go. I went to Dubai once when I was the President. I have never been to Dubai in any other capacity. -(Interjections)- Yes, it is true I have been President for a long time and that is not a bad thing; that is why I am so experienced. (Laughter). Even if you woke me up at night and asked what me what was happening, I will be able tell you. (Laughter)

These children can quickly be turned round with a little bit of training, equipping and operational capital. Six months’ training can turn them around, just like that. You think our children cannot run maize mills, for example. Instead of exporting unprocessed maize to Sudan and Kenya, where we get less money, and also export our chachu - which is chicken food - why not get all the maize processed by our children who are empowered by finance capital, equipment, operational capital and a little bit of training? I have done it and I will continue doing it. (Applause). If you want to join me you, I will welcome you. If you do not want, you can - When I went to the bush, some did not join me but I eventually came out of the bush. 

What I am saying, honourable Members of Parliament, is that this massive number of young people is a huge force for production and ownership. This does not require land. The problem is that you are stuck with agriculture. Forget about agriculture – (Interjection) - I know many of you like going to America. You love America very much and you are always going there. The next time you go there, find out how many people are involved in farming in the United States of America; it is only two per cent -(Interjections)- Well, you can go and check. You can say “no” but I heard we have the Hansard, which has a record of whatever we say – (Interjections) – They record only my words and not these loose talkers? That is unfortunate. I thought they were capturing some of this confusion.

In the United States of America, the proportion of the population involved in agriculture is only two per cent. This is a country with a population of 320 million people, with a land area of three million square miles, but only two per cent are into agriculture. That is the same story with the United Kingdom. 

Those in agriculture are enough; let them stay there. However, this huge number of children in the towns should not be sent into agriculture. Let them solve, process and go into services. When you send them to the villages, you will cause disguised unemployment. How many people do you need to manage one acre? Do you need 30 people? Pick one or two people to manage an acre and the rest can go to industry and services. I am glad the Constitution gave me the opportunity to come and say these things. (Laughter) 

We should transform them into wealth creators and job creators instead of being idle and unemployed. They are the ones to save us from imports and generate exports using our huge natural resources and our comparative advantage. The money required is not so much. As I already pointed out above, in Najjera I spent Shs 337 million, including Shs 100 million for capital. I spent Shs 375 million in Katwe and Shs 271 million in Nsambya. These figures included cash for their SACCOs, common user machines and in some cases, worksite sheds.

Now, what I am going to do, and I appeal MPs to join me – I have identified land in Entebbe, off Abayiita Ababiri, which some rich people were trying to steal from Government. Come and side with me and we recover the land so that we build manufacturing sheds for these young people. We can build sheds for furniture manufacturers like the ones of Kalerwe, Nsambya and Kireka. They make their chairs, but they are in the sun and when it is going to rain, they must move them. 

These children are already very innovative and with their own efforts, they have done so much. All they need is a little support from us - (Interjections)- We shall go to Mbarara; it does not matter. However, let us first deal with the huge number of children in Kampala. Let us build an industrial estate in Abayiita Ababiri or where we get any other Government land. Let us build shed for them for the furniture they make. Here in Kampala, we can help them have showrooms instead of lining them by the roadside.

We can build sheds for shoes, weaving, knitting and other products. Let us give them factories and showrooms, and then you will no longer import this taka taka which you are importing from all these places. Your children will be transformed from idle and unemployed to wealth creators and job creators. If you give them capital, they will employ other people. They will change overnight from people without property to people of property. They will not only be people of property, but they will employ others too. I am so happy I have lived for so long. You will see how we will change your country using these children whom we have already educated. (Applause)

In job creation and wealth expansion, we shall not only depend on converting our youth to wealth and job creators, but we shall also aggressively attract Foreign Direct Investments (FDIs). These can move things faster. They have the money, technology and contacts in terms of markets. Now that we have electricity, which was one of our big problems - I have been seeing people writing in the newspapers that the economy is very bad. Poor people; they have no eyes to see. An economy which has got surplus electricity for the first time cannot be in a bad shape, unless you have no eyes to see.

Now that we have electricity, once we have solved the high price of electricity, we shall be competitive. I can use this occasion to explain a little bit about the problem of the high price of electricity. The electricity from Nalubaale, the power station on the Njeru side, costs only about one US cent. The cost of the one on the Jinja side is also very low. The cost of the Karuma electricity will be 4.8 US cents. Isimba’s electricity will be 5 US cents. All the other smaller power stations - We have a power station which is about to be finished in River Agago, which will produce 88 megawatts. The only power station polluting our energy mixture is Bujagali. Bujagali was badly negotiated by our people who were involved - (Interjections)- I do not think any one of them is a minister. It was badly negotiated, so the cost of Bujagali power is 11 US cents. 

However, we are going to refinance it and we shall come to you for support -(Interjections)- You know, if you would like to be a leader, you should avoid prejudice because prejudice makes you green with envy - (Applause) – and you can die from high blood pressure - (Laughter)- because you do not see facts. The National Resistance Movement is not a party of borrowing. If you are looking for home-grown solutions, the NRM is one of them. (Applause) 

Now that we have electricity, once we have solved the issue of the high price of electricity, we shall be competitive. We shall also review the landing fees for aircrafts at Entebbe and the ground handling charges. That airport must be competitive. (Applause) 

It is not wise to overprice yourself out of business. However, for the FDIs to flow in, we must purge out the entire corrupt officials - (Applause) - in the UIA, in the Ministry of Finance, in NEMA, etcetera; they are the ones that have been delaying and frustrating investments and if they are there in State House, we shall purge them. How shall we know them? We shall know them by their fruits. Their actions will tell us who they are. You delay an investment for two days, we know who you are.

You have seen how I have been using little money to convert the youth from propertylessness and unemployment to wealth-creation and job-creation. The girls who are being trained will be equipped with the necessary gadgets once they qualify, similar to what we had done to other groups but, this time, in their own respective trades. Why can’t we use the huge monies for women groups, for the youth, for the SACCOs, etcetera for similar efforts?  

In addition to converting our youth from idleness to wealth-and job-creation as well as attracting FDIs, we shall also encourage our present members of Uganda Manufacturers Association (UMA), who are 700 in number, to expand diversity and deepen their operations. Those engaged in exporting wet-blue leather, should make final leather so that our massive move on making shoes by our youth utilizes our leather - You are the market; you are wearing shoes. If you come without shoes then I will know there is no market. 

Kilembe mines must produce the 99.9 per cent pure cathode copper rather than the 94 per cent pure blister copper because the former can directly be used in our cables industry at Lugazi rather than having the irrationality of copper producers having to import copper ingots for use in our cables industry. I agree with the Rt Hon. Leader of the Opposition that the group which had been given Kilembe mines was a fake one and I was not happy with the person who was involved. (Interjections) We do not always say what you have done in public.

That was the case in the 1960s when we were producing and smelting copper but not to the final degree. The gold refinery recently commissioned at Entebbe is a good example because the gold produced there is pure enough to be used in coins, jewellery, etcetera; our daughters in Parliament and outside like to wear gold jewellery. 

We produce gold but the gold was not purified here. They would just take out to Dubai; purify it there, make the jewellery and then we buy from them. What sort of blindness is this? Therefore, now we have the gold refinery and they are producing gold ingots. These children of ours can go making jewellery from that gold directly. That is what we want to do for the gold, copper, cobalt, and all our minerals.

The steel from Osukuru in Tororo - we have been using since the NRM came into government; the private sector would buy the steel mills, Casements, the one of Iganga, Mbarara, Mwebesa; they were a number of them. However, they were using recycled steel; the old cars, the tanks of Idi Amin - (Interjections) - yes sometimes once in a while they would steal it. Sembule was -

Now, for the first time since the time of our - our ancestors were getting iron from the iron ore. Those who do not know that Runyakitara language, when you hear the word “Rutare”, you know that there is iron ore there because in our language iron ore means “obutare”. Our ancestors were making iron ore direct from “obutare”. However, during colonial time, and NRM to date, that integrated from “obutare” to steel.

Had that not happened, it is now happening; in Osukuru, they are going to produce 3,000 tonnes of fully integrated steel industry in addition to the phosphate fertilizers. Therefore, the NRM way, “one by one makes a bundle”. Kamu Kamu gwe ki? Akwata empola akolaki? Bugu bugu siki? - that language. I do not know whether that is for the Speaker to determine but I doubt whether it is unconstitutional to speak one of Uganda’s languages here. The only requirement is that everybody understands what you are the saying. Therefore, it says “one by one makes a bundle”. That is what I am saying.

The iron ore of Osukuru is more difficult than the iron ore of Kabale. The one of Kabale is better. The one of Osukuru hill is the magnetite which is a bit difficult compared to the hematite. The one of Kabale is 70 per cent pure but because of distance they have started with this one; we are trying to see how to open the water transport route using Victoria and the Kagera River. You can actually go by railway and water up to Nshongezi in Mbarara. 

In that case, Kabale and Rwanda are near - only 30 to 40 miles away that is what will help our steel industry on the Kabale side. The steel from Osukuru will straight away go into the dams, the high rise buildings, the railway and others.

We are going to build the Standard Gauge Railway but the Chinese say that the recycled steel is not good enough for the railway and it is true it is not the same as new. We need new steel for the dams, railway, for these big building instead of importing from China, Singapore and from all over the world when we have the iron ore here.

Our sugar producers should further refine sugar to produce purer sugar for use in beverages and pharmaceuticals; our beverage and pharmaceutical industries are rendered expensive on account of importing pharmaceutical grade sugar from outside. Our sugar producers cannot do this because they are still being disturbed by pirate sugar companies that were licenced by our system to operate as the traditional sugar producers.

We are going to rationalise this dangerous chaos in that sugar industry. One area you should not put politics in is the economy. (Applause) If you are a good manager like myself, you will never mix politics with the economy. My sister hon. Cissy Ogwal she has a big something somewhere - (Laughter). 

We are now friends -(Applause)- at the beginning of our Government we were not friends and I was aware that she had her something somewhere; but I could not touch it. I could not say that because Cissy is against me politically, I should  undermine her -(Laughter)- it was not Cissy Ogwal who made a deal with me; it was I, as a manager, who had to separate politics from the economy. (Applause) She has even never told me that she has got something somewhere. However, because I want your country to succeed if she is engaged in wealth creation in job creation, even if she is politically against me, I do not mind. (Applause)

I can struggle with her politically, they go to Lango and steal my votes - (Laughter) - but meanwhile her factory is employing Ugandans -(Interjections)- she is saying that NRM killed it that is not true. If it died then she was just a bad manager –(Interjections)- I will bail you out. When I bail out her factory - these factories do not belong to individuals; if you earn, for example, $100 million from a factory how much money will you as the owner take? Maybe 15 per cent if you make a profit. The rest 85 per cent is salaries, buying raw materials and electricity. The factory is not yours, it is for Ugandans and we are just using you as an agent of wealth-creation. (Applause)

The sugar prices are now high because there has been some politics in the local area; and if you are not careful, we may lose that. I will study it and give you what I think. However, we need sugar; now you can imagine we have been producing sugar all this time but the sugar which goes into Coca cola comes from outside. The sugar these people produce is not pure enough to be used in the sodas.

Our pharmaceutical companies have two issues which we need to help them with: first we need starch to make tablets. Starch is from cassava or maize; we have both but they are not processing it enough to reach pharmaceutical grade stage. If we want to make syrups for children’s medicine, we need sugar.

We can get our sugar people to produce the more refined sugar for syrups - the more refined starch for tablets so that our pharmaceutical industry is fully integrated. We have everything but we just need the organisation.

Now, you will find that they are importing starch from India yet we have cassava and maize - that whole tablet is not medicine much of it is starch to carry the medicine but the starch which goes into the stomach to dissolve must be good. 


We can get our people to produce all these and it will make medicine cheaper because the medicine will wholly be made here; it will be having all the other ingredients for medicine.

On this occasion, I will not speak a lot on agriculture because Operation Wealth Creation (OWC) is already on the move to tackle the 69 per cent of our population who are our subsistence farmers whose muziro (totem) has been money.  You find people have no money, and when you ask where they get money from, they say: “I do not ever see the money - ate nziraba munange”. Maybe, on another occasion, I will give details of what OWC has done.

As far as agriculture is concerned, I will only mention three areas: One, we should remember that there are richer farmers who do not benefit from OWC. These need separate support through low interest money in UDB –(Applause)- they need this money to do bush-clearing, pasture development, water excavation, accessing chemicals for crop parasites and agricultural machinery.  Part of the capitalization of UDB by Government will do this.  I have also discussed with PTA and SADC Banks on this issue.

The other issue is irrigation. We cannot depend forever on rain-fed agriculture. In the second season of last year (Itumba) when there was stampede about the drought, there were at the same time, the second highest recorded water levels since 1900 in Lake Victoria. The water levels last year, in the first season (Katuumba in Runyankole), at Entebbe reached the level of 12.70 metres. 

That water level was only exceeded by the record water level of 1964 when it reached 13.65 metres at Entebbe. In fact, since I follow those issues, I was very worried that the landing sites and piers would be swallowed up by the water as it happened in 1964. Indeed, part of the shoreline was flooded. Even today, the water level at Entebbe is at 12.13 metres. Ever since 1964, the water level in Lake Victoria has never gone back to its 1959 level of 10.76 meters or that of 10.28 meters in 1923. 

There was shortage of rain in the second season last year (Itumba), but the Katumba one had brought so much water; it almost reached the record. Therefore, to talk of “drought” in Uganda is an irrationality.  The answer is irrigation. I am glad the Government is working on this. The plans for the irrigation schemes of: Katabok, Ongom, Biiso, Labori, Namalu, Musamya, Kibiimba and Matanda are at the feasibility and design stages. Designs for the following irrigation schemes are already finished: Mobuku II, Doho II, - because Mobuku I and Doho I are already in existence and functioning, but they are not enough, that is why we are going in for Doho II and Mobuku II. Other irrigation schemes are: Wadelai in the West Nile, Tochi is in Lango and Acholi sub regions, Rwengaju in Fort portal and Ngenge in Kapchorwa. 

There are also 130 micro irrigation schemes in various districts. To do some experimentation, I would like to thank the former minister Ms Maria Mutagamba - there is a place called Kandago in Rukiga County where we went and installed a solar powered water pump and we launched it. Other designs to be done are: Rwebincuuncu, Mabira, Atari, Acomai in Bukedea, Geregere, Ojama, Kyenshama and Kyahi. 

These do not include the mega irrigation schemes around the Rwenzori, Elgon, Agoro and Kigyezi Highlands as well as bulk water transfers for Kagyera, Nakasongola and Kakyeera areas.  More importantly, working with industrialists, we are developing solar powered water pumps that can be used by individual farmers. I am looking forward to throwing away my diesel water pumps when the cheaper solar pumps are available. I could then irrigate my pasture and crops. At a personal level, I have a number of diesel pumps, but because every time you run it, you use diesel, I have avoided using them for irrigation. I only use them for putting water in the dip. With the diesel pumps, I have confined myself to only filling the cattle dips. 

The ministries –(Interjection)– I do not remember, but I bought them and now they must be very expensive - no, I do not buy on loan, but with cash; I am not a loan man. If you go to any bank, you will not find that President Museveni has got a debt anywhere; I use my salary. I earn about Shs 3.6 million – I do not buy from my salary, but from my cows –(Interjections)-  that is unparliamentarily; he is asking me how many cows I have? But if you go to the IGG, you will see my declaration. 

The ministries concerned have pledged to finally work on some of the industrial parks such a Namanve, Luzira, Mbale, etcetera. We are also expecting our Kira electric car, Kayoola mini-bus and pick-up in 2018.  The Automobile Industrial Park is being developed in Jinja- though I think they should have put it on the other side but they have put it in agriculture. 

That Member of Parliament is very concerned about my welfare. He says I should continue because I need to drink water; I am very grateful for the concern. (Laughter)

The fourth issue is to remember that, in order to supply the industries our agriculture must wake up and behave industrially. We, for instance, are now required to supply cattle for the abattoirs that are springing up and also supply the Chinese market where our people have got orders for beef where a kilogramme is now $11.5.  With 14 million heads of cattle, this should not be a problem because you can easily sell off 20 per cent per annum and it will not affect the national herd.  

Twenty per cent of the national herd is 2.8 million. Therefore, supplying a factory that needs 146,000 cattle per year is not a problem. However, somebody must concentrate those cattle so that the factory gets its 400 cattle per day when it needs them.  We have directed NEC to do this. Everybody should support them. Even private fatteners of bullocks can be licensed to feed these factories and also export outside.

In all this, I have not yet commented on the oil and our other minerals.  Having agreed on the pipeline, we are set to move.  This oil will make it easy for the Uganda state to fund infrastructure and innovation in science.

The fifth crucial issue is market access. Under our 10 strategic bottlenecks that we identified long ago, limited market access is one of them.  Recently, in Dar-es-Salaam, I pointed out that in order to guarantee our prosperity, we must ensure that our products access the internal market, the regional one and the international one.  Trade is about mutual support, if it is fair trade.  

The East African Community market of 170 million people gives us a good base to negotiate with others ─ the Americans, the European Union, the Chinese, the Indians, the Japanese, the Russian, etcetera.  Once somebody buys what you produce, he is supporting your prosperity. The reverse is the case if you buy what he is producing. You are supporting his prosperity; you are creating jobs for him and giving him that that should be yours in terms of money.

Let us wake up and wake up everybody. 

As far as the legislative programme of the Government is concerned, here below are the Bills; they are all listed there. They are 81 in total and they are so many. 

With these few words, I beg to submit. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Your Excellency the President, I would like to thank you for fulfilling your obligation under Article 101 (1) of the Constitution. As expected, this statement will be debated in the House. We will also expect the Leader of the Opposition to formally make a reply so that both your statements are debated. 

Your Excellency, we would like to invite you to join us in the gardens for a reception, which has been organized to mark the opening of the Second Session of the Tenth Parliament. 

However, before you go for the reception, Your Excellency, we are inviting the Members of Parliament, our guests and Your Excellency to go to the steps of Parliament to take a photo to commemorate the commencement of the Second Session of the Tenth Parliament.

Your Excellency, in your speech, you have given me notice about your intention to come here with different shoes so I would like to invoke the powers of the Speaker, under Rule 73 (e) of the Rules of Procedure; with my prior permission, you are granted leave to come here with foot wear that may not necessarily be described as shoes and this is for the purpose of promoting “Buy Uganda, Build Uganda.” 

I now adjourn the House to Thursday, 8 June 2017 at this venue at 14:00 hours. Thank you very much.

The East African Community Anthem

The National Anthem

(The House rose at 5.40 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 8 June 2017 at 2.00 p.m.)
