
PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA

Friday, 4 June 2021

Parliament met at 2.29 p.m. at Kololo Independence Grounds, Kampala

National Anthem

East African Community Anthem

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

PROCLAMATION 

THE SPEAKER: “WHEREAS Article 101 (1) of the Constitution mandates His Excellency the President, at the beginning of each session of Parliament, to deliver to Parliament an address on the state of the nation;

AWARE THAT the First Session of the 11th Parliament commenced on the 24th day of May 2021;

NOTING THAT it is expedient that the Parliament of Uganda receives the address of the President on the state of the nation;

NOW, THEREFORE, in exercise of the powers conferred upon the Speaker by the Constitution, I hereby proclaim that the Parliament shall sit at Kololo Independence Grounds today Monday, the 4th day of June 2021 at 1400 hours, to receive the address of His Excellency the President on the state of the nation;

AND FURTHER, in exercise of the powers conferred upon the Speaker by the Constitution, the Parliament Powers and Privileges Act, Cap.258, and the Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of Uganda, it is hereby proclaimed and declared that the said Kololo Independence Grounds are to be precincts of Parliament for the aforementioned purposes.

Given under my hand at Parliament House, Kampala, this 27th day of May 2021.

Jacob L’okori Oulanyah,
Speaker of Parliament.”

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Your Excellency the President, His Lordship the Chief Justice, the Rt Hon. Deputy Speaker, the outgoing Rt Hon. Prime Minister and Leader of Government Business, the Leader of the Opposition in Parliament, Members of Parliament, outgoing honourable ministers, the Dean of the Diplomatic Corps, distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen. I welcome you all to this sitting today. 

Today is the state opening of the First Session of the 11th   Parliament of Uganda, and in consonance with Article 101 (1) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, His Excellency the President will deliver his address on the state of the nation. 

The State-of-the-Nation Address is a constitutional obligation and a yearly tradition where the President, being the Chief Executive of the country, reports on the status of the country and unveils the Government’s agenda and legislative plan for the coming year. 

This is the maiden State-of-the-Nation Address in this new five-year term of Government 2021-2026. I congratulate you, Mr President, upon your re-election. (Applause) 

I would also like to congratulate all Members upon your election to the Legislature. (Applause) Society has entrusted you with the responsibility to lead and as such, we ought to be responsive to their aspirations. It is this that will enable us realise our vision of being a people-centred Parliament. Remember, society watches all the time. 

I pay tribute to our predecessors, the Tenth Parliament, for their successes and milestones, and reiterate that as we embark on the First Session of the 11th Parliament, we should build upon the achievements of the Tenth Parliament and those that came before. 

In a special way, I commend my predecessor, the Speaker of the Tenth Parliament, hon. Rebecca Alitwala Kadaga, for the accomplishments of the Legislature during her tenure. The 11th Parliament has a foundation to build upon.

Societal transformation is an incremental process where responsibility holders play their roles at various stages and points in time. I urge you, Members, to play your role effectively and diligently as our sole contribution to a better Uganda.

Upon its constitution, the Business Committee will draw up a parliamentary calendar for the First Session of the 11th Parliament. The parliamentary calendar is a schedule of the various planned events or activities of the Legislature. This calendar will enable the work plans of committees and the schedule of the House. I urge you to abide by the parliamentary calendar to enable better planning, orderliness and execution of legislative business.

At the end of the Tenth Parliament, there were items of business that were not concluded. Rule 235 of the Rules of Procedure governs the lapse or reinstatement of parliamentary business upon dissolution of the House and it provides as follows:

“(1) A Bill, Petition, Motion or other business before the House or a committee during a term of Parliament lapses upon dissolution of Parliament.

(2) Notwithstanding subrule (1), a Bill, Petition, Motion or other business before the House or any of its committees may be reinstated in the next Parliament by a resolution of Parliament.”

Honourable members, this is the second sitting of the House, the first one having been the election of the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker. Ordinarily, a motion should have been moved in this sitting to reinstate business that lapsed with the Tenth Parliament in line with rule 203 and rule 235(2) of the Rules of Procedure. However, given the nature of today’s sitting, this motion will be moved at an appropriate future sitting. 

In the coming weeks, parliamentary committees will be duly constituted. From the onset, I urge them to adopt efficient and effective working methods that mitigate resource wastage and optimise time, without jeopardising the quality of outputs and outcomes. The responsiveness, efficiency, effectiveness of the House is a mirror image of the efficiency of the committees.

Honourable members, as the 11th Parliament gains traction, I implore you to line up to desired levels of responsibility, efficiency and effectiveness expected of us, Members of Parliament. This will require sanitising ourselves of the known pitfalls that usually impede the work of Parliament, notably endemic absenteeism, time wastage, delays by the Executive to introduce business as laid out in the Government legislative agenda, and inadequate adherence to the rules. This causes delays of the business, even those before the House already, especially when the delay is with Parliament. 

To change this, I earnestly urge you to embrace and practice the following:

    1. Always be time conscious. Time is a unique non-renewable resource that we need to optimise in our day-to-day work. I urge you to always be punctual for parliamentary business. Always ensure that you turn up in time for committee and House businesses and any other parliamentary work that you may be called upon to take part in. This will aid the timeliness of our delivery as a legislature.

    2. Endeavour to always attend to parliamentary business and dedicate yourself to the timely and effective execution of your tasks in both committees and in the House.

    3. Respect and abide by the Rules of Procedure to minimise disruptions and ensure efficiency and effectiveness in the discharge of legislative business. Let us reduce on the procedural debates and adopt more substantive debates to do the work of the people of this country. 

As the nation awaits the constitution of the Cabinet in line with Articles 113 and 114 of the Constitution, I will advise those that will comprise the Front Bench to embrace the following:

Ensure timely introduction of Government business in the House. Today, His Excellency the President will spell out the Government’s legislative agenda for the year ahead. The relevant ministries bear the responsibility for realisation of this legislative agenda by tabling the required Bills in time for timely processing by the House.

Given the complementarity of the arms of Government, any delays by one arm occasions delays in another. Therefore, collectively, we need to be more responsive, efficient and effective.

Always avail yourselves for House business. Rule 50 of our Rules of Procedure require ministers to attend sittings of the House to respond to questions often. Your regular presence in the House will go a long way in aiding the timely accomplishment of House business.

I also call upon the already designated whips in this House and those that will be designated to effectively play the role as envisaged in rule 15 of the Rules of Procedures. Whips are essential in ensuring participation of their party members in parliamentary business. I urge whips to co-ordinate amongst themselves the discharge of their functions.

The advent of the First Session of the 11th Parliament coincides with the reported resurgence of the COVID-19 pandemic. This portends significant implications on the entire country and will invariably impinge on our methods of work as the representatives of the people. I urge you all to adhere to established Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs) and urge the public to do the same.

Honourable members, on 27 April 2021, one of Uganda’s nine representatives to the East African Legislative Assembly (EALA), hon. Mathias Kasamba, passed on. His demise left a vacancy in Uganda’s representation to EALA. You will recall that the deceased was elected to EALA on 28 February 2017 on the National Resistance Movement (NRM) party ticket and assumed office on 18 December 2017.

Pursuant to section 8(1) of the East African Legislative Assembly Elections Act 2011, the Speaker of EALA notified the Speaker of the Parliament of Uganda on 18 May 2021 of a vacancy in EALA. Therefore, in line with section 8(2) of the East African Legislative Assembly Elections Act, 2011, upon notification of the vacancy, a by-election must be held by this Parliament within 90 days, from the 18th day of May 2021.

Given that hon. Mathias Kasamba was elected to EALA on the NRM party ticket and in accordance with the Treaty for the Establishment of the East African Community, and Appendix B of our Rules of Procedure, the vacancy will be filled by the NRM party to which the deceased Member belonged. I accordingly instruct the Clerk to Parliament to commence the process of filling this vacancy. 

Honourable members, we all know that this last Monday, events happened in this place that were very disturbing. An attempt was made on the life of one of our own and in that incident, his young daughter was killed - a 27-year-old PhD graduate – and his driver, Haruna. That attempt was made on the life of the honourable Gen. Katumba Wamala. We thank God that he survived and he is recovering very well.

Honourable members, for those who are demised, I would ask that we rise and observe a moment of silence.

(Members rose and observed a moment of silence.)

The Speaker: Finally, honourable members, as we embark on today’s sitting, I urge you to take cognisance of rule 10 of the Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of Uganda, and specifically subrule (4)(a), which stipulates that while making a statement in this House, the President shall be heard in silence and his address shall not be followed by any comment or question. 

Time will be allotted at a later date to exhaustively debate the President’s Address on the State-of-the-Nation. Civility demands that we listen, more especially, to those we disagree with. That gives us the opportunity, in the debates that will ensue later, to respond to the issues that will have been raised by the President, in case you have some contrary view to what the President could have stated. However, today is not that day. 

Let us listen to the President in silence. You can cheer or stamp your feet if the points are good - and I am sure the points will be good, so do not be shy to stamp your foot on the ground to appreciate the statement from the President.

I say all this for God and my country.

INVITATION BY THE RT HON. SPEAKER TO H.E. THE PRESIDENT TO DELIVER TO PARLIAMENT AN ADDRESS ON THE STATE OF THE NATION IN ACCORDANCE WITH ARTICLE 101(1) OF THE CONSTITUTION OF THE REPUBLIC OF UGANDA

The Speaker: Your Excellency the President, Article 101(1) of the Constitution mandates you, on a day like this, to come and give this country the State-of-the-Nation Address. It is my singular honour to invite you now to do that.

2.50
The President of the Republic of Uganda (Gen. Yoweri Museveni): The Rt Hon. Speaker of Parliament, Jacob Oulanyah; His Lordship the Chief Justice, honourable Owiny-Dollo; the Rt Hon. Deputy Speaker of Parliament, Anita Among; the Rt Hon. Secretary-General of the NRM, Kasule Lumumba; the Rt Hon. Leader of the Opposition; honourable Members of Parliament; members of the diplomatic corps; ladies and gentlemen.

In fulfilment of the constitutional requirement under Article 101(1) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, I am here to deliver the State-of-the-Nation Address, 2021.

Again, I congratulate honourable Members of Parliament on your election on 14 January 2021 and some of the special groups later. Pastor Kayanja told me that 14th of January is special in the Bible. I did not know. Later on, I checked and found out that indeed, it is the day in the book of Leviticus 23:5 which says, “On the fourteenth day of the first month evening shall be a holy convocation - a feast of the Lord’s Passover.” The Electoral Commission, in selecting that date, must have been guided by God. 

As I said on my inauguration and on a number of other occasions, at this point in the history of our country, having restored the small enclave modern economy of 1971 that had been destroyed by Idi Amin in the 1970s and having greatly expanded it from US$1.3 billion in 1986 to now US$40 billion, we have a number of points that we need to concentrate on in order to transform Uganda into a middle-income country on the road to becoming a first world country. 

However, before we talk of our medium and long-term strategic plans, I need to first remind the country about the interesting and challenging 2020, pronounced as tweny-tweny by some of the bazukulu and some other interesting Ugandans. Tweny-tweny came with locusts, floods, the rising levels of the lakes, landslides, floating islands etc. Soon after, the coronavirus came in, starting with March 2020. 

I am happy to report to you what everybody knows - Uganda did not only manage to cope with these challenges but also the economy managed a modest expansion of three per cent in the financial year 2019/2020 and will manage another small expansion of 3.3 per cent in the financial year 2020/2021. If you check globally, many countries achieved minus rates of growth. However here, in spite of all these multiple issues, the economy has been able to expand but at a lower speed. If it had not been for the coronavirus, the economy was projected to grow by 6.3 per cent and 6.2 per cent in the financial years 2019/2020 and 2020/2021 respectively. 

We defeated the locusts and coped with all the other problems. Remember, they said that locusts were going to finish all the food but I do not think those locusts were given a chance to eat much food because we killed them. I would like to salute the Uganda People’s Defence Forces (UPDF) for doing that. 

On 14 May 1964, Lake Victoria set a record when its water level reached 13.41 metres at Jinja for the first time since records started being kept in 1904. On 14 May 1964, Lake Victoria, measured at Jinja, reached the highest level of 13.41 metres. This was the highest since records started being kept in 1904. 

Indeed, right from 1961, there had been a lot of floods. At that time, my family was still nomadic; we were not as settled as we are now. I remember the inconvenience of the flooded plains of Kashaari at that time - what is called “empita” in one of those dialects. The plains of Ruyonza, Kakigoonjo, Rweera, Katebe, Nyakisharara were all flooded. That was the time transport on the lake disappeared. That was the time Butiaba Port, Bukakata and Namasale were flooded and lake transport stopped because of the flooding of the landing sites. It is only recently that we restored some of that lake transport. That was in 1964. 

However, on 19 May 2020, the lake achieved a record higher than that of 1964. It measured 13.49 metres. That was last year. The lake, not being satisfied with that record, on 14, 15 and 19 May 2021 reached the highest point ever, of 13.50 metres. On 31 May, it had slightly reduced to 13.42 metres. All this was in spite of us releasing much more water at Jinja than ever before. That is what we controlled at Jinja, at the dam. We normally release 800 to 1,200 cubic metres of water per second. Today, however, we are releasing 2,400 cubic metres per second. If we do not release a lot of water, much of the lakeshore would be flooded. 

In 1964, they could only release a maximum of 1,300 cubic metres per second. Today, however, because we built new outlets at Jinja, we can release up to 3,000 cubic metres per second. Therefore, the worry that people had that the power dams would be flooded cannot happen because we are able to release a lot more water than they were able to do in 1964. That is how we have been able to cope with this lake that has been so high for so long. You can see that for the whole of last year, the lake has been above the 1964 record of 13.41 metres at Jinja. It has been higher than that all this time. 

In addition to dealing with the locusts, the rising lake levels, the landslides and the floods, we had to deal with the deadly phenomenon of the coronavirus pandemic. On account of the tough measures we took quite early, we avoided the catastrophes we saw in other countries. 

However, on account of widespread reckless behaviour, we are now entering a new phase with the wider spectrum of variants of the virus that may be more dangerous. Up to now, 49,761 people have been infected cumulatively; this was up to 1 June 2021. Forty-six thousand one hundred and fifty of these have recovered. Therefore, many people recover if they are well treated and in time. 

However, it must be noted that the coronavirus is very dangerous because it targets epithelial cells in our bodies that line and create protective barriers in many organs of the human beings, including the lungs, the heart, the blood vessels, kidneys, liver and the digestive tract. This virus can damage those organs even if the patient recovers. 

Fortunately, as you can see, many Ugandans have completely recovered with no permanent damage to their body organs. Nevertheless, the best is to avoid this disease until one is fully vaccinated and we maintain the SOPs until the pandemic in the world is defeated. This is the wisest thing to do. 

The vaccination recently hit a snag when, on account of the very bad situation that developed in India, the country stopped the fresh export of the vaccine. My advice to the countries that are producing vaccines now is to be careful at this point. I had the same problem with sanitisers here, like I said the other day. Being waragi producers, when the pandemic started, the only factory that was making sanitisers in East Africa was Saraya Manufacturing (U) Ltd in Jinja. There are some advantages in having a lot of waragi. I do not like drinking but this time I appreciated the drunkards. 

In Cabinet, while discussing this point, somebody suggested that we should stop the export of the sanitisers because we badly needed them here in Uganda. As a Christian and traditional Munyankole, I could not accept that logic. It is called okuhemuka - to let down friends, colleagues, partners and anybody that trusted in your solidarity by saying that because you are in great need, those who depended on your solidarity can go to hell. 

A real Munyankole can never do that, except those eating pigs in Kampala. If you see those Banyankole who are eating pigs, maybe they may do this. A real Munyankole cannot say because I have a problem, you go to hell. No! You suffer with your friend. Otherwise, if you do not, it is a serious offence in the code of conduct of the Banyankole and it is called okuhemuka.

Apart from the moral issues involved, there is also the issue of strategy. You should always remember that there is a tomorrow - hariyo nyentsya. If you let me down today when I am in such a great need as life and death for my people just like you also have the same crisis, how will I ever depend on your partnership in future? It seriously undermines international partnership.

What I decided in the case of the sanitisers was to advise the hon. Jane Aceng to put aside 40 per cent of the production for Uganda and share the 60 per cent with other East Africans. I could not kuhunga (abandon) fraternal people and partners by okuhemuka (let them down) just because I am in acute need myself. I share the hardships with my fraternal people or partners.

Nevertheless, the egocentrism in the world is also good for us patriots and Pan-Africanists in Africa. It makes it much easier to arouse even the most indifferent who are busy dancing and taking alcohol, that Africa must take care of itself.

I salute our scientists who have developed the diagnostics and have been working on the therapeutics and the vaccines. Two of our diagnostics are ready for manufacturing and we are in the process of putting up the factory to mass manufacture. The therapeutic has been tried on 53 patients but we need a minimum of 124. Up to now, results are good. In the months of February, March, April and a bit of May, we had a problem because we did not have patients. There were no coronavirus patients and we did not have enough numbers.

The research authorities say that for the two medicines to work, we must try it on 124 people. Up to now, we have up to 53 patients and results are good. With the vaccine, we have got to phase four out of nine phases. At this stage, I need to renew my demand but this time, renew it as an order that should be implemented. 

Many years ago, I proposed that the Government scientists must start with Shs 4 million per month as pay when they join the Public Service. A top scientist in a research institution should be earning Shs 15 million like professors in public universities. This is because we want to retain the large number of scientists we have trained so that they solve our needs of health, nutrition, infrastructure but also benefit from the pathogenic economy - the economy of diseases.

There is business in diseases. Other people in the world have been making money from our sicknesses. We shall earn more money from the pathogenic economy than from coffee. Therefore, paying our scientists well is not a favour to them; it is first and foremost in the enlightened self-interest of the country.

All these are temporary phenomena - locusts, floods, rising water of the lakes, landslides, coronavirus, among others. We are coping with them. However, our real historic task is to cause social-economic transformation of our society. This society must go from its pre-capitalist and pre-industrial way of life to a middleclass skilled working class society.

When the French Revolution took place in 1789, the French society, which I suspect was a microcosm of the wider European societies, was a four-class society: feudalist, capitalist called bourgeois, working class also called proletariat, and peasant. At that time, the society in Uganda was a three-class society consisting of feudalists, artisans and peasants. 

Today, the European societies have two classes. These are the middle class, being sustained by profits from business, and the skilled working class – the proletariat - who depend on good salaries to sustain them plus a welfare system when they are out of work. Therefore, Europe has undergone a social metamorphosis; it has changed like the process, which we know in biology, where the insects change form.  There are no more peasants in Europe. If you go to Europe and you are looking for peasants, you will not find any. There is no more feudalism in Europe.

Here in Africa, many actors are engaged in peasant conservation and some elements of feudalism. It is this incomplete metamorphosis of society that I have been addressing ever since 1986, when we got a chance to run the country and even before when we were still in the student movement. Our appeal is for everybody to join the money economy and get out of okukolera ekidda kyoonka - You remember those Bagwere - tic me ice keken, akoru lu akoik bon in Ateso, and in Lugbara azi-ngaza aleni. We must get out of that problem.

As you have seen, even modest waking up of sections of our people from kulambaala, nino-matek and even using old methods generated a lot of production. Some of the increased production, fortunately, has got big international demand. Coffee falls into this category. We have gone from three million bags to seven million bags. Fortunately, the global demand is able to take all the coffee because the global coffee demand is 166.34 million 60 kilogramme bags. The global demand for milk products is 906 billion litres valued at US$458 billion.

Therefore, our present production of 2.6 billion litres of milk can enter the global market, provided we solve the problem of cattle diseases such as foot and mouth, CBPP, anthrax, among others, and of course, offer competitive prices. Therefore, the Banyankole I once met at Rwakitura clamouring for high milk prices need to know more about this global competition for market with other countries such as New Zealand, Holland and others. Our people need to know that if we are to compete for global markets, our products must be of good quality and safe, but also cheaper than what other countries are offering. 

One day, I attended a meeting at Rwakitura with the Banyankole. They said, “We want more money for our milk”. I said, “Okay, but if your milk becomes too expensive, how will it compete in London, Beijing, New Delhi, and New York with milk from other countries?” So, we need to awaken our people to the fact that we are struggling in a global environment.

The global demand for maize and maize products is 852 million metric tonnes, valued at US$153 billion. Therefore, our production of 5 million tonnes of maize can be absorbed, provided we solve the problem of quality - getting rid of the shameful aflatoxins caused by people who mishandle food during harvesting. Why do you mishandle people’s food? Wait for the maize to dry properly on the kikoonko (maize stalk). When you harvest it, put it on canvas (ntundubaare) or a cemented drying ground, etc. The maize will dry properly and there will be no aflatoxins.

The Iranians came here and they wanted to buy all our maize because we have very good relations with them. Their annual demand is 9.4 million tonnes. They import 7 million tonnes. The problem was ourselves - negligence in handling food we want to sell to people. Are we balogo? Balogo are people that give something bad to somebody to eat. Are we to sell good products to people or to sell bad things to people? How can it be that we want to sell bad things to people? We shall turn out to be like balogo - the poisoners of people. 

Algeria imports 300 billion tonnes of powdered milk per annum. To produce this milk powder, you need – I do not know whether this figure is correct. It was put in by my people. I need to check it. To produce this milk powder, they say you need 2.7 trillion litres of milk. Therefore, the powdered milk Algeria consumes would finish off all this milk we are talking about. 

Nigeria – I am not sure about these people’s figures; kansooke nzekeenenye. Anyway, the point is that Algeria and Nigeria consume a lot of powdered milk and to produce powdered milk, you need a lot of liquid milk and we produce a lot of milk here. So, these people could buy this milk.

With many of Uganda’s products, there is a global market but we must solve the issues of safety. I will not talk of quality because our agricultural products are the best quality in the world. When we had the inauguration here, I met delegations at Munyonyo. As part of my diplomatic protocol, I would have my menvu, the kabalagala (small sweet bananas) and the bogoya. People like those products. They like bogoya, they like small sweet bananas, the pineapples of Uganda, which are among the best - the millet and the milk. They are the best quality. The problem is the mishandling by our producers who are not well sensitised. 

I have been telling the world what you know - the huge surplus of so many products as a consequence of the limited waking up of sections of our people. Only a very small number of people have woken up to produce for the market, yet this is a mere ndozo. Ndozo is jaribu - to make people taste. 

If you take the beef and dairy sector, for instance, there is a big increase in the milk production in spite of still using the free range method (kuseetura), where cattle are sent to the bush or farm to graze, when the farm is bush cleared. In this method, the stocking ratio is only one and half cattle per acre, per annum. In a square mile, you will have about 300 cows. Some years ago, mama and I went to Israel and saw 1,000 Friesian cattle being fed in one acre.

Recently, I met somebody from the United Arab Emirates, who told me that their company has a herd of 18,000 heads of cattle on 250 acres. Here, in a whole square mile, you find we have got just 300 cows. We should systematically, therefore, shift to zero grazing. If you talk to Dr Ademun, a commissioner of veterinary, she will tell you that when you grow grass on a farm and you cut it and feed the cows on zero grazing instead of them going to feed, you will be able to look after eight Friesian cows on one acre in a year. So, if you have got 10 acres, you can actually look after 80 Friesian cows in a year. 

Therefore, with our 18 million heads of cattle, one-third of which would be milking at any one time, each giving 20 litres, the total production would be 44 billion litres of milk in a year. The same for bananas; while the rural farmers have been producing five tonnes of bananas per hectare per year, Dr Muranga at Nyaruziinga, in Bushenyi District, has got to 53 tonnes per hectare per annum. I hear that in Brazil, they go up to 80 tonnes per hectare per annum. This increased production is partly due to irrigation and fertilizers, among others.

This is why in my inauguration speech, I emphasised the question of the market for Ugandan products, if all Ugandans wake up. Again, to remind everybody, the answers are four on the issue of the market: One, the internal market of Uganda boosted by increased purchasing power when all homesteads join the money economy by producing for the stomach but also for the pocket.

Secondly, the East African market through the East African Community. Thirdly, the African market through the Continental Free Trade Area. Fourthly, the global market through the trade access agreements like African Growth Opportunity Act (AGOA), the Chinese preferential access market, the European Union where they allow everything but not arms, and also access to other markets on the merit of the quality and pricing of our products.

Once all the leaders are clear on these points, we shall more easily be able to implement the guidelines we have put out for the whole country. Who is to produce low-value crops but on a large scale such as sugarcane, cotton, maize, tobacco etc, and who is to produce high-value products on a small scale such as coffee, milk, fruits, poultry, piggery, horticulture, and who should do both? 

If we want to help our people, this Parliament, please - we had a long discussion in Kyankwanzi with the new MPs. There is nothing we did not discuss. I hope the way forward is clear. The difference between extensive agriculture, where you produce low-value crops but on a big scale, and intensive agriculture, where you use smaller land but produce high-value crops - if we are all clear on that, the future is bright.

Let all the leaders stop confusing people by sending contradictory or divergent messages. The NRM message, ever since 1986, has been: all homesteads to join the money economy using ekibaro (cura, otita, aimar - profitability assessment) to guide their enterprise selection; prices of products are determined by the market and not by the Government unless we provide subsidies, which we cannot afford and few have sustainably afforded in the world; moreover, our products must be safe for consumption, good quality and competitive prices; and the markets are four - internal, East African Community, African and global.

The colonial approach is no longer possible, where they say, “produce the coffee and cotton, we guarantee to buy them at guaranteed prices.” We do not have time here to go into that but that was a colonial approach for a narrow range of products - just two or three. However, if you are going to have 20 or 30 products, how will you provide a subsidy for them? The world of production is now for competition and it can be done. 

With this clear vision, I strongly urge our people to join the four sectors - commercial agriculture, industries, services and ICT. With commercial agriculture, we are emphasising the parish model; at the parish, you are able to know all the homesteads. When you are at your subcounty or constituency, it is too far; you may not know all the homesteads. 

For instance, I know that Ndangaaro Parish in Rubirizi has 3,330 homesteads. That is the parish I visited some time ago when the homesteads were still 2,500 and they were all “democratically” without money except one man, Kateeba, who had seven pigs. When I asked the people how Kateeba got seven pigs, they said “Ogu ne’ishe akari omugaiga” - even his father was a rich man. Now, you hear that the homesteads in Ndangaaro Parish are 3,330 - they have increased.

Rwengaaju, in Kabarole, has 3,196 homesteads, but those ones are a model; they listened to our advice and they are doing very well. In Mawale Parish here in Luweero, where my model farm of Kawumu is, there are 1,480 homesteads. So, when you are using the parish model, you are able to know how many homesteads there are. You will be able to know who has woken up and who is still asleep. Our aim is to make all the homesteads wake up.

On the side of industries, we shall continue to deal with the issue of the costs of manufacturing in Uganda. The cost pushers are three: the cost of money (interest rates of the exploitative commercial banks; they are suckers); the cost of transport (to Mombasa, Dar-es-salaam, Juba, Kigali, Congo, Ethiopia and many others); the cost of electricity. The other would be the cost of labour but that is still low. It is not a problem yet.

Ugandans should be informed that with our fraternal states of the East African Community, we are handling the issue of transport costs. By road, a 20ft container costs US$1,900 and a 40ft container costs US$3,200 to Mombasa and vice versa, yet by rail, it is US$1,400 for a 20ft container. So, for a 20ft container, instead of paying US$1,900 by road, you save US$500 because it is $1,400 by rail. For the 40ft container, by rail it is $1,900 instead of $3,200; so, you save almost half of that money.

Hence, in addition to our long-term goal of building a modern standard gauge railway, we are together with Kenya - We are continuing with our plan to build the modern standard gauge highspeed railway but at the same time with Kenya, we are rehabilitating the old metre gauge railway for immediate use. Actually, Gen. Katumba and hon. Sam Kutesa were very involved in this one. 

The metre gauge railway is the old railway. When repaired, its cost of transport will be much lower than the road transport.

On the cost of money, we are continuing to fund Uganda Development Bank so that it can give loans for manufacturing, agriculture, some services like tourism, medical and ICT at no more than 12 per cent. The more they lend, the lower the interest rates will become.

The cost of electricity is distorted by the mistakes committed by some of our actors without my knowledge, even when I was heading the Government. The mistakes especially of Bujagali and Umeme add 55.3 per cent to the cost of electricity per unit. You are paying a high electricity bill because 55.3 per cent was added by Bujagali and Umeme. Otherwise, the cost of power from Kiira Dam is 1.19 US cents per unit, Nalubaale Dam is at 1.1 US cents per unit, Isimba Dam is at 4.1 US cents per unit, Karuma Dam is at 4.9 US cents per unit but that from Bujagali Dam is 8.3 US cents per unit. Bujagali Dam’s power at one time was at 13.8 US cents per unit. We had to struggle until we brought it down to 8 US cents. 

We shall see how to get out of this mistake. One solution that I have already ordered for industrial parks is to supply power directly from some of the Government dams to the parks without going through the Umeme line – going straight. I will not be deflected from that.

The services sector - tourism, hotels, banking, music, sports, professional services, et cetera – was moving very well until coronavirus came in. As I said above, the answer for coronavirus, apart from the preventive measures we continue to take, is the vaccines and the therapeutics.

Above, I talked about okuhemuka - letting down our partners. We are continuing to talk with India, the USA for the Johnson & Johnson vaccine, China and Cuba. I am sure we shall succeed with some of them.  

With the therapeutics, one of our products has been tried, as I said, among 53 patients and 43 of them have fully recovered, while the others are still on treatment. We target to reach 124 patients before we are sure that this medicine treats COVID-19 patients.

On the side of the vaccine, as I said we are moving very well, only that we were delayed by the perception that Africa is not supposed to manufacture vaccines but is only supposed to buy from others and also work as foot soldiers in doing field research for others to develop and own vaccines. Like the vaccine for Ebola, much of the work was done by our people here but I hear that somebody else made the Ebola vaccine, yet this was our disease. Why do you allow somebody to take your disease? (Laughter) 

I have been having some discussion with Prof. Ponsiano Kaleebu, the man at the Uganda Virus Research Institute. Please, I do not want to continue like this. Ebola is our disease. If it is my disease, I must benefit from it. How does somebody come and develop a vaccine, yet you are here? What are you doing? 

I salute the few outsiders that helped us. We have a few outsiders who helped us. I will give you the whole story at some stage. I do not want to give out secrets now. I am sure God has created space for them in heaven for their Christian-like actions of sharing with other children of God. So, the few outsiders who helped us with the vaccine, God will reward them. I pray for them.

Making a vaccine in a kutembuura, which is the word used to describe a situation where one goes to make a fresh garden from the bush - starting a new garden from the bush - involves nine or eight phases if WHO allows you to skip one phase. Our researchers are now entering stage 4. I congratulate them. We hope to get to stage 8 by November 2021. 

I can assure Ugandans that by the end of 2021, we shall no longer be waiting for outsiders to rescue us from ekyorezo - from mass death. You are just here dying until foreigners come and say, “Bambe, Africans are dying; let us help them.” It is really not – I do not want to be part of such a group. 

By controlling the coronavirus, our services will resurrect. Before the coronavirus emergence, we were earning US$1.5 billion from tourism alone. Since some decades ago, I have been urging our people in the ICT sector to take advantage of the BPO business in the world. Since many of our children speak Kampala Parents’ English – you know the tweny tweny one – they can, through the internet, do jobs for companies in the USA, Canada, etcetera, such as call centre services for utilities, hospitals, auditing accounts from here and be paid.

India is earning US$191 billion per year from this business of BPOs and employing 1.1 million young people. The ICT has been unserious in relation to this sector.

Therefore, again, honourable Members of Parliament, the four sectors are commercial agriculture, industries, services and ICT. Given the correct policies of the NRM, right from 1986, in spite of obstacles erected by those who do not understand our strategy, the economy has grown – as I said at the beginning of this speech – from US$1.3 billion to US$40 billion. That is 31 times bigger. The economy is 31 times bigger than it was in 1986. That is if you use the foreign exchange method; if you use the Purchasing Power Parity (PPP) method, it is US$114 billion.

By 2026, the economy is estimated to be US$69 billion, if you use the foreign exchange method, or US$193 billion by the PPP method. 

I am, however, nor have I ever been, satisfied by this level of performance. Some companies in the USA have annual turnovers of US dollars in billions. You can take examples of the following, as indicated in the table: 

There is one company in the US called Walmart. It is a retail company. Its business turnover each year is $560 billion. Here, we are talking of an economy of a whole country at $40 billion yet one company in the US is at $560 billion. 

Another company called Amazon makes $387 billion. Walmart employs 2.2 million people and Amazon employs 1.2 million people. Another company called Apple is worth $275 billion. A healthcare group called CVS Health is worth $270 billion. ExxonMobil, petroleum - $265 billion; United Health Group, healthcare - $257 billion; Berkshire Hathaway, a conglomerate – I do not know what that one is – $255 billion; McKesson Corporation, healthcare – $215 billion; AmerisourceBergen, pharmaceutical industry – $190 billion.

How and why should a company have a size of business that is bigger than the economy of a whole country? The combined GDP of East Africa is $440 billion – the whole of East Africa - yet one company in the US called Walmart is worth $560 billion. You have seen how some of the individual companies have business sizes comparable to the combined economies of the whole of East Africa. Hence, in the medium term, we must aim at the size of an economy of at least $300 billion by the foreign exchange method.

By 2026, Uganda’s population will be 48 million people. If each person is earning $3,000 per year – the children will not be earning but their parents can earn for them – that will be $144 billion. This will just be people’s incomes without including infrastructure. Yet, $3,000 per person per year translates to Shs 10.80 million per person per year. For a household of five, this will translate to Shs 54 million per year. If each person was earning $3,000 in Uganda Shillings, for a household of five it would translate to Shs 54 million per year.

Some of our households, for example in Rwengaju near Fort Portal, - Mr Nyakana and his group - using one acre are already earning Shs 240 million. For the new Members of Parliament who were at Kyankwanzi, I brought Mr Nyakana and he testified. Shs 240 million translates to $67,000 per year, per household. If you divide $67,000 by five members in a household, that comes to $13,000 per person per year. So, this is achievable because some of our people have already achieved it. Even the people in the cattle corridor who deal in milk have achieved it. 

I, therefore, do not accept the minimalist approach by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, where the people of Uganda generate wealth that is smaller than the businesses of individual companies in other parts of the world.

We shall earn more from coffee and its products, from milk, and from fish, especially ennuni - the fish maw. The plan, which some of our people have presented to us, is that out of ennuni alone, Uganda can get around $156 billion per year, which is bigger than what Saudi Arabia earns from oil in a year. I will present a plan on how we can transform fishing into a gold mine which is bigger than oil.

To achieve these aims, we must defeat corruption and disorientation, and we shall defeat them. Corruption has become a real enemy. It starts in the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, where projects are designed with supernumerary element or extras; they design a project but they add in things which should not be there. These bloated projects then go to the ministries like the Ministry of Water and Environment and so on. They then go to the committees of Parliament – you watch out – and then to the Auditor-General, and there is collusion all the way. There are agents along the way, each one getting enjawulo. I have the story now; you will see. That is how I moved on Uganda Airlines. They thought they were very smart but they will find out what sort of people bayekera are.

What the corrupt fraternity did not factor in, in their kibaro of corruption and criminality, was the large number of young people the NRM has trained over the years. Many of them come from the middle class, where they do not have the pressure of home poverty. We are beginning to have young Ugandans who are from rich families; this is a structural change. These are children who do not have pressure of poverty from home. You will see how they will help us to fight this corruption.

I have been discussing with my children, who are now senior adults - they are no longer children but they do not want me to mention their age - the timeliness of creating Descendant Resistance Army 1 (DRA) to take forward the work of the original National Resistance Army (NRA) of their parents. This fraternity recently recommended to me one of their group. When I talked to her about a certain job, her answer was, “No, Mzee, that is not my ‘pession’.” They speak in their exotic accent. These people work for passion, not for money. 

Against resistance, I put one of them, Ms Irene Kaggwa, to manage the Uganda Communications Commission. When I was appointing that girl, people said, “No, that one is young; she is not experienced. Although some of these have problems, but they are politically…” I said, “No; if you are corrupt, you are not a political asset.” A corrupt person is not a political asset. He or she is a political liability.

I put one of them, Ms Irene Kaggwa, to manage Uganda Communications Commission. She is doing a commendable and clean job, from the little I hear. The young passionists are liberating Uganda Airlines. The resistance movement in Uganda Airlines was by these young passionate people there.

It is easy for the NRM to defeat corruption. With disorientation, I want to appeal to the NRM Members of Parliament to grasp our strategy, of everybody joining the money economy with ekibaro, as we agreed at Kyankwanzi recently.

The target of all these efforts is to ensure two things: prosperity of our people by helping them to create wealth for themselves as well as jobs for themselves and others, and also ensuring the security of our country. To achieve these, we must ensure the socio-economic transformation of our society by phasing out the peasants and feudalists and creating a middle-class and skilled working class society.

It is a shame that we are still struggling with this social metamorphosis 232 years from the time of the French Revolution in 1789. As pointed out above, France already had a middle class and a working class, in addition to the oppressive feudalists and the poor and badly exploited peasants, the serfs.

A lot of time was wasted not only by the colonialists, the ignorant chiefs, but also by some of the post-colonial actors like politicians, cultural leaders, religious leaders, among others. Many times, they divert people’s attention to wrong positions of superstition, sectarianism, miracle wealth, etcetera. 

Mao Tse Tung in China struggled against these parasite groups. That is why China is now on the verge of becoming a first world country. China is now the second richest country in the world. If you go back to 1949 when Mao Tse Tung came to government, it was very far - you can go and check - but the Chinese struggled against these parasite groups. 

Ever since 1986 - if you leave out the other years of struggle - the NRM has been insisting on four stimuli to cause this socio-economic transformation. These are – 

    1. Education for all. I spoke about that the other day at the inauguration here. 

    2. Everybody joining the money economy, away from the pre-capitalist practice of primitive self-sufficiency of okukolera ekidda kyoonka.

    3. Private sector led-growth to attract actors that are already part of the money economy in big numbers. 

    4. Infrastructure development so as to facilitate the three efforts above, including lowering the cost of doing business in Uganda, so as to enable our economic actors to make profit in their businesses, thereby making Uganda more competitive.

This vision helped Uganda, as has been demonstrated again in this speech. However, much more could have been achieved and can be achieved if all the politicians of the NRM and the civil servants understand and push this effort in a united way. 

Many times, we have had to swim against the current; we have been facing opposition from within the system. Yet, as Mwalimu Nyerere said, “Africa needs to run while others walk” if we are to catch up. Some parts of the world are on the verge of the fourth industrial revolution, while many parts of Africa have not entered even the first industrial revolution.

The fourth industrial revolution is the phenomenon of intelligent machines that can replace man in the workplace, such as factories. China and India benefited from cheap labour and lured business to the East. That migration of factories and businesses in search of cheap labour forced the other societies to look for cheap labour that avoids expensive human beings that were demanding high wages using the trade unions - the labour movement. The answer is intelligent machines as a consequence of Artificial intelligence (AI). This is what is being referred to as the fourth industrial revolution. 

The first industrial revolution (mechanisation revolution) was the use of steam power operating machines instead of the manually operated enyoondo - the hammer. The second industrial revolution (the technological revolution) was the discovery of electricity to operate machines instead of steam power. The third industrial revolution was automation. We are now entering the fourth industrial revolution of intelligent machines. Uganda, under the NRM, will not miss the bus of history again. That is what I am here to appeal to you about. 

Finally, security will be maintained in the whole country. Cattle rustling that has been showing resurgence in Karamoja will be defeated. We are expanding the brigades of the 3rd Division and 1st Division. The criminality around Kampala was defeated and it will be defeated again. The only element to get rid of is the corruption and poor procedures within the police.

The NRM people were reporting intimidation and harassment by terrorists at the police posts. These good-for-nothing characters would tell them that there is no political desk; if you do not have a desk for terrorism in your police post, you will go home and somebody else will do the job.

The recent shooting of Gen. Katumba by the usual shallow actors, whom I called pigs the other day, as you may remember, showed the poor organisation of the police. The cameras I put in place did their work. As you saw, the killers were running from one area to another area. Why didn’t the camera centre alert all the patrol cars and even the Unmanned Air Vehicles (UAVs) - we have them; they can follow you anywhere once they are deployed - to chase and block these killers? 

No; these wonderful camera managers think that their gadgets are only for storing videos for forensic analysis as part of the post-mortem of the operation. Yes, the cameras are for forensic analysis but also for enduulu (alarm) – wuyo, wuyo, wuyo! That is what the cameras should do. You should be watching and if something like this happens, you follow him on the cameras. They are there watching; why don’t they make an alarm while the crime is going on? They are just sitting in the command centre and watching.

The criminals will then be on continuous viewing by all the camera centres if the policemen adopt my directives and rationality in the use of those cameras. So, those cameras are there but not fully used. 

However, as you saw, they captured - I told the police to show the public what the criminals were doing. The criminals had covered their faces but we shall sort that. After the other killings, I heard some people talking about the killing of Kagezi the prosecutor, the killing of Kaweesi, the killing of Kirumira and the Muslim sheikhs. But by that time, we did not have cameras. At the time of most of those killings – even Kiggundu - we did not have cameras.

I actually introduced cameras because of those killings that were going on. You will remember when I addressed Parliament and I outlined 12 steps. The cameras are just one of them. There are other measures; for instance, the gun which was used in the Gen. Katumba attack is already identified. It is the same one which was used in the Maj. Kiggundu case. A number of those, though not all, were arrested but they were released by the courts on bail. The reason why somebody who has killed people should be released on bail, I cannot understand. Bail for what?

His Lordship the Chief Justice is here; I will get time and we talk. We cannot really go on - These people want to turn our army into a criminal one. If they go on arresting individuals and you release them, next time they will just shoot them and they will say, “Oh he was running away, so we killed him”. You will not be there to tell the story. Therefore, we are going to sit down. I am glad the cameras are working. The other systems are also working but they are not fully used.

The police are, therefore, directed to stop – These policemen abandoned using radios. I think this was under the regime of Gen. Kale Kayihura. They now use mobile phones. With mobile phones, you talk to only one person. Police do not work like that; they work on a network. It is like a village where you make enduulu because when you do so, the whole village wakes up.

When the camera people are watching and they see something like that, they should shout, “wuyo, wuyo, wuyo!” and everybody should be hearing; you should be on the same network, not looking for the District Police Commander (DPC) who is asleep. We do not need the DPC; we just need the people on duty. Whether the DPC is asleep or not, it is none of our business.

The police post or station must always be open and on radio communication. Everybody should be communicating. If something happens here, the whole system should know.

Henceforth, the police is directed again – I had already directed them but I repeat it - to stop using mobile phones and go back to using radios that are open to all stations, so that they can act promptly in emergencies like the one of Gen. Katumba. 

In addition to the cameras, our security leaders have been working on my directive of installing digital monitors. This was part of the 12 points - to have a digital monitor in every vehicle and piki piki so that wherever you are, the command post can know. I know some people want to hide where they are going for some very simple reasons, but we have got very serious issues we are dealing with; you will have to forgive us.

Actually, Gen. Katumba and Gen. Tumwiine were the people working on that particular system of digital monitors. When you try to tamper with it, we will see you. They have taken long to implement this plan. This would make it easy to know which piki piki, car or boat - We shall also introduce it on the lakes so that we know which boats are where on the lake. 

The country is secure. I am sure we shall get these people who were involved in the Gen. Katumba incident because we already have good leads. I am also following it very closely. This is different from the Kagezis and Kaweesis because at that time, many things were not in place. Now, we have some of them in place. They are not all in place but it is much easier this time. The country is secure and progressing. Corruption and disorientation will be defeated.

Rt Hon. Speaker, I have not yet appointed a Prime Minister, therefore I am not able, this time, to present the legislative programme. I will do so when the Prime Minister is appointed because it will be much easier for me then. Here, I just repeated the strategy of the NRM that will cause social transformation in Uganda and ensure security of our country.
I thank you very much. (Applause)

ADJOURNMENT

THE SPEAKER: Your Excellency the President, let me take this opportunity to thank you for fulfilling your constitutional obligation. Within our rules, we shall have time devoted to consider this address and have serious discussions about the matters you have raised.

The address was done in a timely manner, on the Second Sitting of the First Meeting, and it is good that it has been presented before the budget is read on Thursday, 10 June 2021. We shall, therefore, be equipped with the necessary factors and gadgets to assess it and make contributions to it. 

The address has covered a number of programmes and highlighted achievements of the Government. It is important to note that to date, Parliament has not constituted the requisite committees since it has just commenced. 

For the record, in the past, before the new normal, after the address by the President he would take a group photograph with all of us, Members of Parliament, but now it is not possible. The other part of the ceremony used to be a cocktail reception hosted in honour of the Members by the Speaker. This one will be deferred and we pray hard that this virus goes away and we do that. That one will never go away; we will have it in one-way or the other. However, this will also not be possible for now. 

We pray for divine intervention and the working of our scientists so that in the near future, the pandemic disappears and we are able to move normally with our lives.

With this, once again, I thank you, Your Excellency, for the address and honourable members for turning up in these numbers. 

Let me take this chance to record some apologies from our Members and colleagues who are not able to be here. I received notification from hon. Connie Galiwango who lost a close aunt and she had to be there.

Secondly, we record apologies of the Members from Karamoja sub-region. They all left to be home with the people. The situation there does not seem to be going down and seems to be escalating. You had a discussion with them, Your Excellency. You might now need to move quicker and see how the situation there could be resolved.

There are some announcements. Honourable members and staff, the budget will be read on the 10th of June. That means on Monday and Tuesday, we will be taking samples for COVID-19 tests at Parliament. Please, prepare and do this so that we are safe and can be admitted for the Budget Speech on 10th of June. Members should take note.

After the anthems, the House will be adjourned to - I can say with certainty - 10 June 2021, but should we receive some documents from the President and others, we will sit early to handle some urgent business before the budget reading. Proper notification will be given to you if this should be the case. 

Otherwise, this House is substantially adjourned to 10 June 2021 at 2.00 p.m. to receive the national budget. However, as I said, there could be modifications, so just stay on the alert. We could sit to deal with the committees on appointments and deal with some motions that are vital in dealing with what the President will be doing with the Vice-President, the Prime Minister and some other proposals that he will be asking Parliament to act on to facilitate the setting up of his Government. House is adjourned.  

East African Community Anthem

National Anthem

(The House rose at 4.16 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 10 June 2021 at 2.00 p.m.)

 


