Thursday, 27 June 2013

Parliament met at 2.22 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this morning sitting. I also thank you for accepting to interrupt your other work. I will only adjust the Order Paper very briefly to permit hon. Mawanda Michael Muranga to make his personal explanation before we proceed with the items on the Order Paper.

2.25
MR MAWANDA MICHAEL MURANGA (NRM, Igara County East, Bushenyi): Madam Speaker, this is my personal statement. On 17 April 2013, I travelled to India on a private visit, but I happened to travel with other two Ugandans: hon. Isaac Musumba and Mr Mathias Magoola, who were on their own business trip.

On 19 April 2013, the Uganda public woke up to some shocking news under the headline, “MP Mawanda Michael, x-minister, hon. Isaac Musumba and another Uganda arrested in Mumbai and charged with extortion of $ 20 million from an Indian businessman.” The press was informed of this “arrest” by the deputy commissioner of police, according to the Mumbai Mirror newspaper.

Along with the newspaper stories, there were postings on the internet to ensure all media houses in Uganda and the World could not miss that important news. For about a week, the media kept reporting on us negatively, including some senior officials at the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Uganda.

In fact, one junior minister from the Ministry of Foreign Affairs is quoted to have said to some circles of Government that, I and hon. Isaac Musumba had disgraced our country that we had the obligation to sort out our own problem the way the IMF managing director was abandoned by his country, France, when he disgraced himself.

The same ministry officials continued making unresearched comments and giving misleading and unconfirmed facts about our case yet none of these fellow ever made any contact of any form to find out the true side of that story.

In a nutshell, a lot of negative publicity was always published or aired about us and more or else as criminals.

Madam Speaker, my telephone line was always ringing because a number of people wanted to know whether I was okay after they had been told I had been arrested and taken to prison. But it would surprise many people whose calls I answered while laughing and informing them that I was okay and innocent. However, some people thought I was lying having consumed negative media content. Even when I told them that the allegations were not true, they could not believe. So, little did they know that they were, without their knowledge, being used to further some one’s agenda.

Madam Speaker, I therefore take this opportunity to inform all Ugandans that I understand their anguish. I also wish to thank you, Madam Speaker, for according this opportunity to clear my name. In fact, the truth is the opposite of what was portrayed and you should now turn your anger to the opposite direction.

When we returned from India on 25 June 2013, hon. Isaac Musumba addressed a press conference at Hotel and made it clear thus: “Hon. Mawanda Michael was not in any way connected with the affairs of my client. He was on his own affairs but was victimized for being with me at the time in question.”

Madam Speaker, in brief, in 2008, there was a business relationship between a Ugandan businessman and some Indians dealing in mining; they owned mines in Uganda. For reasons best known to them, their business did not take off but had formed a joint venture company where all the assets of the Ugandan businessman were transferred into the name of the company.
When that new company failed to take off the Ugandan businessman requested that his assets be retuned, which the Indian businessmen, who were majority shareholders, refused to do. Thereafter, a criminal case was registered in the Ugandan court and legal instruments were executed in courts of law. It was on that basis that hon. Musumba and his client had to travel to India. Prior to their travel to India, consultations were made before they were given a go-ahead to move. They hence travelled to India at the very time I was also traveling to that place - we travelled together.

On arrival in India, hon. Musumba and his client contacted their people, but who later turned against them and concocted false allegations against them. Unfortunately, I was victimized simply because I had been in their company.

False allegations were made against us at the Mumbai Police and from there police officers started following us, and made our lives very difficult before they took away our passports.

Around 1 May 2013, we decide to travel to New Delhi and filed a case against them at the Supreme Court of India for violating our rights. After our case was heard  by a Bench of Judges, the Supreme Court of India made some interim order or relief on 10 May 2013 directing the police at Mumbai to file a defense for its actions, so would be the directors of the company that hon. Musumba and his client had travelled to meet.

On 19  June 3013, the Supreme Court heard all the parties and made the following ruling, which said in parts thus: “The allegations were baseless and did not have any aorta of truth; that the allegations did not have any legal foundation whatsoever and that police should not have registered such a complaint unless they were acting under someone’s undue influence; that there was no extortion whatsoever, how could there be when the ingredients of the offence were non-existent; that there could not have been an offence of criminal trespass, how could there be when it was not in dispute that there had been a business relationship between the parties and one of the parties visited the premises of the other in pursuance of a settlement; that an offence of conspiracy would not stand when there was nothing to conspire about; that the complaint is hereby quashed and that if any of our passports were in the custody of police, such should be released forthwith.”

Madam Speaker, I wish to categorically state that we were never arrested, charged or imprisoned in India for the whole period we were there. In fact, it was us who took the India Police and the business people to court for making false allegations against us in a bid to clear our names and integrity in the faces of all Ugandans. In fact, today, we are filing for our bill of costs in the Supreme Court of Mumbai which is totalling $10 million for the damage they caused to us – (Laughter) – and this is minus the compensation the Musumba’s were chasing.

Lessons to be learnt, in my view:
    • The government needs to focus on Ugandans who need help when they are abroad. They are venerable in an unfamiliar territory and can easily have their rights violated deeply.
    • Regardless of the offense, real or imagined, the government should arrange to provide prompt or timely consular services to Ugandans abroad – simple advise on where to find a good lawyer or hospital can make life different. 
    • Ugandans at home should endeavour to give support to Ugandans abroad at the time of need. If Ugandans do not do this and instead publish condemning propaganda, a message of being disposed is conveyed which further aggravates their plight.
    • Government officials should be conscious and avoid making un-researched or unhelpful comments. People in certain positions should know that the public take seriously what they say. They should, therefore, refrain from making statements that might incite the public or cause disaffection to the victims. It is always worth remembering that people are presumed innocent until proved guilty. In circumstances as these, let us always focus on the real issues and not on the peripheral ones. 

Appreciation

I wish to thank very deeply the following people for their care and concern:

His Excellency the President of the Republic of Uganda, Yoweri Kaguta Museveni; Rt Hon. Speaker of Uganda, Rebecca Kadaga; hon. Sam Kutesa; hon. Mary Karoro; hon. Mwesigwa Rukutana; hon. Kasule Lumumba; hon. Daudi Migereko. 

My list is long, but I must mention the following people: Hon. Elijah Okupa; hon. Nassa Basajjabalaba; Mr Hassan Basajjabalaba; Mr Julius Kavuma Kabenge; Mr Alex Bashasha; members of my family; my friends, colleagues and relatives. Thank you very much! 

Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on Table the ruling and orders that were given by the Supreme Court of India. (Applause) I also wish to extend our sincere thanks to the High Commission of India. Thank you very much. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Mawanda, on behalf of the House, I welcome you back. It is a pleasure to see you in your usual corner and wish you well. I hope you will be able to share some of the costs with some of your friends –(Laughter).

DESIGNATION OF MEMBERS TO SECTORAL COMMITTEES IN ACCORDANCE WITH RULE 176(7) OF THE RULES OF PROCEDURE OF PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, as you recall, last time we had received nominations from NRM, the Independents and from UPC. Now I want us to handle that of the Opposition and a few other Members. 

I want us now to deal with the Committee on Public Service and Local Government:
    1. Hon. Betty Nambooze 
    2. Roland Mugume 

Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development:
    1. Hon. Kizza Winfred,
    2. Hon. Achile Christopher

Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry:
    1. Hon. Kevina Taaka
    2. Hon. Deogratius Kiyingi
    3. Hon. Nagayi Nabilah Ssempala

Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs:
    1. Hon. Abdul Katuntu,
    2. Hon. Medard Sseggona Lubega
    3. Hon. Joseph Balikuddembe
    4. Hon. Nabukenya Brenda
    5. Hon. Paul Mwiru

Committee on Presidential Affairs
    1. Hon. Ssebagala Latif
    2. Hon. Peter Omolo
    3. Hon. Samuel ODONGA OTTO  

Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs
    1. Hon. Fungaroo Caps
    2. Hon. Muwanga Muhammad Kivumbi
    3. Hon. Bako Christine Abia
    4. Hon. Ssemujju Ibrahim Nganda
    5. Hon. Kyanjo Hussein

Committee on Physical Infrastructure
    1. Hon. William Nzougu
    2. Hon. Cecilia Ogwal
    3. Hon. Ssebuliba Mutumba
    4. Hon. Amuriat Oboi
    5. Hon. Muhammad Kawuma
    6. Hon. Elijah Okupa 
    7. Hon. Stephen Ochola

Committee on Education and Sports
    1. Hon. Angelina Osage
    2. Joseph Ssewungu

Committee on Foreign Affairs
    1. Hon. Wamanga Wamai
    2. Hon. Jack Sabiiti 
    3. Hon. Isa Kikungwe

Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development:
    1. Hon. Geoffrey Ekanya
    2. Hon. Isaias Ssasaga
    3. Hon. Odo Tayebwa
    4. Hon. Nsubuga Mathias
    5. Hon. Franca Akello

Committee on Health:
    1. Hon. Dr Bayiga Lulume
    2. Hon. Femiar Wadada
    3. Hon. Aol Betty Ochan

Committee on ICT
    1. Hon. Wafula Oguttu
    2. Hon. Bernard Atiku

Committee on Natural Resources
    1. Hon. Reagan Okumu
    2. Hon. Beatrice Anywar
    3. Hon. John Ken-Lukyamuzi
    4. Hon. Bihande Yokasi
    5. Hon. Florence Ibi
    6. Hon. Alaso Alice
    7. Hon. Florence Namayanja

Committee on Agriculture
    1. Hon. Francis Epetait
    2. Hon. Kassiano Wadri
    3. Hon. Suzan Namaganda

Committee on Legal and Parliament Affairs
    1. Hon. Wilfred Niwagaba

Committee on Defence and Internal Affair
    1. Hon. Theodore Ssekikubo 

Committee on ICT
    1. Hon. Barnabas Tinkasimiire 

These are now the proposals for the chairpersons of the committees:
    1. Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Welfare, hon. Komuhangi, deputised by hon. Arinaitwe Rwakajara.

    2. Committee on Natural Resources, hon. Werikhe, deputised by hon. Eddie Wa Gahungu
    3. Committee on Public Service, hon. Grace Freedom  Kwiyucwiny of Zombo, deputised by hon. Mabel Bakeine.

    4. Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry, hon. Flavia Kabahenda, deputised by hon. Grace Namara.

    5. Committee on ICT, hon. Paula Turyahikayo, deputised by hon. Vincent Bagire.

    6. Committee on Physical Infrastructure, hon. Biraaro, deputised by hon. Simon Peter Aleper.
    7. Committee on Agriculture, hon. Mathias Kasamba, deputised by hon. Huda Oleru.

    8. Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs, hon. Benny Bugembe Namugwanya, deputised by hon. Peter Eriaku.

    9. Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development, hon. Robert Kasule, deputised by hon. Anthony Okello.

    10. Committee on Presidential Affairs, hon. Fred Mwesigye, deputised by hon. Peter Ogwang.
    11. Committee on Foreign Affairs, hon. Dr Sam Okuonzi, deputised by hon. Peter Abrahams Lokii.

    12. Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs, hon. Stephen Tashobya, deputised by hon. Stephen Baka.

    13. Committee on Education, hon. Sylvia Namabidde, the Chair and deputised by hon. Jacob Opolot.

    14. Committee on Health, hon. Dr Kenneth Omona, deputised by hon. Margaret Iriama.
    15. The Committee on the EAC, hon. Sarah Mwebaza, deputised by hon. Veronica Kadogo.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that all those nominated be approved including the chairpersons. I am reading what the whip presented to me – yes, hon. Obua.

MR DENIS OBUA: I thank you, Madam Speaker. You are the custodian of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament and it is important that before we approve the list, the list must conform to the provision of Rule 176 (8) which says: “Subject to sub-rule (7), the Speaker shall ensure that at least 40 percent of the leadership of the committees of Parliament are women”. I am an associate member of UWOPA, Madam Speaker, and maybe we first affirm to that fact and then we can proceed and confirm. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: I think let us take stock; the Committee on Gender chaired by hon. Kyomuhangi who is a woman; the Committee on Public Service has hon. Grace Kwiyucwiny and Mabel Bakeine; Committee on Tourism has a vice-chair, hon. Grace Namara; ICT Committee has hon. Mary Paula Turyahikayo; Committee on Agriculture has the vice-chair as hon. Huda Oleru; Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs has hon. Benny Namugwanya Bugembe; the Committee on Trade is chaired by hon. Kabahenda; Committee on Education is chaired by hon. Sylvia Namabidde; vice-chair Committee on Health is hon. Margaret Iriama; Committee on EAC both chair and vice-chair are women. I think – (Applause) - is it 46 percent?

MR DENIS OBUA: It is 40 on the dot.

THE SPEAKER: 40?

MR DENIS OBUA: Yes.

MR WADRI: Madam Speaker, I think we should not waste a lot of time on that especially knowing very well that the chief chair who is the Speaker is a lady and that number adds up and balances the equation. Let us proceed with other business, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Do we have any – yes, hon. Wamakuyu.

MR WAMAKUYU: Madam Speaker, I have heard three names of Members, hon. Niwagaba and the group, but I have not heard the one of hon. Nsereko. 

THE SPEAKER: I have not received his proposal, so I do not know where he wants to be. When he informs me, I will let you know. Yes, honourable Government Chief Whip.

MRS LUMUMBA: Madam Speaker, I am responding to the issue raised by hon. Obua Denis. When you look at that list, those in leadership are 30 but out of the 30, 17 are male and 13 are female.

THE SPEAKER: I think we have made the target.

MRS LUMUMBA: Madam Speaker, I want to add that out of the 15 chairpersons of committees, the females are seven and the males are eight.

THE SPEAKER: I want to congratulate the Government Chief Whip and the coordinator of the Independents for facilitating this process. I thank you.

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, at the rate at which the Government Chief Whip is moving, the men may need affirmative action. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Let us go to the next item.

DR BITEKYEREZO: Madam Speaker, you know that I come from Mbarara District. I wanted to know what is going to be the fate of my brother, hon. Kyamadidi Vicent Mujuni – and you know he is a very wonderful debater! Is he sacked completely or what? Where is he?

THE SPEAKER: Okay, let us hear from the whip.

MR ODONGA OTTO: The three months are over.

MRS LUMUMBA: Mr Speaker, as a Government Chief Whip, I receive instructions from the leaders of the ruling party. I am yet to receive instructions from the leaders of my party on issues to do with deploying hon. Kyamadidi Vicent Mujuni –(Interruption) 

MR WADRI: Madam Speaker, I think that we are setting a very bad precedent. There are three organs in Government: the Executive, Legislature and Judiciary and all these operate independent of each other albeit they cooperate. 

For how long are we going to leave the fate of this institution, the Parliament, to be determined by political parties out there? You have suspended the man as far as NRM-O is concerned, the party to which he belongs but his membership in this Parliament continues and it is constitutional and even by our Rules of Procedure every Member of Parliament must be assigned responsibility in a committee. Where is he? Is hon. Kyamadidi a Member of Parliament or not? That is the fundamental question that the chief whip should assist us to answer so that we can move forward.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, now that you have raised the question, why don’t you give us time to handle it?

MRS LUMUMBA: Madam Speaker, when you look at our Rules of Procedure, Rule 176 (2), “In the selection of Members of Sectoral Com­mittees, the parties or organisations repre­sented in Parliament shall designate, through the whips, membership to committees on the basis of party or organisation represen­tation in the House.” The rule says, “…the parties or organisations repre­sented in Parliament shall designate through…” that means that the whip will come and present what has been decided by the parties.

MR ODONGA OTTO: I thank you so much, Madam Speaker. Rule 176 must be read conjunctively with Rule 175. Rule 175 talks of sectoral committees and it says, “There shall be sectoral committees of the House.” So, the presumption is that all Members of Parliament must belong to committees. In fact, the rule goes to say “…on basis of party or organisation representation and interests of Independent Members in the House at the beginning of every session of Parliament.” The rule talks of, “...at the beginning of every session of Parliament.” 

So, Madam Speaker, for this House to move and approve the other Members of whom I am also part of, to belong to committees and leave out hon. Kyamadidi is discriminative. It is actually unconstitutional. Why are we leaving alone in an island? When we are being taken to committees, he is not being put into any committee. I think this kind of behaviour of witch hunting Members of Parliament who seem to think different from others must not be encouraged in this House.

Secondly, we need to start thinking of amending Rule 176 because for parties to designate members who should chair committees, it may not be in the best interest of this House because I am seeing some Members of Parliament who have been performing very well in committees like hon. Muwuma - they are now nowhere! (Laughter) They have a lot of experience, institutional memory and now all of a sudden someone is sitting somewhere and appointing Members of Parliament to belong to committees. 

As Parliament, we may have to amend the rules and find other mechanisms of electing our own leaders to chair committees because at this rate, we seem to be compromising on experience and bringing in political considerations - with all due respect to those who are given new positions. We are not undermining any of you but, Madam Speaker, this House needs to amend the rules and assert our independence, the same way we elect the Speaker and Deputy Speaker, for such sensitive positions in the country. It should be a little easier for us to elect those who should chair committees. Otherwise, we shall have chairpersons who receive midnight calls and cannot have checks to the Executive who have appointed them.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, you know the position was changed when we went into the multiparty system. It used to be different but now that we have seen the problems, I think we will have to re-examine our Rules of Procedure. But I have noted the concern about hon. Kyamadidi. Give me a few days to handle it. 

MS HUDA OLERU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. You are aware the leadership for the standing Committee on HIV/AIDS and Related Matters fell vacant when the chairperson was promoted to another position. I want to get clarification from the whips whether this would be the right time to fill that position. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: It is necessary to fill it to complete the term and we can then renew when the tenure expires because there must be a leader. Maybe the whips will address it.

MRS LUMUMBA: Madam Speaker, I think it was an omission on my side but the party wrote to me deploying hon. Sarah Netalisire, the Woman MP of Manafwa District, to take up leadership on the HIV/AIDS and Related Matters committee. 

MR WADRI: Madam Speaker, let us not take this as casual information. The right procedure would be that the Government Chief Whip, citing the provisions in the Rules of Procedure, formally writes to you about the new designate or deployment and that letter, upon reaching you, will be read to the House and then you will ask the House to pronounce itself on it. It is not just a matter of coming here and saying, “I was given a letter by my party.” No; make it formal, as provided for under our Rules of Procedure. 

MRS LUMUMBA: Madam Speaker, a question has been asked and I had to give an answer and that is why I did not stand here to say “I am designating” because I have not written. I know the rules; that is why I said it was an omission on my side but it was hon. Sarah Netalisire and I am supposed to go and do exactly what the rules expect of me. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Let us move to the next item. 

MR MUWUMA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I just wanted to appreciate my brother, hon. ODONGA OTTO, and your guidance regarding designation and deployment of Members or chairpersons. Yesterday, at 1.00 O’clock, all media houses were reporting negatively about Members who have been – the word that was being used is “fired.” I think it negatively impacts on our credentials. So, I want to appeal to Members to appreciate the work we did. We are not complaining but we thank you for the support that you rendered to us during our term of service. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Perhaps we shall have to ask the chief whip to arrange a formal “Thank you” ceremony so that the public can know that the Members worked well and their contribution is appreciated. (Applause) Honourable members, I put the question that all the Members be approved.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Motion carried)

We have in the public gallery pupils and teachers of All Saints Primary School Lweza, represented by hon. Kikungwe and hon. Sseninde. They are up here; you are welcome!  (Applause)


BILLS

SECOND READING
THE ANTI-MONEY LAUNDERING BILL, 2009

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, yesterday we received the report. It has been duly signed by the necessary number of signatures. You may contribute and as I indicated yesterday, we do have a timeline for this Bill. Hon ODONGA OTTO, you have three minutes.

12.18
MR ODONGA OTTO (FDC, Aruu County, Pader): Madam Speaker, I want to really thank the committee chairperson for the report. I was so impressed yesterday that they came out with substantial amendments. I just have one concern. We have been asking for this Bill for over nine years but the government has been reluctant to bring the Bill until today. We have very serious concerns that they are bringing the Bill at a time when key people in Government have laundered all the money they need –(Laughter)– yes, we have very serious concerns. 

The key people in Government have laundered all the money they need. We have been asking for this law for nine years now, and they are bringing it at a time that the law may not catch up with them because they are home and dry. If you read through this law, it will catch up with those who are in a precondition to take off. The law will seemingly not catch up with those who have successfully taken off and they have their money secured around the world. 

So, I want to persuade Members of Parliament that this law should have a retrospective effect. We have to put a threshold; we have to trace certain monies even up to the year 2001 because as we speak, some people have billions of shillings in their foreign accounts offshore. I know of a minister who has Shs 56 billion in an account. This Anti-Money Laundering Bill should not come and get hon. ODONGA OTTO or the Obuas who have Shs 1 or 2 million and then those whose origin of money we should actually trace are secure. I think we would not solve any problem. So, I want to persuade this House that at an appropriate time, I will move an amendment to give a retrospective effect to this legislation - I know this raises eyebrows - so that the law can catch up with those who have colossal sums of money that they even take fumigators to their homes to spray this money because they cannot put it in banks. 

Secondly, Madam Speaker, I do not know if the law talks about carrying money in sacks – (Member timed out_)

THE SPEAKER: One minute to conclude. 

MR ODONGA OTTO: Thank you, Madam Speaker, we have seen on TV some senior citizens in this country carrying money in sacks – Shs 250 million in a sack - moving around the country and saying, “I have brought the money that some people have been blocking.” I think the law should prohibit this kind of behaviour. How can a whole head of state carry money in a sack and not even in a briefcase? This is passing a very bad message on financial transactions around the country. So, the law should come out with steps, other than limiting the quotas of money to be written in cheques. 

We also need to state that if hon. Omach goes to the bank and wants Shs 300 million in cash, it must be prohibited. There must be other mediums of transferring that money from one financial institution to another. So, we need a threshold on how much cash someone can withdraw from a financial institution. Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. 

MR OBOTH: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Whereas I agree with my learned friend, hon. ODONGA OTTO, I want to seek for clarification from him. He is a lawyer and knows that the law sets in motion – usually goes forward; it is not like a vehicle that will have a reverse gear. The retrospective aspects you are raising are very good to our ears. I am wondering whether that should not be that you are now targeting a few individuals to make this specific law to go on the reverse. I am a lawyer of some bit of standing in my own view –(Laughter)

MR ODONGA OTTO: Thank you, my honourable colleague. Retrospective legislation is admissible if it is the intent of the legislator to do that. For example, we passed the Parliamentary Pensions Act in 2005 but we made it retrospective up to 2001, and that is how some Members managed to get pension even though they served for a short term. So the principle can be applied. 

My only appeal is, we do not apply it when we seem to think of gain. We should also apply it if we want to trace how hon. Okecho five years ago transferred Shs 3.0 billion from Crane Bank to Standard Chartered Bank. At least we need to mop up; I think that is the intention of this legislation. The law should not catch the flies and leave the birds; the net should be intact so that any living thing passing through will be got. I thought, it could be of help.

MR OBOTH: Well, with elections, I agree that it could apply. On pensions, it was for the general good. The general principle of law is that it should be blind when you are making it; you cannot reverse the law when you know that there are few others with Shs 56 billion in their accounts.

I am saying this, not because I have any –(Interjection)– I wouldn’t because I do not need that much money in my account. But, Madam Speaker, just to get this very good law to start to be fought, this is one of the laws that should get the support of everyone else. And it should not be a victim of the possible fight. A lot of water has flowed under the bridge –(Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I thank my brother for giving way. The clarification I want to seek from him – you know, we went to the bush in 1980 to remove bad governance and come to have zero tolerance to corruption. And when we came to power in 1986, we said we were to implement that. What would be wrong for us to extend this to start from 1986 because – the one who will object to this must be one of those who have been participating in this “fundamental stealing”. If you were not, why would you get worried?

THE SPEAKER: Let us get information from the Attorney-General.

MR RUHINDI: Madam Speaker, I appreciate the concerns raised by hon. ODONGA OTTO and the Leader of the Opposition. But I think they may have to introduce a constitutional amendment to Article 28(7) because under that clause, you cannot be punished for an offence that did not exist at the time of its commission. Look at it.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, on a criminal act, there is no time limit, if you are not aware; if you stole money -relax with your Constitution. If some of you stole money many years ago, even if you amend the law and you go away or you die, we will get you. So, Madam Speaker, the clarification I am seeking is that why don’t we get all these criminals from 1986?

MR RUHINDI: Madam Speaker, I agree with the Leader of the Opposition; for the offence not to expire, it must exist; it must be prescribed in the law that there is an existing offence and when you commit it, it does not expire. What Article 28(7) says is, if the offence does not exist, when you create it, you cannot recreate it retrospectively. Study the law, please, you are lawyers.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, I agree with the Attorney-General but he is reading the law to suit him. If you cheat income tax – let us take an example that the laundering was allowed, that means you never paid income tax. Now, the moment you never paid income tax and yet the income tax law was existing, you stole money. So the reason we should extend this is that when we get your Shs 10 billion on your account in 1994, we shall ask you what you traded in; did you trade in charcoal? But where is our income tax? And we stop there. That is what we are trying to look for. We believe that the net should go – 

MR OBOTH: Madam Speaker, as I conclude, I do not know what is magical about 1986 but I know that if we really want to be serious about this, we may as well go back to 1962 and then we start legislating backwards. But as the Learned Attorney-General has indicated, Article 28(7) – maybe with your permission, let me read – 

THE SPEAKER: But hon. Oboth, we will address that matter at committee stage; you talk generally now about the Bill.

MR OBOTH: Madam Speaker, my fear was and still is that if we bring very many things into this law at the preliminary stage - I was just trying to pre-empt the argument of hon. Odonga Otto, which is a good one but it would derail the good purpose of this legislation.

12.31
MR WILLIAM KWEMARA (NRM, Kyaka County, Kyegegwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I appreciate the committee’s work simply because money laundering is a very complex international crime and the Bill needs the necessary certification. I know there are issues concerning individuals but I am of the view that we focus first on the broader macro-economic issues. Let us all support this Bill simply because we have got an international obligation to have this law. 

And secondly, there is no way an individual state can fight money laundering without the cooperation of other countries. But also it has got very bad economic effects; one of them is economic distortion that we suffer as a result of money laundering.

One thing you ought to know is that in money laundering, the perpetrators make illicit money legitimate at the end of the day. This creates false demand. I want you to look at our real estate business today; it is one of the areas where money is being laundered – the word “laundering” means cleaning. And at any particular time, you will find everybody running into real estate business, land deals, hotel construction and so forth. And at time we get misled to think that the construction industry is going up and yet actually it could be a sign of money laundering. So it creates false demand, which we should fight because it distorts the economy.

But also, money laundering itself has made some sections of the economy collapse; you look at the banks. We have got experiences of banks, like the Barings Bank that collapsed in 1995. It was as a result of money laundering. It also undermines the integrity of our financial markets. 

I want you to take the case of Nigeria in the 1980s and the 1990s when money laundering was at its highest. It also stifles our own businesses because when you are doing business, the aim is profit maximisation and cost minimisation. But when you have got this illicit money, your major purpose is cleaning the money. Therefore, you are going to operate below the cost. That means the legitimate businessmen are going to suffer- even social costs- because if I have engaged in money laundering and I been successful, it is like I am glorifying crime.

Also, at the end of the day you find that money laundering transfers economic power from the market to criminals. But the question is, having the law alone is not enough: How sound is our banking system, because if you have the law without a sound banking system the law will not achieve its purpose? Also how good are Government institutions? If we are being marred by corruption, the law will still not work.

Another question is, what is the level of our corporate governance, because if we are not embracing corporate governance then at the end of the day the law will not work? And what is the size of our underground economy? Because, if we cannot trace the economic transactions then that means that at end of the day the law may not work.  

Lastly, how vigilant have we been, especially in the non-bank channels of money laundering? Today we have got so many people who are investing in Uganda, in real estate, like Nigerians and Sudanese and it is as if we are not bothered. You could find it is also an avenue for money laundering. 

Let me mention this, when somebody has got Shs 900 million not kept in a bank but under the bed, isn’t there cause to worry where this money is coming from? That is enough to justify that there is some form of money laundering -(Member timed out_)

THE SPEAKER: Conclude.

MR KWEMARA: When you get a lady like Bad Black investing almost everywhere, don’t you begin wondering where this money could have come from? I think we need to be more vigilant, Madam Speaker.  Thank you very much.

12.35
DR MEDARD BITEKYEREZO (NRM Mbarara Municipality Mbarara): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I want to join my colleagues to thank the committee headed by hon. Kasule for a job well done. Sometimes my submissions are dramatic. I will remove some drama but I will bring in some little drama here. On the page where they were talking about exemptions for accountable persons- in my culture they say that when a drunkard abuses you, do not think it is an accident; it means it has been in his or her head to abuse you only that he or she has been waiting for alcohol to remove the fear and then he or she abuses you in public.

Madam Speaker, I read with pain when they said, “The committee observed that the minister, at his or her discretion, can exempt accountable persons from compliance with any or all of the provisions of the Anti-money Laundering Bill.” I know this Bill passed through Cabinet. It is a Government Bill. Honestly speaking, which minister, which people do you want to exempt from this law? Why did you want this law to become slightly discriminative? Who is laundering the money? Could we be some of the people who are taking money in briefcases out of the country and we end up suffering here? 

Two, I was in a bar recently- I do not drink but sometimes I go there to listen. (Laughter) It is rumoured that some people keep money under beds. Actually it had been rumoured that somebody picked somebody from Game - they blindfold you and you go to fumigate money under the bed; and then they bring you back and drop you at Game. Then you go and you will never know where you were taken; you will only see the money when you are there.

Madam Speaker, that is why I am very bitter with whoever was formulating this sentence here that the minister should exempt some members at his or her discretion from being captured by this law - (Interjections) - I can take the information. 

MR KYOOMA: Thank you, Madam Speaker and thank you colleague for giving way. I am a Member of the finance committee which is the owner of this report. But as far as I remember, at committee level, we discarded that; so I do not know how it got into our report.

THE SPEAKER: No, honourable members, in the report we proposed that it should be deleted. 

MR KYOOMA: That is what it says? Thank you.

DR BITEKYEREZO: Madam Speaker, when I was beginning my submission, I said I was trying to reveal to the House and the entire country that we have some people who take us for granted. You want to bring a law, you know why you are bringing it but you are trying to exonerate some specific individuals who are laundering money. 

I was in Mozambique way back in 2005 when I was trying to run away from the country to look for some more money outside. In Mozambique, you have to declare how much money you have entered with. You cannot run away. And when you are leaving you must tell them how much money you have taken out of Mozambique. By the way, you cannot get more than $3,000 from Mozambique. But in Uganda people take it the way they want –(Member timed out_)

12.40
MS LUCY AJOK (UPC, Woman Representative, Apac): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I agree with what most of my colleagues have stated that there should be a retrospective view to this law we are making. Money laundering has a network of criminality in it and it does not matter whether it is the upper class or the lower one. It is connected to so many vices, which we already know exist in our country. 

They have talked about the real estate sector but we also have drug dealers who are using our country. We have actually been mentioned internationally in drug rings. There is human trafficking and with it all there is murder in there. So, when all these things are committed in a way of defending that illicit way of getting that money and it is investigated - my brother, hon. Oboth, it does not matter whether it was 10 or 20 years ago; you would have murdered somebody and it is another offence on top of that money laundering. Through this criminality we get bribery, not only in the public life but we are complaining about these institutions. 

We need to build our own strong institutions and discourage all this bribery which of course is corruption. We are not only after the money being taken from the public funds, we are also looking at money coming in to weaken our structures and institutions in this country and money laundering is very much connected to this corruption. 

I know the government takes care of it in the area of security but also when our economy is in tatters, and we have so many people living below the poverty line, it is all because of money laundering. The drugs I have talked about are not only in cities now. If you go to the rural areas, there are drugs there and a lot of youths are being destroyed because of these drugs. It is affecting us and putting too much stress on our law and order budget. 

There is also illegal alcohol being sold in remote areas where you find most people have lost their sight and some have even died. So money laundering has a very close link with counterfeiting of goods. The dimension is big and I think we have to learn a lot from Europe on how they are fighting it because in Europe there is no time limit in that –(Member timed out_)

12.43
MR JACK WAMANGA-WAMAI (FDC, Mbale Municipality, Mbale): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. This law was first brought in 2009 and it lay on the shelves. I wonder why Parliament did not take action. I do not know whether the country was waiting for people to stay a little bit more, but it is good it has now come on the Floor of Parliament and I want to thank the chairman for the job well done.

Madam Speaker, in this country, you can see that the construction industry, which they talk about all the time, has gone up. Yes, it has gone up but how did these people get this money? This country has become a cleaning country where people bring in their money to clean it. Does this country find out how much money is brought in by some of the investors who come here? Some of them come with just briefcases and they get money within the country and clean it. 

Off shore banking, or whatever they call it, is cleaning of the stolen wealth. You can see money laundering goes hand in hand with corruption. These people come and make a lot of money here and get out. I have never seen a country in the world where you can go in with an empty briefcase and you get out with millions of dollars without any problem.

Some of these businessmen in this country bring in counterfeit items; we saw the items here yesterday. They sell them to Ugandans, get millions of dollars and they take the money outside. They have cleaned the rubbish they have brought into this country and they go out with the money. In most of these countries that have developed and I will talk of China, when you go in, you must declare the money you have brought and when you leave and have more money, you leave that money at the airport. That is how they have managed and that is how the economy of China has grown. But in this country, the money that is being taken out –(Interruption)

MR WADRI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and I wish to thank the honourable colleague for giving way. The information I wanted to share with you is that in 1986, when one of our own, hon. Major General Muhwezi, was the boss of ISO, he was able to net a now prominent businessman in this country with a bottomless pit of a briefcase, heavily loaded with dollars. This money was seized as it were and brought back. So if this type of vigilance was in existence at that time, what has happened and why can’t we go back and resurrect it? That is the information I wanted to give you.

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Thank you very much for that information. You can see some of these people who are dealing in money laundering. You look at the businessmen in town here and put a question mark on how these people got money. That is money laundering and this is what this country should fight. 

I urge colleagues to support this law. Actually we should back date it to 2009 or even before so that we catch all these thieves who have got this ill-gotten wealth –(Member timed out­_)

12.47
MR WILLIAM NZOGHU (FDC, Busongora County North, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have been figuring out how this law, if passed, would actually help Ugandans get to the status quo of the 1960s. I have also been looking at the situation after 1986 when the Government of NRM undertook, among other, reforms, the divestiture programme where most of the assets, which Ugandans had struggled for, for quite a long time even dating back to the colonial times, were valued at US$ 1. You would see an investor buying Diary Corporation at US$ 1. Really, what was the net value of this investment at the time they privatised it? One wonders whether we are really serious or not. 

UCB is the same. You know very well the circus that happened during the divestiture of UCB and realise that amongst our citizens in Uganda are those who masquerade as investors from abroad and then connive with mafias abroad. They come here and pretend that the foreigners are the ones who are coming to improve the situation in Uganda but actually they are simply trying to rob us in broad daylight. 

That is why I agree with hon. ODONGA OTTO that this Bill, if passed – It would be unfair to retrospectively have it as early as 2,000. It would just go up to 1986 and that is why I agree with the Leader of the Opposition that actually we need –(Interruption)

MR KWEMARA: Thank you so much, honourable colleague for giving way. The information I want to give is that money laundering is a very complex crime, and we may waste a lot of time in passing the law retrospectively. I want you to understand the processes that money laundering goes through: One, there is what we call placement, that is if you have ill-gotten money say through drug trafficking or pirating, you will have to put it in the bank but after that there is a process called layering; how the money is distributed in the different banks and enterprises to a stage of integration. 

It becomes very difficult to trace that money having gone through those stages of placement, layering and integration. So we may be wasting a lot of time in passing the law retrospectively when actually we may not even get the culprits. That is the information I wanted to give.

MR NZOGHU: In the Bill itself they have bothered to define what money laundering means, and they are saying it is an illegitimate process of acquiring or obtaining money, which we can handle as Ugandans. I just want to bring to the attention of this House that in 1987, when we were changing our money, some zeros were added and very many zeros subtracted. Up to today, some of us have been asking ourselves who actually benefitted from that changing of money in 1987. That is why we must not be very soft regarding this Bill because we are the ones who are suffering at the expense of the very few who are benefitting from this process.

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Thank you for giving way. Madam Speaker, what is shocking with money laundering is that this country has really been cheated. Even the money that bought UCB, Westmont, was the money in the bank! Can you imagine? Tristar, Coffee Marketing Board where coffee from Bugisu was coming from was just given away like that. The then Nile Hotel Complex – the vendor that bought Nile Complex – can you imagine that hotel was given away with its complex for only $15 million. 

Today, Madam Speaker, an acre in Nakasero costs $2 million. Serena Hotel is sitting on more than 15 acres but just went for $ 15 million. The information I want to give is that they use even money in the country and take Ugandans for granted.

MR NZOGHU: In conclusion, Madam Speaker, last week I read in the newspapers a story to the effect that there were authorities that –(Member timed out_)

THE SPEAKER: Okay, half a minute for you to conclude.

MR NZOGHU: Most obliged, Madam Speaker. There was information that National Bank of Commerce was closed at 1.30 p.m. but that is when one of the shareholders, the Rt hon. Amama Mbabzi, got there. He was amused that shortly after 1.30 p.m. at 2.15 p.m. Mr Sudhir showed up to buy off the bank. But most shockingly is the fact that one of the shareholders, Mr Mutebile, didn’t even know that the bank had been closed. However, Mr Sudhir, shortly or in less than one hour, was ready to buy it off.

But how does the Governor of Bank of Uganda fail to know of the closure of one of the commercial banks. This shows how complex the situation in Uganda is. That is why they proposed in the Bill that the minster should have powers to exempt others. 

The condition under which such people are exempted is what we must unearth. That is why we should have this Bill operationalised retrospectively and I stand for that. (Applause)

12.56
DR FRANCIS EPETAIT (FDC, Ngora County, Ngora): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. In my mind, I have no doubt that the entire House is supportive of this Bill. It is one way we can surely check on corruption tendencies and other vices like drug and human trafficking, which all constitute part of money laundering.

But I think we have to tighten the loopholes. I want to put the House on notice. I have just read the jurisdiction of this Bill in clause 3 – at an appropriate time, I will move amendments to it when we get to committee stage. This amendment will be important because we must capture anybody even when they are non-Ugandans. I notice that the way clause 3 has been drafted only talks about a crime being committed within the territory of Uganda, a crime being committed by a national or a stateless person or the person committing the offence is using a vessel that is flying the Uganda colours.

I would like to think that a money launderer can easily connive with non-Ugandans and agree to use them, for example, Emirates and Charta Airways, and if such a person is discovered out of the Uganda’s territory, money will have gone. So, I think there is need for us to have the legal basis to follow up on such connivance such that such money is recovered.

Madam Speaker, I pray that we accept the issue of retrospective application of this law because it appears there was intention to have it delayed so that those with such tendencies can sort themselves out clean without being nabbed by an existing law.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Thank you for giving way. The Attorney-General had earlier advised that Article 28 (7) prohibits retrospective legislation. On reading it, I notice that it says: “No person shall be charged with or convicted of a criminal offence which is founded on an act or omission that did not at the time it took place constitute a criminal offence.” Great, because that is the law, however, when you look at clause 4 of the Bill, which is the information I want to give, you realise it states that, “…to conceal, disguise, establish or to continue knowing or suspecting that such property to be, precedes a crime”.

So, if you know or suspect that there was a crime committed on the money you are receiving, that follows under the activities that are prohibited under Section 3 of the Act. So, with this in mind, what is the definition of a crime? The entire Penal Code Act is all about crimes and specifically Section 314. There is no way the Attorney-General can persuade us that this law says that if you receive money knowing a crime preceded it - that is already money laundering. Crimes relating to such money are already covered by Section 314 of the Penal Code Act. 

The information I am giving is that, it is my considered opinion that nothing can stop this House from having this law move retrospectively, as long as, we are sure that the money which one received came from a crime, no matter whether that crime was committed in 1986, 1987 – that is immaterial. 

DR EPETAIT: Since the Penal Code Act bails us out, there is no reason why we shouldn’t have this law applied retrospectively, unless there is something that we intend to hide, which I believe – (Interruption)

MR MULONGO: Thank you, my colleague for giving way. I want to provide further information. I was looking at similar law as applied in Malaysia, which is also a commonwealth country. Section 2 of that law is about application and it reads: “This actually applies to any serious offence, foreign serious offence or unlawful activity, whether committed before or after the commencement date….” (Applause) So, I believe this material is useful, Madam Speaker.

DR EPETAIT: Madam Speaker, I think we have very strong –(Interruption)

MR RUHINDI: Madam Speaker, what I would want to clear is, if you are saying the offence already exists then you cannot talk about retrospectively –(Interjections)– no, there cannot be any avoidance of doubt. If you are proceeding against a person for an offence, which is in existence, you cannot talk about retrospectively. That should be clear.

But also certainly, I also agree with you on the fact that if such money, for instance, is laundered here to finance existing offences like terrorism, there is no way such a person cannot be handled that way. So the offence must be existing; but if you are looking of an offence – look at the definition of “Money laundering”, in the definition section. For as long as money laundering is the process of turning illegitimately obtained property into seemingly legitimate property and it includes concealing or disguising the nature, source, location, disposition or movement of the proceeds of crime and any activity which constitutes a crime under section 3 of this Act. 

Now, you will note that this is very broad. For instance, if you obtain money here illegitimately or fraudulently, and you go and conceal the money in another country where that does not constitute an offence - then that is a problem. All we are trying to do is, if for instance you have gotten money elsewhere and you bring it here disguising it, then you are committing an offence. But if here, you get money fraudulently, and otherwise, we proceed against you under that offence that already exists. 

DR EPETAIT: The way the Attorney-General was preceding, I think we are now getting at per. We need to curtail this crime. 

So lastly, the issue of the threshold; what will be the minimum amount that somebody can bring in or take out without due diligence? We need to be very careful because I see a proposal in the Bill which is rather so high. It is talking about Shs 50 million –(Member timed out_)

1.06
MR RICHARD OPOLOT (NRM, Pallisa County, Pallisa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to express my discomfort especially with regard to retrospective application, without clearly justifying and defining the time frame within which this application works –(Interjections)– hon. Nandala-Mafabi, I listened to you, and I respect you as Leader of the Opposition. And, therefore, I request that you listen to me. 

I am not comfortable because we are not justifying the timeframe within which to apply the retrospective application. If you are going to say that we stretch it back to 1986, is that when it began? Are you sure before 1986 there was no money laundering?

Secondly, when it comes to its implementation, how will you spread the net in order to capture everybody, especially in situations where some of the participants are no longer alive? So as we consider the retrospective application, can we answer all those questions?

The other issue is that it could be true that they are talking with some individuals in mind. My question is, do you want to say that there was no law that could handle those criminalities? Because we seem to be very sure of some culprits that we let go and waited for another law to capture them. 

1.08
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Nathan Nandala-Mafabi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Recently, Gen. Salim Saleh, wrote a letter to the IGG asking for people to be forgiven of the crimes of corruption which they could have committed. That answers the reason why since 2004, we have been pleading for this law. 

I want to thank my brother ODONGA OTTO because he has been with us in the struggle. I am sure many Members of Parliament would love to reside in Kololo, but you cannot afford it because of money laundering. 

Let me give you an example; a quarter an acre of land in Kololo costs $2 million; if you multiply that by 2500 that is Shs 5 billion. You build a house of Shs 500 million that is Shs 5.5 billion. You rent a house at $3,000 per month, in a year that is $36,000. If you multiply that, it is less than 100 million. But if you carried Shs 5.5 billion and took it to a bank at 10 per annum, you will get Shs 550,000,000 without stress. 

So somebody opts not to take it to the bank because they know it is not right money. That is why land in Kololo is expensive. Some of you go as far as Kyengera to sleep instead of sleeping in Kololo –(Laughter).

Madam Speaker, you cannot enter the country with $10,000. If you do, they have to question you. $10,000 is equal to Shs 26 million. Yet you want to say that people can enter Uganda with $20,000. Are you stronger than the economy of America to allow $20,000 which a developed economy does not allow? We should be realistic. 

In America, you cannot draw money – say if you want to beat the system and you draw $3,000 and do the same the following day, immediately your account will be blacklisted and you will be required to explain why you are not doing electronic transfers in your transactions. 

So, we should also be very serious on this and at an appropriate time, I would like to propose that we do currency reform. All our money should be brought to the banking sector so that we can pull out money kept under people’s beds. If you do not bring it when we change the money, it becomes null and void. We should do that urgently after passing this law so that money put under the beds can   be brought out. And when that money comes out, you will realise that we have been running a black economy. 

Madam Speaker, this law is very good. In 2001, one businessman claimed that he had exported skins and hides to china and got $59 million – you know the gentleman. He deals in skins and hides. President Museveni praised him that the man is a good investor and so forth. I did calculations and I also went to China. If you get $59 million and divide that by $10 per skin, you get 5.9 million hides and skins. 

At that time, census carried out showed that the total number of animals in the country, including dogs and hens, were less than 3 million. Now, this man had exported 5.9 million hides and skins. Where did these skins come from? That is a clear indicator that there was money going to China dirty and coming back in form of cleaning. And that is why you should not say that the crime has been committed only in Uganda. The crime must be committed in other places in the world. This business of Uganda, we shall not agree. So, I raised it with President Museveni where I asked where the 5.9 million came from and he could not explain. Up to now, I have never got an answer and that shows that money laundering has been around for some long time. 

If you talk about the law now, it will catch the small ones and I have seen that the law is ending at a few where a minister can exempt other – if you are in NRM and you become a rebel, they go for you –(Interruption) 

MR SEBULIBA MUTUMBA: I thank very much, the Leader of the Opposition for giving way. The information, Madam Speaker, that I want to pass on to the House is, one time, the Leader of the Opposition was travelling to the UK and he wanted to buy a laptop and he pulled pounds in cash but the lady declined to sell him the laptop and instead asked for his address. Later – he gave more details – he was visited by plain-clothed personnel to explain how he got the money. Do you see and it was between 200 and 300 pounds. You can see how strict countries are, because if you go with a lot of money, they always suspect.

The other question I want to ask the Leader of the Opposition, because he is good at accountancy is, how much should we even allow companies like MTN to repatriate home because that is also very fundamental?

Lastly, what about our policies that we enacted after these structural adjustment programmes that were brought about by - because they are also affecting in this business of money laundering. We should also revisit most of the policies that came in after decentralisation, privatisation and liberalisation. I thank you.

MR ANYWARACH: I thank you very much, the Leader of Opposition for allowing me seek for clarification from you. I have three points. We are talking of economies which are of probably different development level. When you talk about the US and UK, these are highly monetised economies that when you compare them with most of the African economies, we are not so much highly monetised. We are half or even quarter way monetised and three quarter way agricultural. 

Now those developed economies use what we call credit cards for most of their transactions. Put that situation to our Ugandan situation – that is why I would seek for your clarification on how you marry the two where credit cards are highly encouraged but for us credit cards are still a dream because even ATMs themselves, many people are not so much involved in dealing with ATMs.

The clarification that I want to seek from you is that, if we looked at the statistics that you gave us or the total number of animals including the cats, dogs and so forth and we compare it with someone’s business that probably is looking at – because your statistics could be the number of the animals per year but if I have been successful in my hides and skins for probably three years, I would want to be educated here whether that number is constant in a given period, or is it only for a period of a year.  But if in a year the number remains the same but the number of animals slaughtered will probably increase and the next year again, I have storage of more hides and skins and so forth. Wouldn’t that be a reflection of a true business other than just money laundering? The last one –

THE SPEAKER: No, honourable member, you are contributing. Please, Leader of Opposition, wind up.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I think that my brother never got me very well. I said that when you get US$ 59 million divide by 10, you get 5.9 million cows. I said that at that time, the statistics showed that the animals we had in Uganda with skins – all animals alive were 3 million. That meant that you would kill all and take the skins but there would also be deficit of 2.9. But they were never killed; they never killed the dogs and – so that is what I was trying to explain to you and show you how money laundering was at play at that time and was glorified by the President.
 
So, Madam Speaker, I want to also agree with my brother hon. Sebuliba when he talked of those cases. I have a live example in 1996, I wanted to buy a computer in London and for this computer, I had carried cash. They wanted £560 pounds. At that time, they were expensive but now they are cheap. When I went to buy from a place called Croydon, the man said, “What? You want to give me 560 pounds?” I said, “Yes.” He told me to give him a cheque or pay by card. That demonstrates how people are allergic to cash in these countries and yet here we really like it. We should bring our policy of introducing credit cards, which you are talking about and I have seen some banks have come up – debit cards, ATMs and cheques. Of course on the cheques, the big culprits are the ministers. If you get a cheque from a minister in Uganda, be sure that it is going to bounce. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Point of Order.

MR BYANDALA: Madam Speaker, I thank hon. Nandala-Mafabi for giving way. This is a very serious statement showing no respect to ministers of Uganda. For him to say that if you receive a cheque from a minister in Uganda, it bounces - is hon. Nandala-Mafabi in order?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Leader of Opposition, unless you can really substantiate and name the ministers who have issued bouncing cheques, I think you should withdraw. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, I want to thank you. He is not among them because he has been one of the participants in money laundering in KCCA. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Point of Order.

MR BYANDALA: Madam Speaker, this is a very serious accusation - (Laughter) - which shouldn’t be made a laughing matter. This is character assassination. I am globally known to be a straight and clean man. Now Nandala-Mafabi is here making statements I never expected a man of his calibre to make. I think that Madam Speaker, you being in charge of this House, we have to control this because I have a family, a wife and children and I cannot accept this.  So, is hon. Nandala-Mafabi in order to make such statements that are absolutely, wide and wild away from the truth?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think that we need to observe our Rules of Procedure and treat one another with courtesy. Hon. Nandala-Mafabi, I think that you have gone very, very far. Please withdraw.
  
MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, I thank you very much for your wise ruling. I want to tell you that there is a report in Parliament from the Auditor-General on local government which implicates hon. Byandala in mismanagement of money in KCC. So, it is a report here that is well known. (Laughter) 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Opolot.

MR OPOLOT: I thank you very much, Madam Speaker. From the information that I get, this Bill has been in this House since 3 November 2009 and I would really think that we needed it earlier than today but from the way we are discussing, we have become casual. I acknowledge the fact that there is a report in this House from the Auditor-General’s Office, which must have been received when hon. Nandala-Mafabi was the chairman of PAC and I think he had enough time to dispose of that issue. Is he procedurally right to derail us from those pertinent issues and go back to an issue that was concluded then?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Leader of the Opposition, please stick to this matter. When that report comes, we shall deal with it at that time. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, I thank you very much. That is why we are saying that this Bill should be retrospective, to deal with the many issues which we may have skipped without knowing and this is the time to deal with them. 

We, Members of Parliament, have ratified the UN Convention which talks about money laundering, asset recovery from wrong doers engaged in acts such as corruption, money laundering and drugs. But ever since we did it, this law is just coming up today and we have never implemented it. 

Madam Speaker, I want to plead that we should make this law operative immediately; otherwise, we can pass this law and it may be put on the shelves and it becomes redundant because the people who are supposed to implement it may be some of the culprits. So, today as Parliament, we should state that the law must be immediately operationalized because if we don’t do it, we are in danger.

Recently, somebody told me a story about a man who moved from Nigeria and left his briefcase which had US$2.5 million on the plane. He went and told the security, “Guys, I left my bag on the plane, with US$2.5 million. Can you kindly go and look for it?” He then went and sat and immediately took a nap, not worried and not mindful. That meant that these guys who are engaged in money laundering have no pain because this money is free. They take taxpayers’ money which should have bought drugs, made roads and built schools for our children. They launder it to benefit themselves yet they are sure of only one piece of land – the 3-feet by 6-feet under - and as soon as they die, before they are even buried, others are already grabbing what they grabbed from us.

 I believe all of us should agree and take this law seriously and make real safeguards to deal with these people who have messed with our public resources and those who are yet to make the same.

The board, Madam Speaker, I don’t agree that civil servants should be part and parcel of this board because if they are the culprits – let me give an example, what will happen if you make Kazinda a board member? I want to propose that the board should have retired people, bishops, judges but not people like Kabakumba Masiko because it is very dangerous. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Please wind up.

MS KABAKUMBA: Madam Speaker, I had restrained myself even when hon. Nandala-Mafabi made sweeping statements. Hon. Nandala-Mafabi was the chairperson of PAC and allegations were made against him of envelopes exchanging hands and some money being taken to him. There is wealth that he has that he cannot even explain. He even messed up the CHOGM investigation and feared to look in the face of those people and left hon. Oduman to present the report to this House. Let him not think that we do not know. 

Madam Speaker, is hon. Nandala-Mafabi in order to insinuate that I shouldn’t qualify even when there were wishful thoughts that I could be found guilty but it couldn’t go beyond the allegation? Is it in order for hon. Nandala-Mafabi to keep bringing me – you know, hon. Nandala-Mafabi cannot finish his sweeping statements without calling my name. Is he in order to go personal and try to associate me with the bad things he is talking about intended to tarnish my good name? 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I want to appeal to you to restrain yourselves from attacking one another. We have not had opportunity to discuss the issue of the masts here; no one has been found guilty and I have not received information about the exchange of envelopes. Please, hon. Nandala-Mafabi, wind up so that we can go to committee stage and stop accusing one another people.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, that is why we need the money laundering law. It does not say that Nandala-Mafabi will be exempted. That is why we needed the law yesterday and I am talking because I know who I am. If you have issues, they should be brought up. Madam Speaker, you recall I am the one who presented the CHOGM report here for two hours, and for you to come and say that I am not the one shows that there are people who are not sincere on this earth of God. We know very well – (Laughter) – I am not going to say anything more about my sister, hon. Kabakumba. Relax; you can have whatever you took but the money laundering – (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Nandala-Mafabi, please.
   
MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I want to conclude – (Interruption)

MS KABAKUMBA: Madam Speaker, hon. Nandala-Mafabi is turning this House into some kind of playground and I have been in this House for a long time. Actually, I at one time deputised hon. Nandala-Mafabi on the Committee on National Economy and there were even allegations at the time that hon. Nandala-Mafabi tried to extort money from Mukwano. Is hon. Nandala-Mafabi in order to insinuate that I took anything from Government when he has no proof at all? The Police investigated the allegations by the way and a report was given, and they could not find even a pin in the studio of the radio station I am associated with, and hon. Nandala-Mafabi knows very well that a mast can never be put in a studio. Otherwise, I wouldn’t even be here. Madam Speaker, can he substantiate and lay on Table the evidence of what he thinks or he is alluding to that I took from Government? Is he in order?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I do not know what has happened between the two of you today to attack one another continuously. So, honourable members, I see no opposition to this Bill. I put the question that this Bill be read for a second time. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Motion carried)

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE ANTI-MONEY LAUNDERING BILL, 2009

1.33
Clause 1

THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Robert SSEBUNYA): Madam Chair, Clause 1 of the Bill is the long title of the Bill. So – 

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, Clause 1 is on commencement. Do you have an amendment on that?

MR SSEBUNYA: Yes, we do.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Okay.

MR SSEBUNYA: Replace Clause 1 with the following: “That the Act shall come into force on its date of publication in the Gazette.” That is after the President has assented to it and is gazetted. Justification is that commencement of the Act on its date of application will enable immediate implementation of the anti-money laundering measures that may otherwise be delayed if one is to wait for the coming into force of the Act by statutory instrument by the minister at a later date after the Bill has been assented to. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that Clause 1 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 1, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 2

THE CHAIRPERSON: Do we have amendments on the interpretation? (Interjection) Why don’t we stand over it because you may have amendments within the Bill? So, let us stand over Clause 2 and we go to Clause 3.

Clause 3

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chair, (a) says. “The crime is committed within the territory of Uganda.” There are crimes which can be committed outside Uganda; somebody carries drugs and goes to sell them in Japan and brings the money back. So the crime should be committed anywhere within the world. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: But who will have the jurisdiction to enforce - 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Interpol. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Yes, honourable Oboth.

MR OBOTH: I was wondering whether 3(d) would not take care of hon. Mafabi’s fears.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Nandala, aren’t you satisfied with 3(d)?

MR SSEBUNYA: If I may read 3(d): “The “’crime’ is a crime under paragraph (g) of section 4 of this Act committed outside the territory of Uganda with the object of committing a crime under paragraph (a) up to (f) of section 4 of this Act within the territory of Uganda.”

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, we are dealing with Clause 3.

MR SSEBUNYA: Yes, Clause 3(d). And somebody was asking if it would not suffice for the cases outside Uganda’s jurisdiction. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: So, I put the question that Clause 3 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 4

MR SSEBUNYA: On the Title in Clause 4 which reads, “Criminalisation of the laundering of proceeds of crime and terrorism financing”. We wish to change the headnote to read, “And Terrorism Financing”. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chair, we have the terrorism law which handles terrorism but here we are looking at money laundering; people cleaning dirty money. But terrorism has its own law and the Attorney-General who is here was the lead man in that. Do you remember that law or it is not there? (Laughter)

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable minister, please explain that provision.

MR SSEBUNYA: Maybe what I can explain to the House is that many countries – and this is a document here we are trying to domesticate (International Standards on Combating Money Laundering and Financing of Terrorism and Proliferation). So, the law we are trying to domesticate has recommendations both in money laundering and terrorism financing. And the two have been merged and have a close linkage because most of the people who launder money end up in criminal activities and terrorism financing. Terrorism financing is a crime!

THE CHAIRPERSON: Is terrorism financing different from other crimes?

MR SSEBUNYA: And I want to lay on Table the FATF (Financial Action Task Force) recommendations –(Interruption)

MR ODONGA OTTO: Unless the Attorney-General would advise otherwise, it would add no value leaving the heading the way it is – “Criminalisation of laundering of proceeds of crime.” Terrorism financing is not a crime; terrorism is a statutory offence, created under the Terrorism Act. But my understanding is that terrorism and terrorism financing is itself a crime. If it is not a crime, then what is it? So whether you change the heading substantially or not, the content would probably be of more interest to you than the heading.

MR OMACH: Madam Chair, as the committee chairperson has explained, we are 15 countries in Eastern and Southern Africa which are members of the International Standards on Combating Money Laundering and the Financing of Terrorism Operations. And we are standardising this law. All the other 14 countries have passed their laws and have included this aspect of criminalisation of proceeds of crime and terrorism financing. So the document that the committee chair has tabled indicates all these for harmonisation of the laws in Eastern and Southern Africa.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chair, you can say, “A standard to account for A, B, C…” but A has its own law, B has its own and C has its own. In Uganda, we have the Anti-Terrorism Act which deals with that; what we are now looking at is money. That is why it is called the Anti-Money Laundering Bill. So, the moment dirty money comes in – for any activity whether for buying hoes or guns - it will be treated that way. We do not need to know what its purpose is, as long as it is dirty money, it is dirty. There are people who may launder – like these musicians who go abroad to sell drugs and come back to clean their money; if you got them with that money, you must charge them under Anti-Money Laundering legislation, not under terrorism. Are you trying to say that you will charge them with both money laundering and terrorism? 

THE CHAIRPERSON: But what would happen, for instance, in the case of piracy off the coast of Somalia as an example; people are grabbed there and someone has to pay on ransom and the money is used to finance the terrorism. Isn’t that a problem? 

Now, honourable members, there are some children in the gallery from St Theresa Namagunga Primary School, represented by hon. Bayigga and hon. Mpiima. They are up here. You are welcome. (Applause)  But do you have fundamental objections to this? 

MR SSEBUNYA: Maybe I should read the recommendation to the House and also read the justification and part of the recommendations.    

In the recommendations it says, “Terrorism financing offence: countries should criminalise terrorist financing on the basis of the Terror Financing Convention and should criminalise not only the financing of terrorist acts but also the financing of terrorist organisations and individual terrorists even in the absence of a link to terrorist acts. Government should ensure that such offences are designated as money laundering predicate offences.” They are related. Predicate offences means they are related in nature. 

Targeted financial institutions related to terrorism and terrorist financing: Let me just read verbatim a statement here: “The resolution requires countries to freeze, without delay, the funds or the other assets of, and to ensure that no funds or other assets are made available, directly or indirectly, to and for the benefit of any person, entity designated by or under the authority of the United Nations Security Council.” So, we are trying to realign ourselves with other countries and what they have done. That is the recent development in this law all over the world.

MR KWEMARA: Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. My concern here is that when we limit ourselves to terrorism financing we are being too narrow because laundered money can finance several other bad things. It can finance arms trafficking; it can finance hostage taking; it can finance racketeering and several other things. That is what we are calling the predicate offences. I think what we could do, instead of just limiting ourselves to terrorism financing, which I know is a problem - why can’t we provide for predicate offences and we have a list of these predicate offences? 

I have been reading the Anti-money Laundering Bill of Tanzania. They have a list of all those predicate offences including terrorist financing, arms trafficking, stolen and other goods, corrupt practice, counterfeiting and all that. I think that one would do. Thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Are we party to the Terrorist Financing Convention? 

DR EPETAIT: Madam Chair, just for the record, nobody is opposed to a provision against terrorism financing. But to the best of my recollection, when we were passing the Anti-Terrorism Act, terrorist financing was there. And so, what we are saying is that wouldn’t that be duplicating? What we provided for in the Anti-Terrorism Act is actually in conformity with the convention that the honourable chair has just read. 

More to that, money laundering is not just about terrorism; it can do anything like my honourable colleague has stated. That is why I thought that maybe for us to progress, we would stand over this, look at what is in the Anti-Terrorism Act, specifically areas providing for terrorism financing rather than us attempting to duplicate what is already in another law.

MR ANWAYRACH: Additionally, the title of this Bill is “Anti-money Laundering Bill, 2009.” When you go through the objectives, if you read objective (c), “…would seek to enable Uganda to fulfill its international commitment to participate in the fight against transnational crime particularly money laundering.” 

So, the best thing would be, as hon. Epetait has said, to probably stand over this clause and study the Anti-Terrorism Act and see if it is provided for there. If it is provided for there then we would not need it here. 

But also, there was the proposal brought by the honourable member from across there, to list down the possible crimes that would be committed from the proceeds of the money laundered. Thank you.

MR OMACH: Madam Chairperson, terrorism financing is not covered under any laws in Uganda. That is why we are importing it here and also –(Interjections)– no it is not. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: That is just the title. Let us go to the substance because this was just the heading. That is what he was trying to - let us go to the substance now. I put the question that Clause 4 do stand part of the Bill. Chairman, do you have any amendments to Clause 4? 

MR SSEBUNYA: Yes. Maybe before I agree that we stand over that clause - then we study and we have all options of predicate offences whether we shall put a schedule of predicate offences at the end of the day.

But also Clause 4, we have (d). We are proposing to replace the word “transaction” with the word “activity” wherever it appears in the Bill. The justification is that the term “transaction” as opposed to “activity” is very restrictive. The term “transaction” can be defined to mean any event that causes a change in the financial position of any organisation or network resulting in the normal business activity. Therefore, where no transaction has been established money launderers may easily challenge the basis of prosecution. So we are using the word “activity” instead of “transaction.”

MR ODONGA OTTO: Madam Chair, I am getting worried that maybe this Bill should have gone to the Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Committee because it touches several aspects of our penal law such that by the time we reach Clause 110, I do not know.

But having said that, it is even not advisable for the chairperson to make that proposal that we change the word “transaction” to “activity”. It would read, “It is prohibited for any person to intentionally act and to avoid a transaction reporting requirement.” Those are three words: “transaction reporting requirement”. Now we are saying we say to avoid “activity reporting requirements”. “Activity” actually is vague. It is vague because what amounts to an activity reporting requirement? Is it walking, is it running or jumping? Because “transaction” is a word that tends to take you into that direction that if someone is getting involved in this kind of transaction there are requirements that  come to you to give notice. So I really still think you may have to consider.

Madam Chair, even the opening words, “It is prohibited for any person intentionally…” we are giving an automatic defence to those who are going to commit the crime because whether you know or not, you are committing the crime. Now we are saying, “Any person who knowingly participates …” you take me to court, I will say, “I did not know Dr Omona was transferring this kind of money to me.” So I still see several aspects of the law being caught in several provisions that I do not know if it would be the right time to raise the red flag.

THE CHAIRPERSON: But, honourable members, isn’t mens rea an ingredient of the offence? You cannot run away from mens rea.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, I know my Chairperson of the Finance Committee has been dealing with issues of banks. You remember this transaction on this statement and how it came about. The moment you say “activity”, you are leaving the real thing. So, I would propose that we leave it to “transaction”.

MR SSEBUNYA: As we have said, money laundering manifests in many forms. Somebody has just said in the debate that somebody will send goods like during the time of piracy in the Somali maritime activity when they were confiscating fuel off the seas and then dumping it in a country and cleaning the money. That may not be an activity but it is money laundering. Somebody is cleaning the money in this country using stolen fuel and stolen goods. That is why we are widening it. Somebody may not pass through the banks as we know. So in order to have a wider net, let us use the word “activity” which is going to appear in many clauses in this Bill.

Hon. Mulongo read something to do with activity in his provision.

MR MULONGO: Thank you very much, Mr Chairperson. I would like to defer from the chairperson’s explanation about “transaction” or “activity” because he is trying to convince us to change from “transaction” and it makes us actually go back to “transaction” because “activity” is a loose term. “Transaction” is an operational term, it is financial. If we are going to talk about finances then you talk about transactions because it is about movement of money, it is about value, conspiration and about rights. If it is about real estate or property, it is about rights so any exchange of rights or consideration thereof between persons or groups is about transacting. 

If you just say “activities”, it can mean anything else and it would be dangerous for us to say “wherever it occurs” because there could be circumstances where we may buy the chairman’s argument for “activity”. But in this case, it is “transaction” in terms of money, administration and it is extremely important that we professionally and operationally state the terminology “transaction”.

MR SSEBUNYA: Let us concede. Once we find ourselves in a – Maybe we can come to it later but let us concede for the moment.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, I want to ask the Minister of Finance. how will you determine (c): “Acquire, possess, use, administer property knowingly at the time of receipt.” How will you know? Somebody can know and will say, “Prove that I knew.” How will you deal with that?

MR RUHINDI: Really, this is a question of evidence. Whenever these expressions such as “knowingly” are used, it is a question of evidence. There is nothing more than that.

DR EPETAIT: Madam Chairperson, Clause 4 (c) is really married to the opening statement that it is prohibited for any person to intentionally - Somebody will go and argue that there was no intention. I beg to propose that we delete the word “intentionally” from the opening statement and then in (c) we say “acquire, possess, use or administer property knowingly or unknowingly at the time of receipt” so that nobody is given an excuse of saying “I did not know” or “I did not intend”.

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, honourable members, you are altering the principles of criminal law. For a crime to occur, there must be two factors: one is a mens rea, which is the intention and then the act itself. We cannot alter the principles of criminal law here.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, there are many activities, which have been taking place in Uganda. It is unfortunate that I cannot give an example of one person. A person goes and gets a government item. He puts it to his or her use and then comes and says, “I never knew” and yet he knew that that was a government asset. That is what we want to cure in this statement.

THE CHAIRPERSON: It is up to the prosecution to prove that you knew or did not know. Let us conclude, please.

MR ANYWARACH: Madam Chairperson, I agree with your position and it may not be prudent for us to waste time here because in Uganda it is a question of whether you plead guilty or not. The fact is that there is a constitutional presumption of innocence. Here in the drafting language, it brings out the intention clearly that if you have acted knowingly, whether you go and plead that you did not know, it will be proved as to whether you acted with intent or not. So I think this is good language of the law for criminal purposes. Thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: You had another amendment to Clause 4.

MR SSEBUNYA: Yes, Madam Chairperson. I had the intention to have another clause but it has to do with financing of terrorism. We had to name it 4(1) and we had 4(2) and we were proposing to put “prohibition of money laundering and terrorism financing”, which we had said we should stay and look at later. Also, we had 2(b) on page 4. We were supposed to insert a new paragraph (b)-

THE CHAIRPERSON: So what you are suggesting is we stand over Clause 4?

MR SSEBUNYA: Yes.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, we want to propose that we deal with Clause 4 as it is and then you can bring this as a new clause somewhere to avoid bogging us down. Clause 4 here is real law that we are going to deal with in the future and if we stop here now, we will not be able to move and we will have to stop.

THE CHAIRPERSON: So shall we say we give you an opportunity to bring other amendments later?

MR SSEBUNYA: Yes, I would say let us stand over Clause 4, because if you read the amendments, we have a new clause, which reads, "4(2) Prohibition of terrorism financing” and it has many clauses in it: “No person shall, by any means whatsoever, directly or indirectly provide …”- And that is providing money for terrorism financing. So let us stand over Clause 4, we read it together, understand the intention of the drafters of the international recommendations then go to part 3-

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, there are clauses 5 and 6.

MR SSEBUNYA: We have no amendments on those ones.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Okay, we stand over Clause 4. 

Now I put the question that Clause 5 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 6, agreed to.

Clause 7

MR SSEBUNYA: Madam Chair, on Clause 7, we had an amendment to do with transactions, but we dropped it. I think let us just proceed.

DR EPETAIT: Madam Chair, I have an amendment to Clause (7) (b), which says that an accountable person shall not initiate a business relationship or carry out an occasional transaction including the opening of a new account or issuing a passbook, entering into a fiduciary transaction, renting a safe deposit box or performing a cash transaction of over 2,500 currency points, which is Shs 50 million.

In my opinion, that is a lot of money. For somebody to just have a Shs 50 million, transaction without due diligence is like we have given the intending money launderers a leeway. I propose that we reduce on that amount so that if somebody is to wire money from outside or to attempt to launder money – we should reduce it to a maximum of Shs 20 million. Okay, it is now 2,500 currency points, which is Shs 50 million, but which to me, is heavy money. I propose we reduce it to 1,000 currency points.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Madam Chair, this clause is very dangerous because it says that if you go to the bank, the person you meet at the counter should not deal with you, if you have Shs 50 million unless they find out your name, address, residence, employment status, your relatives etcetera.  But to subject someone to such kind of questioning at a bank counter will make many people to start keeping money at their homes. This means we are now putting responsibilities on the persons inside the bank to begin asking questions of this nature – look at (i), (ii) – the list of questions is long – you are putting unnecessary burden on the bankers, and Shs 50 million is not a lot of money! Actually we should raise this money to Shs 200 million – (Interjections) – yes, because there are people who sell their land at Shs 200 million and may wish to take their money to the bank. But the moment I come to the bank with such money and you start asking me all those questions - you are handicapping the economy!

THE CHAIRPERSON: But hon. ODONGA OTTO, if you sold your land and got such money, why wouldn’t you want people to know that you sold such land, for example, in Arua?

MR ODONGA OTTO: But Madam Chair, what I am saying is that Shs 50 million is little. We should raise the threshold. When you have money, say to the tune of Shs 200 million, that is when the bank should begin to ask all these questions. But for only Shs 20 or 50 million - people will start to keep their money at home and we will not have solved any problem.

MR OMACH: Madam Chair, the definition of “accountable persons” as stated at page 7 is: “’Accountable person’ means a person listed in the Second Schedule to this Act.” And when you go to page 93, there is the Second Schedule, which gives the definition of those who are going to be affected.

THE CHAIRPERSON: What about the amount, which Members are complaining about? One said the figure is too high while another is saying it is too low.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chair, maybe at this point I can take this opportunity to respond to what my sister said. You know, I have been dealing in fuel since 1954 – (Interjections) – yes, before I was born. I wanted to tell her that I saw money before I was born.
Madam Chair, in fuel transactions, you can pay maybe about Shs 500 million, but that will depend on sales. What the law is saying here is that, you should have an address and that one should not initiate a business relationship or carry out occasional transactions, including the opening of a new account – this is the beginning and the moment you have an address, then your transactions are known and there should be no problem.

What hon. Dr Francis Epetait is talking about relates to first customers. Somebody sells a mast and wants to bank Shs 50 billion. How do we accept that? Actually, we should come down to Shs 10 million –(Interjections)– no, no this is just for beginners not for people who have been transacting before. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Minister, what was the rationale for Shs 50 million?

MR SSEBUNYA: Honourable members, this is intended to identify clients to the banks. The banks usually don’t want to deal with alien depositors – people who can deposit money without their details being captured by the bank. This is just to put an obligation on the banks – and we have a schedule behind here. Look at page 93: we have estate agents, trust and company services, financial institutions, a board of executors, advocates – we have a schedule on page 93 with the accountable persons.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Madam Chair, just a clarification here. We may have to look at the Advocates Act again. I am under duty of non-disclosure in certain instances. So, if you list advocates under accountable persons – owners of casinos, real estate agents – we may have to look at other laws. I am saying this because if someone confides in me, as a law firm, and deposits Shs 200 million - you are now shifting the obligation to me to run around - you might cause me to break other laws. Remember, this is a fiduciary relationship between I and the client. You cannot now compel me to start severing such information. So, we either reduce on the amount or we study the list of accountable persons extensively because you are going to make life hard for everyone in this country.

MR BIREKERAAWO: Thank you very much, Madam Chair. We should also look at the state of our economy. At the time we were still young, people never used to talk about a billion shillings. But today we even talk about trillions of shillings, something that was unheard of. Let me give an example of a farmer or those who are engaged in produce and buying; for example, Shs 50 million is nothing for someone engaged in buying coffee. 

First of all, whenever you open an account in the bank, you provide all these details. It is not a one-time incident that you just get into the bank with Shs 50 million. Even my chairman from the Bugisu Cooperative Union Farmers knows this very well.

Given the economic situation in which we are, I want to support the suggestion by hon. ODONGA OTTO, that money just gets increased. I mean what is Shs 50 million to someone dealing in coffee?

MR OMACH: Madam Chair, the import of this is that you have to know your customer and that banks shouldn’t allow any transactions of Shs 50 million without undertaking customer due diligence measures including obtaining, recording and verifying the reliable means. So it can be over Shs 50 million, but when it reached Shs 50 million, you must take due diligence to know the person and the source of the funding. 

MS KABAHENDA: Thank you, Madam Chair. I seek further clarification from the minister. In case someone decides to bank this money in piecemeal – they bring Shs 20 million for ten times - wouldn’t they avoid that proposal as put by hon. Odonga Otto?

MR SSEMPIJJA: Thank you, Madam Chair. We are discussing this bearing in mind what is around us. To me, there is already a problem of poor banking culture. In my area, there are very few people who take their money to banks. But there is also another problem of unavailability of banks. So what happens in Kalungu East and Lwabenge, people sell about 200 bags of coffee and keep their money at home. 

So, I think this Bill should encourage our people to take their money to the banks instead of deterring them. If someone has to answer for Shs 50 million, then you are sending them away from disciplined banking. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: But, honourable members, this provision says that that bank should just find out your name, address, where you live and your employment. We always fill these when opening up accounts. How can you open up an account without giving this – 

MR SSEMPIJJA: Whoever is banking may not be their customer –

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, if you are going to become a customer, you must have an address; they must be able to find you. You must have a contact where they can reach you. 

DR EPETAIT: By somebody fearing to be identified in a bank, that person must be a launderer. If you are going to buy coffee and you have Shs 100 million, what is there to hide; why would you fear to be identified?  I am still of the opinion and beg the chairperson of the committee to accept –(Interruption) 

MR ODONGA OTTO: Madam Chair, if you have reached a situation where the list of accountable persons – forget about the banks. Assuming in the banks, it is routine. But this might include casinos, dealers in precious metals and games; so in a situation where I have Shs 49 million, I have no problem. But the moment I have Shs 51 million and I want to buy a golden necklace, then the list of things that they can ask is a birth certificate, passport – even asking me those questions alone causes me more problems. Having the money alone is already a problem; now if people start asking me, “Where do you stay”, it will be adding on people’s problems. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, you have bank accounts. In all those forms that you fill, they ask you for your residence; they ask for your address, your telephone contacts and your next of kin. How else would you have those accounts?

DR EPETAIT: Madam Chair, we were given an example of someone who wanted to buy a computer at $565 in Uganda currency, that is Shs 1.5 million. They had to call security to identify this tycoon with $565. 

Let us make this 1,000 currency points which is about Shs 20 million so that they only ask you when you have Shs 20 million. I beg to propose. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chair, honourable members are making two mistakes. They are assuming that you cannot transact when you have the money. I may have Shs 500,000 and I want to pay fuel, I can fill a form instructing my bank to transfer Shs 500 million to Shell. I can do that because I have an address and so forth.  If I want to buy a necklace at Shs 50 million at Imperial Hotel, I can go to the hotel, and tell the seller that I am going to do an EFT for you of Shs 50 million – 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, there are many children coming. There are children of Standard Primary School in Wakiso represented by hon. Seninde and hon. Kikungwe. Others are St Agnes Catholic Girls School, Nagalama in Mukono represented by hon. Ssekitoleko and hon. Nambooze. You are welcome! (Applause)

Honourable members, I think you should be focused on the substance – the opening of an account, issuing a pass book and so forth. 

MR SSEBUNYA: The position of the committee was Shs 50 million. The Member is proposing to lower it to Shs 20 million. So it is okay for the banks to identify you for Shs 20 million. 

MR ANYWARACH: My proposal is to raise it a little higher to at least Shs 100 million. Somebody can sell his cows in Mbarara and he wants to acquire land in Nebbi and he would like to transact through the LC chairperson’s account. It is a known fact that the bank will always ask you if you had no money on your account, “Where did this money come from?” We are talking about the inconvenience and the embarrassment of delaying transactions; that should also be put into account. Not all money transacted is laundered money. We should be careful not to inconvenience our business transactions for people who have clean sources of money. So, let it be raised to Shs 100 million. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I want you to note the words, “Opening of a new account, issuing a passbook, entering into fiduciary transactions, renting a safe deposit box, performing a cash transaction” over that much - Why would you be seeking to transfer Shs 100 today to where you do not have an account?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: How can you carry Shs 200 million? You remember the President carried Shs 250 million and you saw how he suffered with it; he needed a pickup for it. So, how can you carry Shs 200 million on your head to go and transact? In fact, this thing should be Shs 10 million. 

Madam Chair, the reason we are doing this is because we want all transactions to be done through the banking system; that is all. So when you are opening an account, you can go with Shs 10 million that is allowed. But Shs 20 million is too much. Madam Chair, let it be at least Shs 10 million. 

MR OKUPA: Thank you, Madam Chair, I know Members could be getting tired because it is about 2.15 p.m. but this is a very simple thing for us to handle. First of all, if you have Shs 20 million, how can you have all that money and not have an address? I think we should standardise it since we have it in our financial regulations that you cannot issue a cheque more than Shs 20 million? Can we stick to the Shs 20 million and standardise and leave it at that. Thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Okay, honourable members, I put the question that Clause 7 be amended as proposed by hon. Epetait.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that Clause 7 as amended, do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 7, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 8, agreed to.

Clause 9 

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that Clause 9 do stand part of the Bill - 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Yes, hon. Epetait. 

DR EPETAIT: Madam Chair, Clause 9 (3) reads – this is about recording or reporting cash and monetary transactions. (3) reads: “Multiple cash and monetary transaction which altogether exceed the prescribed amount shall be treated as a single transaction if they are undertaken by, or on behalf of any one person during any one day or such other period prescribed by the minister.” I wanted to amend that “one day” to “one week” - on that one, I am abandoning it.

THE CHAIRPERSON: You are abandoning it?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: No, Madam Chair, what hon. Epetait is saying – first, sub-clause (1), since we have amended the other side to 1,000 currency form, this one also comes to 1,000 currency form. I want to answer my sister’s question. The person can decide in the morning to take Shs 20 million, if you have allowed that; in the afternoon Shs 18 million or whatever - or in a week, he can take Shs 20 million; today, Shs 20 tomorrow and in a week he has taken 140. That is where the problem is. We are saying that it should not be these transactions of cash which should be picked up for one week of Shs 20 million. The justification is to avoid –

THE CHAIRPERSON: hon. Nandala-Mafabi, people will know that I have got money and they will come for me because they know that I cannot bank my money until one week - 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chair, I want you to understand.  I do my business and I can bank Shs 50 million per day. I have an address and that is no problem - are you getting it? I have a transaction of one off– I am putting Shs 20 million – you have said Shs 20 million- You put Shs 20 million because you have a new transaction and you want to put it in the bank in the morning, in the afternoon or whatever and make Shs 200 million. You would have come back to the money laundering. So what we are saying, there are normal people with addresses and they can bank Shs 200 million whenever because that is their business and they have an address. But this person of a one off transaction the moment in one day or in one week you allow him that Shs 20 million, he will go and divide it and bring Shs 140 million in one week – (Interjections) - that is Clause 3

THE CHAIRPERSON: But what would stop me from opening several accounts in different banks, 80 in Centenary Bank and 20 in Stanbic Bank?

MR OKUPA: Madam Chair, if someone wants to avoid being caught by doing that – in fact, that alone is a ground to raise suspicion in the bank. All of a sudden, if your rate of banking is so much a daily basis or every two days, when you have not been banking, you should be able to raise alarm in the banking system. 

In some countries, and even in some banks in Uganda, if you keep depositing money on a daily basis or the level of withdraws exceeds what that bank has agreed with you, they will definitely ask you why money is leaving your account abruptly unless it has been continuous transactions that you have been doing for the last five or 10 months. But if it is just a one off- some even have a system they just block the account and you cannot access the money. It has ever happened to me – and they ask you to give a justification. So, I think that should not really scare us.

THE CHAIRPERSON: So since hon. Epetait has abandoned his proposal, I put the question that Clause 9 do –

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: But then what about sub-clause (1)? Do you agree –

THE CHAIRPERSON: Of Clause 9?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: It is not exceeding 1,000 currency points.

THE CHAIRPERSON: We have agreed that across the board wherever there is 2,000 we replace it with 1,000. I now put the question that Clause 9 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 9, agreed to.

Clause 10

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that Clause 9 do stand part of the Bill.

MR SSEBUNYA: I would have wished we stand over Clause 10 because what we are proposing was about adding or changing the word, “financing of terrorism” to “terrorism financing” just changing the nomenclature. So maybe we pass it or we have decided to stand over where there is “terrorism financing”.

THE CHAIRPERSON: We wanted to see how it fits into this law. So we stand over – in 10 minutes. 

DR EPETAIT: We came at 10.00 a.m. and I think that it would be appropriate to break off. But just to talk about the terrorism financing, as I did say earlier that to the best of my recollection, we had a very long provision for it in the Anti-Terrorism Act. It is actually a whole part of its own. Part V of the Anti-Terrorism Act, 2002 - 

THE CHAIRPERSON: No but honourable member, you are moving ahead of us. We had said that we stand over that. We shall deal with that terrorism financing –

DR EPETAIT: I was just saying that the amendment that they were proposing to bring in Clause 4 is really taken care of in the whole part V of Anti-Terrorism Act. In fact, it is more detailed than what you are attempting to do with this law.

THE CHAIRPERSON: So give us time to finish these others and then we shall come back to that and agree whether we do need a new clause or not. But thank you for acquiring the information. So, we stand over Clause 10.

Clause 11

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that Clause 11 – yes chair?

MR SSEBUNYA: We are proposing a new Clause 11 just after Clause 10 and this is to do with lodging reports of suspicious activities. I am on page 6. We are proposing Clause 11, just after Clause 10.

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, there is a Clause 11 already. Are you introducing new clause –

MR SSEBUNYA: This one shall consequentially be Clause 12 –

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, no, let us first deal with the present 11. Are you deleting the present 11?

MR SSEBUNYA: We shall come to it after inserting this clause. We are inserting a clause between 10 and 11. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: You said that you are introducing a new clause because there is a Clause 11.

MR SSEBUNYA: Yes, that is what I am saying. I am introducing a new Clause 11.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Under which marginal law? 

MR SSEBUNYA: I want this clause to be between the current Clause 10 and Clause 11. So, I am inserting a new clause that reads, “Clause 11- Lodging of reports of suspicious activities” - okay, it shall be 11 and then the other one shall be 12.

THE CHAIRPERSON: You stick to the amendments; they will be numbered later.

MR SSEBUNYA: Okay, let me read Clause 11 “(1) Every report under section 10 shall be lodged with financial intelligence unit.”

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Procedure. Madam Chair, we have stood over Clause 10. We cannot talk about it here now. Supposing we reject it – if the clause you are introducing touches on Clause 10 which we have stood over, you have to wait.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I do not think that we are amending Clause 10. He is introducing a new clause.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: He is talking of Clause 10 that we have stood over.

MR SSEBUNYA: Can we first hear -
 
(The House was suspended at 2.37 p.m.)

(On resumption at 3.44 p.m. the Speaker presiding_)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to the afternoon sitting. When we suspended, we were handling item No.4 but it seems people are still having lunch. So, let me invite the minister to move the motion on item No.7. 

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO PAY GLOWING TRIBUTE TO THE UGANDA NATIONAL SOCCER TEAM, THE UGANDA CRANES FOR THEIR 1-0 AND 2-1 TRIUMPH OVER LIBERIA AND ANGOLA ON THE 8TH AND 15TH JUNE 2013 RESPECTIVELY IN THE WORLD CUP QUALIFIERS FOR BRAZIL 2014 AT MANDELA NATIONAL STADIUM

3.45

THE MINISTER OF EDUCATION AND SPORTS (Maj. (Rtd) Jessica Alupo): Madam Speaker, this is a motion for a resolution of Parliament to pay glowing tribute to the Uganda National soccer team, the Uganda Cranes, for their 1-0 and 2-1 triumph over Liberia and Angola on the 8th and 15th June 2013 respectively in the World Cup qualifiers for Brazil 2014 at Mandela National Stadium:

“WHEREAS the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, 1995, under the provision of the National Objectives and Directive Principles of the State Policy XVII, mandates the state to ‘promote recreation and sports for the citizens of Uganda’;

AND WHEREAS Article 8A of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda provides for governance based on ‘principles of national interest and common good enshrined in the national objectives and directive principles of the state policy’;

AWARE THAT on Saturday 8th and 15th June 2013, the Uganda national football team, the Uganda Cranes, made Uganda proud by registering deserving victories over Liberia (1-0) and Angola (2-1), respectively in the ongoing FIFA World Cup Qualifiers for Brazil 2014, thereby brightening Uganda’s chance towards qualification;

WHEREAS the two victories at Mandela National Stadium put Uganda one match away in Senegal towards qualification to the last round of playoff between 10 countries in Africa from which five will qualify for the 2014 World Cup in Brazil, Uganda’s FIFA ranking will continue to improve and be regarded amongst the elite football nations, because of the Cranes’ achievement;

AWARE THAT these triumphant victories present a requisite impetus for the promotion and support of sports amongst the people of Uganda, especially the youth, for national health, economic growth and national glory;

APPRECIATING THAT the Uganda Cranes, despite the limited facilitation through determination, patriotism and love for Uganda and with massive support of the Ugandan population deservedly put up a good show and are still holding the Uganda flag high until last Group J qualification match against Senegal scheduled for September 2013, at a neutral ground in Conakry, Guinea;

AWARE THAT a growing number of sportsmen and sportswomen from various disciplines have continued to be our worthy goodwill ambassadors by bringing to glory the image of Uganda;

CONSCIOUS THAT it is now common practice for this august House to appropriately and timely honour and recognise all those Ugandans – young and old; male and female – who deservedly excelled in various fields of human endeavour, including sports;

CONSCIOUS THAT the current enabling environment in Uganda is conducive to promoting sports development from the grassroots countrywide;

RECOGNISING THAT His Excellency the President of the Republic of Uganda is committed towards sports development in the country by rewarding excelling sports personalities such as: Dorcus Inzikuru, Moses Kipsiro, Stephen Kiprotich, among others and giving a monthly salary to the national athletics team and supporting the Uganda Cranes and other national sports teams in addition to infrastructure development like the Teryet High Altitude Training Centre and regional stadia;

RECOGNISING THAT the Ministry of Education and Sports has appropriately and timely established a fully-fledged department of Physical Education and Sports to steer sports development in the country;

NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved, on this Ninth Parliament sitting on the 27 day of June 2013 at Parliament House, that:

Parliament collectively congratulates and pays glowing tribute to the Uganda National Soccer Team, the Uganda Cranes, for the 1-0 and 2-1 triumph over Liberia and Angola on 8th and 15th June 2013 respectively, in the World Cup Group J qualifiers for Brazil 2014 at Mandela National Stadium.
 
That that achievement was not only for the players but for their families, the coaches, fellow athletes, sportsmen and women, FUFA, the fans and the nation at large.

Parliament formally registers recognition of the great honour and pride that the Uganda Cranes have earned for this country and the people of Uganda; which feat puts them closer to becoming even greater national heroes as we prepare for the last Group J match against Senegal in September 2013 in Conakry, Guinea.

Parliament urges and encourages all Ugandans with potential talent in sports, especially the youths, to emulate the example set by the Uganda Cranes through patriotism, hard work and determination.

Parliament commits itself to providing resources for the Uganda Cranes’ last Group J qualification match against Senegal in September 2013 and for the subsequent matches.  

Parliament commits itself to increasing appropriate funding for physical activity and sports development especially at the grassroots and in the education institutions.

Parliament recognises the role of the private sector in promoting sports development in Uganda; and that Parliament institutes appropriate legal incentives for the private sector to increase support and contribution towards sustainable development and achievement of sports in Uganda.

Parliament collectively registers recognition of the benefits of physical education and sports to individuals, citizens and the nation at large and therefore urges Government and development partners to support and promote physical education and sports at all levels in this country.” 

Madam Speaker, I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, Minister. It is seconded. Now before she justifies, I want to invite the Members who are trying to go to Kapchorwa and those who are trying to go to Lira, to get out of the buses and return to the plenary. I have directed the Sergeant-at-Arms not to release any bus. No bus should leave this compound this afternoon; we have a duty to provide money for the country- yes, we have a responsibility. No bus should leave this compound today to go to any of those places. Thank you. Yes, Minister, justification.

MAJ. (RTD) ALUPO: Madam Speaker, we would like to share with you and Members of this House, the recent successes registered by our national soccer team, the Uganda Cranes. We have highlighted the current Cranes squad, which list I request Members to read. The countries which correspond to their names are the countries where these players currently play in different clubs. When we have national competitions like the ones we are currently engaged in, they come back to Uganda as patriots to support our national team.  

There is also a list of names of the technical team, which we thought would be good for us to share with this august House.

But particularly, Madam Speaker, the Cranes have been champions 13 times for the East and Central Africa (CECAFA) competitions. 

Secondly, they were eliminated by Zambia, the African champions, on 11-10 penalties after beating the Africa champions 1-0 in the last AFCON campaigns - (Interruption)

MR ODONGA OTTO: Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I rise on a point of procedure. I first of all appreciate the minister for bringing such an important motion. Having looked through the motion, it would make a lot of sense if the players were within Parliament because the encouragement would go to them personally. It would mean a lot to them more than us speaking to ourselves.

So, I am rising on a procedural issue, Madam Speaker, if you would direct the minister to use her big office and bring the players here. We have already got the substance of the motion and so as we begin the general debate, it would be very good credit to have the players within the precincts of Parliament. I seek your guidance. It would mean a lot to them and also to us as an institution.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I know we normally have them here but I do not know what happened.

MR BAKABULINDI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to thank hon. ODONGA OTTO for that observation. I was coming to that. As we talk, 22 professionals who participated in this tournament have already gone back to play in the various countries which the honourable minister was going to mention. But we had that feeling that even though they have already gone back, we should come to this honourable House and express our gratitude and appreciation for what transpired in Namboole. We apologised for that.

MR WAMAI-WAMANGA: Clarification.

THE SPEAKER: No, let the minister finish. She is still moving her motion. 

MAJ. (RTD) ALUPO: Madam Speaker, maybe what we shall commit ourselves to do is that since we shall be calling them back soon to start the official campaigns for the preparations against Senegal, we shall find an appropriate way of inviting them to come to the gallery and then we shall communicate to them that this is what we did. Madam Speaker, if that is reasonable enough, I wish to continue submitting on the recent successes that the Cranes have earned the country.

I was about to conclude by saying that they participated in the all Africa Cup of Nations competitions and World Cup qualifiers. In addition to that, they have never lost a home game in official matches of AFCON and World Cup since they lost to South Africa at Mandela National Stadium in 2005. The Cranes qualified for the finals of the Africa Nations Championship (CHAN), second edition, in Egypt 2011; and in 2011 again, they were runners up in the Nile Basin Countries competition where Egypt won. Again in 2011, they were in a group of runners up in Morocco where Cameroon took the trophy. 

In addition to that, the Cranes currently have MTN and Nile Breweries as their official sponsors. National Insurance Corporation (NIC) covers insurance of players of Shs1 million and yet some injuries cost about Shs 5 million.

Uganda Cranes has a coaching expert from Serbia who is paid UD$20,000 and we have also said that some countries pay – (Interjections) - the name of the coach is there. You can pronounce it in the style which is easy but what I was saying was that, some countries pay as much as US$50,000. 

We have a few challenges including that, World Cup matches like the ones we are currently dealing with cater for their full expenses whether it is home or away; and the Senegal match which we are looking forward to winning will be played in West Africa at a neutral ground and needs funds for adequate training. We also need to organise a friendly match for our national team before they go for that match against Senegal. We also need to arrange for timely travel for them to Guinea so that they can acclimatise themselves well enough to the environment there before the kick-off.

In conclusion, Madam Speaker, the Cranes is composed of a promising age category of players who are still young and getting experience and have brighter future to compete. After the Senegal away match, which hopefully the Cranes must win, the team will move to the last play-offs to qualify for the World Cup.

Madam Speaker, I beg to submit. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Minister of State you have four minutes.

4.04
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR SPORTS (Mr Charles Bakabulindi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise to support the motion and call upon my colleagues in this Parliament to appropriate enough for the development of sports in this country and Cranes, in particular.

Before I proceed, allow me to give you some good news. The She-Cranes, who are participating in the African Championships in Malawi, yesterday won the second victory after triumphing Namibia 72 to 45 and earlier on, She-Cranes had defeated Swaziland with 69 to 38. So, you can see how our national talents are proceeding.

I think we should take sports as the tool for development. We can use sports as a tool for boosting our tourism in this country and it is through sports that we can carry our flag, particularly the Cranes.

Hon. Members, as we talk now, we are preparing for the African Championships in which our sons will be participating starting late July this year. We need a lot of money to support our national team. Our national team has done us proud and as the minister has said, we are preparing the team to play against Senegal. This time, we have come to realise that in most cases, we lose away games simply because our team lacks support. If you see in the coming supplementary that we need money to boost the morale of the team, that is what we are talking about. We should not send the team without people to support it.

Recently, when Angola was here, they brought a whole plane of supporters to boost -

THE SPEAKER: Just a minute, hon. minister. Can the children in the Gallery wait? I need to introduce you but I do not know who you are. These people are a bit slow. Please, wait a bit. Minister, you can continue. I am waiting for the name of their school.

MR BAKABULINDI: So, hon. Members, there is need to support the team by not only looking for the money for the tickets but also supporting it physically and escorting it wherever it is going. The Cranes have done us proud and as we have said, we are also preparing for the all African Championships. We need to allocate enough funds for the Cranes and we need to come in big numbers. 

At this point, I would like to salute my colleagues, the Members of Parliament, who are ever with us at Namboole. Thank you very much for that morale boost. In fact, your presence has contributed a lot to the success of the Cranes.

As I said, sports can be used as a tool for tourism and developing the nation. Even as we talk, next year in March, we shall be hosting the African Cross Country Championships in this country and that is already a good sign. In the same year, 2014, we shall have the World University Cross-Country Championships in Uganda. That means that we are going to bring a lot of visitors in this country.

I would like to use this opportunity to clarify one point. When we talk about boosting sports, some people have been thinking that maybe, the ministry is looking after one game and that is football. We are looking after 53 disciplines and through our bigger resources, we have been contributing to these disciplines to achieve what they have done. 

If you allow me, Madam Speaker, I will quickly show you what we have done so far in this year. We contributed to Uganda Basketball Federation, which is doing well by about Shs 7 million. We have contributed to Uganda Baseball and Softball, Uganda Netball Federation, which is already doing wonders; we have contributed to FUBA players, Uganda Cycling Association - By yesterday, one member from Congo Kinshasa rang me and they had covered 500 kilometres and they are proceeding to cover 1,000 kilometres. We already have participants in cycling.

We have also contributed to Uganda Cricket Association, which is doing a wonderful job for this country. We have contributed to Uganda Lawn Tennis Association, Uganda Volleyball Federation, NUSUFU cross-country and others. Why am I bringing this? This is because when we talk about Government not contributing or trying - yes, it is not contributing or seen because we are not putting in enough and that is why we are here to say, dear colleagues, when you are doing some appropriation, give us enough because we are looking after many kids.

I would like to thank you very much for supporting the Cranes and I wish to continue pleading that, please, support us more so that after our Cranes beat Senegal, which we are sure they are going to do, we shall remain with one team to head for and that is Brazil. I thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I know this is very exciting but we do not have too much time. So, I will only take three Members; two men and one lady. We have been speaking to those issues whenever we are paying tribute and they are already on the Hansard. I understand the children are from St Agnes Nagalama, in Buikwe. You are welcome. (Applause)

4.08
MR TOM AZA ALERO (NRM, West Moyo County, Moyo): Madam Speaker and my dear colleagues, first of all, I would like to pay tribute to the Ministry of Education and Sports for a job well done. Secondly, I would like to pay special tribute to Lawrence Mulindwa, the FUFA President who has been working for the past nine years in order to ensure that our team succeeds. Lawrence Mulindwa, bravo, and I wish that you had not resigned but remained there for us.

Members of Parliament, I would like to inform you that this year, the Parliamentary Football Team is defending the trophy in Kampala and therefore, we shall need your support. We got the trophy in Bujumbura in 2011, in Nairobi in 2012 and this year, it will be in Kampala. Come one, come all, to support hon. Odonga Otto, hon. Nsereko, hon. Aza, hon. Obua and others so we can get that trophy for keeps.

Lastly, to you, the Minister of Education and Sports, can we ensure a smooth transition of leadership in the Sports fraternity? This issue of bickering, fighting for money and quarrelling is not good for our sports development. So, my request to you is that we ensure a smooth transition of leadership from Lawrence Mulindwa to another person who might be interested.

To crown it all, there is a gentleman called Mubiru who I am told and I investigated, likes sodomising our players. This issue came out last year and he disappeared. Since then, we have been looking for Mubiru.

I request all of us who are still young and energetic to replace some of us who are now 51 years old in the Parliamentary team. Normally, I do not see the youth MPs joining us. I will be happy to have them on our Parliamentary team.

Away from that, as the minister said, sports can take the name of a country far and wide. It can bring glory for the country and therefore, let us take it as serious as possible, so that we can have an increased budget for it. (Interjections) I will take information from my sister from Bundibugyo. Thank you very much.

MS NTABAZI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and my colleague, our captain. I never intended to make a submission but I am giving information to my colleagues that an achievement like this requires a lot of commitment and training. 

We have been having a lot of complaints from the Uganda Cranes that they get little funds for training yet as you struggle to achieve something, you must put in effort. The little funds we are giving to the Ministry of Education and Sports cannot enable Uganda to fairly compete with other countries.

Madam Speaker, you will recall that we went to defend our country in Nairobi during the Inter-Parliamentary Sports Competition for the East African Region. I came out as the best defender of East Africa, but that was because of the commitment and training that I had gone through. And you know, I did all that without funding. (Laughter) Yes, because if I had been funded, I would have done better. 

I know that the Tanzanian team that won had had a two-months training outside their country. That is why they challenged us. If we had had the funding, we would have done wonders as a Parliamentary Netball Team.

The moment we get to fund these sports, our name will continue going high, to maintain the flag high.

4.13
MR KEZEKIA MBOGO (Independent, Budaka County, Budaka): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also thank the Uganda Cranes for making us proud. However, I have some concerns directed to the minister in charge of sports. It is true we are saying sports should be one of the tourist attractions in the country, but we cannot get to that unless we get to start. When you visit all schools at all levels – primary and secondary – there is no plan to groom sports persons. We only keep looking at the levels of the Uganda Cranes. What will happen to sporting when these people age up? 

My advice to the responsible ministry is for them to go to the ground and train young people to support the Uganda Cranes in the future. This will save us better than us singing how we are proud of the Uganda Cranes. How about if one of those Cranes players breaks their leg?

And, lastly, the minister –(Interruption)

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Thank you very much for giving way. Madam Speaker, we appreciate when ministers come here to praise our sports persons when they win. On this Floor, when Kipsiro won a gold medal, Government said they were going to build a training ground in Kapchorwa. However, I want to inform you that to-date, there is nothing in Kapchorwa. 

My problem is the ministers wait until these guys have worked out their sweat to come here and talk about the achievements. You can even see that the minister did not talk about the FUFA Chairman who is resigning simply because Government is levying high taxes on the Uganda Cranes, yet it puts in very little.

The information I want to give is that Government needs to realise that they need to inject money into sports and not just wait until the sports persons have won something for us to praise them; we must feed the cow before we milk it. 

Lastly, I would like to seek this clarification: David Obua is playing in Scotland but we do not see his name on the list. Is it because he asked a question while at Namboole? Thank you.

MR MBUGO: Thank you for the information. Last week, I was told that there were some districts that convened in Lira –(Member timed out.)

4.16
MS FLORENCE EKWAU IBI (FDC, Woman Representative, Kaberamaido): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also would like to thank the minister for presenting the statement. I thank the FUFA President, Mr Lawrence Mulindwa. I feel very proud, him having been my headmaster for many years while I was a teacher at St Marys Kitende. We are very glad for whatever input he extended, including personal resources, in making the Uganda Cranes get where they are now. I pray that he continues with that good spirit even when he leaves the leadership of the FUFA.

Secondly, let me talk about the sports facilities in this country. Madam Speaker, when you get to Namboole, you see the taps getting filled up most of the time with no attention being given to them. The toilet facilities are also almost falling apart with most of the lights in there being dysfunctional. I do not know whether we just look out for the victory. What is the ministry doing about supervising and monitoring the various stadiums in the country? (Interruption)

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, we got so disappointed during the IPU Conference dinner at Namboole when we found all the toilets blocked. Thanks to the Uganda Police Force; it took them a whole day to clean up that place. So, we wondered where the money that people pay as rental fees goes. The stairs and the ceilings have all given way. Whenever we get to do our FDC Delegates Conferences in that place, we pay a lot of money. Last month, when we went there to watch the East and Central Police Drills, we saw the stadium is still in a sorry state. What is the ministry doing? Are you still waiting for another donation from China to renovate that place? The situation is very pathetic, given the fact that the stadium carries the name of a very important man in the World. It is a shame and very embarrassing for us. We should put that stadium to the standards befitting Nelson Mandela. 

But also, some people should be held accountable for the money that is being collected from those who rent the premises. Where does that money go? That is the information I wanted to give to the House. Thank you.

MS EKWAU IBI: Thank you very much for that information. In fact, it is not only Namboole Stadium that is in a sorry state. If you went for a tournament at Nakivubo Stadium and nature called you to visit those facilities, you can easily collapse –(Member timed out.) (Members rose_)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I told you that we would only have few contributions because we have to do the Vote-on-Account. So, many of the issues you have raised have been said before and they are on our Hansard. I hope the ministers have heard. I now put the question that this House do resolve to pay tribute to the Uganda Cranes, as proposed in the motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR ODONGA OTTO: Madam Speaker, the minister should say something about the mismanagement of Namboole Stadium.

THE SPEAKER: You will get an opportunity – we are about to debate the State of the Nation Address and the Budget Speech. You will raise those issues during that time. Let us move on to the next item.

MOTION THAT THE HOUSE RESOLVES ITSELF INTO A COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY TO CONSIDER SUPPLEMENTARY SCHEDULE NO.2 FOR FINANCIAL YEAR 2012/2013

COMMITTEE STAGE

THE CHAIRPERSON: I am thinking, are we ready for the Vote-on-Account? Hon. Members, I think let us start with the Bill then we will adjust at the appropriate time. 

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE
THE ANTI-MONEY LAUNDERING BILL, 2009 

Clause 11

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, when we suspended at lunch time, we had reached clause 11, but I think the Chair had some amendments. (Interjections) Isn’t it? Okay. Let us look at clause 12 – (Interjections) Okay, hon. Members, let us look at the present clause 11. I put the question that clause 11 do stand part of the Bill – 

MR KASULE: Madam Chair, by the time you suspended, we had new clauses that we wanted to introduce –

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, the present clause 11. I put the question that Clause 11 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 11, agreed to.

Clause 12, agreed to.

Clause 13, agreed to.

Clause 14, agreed to.

Clause 15, agreed to.

Clause 16 agreed to.

Clause 17 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chair, this is refraining from doing business with money launderers. How will you know that one is a money launderer? You may find yourself doing business with him or her, not knowing they are money launderers. Here, the clause says, “You must refrain”. It should change and include that, “people should refrain from money launderers when they get to know them.”

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, they are talking about accountable persons; that group of persons we talked about. They are the ones they are telling to refrain.

MR KASULE: Madam Chair, let me read the statement, “Refraining from doing business with money launderers. Subject to the requirements of section 14, every accountable person shall take such measures as are reasonably necessary to ensure that neither it nor any service offered by it is used by a person to commit or facilitate a crime of money laundering and financing of terrorism activities”. 

So, it is telling those – like in Schedule No.2, those people in the list; real estate developers, casinos and so on to refrain from doing business with money launderers. It is caution and I think it is appropriate. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: So, this looks for that category of people, not everybody. They are dealing with people who have certain responsibilities as listed in the schedule. 

MR SSEMPIJJA: I need clarification from the Chair, why he chose to use the word, “Refrain”?

THE CHAIRPERSON: But the word is in the Bill. That is what the minister proposed. You wanted to use a different word?

MR SSEMPIJJA: You see, refraining is not measurable. How do you determine how far someone has refrained? Instead say, “They should desist.” 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: The subject should be, “Business with money launderers”. Then you say, “Subject to the requirements of section 14 …”; you cannot say, “Every accountable person”; you should say, “Everybody”. 

I say so because, currently, we have Somalis dealing in fuel. Their fuel is so cheap and we do not know where they get this fuel from. Maybe, they get it from pirates. So, when you arrest him, he will say, “I am not accountable, according to the law.” So, we should say, “No person shall do any business with a money launderer.”

THE CHAIRPERSON: But, hon. Members, supposing I go to Napak, I happily donate some money for a building. How can you place the duty on the people in Napak to find out whether I am a money launderer? That is why I do not want you to say, “Everybody.” That will net everybody, including innocent people.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: That is why we should say, “Knowingly”; the people of Napak may not know that one is a smuggler of fuel but any person who is in the know should not do business with a money launderer. 

But if you say, “Accountable”; the Ministry of Finance might do business with a money launderer and they claim, “I am not an accountable person.” 

MR KASULE: We are restricting the sphere of influence of this financial intelligence unit we are going to create; we must give this intelligence unit a budget. And after giving them a budget, we must give them parameters and people to work with. 

So, accountable persons are the people who shall have responsibility to correspond with this financial intelligence unit but if the money is out there in the world; not in the banking system, it is very hard to follow up and very hard for us to enforce. That is why we have specific people and we shall mention them and we shall have a budget and responsibilities of accountable persons that they must do work in accordance with the regulations we put in place. Therefore, we must put specific people and those are the accountable persons. And we have a schedule for the accountable persons.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I agree, Mr Chairman, that you have a list of accountable people but what we are saying is that the moment you only restrict the list to that, then other people will do business with money launderers and make money. The financial unit is not only to investigate accountable people. It must do the same with everybody. If you do any transaction that involves money laundering, that is why we should remove this thing, “Any person, knowingly, does business with money launderers.” Otherwise, when you leave it like this, there will be a lot of problems and when they do business, they will be doing business to clean their money. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, what I want to say is that if you look at clause 4, that we have stood over, it provides for everybody else. They will be caught under clause 4. The other one is for responsibilities, the owners of the banks and ATMs so that you can instruct if you see someone behaving like this, stop the facility. Clause 4 catches all the others but the other is for the accountable people.
 
MR ODONGA OTTO: I think that that is acceptable because clause 17 is actually saying that if you are an accountable person, you must observe your dealings with that person because if your dealing is going to facilitate that person to commit the crime of money laundering or financing terrorism activities, I would personally see no harm in this clause 17 remaining the way it is because if you go to the penalty section under Part 7 – I know that I am speculating. They are now making it an offence to do this kind of thing. So, what clause 17 is doing is just stating it in advance. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: So, hon. Members, I put the question that Clause 17 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 17, agreed to.

Clause 18, agreed to.

Clause 19

MR KASULE: In clause 19, replace the word “Authority” with “Unit” here and whenever it appears in the Bill, in reference to the Financial Intelligence Authority. So, we want to change it to “Financial Intelligence Unit.” The justification is that the Financial Action Task Force (FATF) recommendation 29 requires countries to establish Financial Intelligence Units to serve as national centres for receipt and analysis of suspicious transaction reports; Other information relevant to money laundering associated predicate offences and terrorist financing and for dissemination of the results of that analysis.
Secondly, the word “Authority” may be perceived as a big connotation and therefore, having significant budgetary implications attached to establishment of authorities and their operations. So, we are just proposing to cause a Financial Intelligence Unit.

(b) Insert a new sub-clause (4) to read as follows: “(4) The Financial Intelligence Unit shall be the central agency in Uganda responsible for receiving, requesting, analysing and disseminating to the investigatory and supervisory authorities.”

The justification is to ensure clarity on mandate of the unit in relation to other government agencies. I beg to move.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, I put the question - yes?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I have an issue. Madam Chair, we have many authorities and they are becoming too many and I do not know what we are looking at. This is a big cost.

Secondly, the issue that we are talking about is money and the institution that is responsible for the money is the central bank. If we want to move, we can create a unit in the central bank - well, we have issues with our central bank and we cannot deny it but this should be housed in Bank of Uganda. It can be a unit but not to have another authority with all the people monitoring one unit – a transaction that is even in the bank and its just following up.

Madam Chairperson, I would suggest that these authorities and units are too many and they should now have this department under the central bank and the justification is that world over, most of all these – many of these countries like the UK, money laundering is fought by the central bank.

THE CHAIRPERSON: At least, an intelligence unit. I do not know whether we have the capacity in the central bank to – 

MR MULONGO: I thank you very much, Madam Chair. The reference is supposed to be to an institution with powers to do this function and that is what the responsible authority is supposed to mean and not authority with a capital “A”. When you say “a force” – an intelligence component, which you call a unit, in terms of forces, a unit has a connotation to numbers and beyond that, it changes the name and below that, it also changes the name. So, if you loosely use the word “unit” and you are referring to a force, you may run into problems. In other words, you restrict it to such a limited number.

So, legislations that have gone through regarding this – it refers to an authority, an institution whether department or office charged with the responsibility with such authority. So, it should have been an authority with small “a” by whatever name. Or, if we chose to establish it here, then we should give it a specific name but I have reservations about changing it from “authority” to just “a unit.”

MR AWONGO: I would like to propose that instead of using the word “unit”, it should be a “department” and therefore, it should read as follows, “The Financial Intelligence Department in Bank of Uganda shall be responsible for receiving, requesting, analysing and disseminating to the investigatory and supervisory authorities.”

THE CHAIPRERSON: Hon. Minister, why did you want an authority rather than the department?

MR OMACH: A department is normally not autonomous in supporting other bodies but the unit gives it some degree of autonomy and that is why we accepted “unit” rather than insisting on “authority.”

THE CHAIPRERSON: But a unit under who?

MR OMACH: It is an independent body – it may be, under Bank of Uganda but it is independent in its operations rather than being a department that has to report to another body or authority.

THE CHAIPRERSON: So, you are also supporting the chairman? And the Bank of Uganda?
 
MR KASULE SSEBUNYA: Madam Chair, if you want an independent unit, we cannot again put it under another authority called Bank of Uganda. Bank of Uganda shall be working with the unit in a MoU relationship because even in Bank of Uganda, there can be launderers - we do not want to say the Bank Governor. We want this unit to work with other agencies and what I may propose is that maybe, we can first leave the change of the unit and then go to the functions of the unit and then we shall know what this unit is exactly going to do such that we know the job that we are assigning this unit.

Two, when I was reading the recommendations and if I can read verbatim on page 24 – the one I laid on Table - it says and these are international recommendations; “Countries should establish a Financial Intelligence Unit that serves as a national centre for the receipt and analysis of:
    (a) Suspicious transactions reports, (b) other information relevant to money laundering.” So, we want this organisation independent and why they call it a unit internationally – that is the nomenclature that they have chosen. Everywhere, they call it a unit – in Mauritius, Malawi, in Tanzania, they call it a unit. So –(Interruption) 

MR OKUPA: I would like to give information that it is not internationally assisted; there are countries for example in Asia, America, they call it an authority; they don’t call them units. I have just been googling here; in Malaysia, India and Singapore, they are called Anti-Money Laundering Authorities. So, it is not that it is an international name; just Google and you will find it. To me, we are wasting time. We rather just call it an authority because that is what is known in most of the countries. Just Google and you will find that that is the name they use. 

MR KASULE SSSEBUNYA: If it is on the word of authority, then we can concede – 

MR ODONGA OTTO: Madam Chairperson, let us look at our society. These people who issue financial cards that monitor your loan levels in all the banks - the Credit Reference Bureau - practically, we are overstressing some clients over these financial issues but people have reached another level because if you have a bounced cheque or any financial impropriety and it is entered by your bank into the system, then it goes straight to the Credit Reference Bureau. But we have had cases where people go straight to the bureau and alter the data. They are smart enough; they beat the system - just like the bounced cheques department at CPS has virtually failed. If you take a cheque to the Police, it goes nowhere. So, people have beaten the system. In the circumstances, I think we may have to think of empowering an authority that can be directly responsible to Parliament, that we can issue cheques, we can count on them here because these two units I have just made reference to are not serving their purpose. There are some big people who pocket them and delete certain data and some people who are so fraudulent and have multiple bounced cheques have never appeared at the head office because they are better connected. So, I would rather we make it an authority.

If you look at the composition, which we shall debate, and what you are suggesting to be in the board, we will come to that if we could accept the authority. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, I put the question that clause 19 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 19, agreed to.

Clause 20

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon.  Members, I put the question that clause 20 do stand part of the Bill.

MR KASULE SSSEBUNYA: On clause 20, we propose to delete objective (c) stipulated there under and place it under activities of the Uganda Anti-Money Laundering Committee. The amendment reads “to enhance public awareness and understanding of matters related to money-laundering.” So, we are giving this function of enhancing public awareness to the Anti-Money Laundering Committee and not to the Anti-Money Laundering Authority.

THE CHAIRPERSON: So, you are not amending but deleting. 

MR SSSEBUNYA: We are just deleting that one by way of transferring it to another clause. 

MR MULONGO: The circumstance where we have agreed to have an authority is strategic. I do not know which is superior to the other then. Is it the committee or an authority to which the function of awareness should be accorded? We may have to revisit this deletion and allow the authority do the function of PR.

THE CHAIRPERSON: But have you looked at the functions? It is called the Financial Intelligence Authority; it is not just a financial authority. To do analysis, intelligence work. Do we also want them to go and educate?– 

MR MULONGO: Madam Chairperson, I just thought that if it is going to be an authority, then enhancing the PR function, even if the overall function is under the committee which we are about to reach, shouldn’t be a problem. They are just enhancing.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Madam Chairperson, maybe the chairman should advise us. Of course our rules prohibit speculation but he could tell us what the committee is all about. Can we have a separate committee under the authority? Is the committee under the authority since you are privy to that information? 

MR KASULE SSSEBUNYA: I also fear to legislate in anticipation but there are two bodies we are creating. We are creating a financial intelligence unit that shall scrutinise, demand and do analysis and there is a committee of PR of government bureaucrats and we shall see the functions here. And for those, they can publicise, they can do public relations about anti-money laundering because theirs is not so specific to investigation and analysis. It is providing information generally to the public. We shall get to that committee and its functions.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Thank you. So in the circumstances, I am yet to be told if there is any authority that we have currently in Uganda where the work of public relations is left by law to another group because most authorities carry the whole burden - whether it is the URA, KCCA or UWA. So, this should be very interesting, where you want an authority whose public awareness function is a responsibility of another committee. That is very strange.

MR SSSEBUNYA: If it is difficult for us to consume, we can allow for them to do publicity. There is no problem with this, as long as we shall provide the finances.

DR EPETAIT: Madam Chairperson, we passed clause 19 establishing the authority. Now we have the objectives of the authority in clause 20 and the functions in clause 21 but we don’t have the structure of the authority yet when we go down to the composition of the committee, they are more detailed. So, that relates to what hon. Mulongo had asked. It looks like the committee is more powerful than the authority unless we specify the structure of the authority and I think there is need for us to specify the composition of the authority. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon.  Members, I put the question that clause 20 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 20, agreed to.

Clause 21

MR KASULE SSSEBUNYA: Financial Intelligence Authority as we have left it in clause 21(e), we propose to replace the words “For a period prescribed by the minister” with “For a period of not less than 10 years.” So, we are changing it to 10 years to read “To retain the information referred to in paragraph (a) as prescribed in the manner and for a period of 10 years.” The justification of this amendment is to allow for harmonisation of the Bill with the Financial Institutions Act, 2004. Section 46(6) of the Financial Intelligence Unit speculates a 10-year period as the minimum period for which financial institutions should preserve financial records. This is to do with preserving financial records. We should not depend on the minister or the authority to destroy records. It should be the time prescribed in the Bill and not dependant on the minister.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Why 10 years?

MR SSSEBUNYA: Because 10 years is also legislated in the –

THE CHAIRPERSON: And why not 20 or 30 years?

MR SSSEBUNYA: Usually, organisations keep documents for 10 years.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, there is a criteria by which public organisations keep documents, as our chairman has said. From five years, you move it “dormant”. Then after seven years, move it to “archives” and then after 10 years, you destroy. He is right; he has a point. The only problem I also had was with the minister because the minister could be dangerous. He could say, “Keep this information for only one week and thereafter, destroy it.” For now, the only thing is that we should put in safeguards – there should be a minimum. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: But hon. Members, if you are really going to deal with these crimes, why do you destroy evidence after 10 years? I mean, you are saying we retain it for only 10 years; supposing we need the records for evidence?

MR SSEBUNYA: Madam Chair, I do not know; the minister may defend this because all departments, Government organisations and banks – because we are now dealing with banks and insurance companies – those usually keep documents for 10 years because of storage problems.

MR KWEMARA: Thank you, committee chairperson for giving way. To me, we should not even be debating on whether to destroy records or not. We are in an information era – we are in the era of technology; why are we destroying the document? Actually, I am moving that among the functions, there should be a function for the authority or the unit to create and maintain a database. You need expert systems and decision support systems and all that information. Why destroy the documents?

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, but for instance, under the Official Secrets Act, I think we keep documents for about 30 years. For me, 10 years – 

MR MULONGO: Madam Chair, I wanted to provide information that archiving of information depends on the nature of the information. It can last for one year for transactions of annual nature. It can also go to posterity, for instance, regarding documents to do with fixed assets like land. People get leases of about 100 years. You cannot then destroy that document because it is over 10 years. So, I think it is not correct for us to – I think it is why it was left open to the minister to determine, because, standing regulations that govern archiving of documents – So, the 10-year period can only be for certain documents of shorter periods not for the fixed assets like land and so on.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Okay, hon. Members, in the meantime, we are going to instruct the Clerk to ring the bell because we have additional work, which we need to do. So, while we proceed, I instruct her to ring the bell.

MR REMIGIO ACHIA: Madam Chair, I would like to tell Members that this is going to be a Financial Intelligence Authority. You may be aware of the South African Financial Intelligence Unit. It is partly supporting the functions of prosecution in court – partly collecting information that will be useful in this country for future purposes. I do not see any reason, at all, why any of that information concerning any person should be destroyed. It should not be destroyed because it goes beyond just a corporate body; these are issues we are going to be dealing with 20 or 30 years from now. They are documents that will constitute evidence in court. We should remove the idea of destroying documents after 10 years.

MR OMACH: Madam Chair, not all these documents are electronic. There are some, which are hard copies. And for the hard copies, there must be a limit within which to store them in the archives. So, right now, the practice in banking institutions is up to 10 years and that is why we agreed with the committee when they were making this proposal for amendment.

MR AMURIAT: Thank you, Madam Chair. Whatever form the information could take, storing it comes at a cost – whether it is electronic or hard copy, you still need space – in a disk or a store somewhere. I do not know why we are splitting hairs. I think the manner in which this particular provision is presented makes adequate checks and balances. The minister is not going to make his or her own decision. He or she will take a decision upon the advice of the authority. If as Parliament or as a country, we are entrusting the Authority with the responsibility, I do not know why we should not trust the Authority in advising the minister. Moreover, it has already been said that information varies; the value of information varies – it is not uniform and so it requires some discretion on the part of an officer assigned this responsibility to take a decision. 

And moreover, they take decisions as a team. When you have a blanket 10 years as a minimum, that is to assume that all information that you are handling is uniform. And yet, information is never going to be universal; it will vary from time to time depending on the kind of activity that you are engaged in or the level of money-laundering you are dealing with. I do think that this particular sub-clause should be maintained.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, I have just had a closer look; the sub-clause here refers only to the contents of sub-clause (1). Sub-clause (21)(a) says, “To process, analyse and interpret information disclosed to it and obtained by it in terms of its act.” So, it does not refer to the other areas. So, I think we should leave it.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: No, Madam Chair. The ministers – we are not talking about the ministers of the 1960s and 1970s; we know our ministers of today. I think the minimum period according to the Financial Institutions Act is right. That is agreed. When financial institutions go to destroy their data, they do not ask the minister. So, I propose that we go with the committee’s proposal that the minimum period the records should be kept is 10 years. The maximum could be 50 years - (Interjections) - yes, they have processed and analysed –(Interjections) No, Madam Chair, why we are saying this is because somebody may have processed some information and this minister knows that for this person to be safe, I must destroy this information before I leave the office. This is very dangerous; he will process the information of stealing masts and then he says, “I am about to leave; destroy the information.” So, Madam Chair, we must leave a minimum of 10 years.

MR REMIGIO ACHIA: Madam Chair, let us take this scenario: what if, based on the documents of the Financial Intelligence Unit, you have taken someone to court. And after two or three years that person has been convicted and maybe thereafter, someone appeals to the Supreme Court or the Court of Appeal and it takes 10 years. By the time someone comes before the Supreme Court, you have destroyed the document. What happens? So, we should not allow documents to be destroyed. This is not just a financial institution; it is an intelligence unit and it is going to be fighting fraud; it is going to be confiscating people’s property - movable and non-movable. These records must be kept. You are going to confiscate somebody’s house today and in 30 years, he may bring a case against you and you would have destroyed the documents. What are you going to do? We should not provide for destruction of documents, Madam Chair.

MR KASULE SSEBUNYA: What I propose for Members is to read the statement and either propose and we debate the proposal or we go with what is here. So, you had said that we do not destroy the documents but you had not given us a way forward. That was the problem.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Let us have a way forward. We have heard the arguments.

MR MULONGO: Madam Chairperson, thank you very much. I agree with the colleagues in the finance sector who argue and provide for a 10 year period. But this law is not about finance records. We are talking about an intelligence component that will be collecting information including finance and other things. It could include data or documentation that are beyond finance records and which should be retained and which can be destroyed with certain adopted criteria. In records management worldwide, there are guidelines for archiving, retention of documents and destruction of them: that those of one year, those of five years stay 20, 50 and others for posterity. So, we rather not really prescribe this here. 

I rather that we leave the discretion to the minister to be advised depending on the nature of the document and the information involved.   

MR AMURIAT: Madam Chair, even if the House was to buy the argument of a minimum of 10 years, the minister or somebody in authority should prescribe what happens beyond the 10 years. For how many more years would this information be kept? And so, I think if we had a marriage of the two schools of thought we would probably reach a consensus and have a hybrid of the two working.

I wish to propose that we have a minimum of 10 years but also give the minister the discretion to determine beyond those 10 years how much longer a piece of information shall be kept. 

MR MULONGO: What is the basis of 10 years? Nobody is answering that. Simply because some institution’s financial records are kept for 10 years, so, we say everything is going to be financial information, which is not even prescribed. Why should we limit it to 10 years? I think we should leave it open and up to the minister because there are regulations that are supposed to be used to determine the period: the issue of durability, the nature of the records, the nature of the information therein. Let us leave it at the discretion of the minister who will be advised competently by the authority.   

MR OKUPA: Madam Chair, I think we should not leave it open. In our books regarding records, there are periods stated. Why don’t we standardise by setting the time frame as Members have proposed? 

So, Madam Chair, I would like to move that the minimum of 10 years be adopted, just like it happens with other financial records and we proceed. 

MR KASULE SSSEBUNYA: Madam Chair, we can say -

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chair, after analysing what hon. Amuriat and what my brother, the hon. Member from Karamoja have said, I have discovered something. 

Somebody can grab an asset and then sell it, praying that the 10 years should expire quickly and they destroy the document. I would propose a marriage with the committee’s proposal that the documents should be kept for a minimum of 10 years but when they are going to be destroyed, they should report to the minister, seeking authority that these documents should be destroyed, so that the minister grants them authority. 

Otherwise, the board will have analysed, interpreted, done all actions and when 10 years expire, because one does not want to be incriminated, they will destroy the information. So, let us say a minimum of 10 years and then ask the authority of the minister.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Mr Chairman, let us conclude this matter.

MR KASULE SSEBUNYA: I think I can accept the marriage of minimum of 10 years and then the authority to destroy to be sought from the minister after 10 years.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, I put the question that clause 21 –

MR KASULE SSSEBUNYA: Excuse me, Madam Chair. Now, I have solved the problem of the tenure but we have another amendment to 21(g) which reads, after the amendment, “…be responsible for the collection of fines adjudicated under this Act which fines…” we are qualifying where the fines shall be kept, “shall be paid into the Confiscated Assets Fund established by this Act.” The justification is to specify that the fees shall be paid into the Confiscated Assets Fund established in clause 100.

We also want to insert three clauses after (g). 

THE CHAIRPERSON: But hon. Chair you are really interesting. You start from the bottom and then you move up. 

MR KASULE SSEBUNYA: No, we have moved from (g) and now, we are going downwards. After (g), we are putting three amendments.  

THE CHAIRPERSON: We were dealing with (e) then we went to (d) then now…

MR KASULE SSEBUNYA: I said (g) not (d). Madam Chair, maybe the pronunciation is bad. It is (f), (g). (Laughter) This is a Nakaseke accent. So, it is (f), (g). After (e) there is (f), (g), which we have amended as I have read then (h). We are inserting (h), (i) and (j). 

So (h) reads, “Issue guidelines to accountable persons not under the jurisdiction of the supervisory authorities in relation to customer identification, record keeping, reporting obligation and identification.”

Now, (i) reads “May provide training programmes for accountable institutions in relation to customer identification, record keeping, reporting obligations and identification of suspicious transactions.” 

And (j) which reads, “May educate the public and create awareness on matters relating to money laundering and financing of terrorism.” 

In fact, Madam Chair, now that we have stayed the Public Relations function, we may delete the one I have been proposing as (j) and we stop at (h) and (i).

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, I put -

MR SSEMPIJJA: Madam Chairperson, I wanted to say that I am not comfortable with the word “May” in (i) and (j). I think the training is necessary and should be provided by the authority. So, I wanted to even retain (j). I do not see why you are shying away from educating the public. But still I want to delete the word “May” before you address my question on (j). Thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: So, you are making it mandatory for the authority to train the lawyers, the bankers, the engineers, the registrars of lands. That is what it would mean.

MR SSEMPIJJA:  That is it, Madam Chair. Why is it an option in the first place?

THE CHAIRPERSON: I am thinking about the financial implications of training all those people and I do not know for how long. It is up to the Chair and the minister. He wants to remove the word “May” and make it mandatory to provide the training.

MR KASULE SSEBUNYA: No. I think “May” is dependent on the finances. “Mandatory” means whether you have money or not, logistics or not, you must train them. I think that is very hard to implement. We must legislate in a way that allows them flexibility to train today or tomorrow, as and when they get the finances.

MR AWONGO: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. What I want to know is about the ten years we are proposing for the destruction of these documents. I know we have finished but if they are important documents, why should they be destroyed? Can’t we keep them in an archive or scanned and kept somewhere for future use?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Member, there is an agreed amendment on that, which caters for the minimum and the maximum as well as the flexibility to consult with the minister.

MR KWEMARA: Madam Chairperson, I am moving for the committee to include two sub-clauses. One, there is a realisation that money laundering is an international crime. If there could be a sub-clause to say, “The authority may provide information relating to the commission of an offence to any foreign financial intelligence unit or authority or appropriate foreign law enforcement authority”. It is important that we collaborate with other international agencies.

In addition, I want -

THE CHAIRPERSON: You want something new under clause 20?

MR KWEMARA: Yes.

MR SSEBUNYA: Madam Chairperson, I agree with his proposal but we have a section to do with international cooperation and that one should wait to come later.

MR KWEMARA: Lastly, I would like to provide for a scenario where the authority can cause an inspection because there is nothing provided for an authority to cause an inspection.

THE CHAIRPERSON: An inspection of what - premises?

MR KWEMARA: I propose that, “The authority may, at any time, cause an inspection to be made by an inspector authorised by the director or commissioner in writing and the inspector may enter the premises of any reporting institution during ordinary business hours to inspect any documents pursuant to this Act.”

MR KASULE SSEBUNYA: Madam Chairperson, as the Member is proposing, let him interest himself in the general powers of the authority. I think you will propose therein because we have an amendment on clause 22 and what he is proposing may be contained in the general powers.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, I put the question that Clause 21 be amended as proposed –(Interjections) - No, we have not deleted. (j) was abandoned because we retained it in the other clause. We retained the education awareness, which we had wanted to remove. We left it there so it will be redundant here. 

MR AMURIAT: Madam Chairperson, there is a proposal to make additions to sub-clause (g) by including after the word “Act”, which fines shall be paid in the Confiscated Assets Fund established by this Act”. This wants to make it specific to that fund.

The provision that is being given under (g) at the moment makes reference to fines adjudicated under the Act. I, therefore, do not see any reason why the committee proposes all these additions here as it makes the whole law unnecessarily wordy. I need to be persuaded that there is need to specifically mention the Confiscated Assets Fund yet it is implied when this provision talks about the Act.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, we have been quarrelling here with the Ministry of Finance. We provided money for the Road Fund and we have been complaining that it is not going to the right place. Why don’t you want to say where the money should go?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, we may not have a problem with the Confiscated Asset Fund but who manages it? If it is in the central bank, it should be in the consolidated fund. Supposing somebody stole money meant for health and you have got it, that money should go back to the consolidated fund. So, where is this confiscated fund going to be? Who manages it? Is it a consolidated account? It cannot be the Authority because they will use it. The moment you confiscate it, it should be to the State and the State’s account is the consolidated fund account.

MR KASULE SSEBUNYA: In Clause 100, which we have not considered yet, there is the creation of a Confiscated Assets Fund. This money is not wholly for Government. There is still an investigation going on, there is money somewhere awaiting a decision, maybe of a High Court. So, we cannot just take it to the Consolidated Fund because it will be very difficult to remove money after an investigation is completed and you find out that this man was genuinely selling his land; 100 acres in Nakasongola.

So, this money is here in this fund managed by the Authority maybe. We shall know who shall manage it in clause 100 but in the interim, it is put in that fund as further investigations are taking place and awaiting decisions of the courts and whoever. We may not take it there but we shall get to it. It is specific, let us read clause 100 and when we get there we can put controls that shall help us.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, if you pay bail in court, it goes directly to the Consolidated Fund. When you win your case, they refund it. The moment you create more accounts like this, you are creating problems. If you are anticipating that this money is for the State, first, let it go to the Consolidated Fund. When you resolve the matter and it is decided that you should get a refund, the money gets back from the Consolidated Fund to you. Otherwise, Madam Chairperson, I do not agree with the confiscated account as said.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, I think let us leave the details of the fund to when we reach clause 100. If we need to recommit, we can come back to it but for now let us pass the amendments and then do some other work. I put the question that clause 21 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 21, as amended, agreed to.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, I want to ask the minister to move for the resumption of the House so that we can attend to some other business.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

5.19
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Madam Chairperson, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the Whole House reports thereto.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, I put the question that the House do resume and the Committee of the Whole House do report thereto.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding_)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

5.20
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Madam Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the Whole House has considered the Bill entitled, “The Anti-Money Laundering Bill, 2009” and has passed clauses 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20 and clause 21 with amendments. I beg to report.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

5.20
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES): Mr Fred Omach: Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of the Whole House be adopted.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I put the question that the report of the Committee of the Whole House be adopted. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report Adopted.

MOTION THAT THE HOUSE RESOLVES INTO A COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY TO CONSIDER SUPPLEMENTARY SCHEDULE NO. 2 FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2012/2013

COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY

Vote 013 – Ministry of Education and Sports

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, I put a question a total sum of – we are handling item 5; it is where we stopped yesterday – we had done only one vote.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, yesterday, we had gone very far, but one of the things we had agreed on, which can allow money to move tonight or tomorrow was salary. This was after we were told that other votes had been closed. So, I thought we are here to specifically deal with salaries so that workers are paid under Vote-on-Account. Madam Chair, let us deal with salary, as agreed.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, you will recall that hon. Cecilia Ogwal had made that proposal, but we did not take a decision on it. Additionally, I think that if we start shelving requests, we are also going to shelve reports. My opinion is that we should take them as a whole. 

Hon. Members, we have so many days of debate over this matter. Yesterday, I made a proposal that I shall receive an account on where the money has gone in the new financial year, to which the Prime Minister agreed.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Madam Chairperson, yesterday, you asked the Attorney-General, if it was legal for us to shelve the vote. In his response, he said – and that is on the Hansard – that there is nothing wrong with that if this Parliament so decides. 

If the Attorney-General had said it is illegal – because his opinion is always binding on all arms of Government – our hands would have been tied. But since the Attorney-General said that there was nothing wrong with that, and that mandate was still within our powers, then we can shelve. 

But also the minister told us that all other accounts had been closed other than those of salary. So, who are we to appropriate money today when the last day is tomorrow yet the accounts are closed. 

This was the basis for our compromise. And if that is acceptable, we would want to approve the aspect of salaries in good faith. Otherwise, we do not want to be engaged in illegalities. I pray that we take heed of the Attorney-General’s advice, shelve this supplementary, give salaries to people and we can resume debate on Vote-on-Account next week.

MR RUHINDI: Certainly, I cannot change my position, Madam Chair. Like I said, technically and legally, that is possible depending on the mover of this motion and the House. That is what I said. However, one small impression that I want to correct – actually, two. When Government asks for a supplementary and you talk about salaries, that is not correct because salaries do not move in abstract or in isolation of other related factors. 

Therefore, we need to look at that aspect. But even more fundamentally, you will recall that we passed the Appropriation Act, 2012, which has provisions, but Section 4 talks about the extension of the duration of appropriation. The section says thus: “Any part of the sums granted by section 2 of this Act, which has been or is issued from the Consolidated Fund on or before the 30 Day of June 2013, shall be available until a date determined by the Secretary to the Treasury,  not being later than the 31st day of October 2013, for making payments, which become due during the year ending on the 30th day of June 2013, to an accounting officer or a receiver of revenues or to an officer administering a fund established under section 9 of the Public Finance and Accountability Act, 2003.”

That is the Appropriation Act, 2012, which we passed here. In other words, the accounts cannot be closed tomorrow, if there is need to spend up to the 31st day of October 2013.

MR OKUPA: Madam Chair, I think we need to move consistently – because - unless hon. Omach withdraws the statement he made yesterday - he categorically told us here that all the other accounts had been closed, apart from that of salaries. 

So, can he either withdraw – yesterday, he said all accounts had closed except that of salaries. If you lied to us, be honourable enough to withdraw that statement and we proceed. Madam Chair, can we clear that first - because that record is already on our Hansard?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Can we get clarification about this matter - because the Appropriation Act of 2012 and that of 2011 are here. This is a standard clause in the Act. So, I do not know whether to believe the Act or the minister.

MR WADRI: Madam Chairperson, first of all, I want to make this passionate appeal to my colleagues on the other side and I want to believe that on that side, there are people who have worked as senior managers of government programmes and activities and more so those relating to finances. 

Today, when you go to most ministries, their financial accounting systems have switched off, even ours here in Parliament. It is premised on the fact that we are left with only tomorrow as a working day. By 30th, all government accounts for this financial year should be closed. In that case, even if we change our hearts and allow this request to go, I can assure you that the money will hit the accounts in the next financial year. This will cause a technical problem in reconciling books of accounts in the ministries. 

Even if we are dreaming in terms of opening up below the line account; you cannot open up below the line account in this financial year and appropriate money now and spend that money in another financial year. Please, let us act in a manner that we can still enjoy the confidence of the public; otherwise, the public will look at us as people who do not know what we are doing. (Interruption)

MR ODONGA OTTO: Madam Chair, this Appropriation Act, which the Attorney-General is reading needs to be read and understood. Section 4, which the Attorney-General selectively read states, “Extension of duration of appropriation; any part of the sums granted by section two of this Act, which has been or is issued from the Consolidated Fund on or before the 30th day of June shall be available until a day determined by the Secretary to the Treasury (not later than the 31st Day of October)”. This means – (Interjections) – okay, let me read the whole of it. “For making payment which became due during the year ending on the 30th day of June, 2013 to accounting officers or receiver of revenue to an officer administering funds”. 

That means that any money we approve, like if we do so today, shall have the 31st day of October as the last day for it to be utilised. Now, that is the maximum period the law gives. So, today is the 29th day of June and if the law allows up to the 31st day of October 2013 and the Vote-on-Account is only two days to come, why are we in a hurry?

MR WADRI: Madam Chair, the provision of that Act relates to funds, which are committed. But if we approve this schedule now and say these funds will hit the relevant accounts in the next financial year – the issue of commitment does not arise. That is why you are even asking the districts to return money. What is wrong with the Executive waiting until Monday or Tuesday? If you want this money so badly, then bring it as a new supplementary in the new financial year, but let us do the right thing. 

MR REMIGIO ACHIA: Madam Chairperson, I would like to ask a similar question; teachers have not been paid for seven or eight months; what is wrong with paying them today, why do you wait for another three days before you can pay them? 

DR BITEKYEREZO: Madam Chairperson, I come from one of the most volatile places; in Mbarara Hospital, the health workers have no money; they rang me this Monday and said that if I am going to stay in this Parliament, I should not block their payment or else I will be in trouble. By the way, I am very willing to give them the money today – not even tomorrow; it is either today or never –(Interruption)

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, we have stated here, categorically, that we do not have any problem with passing salaries. The minister even assured us that the accounts have not been closed for salaries; no one should deceive you that we are against passing salaries here. So, is he in order to continue insisting that we are against passing salaries?

MR ODOI: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. The correct interpretation of the law is as follows. Number one, that all accounts that are due and owing as at 31st June of a financial year can be carried forward up to the 31 day of October of that financial year, if the signatory to the treasury chooses to do so. That means that you can actually run the vote carried and the Vote-on-Account at the same time – that is the proper and correct interpretation. So, there is nothing wrong with us appropriating the supplementary request. If the ministries are content that this money is actually due and owing, let us appropriate it and close this matter. 

MR KIWANDA: Madam Chairperson, I have listened to my colleagues on the other side. When I listened to the explanations given, I have discovered that there is nothing illegal in appropriating this money today. Hon. Wadri was talking about things like the weekend – the law does not talk about the weekend. Today is 29th; and the law talks about 27th and 30th. So, if somebody has been going hungry without their salary, why should we push it further? We have appropriated money from the time we came to Parliament; I do not think this is the worst situation. Let us help the teachers and nurses by appropriating this money today.

MR OMACH: Thank you, Madam Chair and hon. colleagues. I think hon. Odoi has given the interpretation of the law. This financial year, the districts returned to the Consolidated Fund, up to Shs 33 billion and those that justified the return of that money to the district, we used that window, which allows the payment up to 31st October. But that does not mean that the books of accounts for that financial year have not been closed. So, it is closed with that provision. (Laughter) 

MS KAWOOYA: I thank you, Madam Chair. I do appreciate all effort and the concerns of Members on each side and the fact that all the Members are in agreement that there is need that the teachers’ and doctors’ salaries in arrears should be paid, and we have heard different opinions. 

Having heard the explanation and the interpretation that there is nothing barring us today from appropriating the supplementary, I move that a question be put to Schedule 2 as requested by the Minister. I so move.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, you know the votes go to different ministries. I think it is still important that we do vote by vote. 

I now put the question that the total sum of Shs 4,600,000,000 under Vote 013, Ministry of Education and Sports, be provided for as Supplementary Expenditure for Financial Year 2012/2013. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 115 - Uganda Heart Institute

THE CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that the total sum of Shs 1,290,000,000 Vote 115, Uganda Heart Institute, be provided for as Supplementary Expenditure for the Financial Year 2012/2013.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 144 – Uganda Police Force

THE CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that total sum of Shs 19,500,000,000, Vote 144, Uganda Police Force, be provided for a supplementary recurrent expenditure financial year 2012/2013.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR ODONGA OTTO: Madam Chairperson, I rise on a point of order. We have seen hon. Mutende – [Hon. Members: “And hon. Baba.”] – not hon. Baba. At least, I saw hon. Mutende for myself participating in voting - something which is a preserve of the real Members of Parliament – (Laughter) - not these ones they just pick anyhow. (Laughter) Is it in order for an ex-officio Member to come to this House and participate in voting loudly? 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, I believe hon. Mutende is a happy man and I think he was just smiling in happiness. (Laughter)

Vote 149 - Gulu University

THE CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 194,000,000, Vote 149, Gulu University, be provided for as supplementary recurrent expenditure for the Financial Year 2012/2013.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 157 - National Forest Authority

THE CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question the total sum of Shs 1,600,000,000, Vote 157, National Forest Authority, be provided for as supplementary recurrent expenditure for the financial year 2012/2013. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 162 - Butabika Hospital

THE CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 902,465,000 under Vote 162, Butabika Hospital, be provided for as supplementary recurrent expenditure for the financial year 2012/2013.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 163 - Arua Referral Hospital.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 77,633,000 under Vote 163, Arua Referral Hospital, be provided for as supplementary recurrent expenditure for the financial year 2012/2013.
(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 164 - Fort Portal Referral Hospital

THE CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 66,438,000 under Vote 164, Fort Portal Referral Hospital, be provided for as supplementary recurrent expenditure for the financial year 2012/2013.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 165 - Gulu Referral Hospital

THE CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 256,086,000 under Vote 165, Gulu Referral Hospital, be provided for as supplementary recurrent expenditure for the financial year 2012/2013.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 166 - Hoima Referral Hospital

THE CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 296,908,000 under Vote 166, Hoima Referral Hospital, be provided for as supplementary recurrent expenditure for the financial year 2012/2013.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 168 - Kabale Referral Hospital

THE CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 304,022,000 under Vote 168, Kabale Referral Hospital, be provided for as supplementary recurrent expenditure for the financial year 2012/2013

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 169 - Masaka Referral Hospital

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that a total sum of Shs 65,940,000 Vote 169, Masaka Referral Hospital, be provided for as Supplementary Recurrent Expenditure for the Financial Year 2012/2013. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 170 - Mbale Referral Hospital 

THE CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that the total sum of Shs 242,767,000, Vote 170, Mbale Referral Hospital be provided for as supplementary recurrent expenditure for financial year 2012/2013.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 171 – Soroti Referral Hospital

THE CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that the total sum of Shs 215,873,000, Vote 171, Soroti Referral Hospital be provided for as supplementary recurrent expenditure for financial year 2012/2013.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 172 - Lira Referral Hospital 

THE CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that the total sum of Shs 257,161,000, Vote 172, Lira Referral Hospital be provided for as supplementary recurrent expenditure for financial year 2012/2013.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 173 - Mbarara Referral Hospital 

THE CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that the total sum of Shs 525,363,000, Vote 173, Mbarara Referral Hospital be provided for as supplementary recurrent expenditure for financial year 2012/2013.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 174 - Mubende Referral Hospital 

THE CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that the total sum of Shs 126,786,000, Vote 174, Mubende Referral Hospital be provided for as supplementary recurrent expenditure for financial year 2012/2013.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 176 - Naguru Referral Hospital

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that the total sum of Shs 912,269,000 under vote 176, Naguru Referral Hospital, be provided for as supplementary recurrent expenditure for financial year 2012/2013.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 201 - The Uganda Permanent Mission in New York

THE CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that the total sum of Shs 817,256,000, Vote 201, the Uganda Permanent Mission in New York, be provided for as supplementary recurrent expenditure for financial year 2012/2013.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 204 - Uganda High Commission in New Delhi

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that a total sum of Shs 114,097,000, Vote 204, Uganda High Commission in New Delhi, be provided for as supplementary recurrent expenditure for financial year 2012/2013. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 205 – Uganda High Commission in Cairo

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that a total sum of Shs 72,000,000, Vote 205, Uganda Embassy in Cairo, be provided for as supplementary recurrent expenditure for financial year 2012/2013. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 206 – Uganda High Commission in Nairobi

THE CHAIRPERSON: I now propose the question that a total sum of Shs 389,437,000, Vote 206, Uganda High Commission in Nairobi is provided for as supplementary recurrent expenditure for financial year 2012/2013 –

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Procedure, Madam Chairperson. I want to seek clarification from the Minister of Finance on what he means by “Rent produced assets to private entities” under Vote 206 - the Uganda high commission in Nairobi, there is an item called “Rent produced assets to private entities – 100 million”; what is this expenditure in the Nairobi Mission? There is an item 223003 saying “Rent – produced assets to private entities – 100,008,000.” What is it?

MR OMACH: Madam Chairperson, this is an item on the chart of account for paying rent for rented properties. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, I think I know some English. It says “Rent - produced assets to private entities.” Please, I am a professional accountant and you are not. I know what chart on account means.  

MR OMACH: As I have already explained, it is for paying rent. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, I put the question that a total sum of Shs 389,437,000, Vote 206, Uganda High Commission Nairobi be provided for as supplementary recurrent expenditure for financial year 2012/2013. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 207- Uganda High Commission in Dar-es-Salaam

THE CHAIRPERSON: I propose the question that a total sum of Shs 25,000,000, Vote 207, Uganda High Commission in Dar es Salaam, be provided for as supplementary recurrent expenditure for 2012/2013. 

MR NANDALA MAFABI: Clarification, Madam Chair. Again the same item has appeared. He is saying he is paying rent. As far as I know, in Nairobi, the High Commission property is ours; in Washington, the property is ours and here you are saying rent produced private assets again. What is this rent produced? 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, I know that we own some properties, some of which are used by the principals there who are members of staff –(Hon. Nandala-Mafabi: “But they are paid allowances.”)– we do not pay their rent? (Interjections) Maybe the foreign affairs committee can also help us.

MR TIMOTHY LWANGA: Madam Chair, the chart of accounts – which chart I think probably may need revision to bring it up to-date - they have got this item and under it, they cover rent for the members of staff – all of it is covered in there. The only properties that we own in Nairobi are: Uganda House on Kenyatta Avenue and the Chancery in Riverside Drive and the Ambassador’s Residence. The rest of the staff is in rented property - (Interjections) - no, they are not given an allowance; they are rented for as contracts. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chair, we have seen allowances for staff; what are these? They are paid salary and allowances; allowances would consist of medical allowance, rent allowance – (Interjections)– please. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Where is the chair of the foreign affairs committee? Okay, hon. Members, I put the question that a total sum of Shs 25 million under Vote 207, Uganda High Commission Dar-es-Salaam be provided for as supplementary recurrent expenditure for financial year 2012/2013.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 201 - Uganda Embassy in Washington

THE CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 618,693,000 under Vote 210, Uganda Mission in Washington, be provided for as supplementary recurrent expenditure for financial year 2012/2013.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 214 - Uganda Embassy in Geneva

THE CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 198,837,000 under Vote, 214 - Uganda Embassy in Geneva, be provided for as supplementary recurrent expenditure 2012/2013.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 216 - Uganda Embassy in Tripoli

THE CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 238,000,000 under Vote 216, Uganda Embassy in Tripoli, be provided for as supplementary recurrent expenditure 2012/2013.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 220 - Uganda Embassy in Rome

THE CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 202,980,000 under Vote 220, Uganda Embassy in Rome, be provided for as supplementary recurrent expenditure 2012/2013.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 221 - Uganda Embassy in Kinshasa

THE CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 192,244,000 under Vote 221: Uganda Embassy in Kinshasa be provided for as supplementary recurrent expenditure for financial year 2012/2013.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 131 - Statutory Revision Office of the Auditor-General

THE CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 2,200,000,000 under Vote 131, Office of the Auditor-General, be provided for as supplementary recurrent expenditure 2012/2013.

(Question put and agreed to.)

DEVELOPMENT EXPENDITURE

THE SUPPLEMENTARY FUNDS FOR DEVELOPMENT EXPENDITURE FOR THE YEAR 2012/2013

Vote 008: Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development

THE CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 7,755,222,000 under Vote 008, Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, be provided for as supplementary development expenditure 2012/2013.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, I put the question that a total sum of Shs 46,943,597,440 be provided for. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

6.08
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Madam Chair and honourable colleagues, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of Supply reports thereto.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, I put the question that the House do resume and the Committee of Supply reports thereto.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding_)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY

6.09
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Madam Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of Supply has considered the Supplementary Schedule No.2 for the financial year 2012/2013 and has passed it without any amendments. I beg to move.

MOTION FOR THE ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY

6.10
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of Supply be adopted.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I put the question that the report from the Committee of Supply be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

MOTION THAT THE HOUSE RESOLVES ITSELF INTO A COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY TO CONSIDER THE VOTE ON ACCOUNT FOR FINANCIAL YEAR 2013/2014

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, that is a vital thing but the minister was supposed to come and present to us the accounting officers. If we are going to pass the Vote-on-Account, there is need for the accounting officers who are going to handle this money. Can the minister come and start to present to us the accounting officers so that we deal with that matter first, name by name, before we can proceed?

MR MATIA KASAIJA: Madam Speaker, I am glad to lay before this august House, the list of the accounting officers for financial year 2013/2014. I beg to lay.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, we would like the minister to read the names because – (Interjections) – relax – an accounting officer is an accounting officer. He holds a vote, which is approved by Parliament –(Interruption)

MS AMUGE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The Ministry of Finance sent us the list of the accounting officers and they were put in our pigeon holes. You could check. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Actually, after the Budget Speech, I reminded the Secretary to the Treasury to send the names and I have been seeing them circulating. So, if there were - is that what we have been doing? Have we been reading names? 

MR ODONGA OTTO: Madam Speaker, it is good the minister has laid the list of accounting officers on the Table and we also got it. It may not be very easy to read a list of 160 names. However, there are some accounting officers whom we feel are not clean. You have seen the circumstances under which we have been passing this money; it has been a sacrifice on both sides of the House. But it is a very risky business to give this money to some accounting officers whose hands we know are not clean. They have been condemned by the courts of public opinion but unfortunately, they are dining with the untouchables in this country. 

For example, on this list, three accounting officers, specifically - I want this Parliament to request the minister to advise this House whether we can trust a leopard with meat. Mr Pius Bigirimana on whom this Parliament has had issues and pronounced itself; the Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Health, Mr Asuman Lukwago. I do not know if he is a fugitive; he has been found - because at one time, they had written that he was on the run. 

The country needs to be told whether it is safe to give our money to someone that the Police was looking for. No one has given us the latest information about his whereabouts. So, in the circumstances, Madam Speaker, in good faith - and the third one is the Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Internal Affairs, Dr Kagoda, who was greatly implicated in the ID scandal. 

So, in the circumstances, now that these budgets have been coming in a manner, which is not very neat, we want to be advised whether this country is safe with this kind of people now that we are proceeding in such a manner. Madam Speaker, we seek your indulgence.

MR WAIRA MAJEGERE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The clarification I want is that when you look at this list -

THE SPEAKER: But whom are you seeking it from? Hon. Otto or someone else?

MR WAIRA: Through you, Madam Speaker, to the Minister of Finance. When you look at this list, Vote 144, we have Uganda Police. You find that the accounting officer is the same as in vote 9, Ministry of Internal Affairs –(Interjections). Vote 145, Uganda Prisons is the same accounting officer. 

I am not complaining but I need clarification. When you look at Police, it is a very big institution and from what we have just passed, it has very many problems. When you look at Uganda Prisons, it is a very big institution. I do not know why we are giving all these institutions one accounting officer. I think this Parliament should look into this because Immigration is under Ministry of Internal Affairs but it has got an independent accounting officer. Why can’t we have an independent accounting officer for Uganda Police and an independent accounting officer for Uganda Prisons so that we avoid these problems, which we are encountering now? Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Minister, can you respond to those issues and we move?

MR MATIA KASAIJA: Madam Speaker, I will begin with the last one. Prisons and Police have got an Undersecretary. They have an Undersecretary designated by the Secretary to the Treasury who designates accounting officers; but also the Permanent Secretary for the ministry. That is for question two.

Now, question one, as Government, I think it is not appropriate to act on things that have not yet been concretised. As for Mr Bigirimana, matters are still under investigation. We have not been informed by any authority in this country that he is guilty and therefore, I cannot pronounce myself against him. If he is guilty –(Interruption)

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, last month or thereabouts, the investigative team wrote to the Ministry of Finance - the interim report and in that report, the recommendation of the Police was that 72 staff from the Prime Minister’s office be interdicted and the person you are mentioning is one of them. They wrote to the senior minister. The senior minister communicated to the Prime Minister.

It is only that I did not know this was coming today; I would have brought copies of that communication. So, it is not true for the hon. Minister to say that it has never been brought to their attention. Seventy two staff in the Prime Minister’s office; it was communicated to your office by the Police that they were implicated. Mr Bigirimana is number four on the list. 

So, it is not right for you, hon. Minister, to come here and say it has never come to your notice. That is the recommendation of the investigating arm, that they be interdicted to allow free investigation.

It was also disturbing that when Mr Bigirimana was transferred, before he left the office, he did write to the DPP that he would want to have a meeting with him and the new PS and the Police to brief the new PS on how they should handle the investigation, which is totally out of order. 

So, Madam Speaker, I just want to give the minister information that what he is saying is not right. This information has come to you. We shall hear from the Prime Minister on whether he has acted on that or not but if I knew, I would have brought these letters and laid them on the Table. That is the information I wanted to give.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, let us go vote by vote and then if there are issues to raise on a particular ministry, you can raise them.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, I want to allay the fears of Members. Being a permanent secretary does not necessarily mean that you should be an accounting officer. Those who are worried that people will lose permanent secretaries - you can be a permanent secretary but not an accounting officer. We want to help the ministries who want accounting officers that Parliament may have a problem with. I will read Article 164 (1) which says, “The permanent secretary or the accounting officer in charge of the ministry or departments shall be accountable to Parliament for the funds in the ministry or department.”

We are going to give money to the accounting officer and not a permanent secretary. We are going to give money to the accounting officers and where we have doubts, we shall say, Mr President, appoint him your PS but since we are concerned with public money, let him not be the one in charge of accounting. Do not worry about those who want to be your PS’ and who have problems. Let them remain as PS’ but not accounting officers.

Article 174 is very clear about permanent secretaries and their functions are therein. None of their functions is that of an accounting officer. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Let us separate the two. Let us vote the money and then we can deal with who will handle the money.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, you cannot vote money and give it to the accounting officers they have given us. We should leave it blank and vote money with a blank space and then we tell the Secretary to the Treasury to appoint an accounting officer for that place. If you vote with the names there, you are telling the accounting officer that we have given you the money. There are many people in ministries who can be accounting officers. Prime Minister and Minister of Finance, that will be very good for you as a way forward.

THE SPEAKER: At one time, here, we had a Clerk who was a permanent secretary but he was not the accounting officer. Mr Kaija was the accounting officer but the Clerk was there as a PS. We did that in this institution but I do not know -

MR JAMES BABA: Madam Chair, regarding the three Permanent Secretaries that were raised on the Floor, I thought there is a process. There is an allegation then there is an investigation, a court process or a decision is made. In respect of all the three, none of these processes have gone through. That is the information I am giving. There is a process before somebody can be removed. That is all I wanted to say.

MR ODONGA OTTO: The information I am giving you is two-fold and I am glad the Prime Minister is here. In the document, which my colleague has gone to bring and which we shall lay on Table, the Police are requesting that these 72 individuals including PS Bigirimana be removed from office because they are interfering with Police processes. 

For your information and you may not know this, the Permanent Secretary, Mr Bigirimana and the Under Secretary, Ms Flavia Waduwa have, up to now, refused to record statements before the Police and the Police are seemingly helpless. They went to their offices and failed to get statements. Up to now, the Police have failed to take statements, not even charge and caution from PS Birigimana and Under Secretary Flavia Waduwa.

So, if the investigating arm is writing to the Prime Minister to get these people out of office as they are interfering with investigations - a letter signed by OC CID of Police - if they are crying foul, who are we as Parliament not to listen to the plea of those who are investigating these individuals? Is Bigirimana above the law to refuse to record a statement before the Police?

MR SSEMUGABA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to be clarified on Mr Kagoda. Parliament passed a resolution advising the Executive that he should not remain in office but he has remained because we have no powers. Now, he is appointed as the accounting officer. How will Parliament look on while he is maintained as an accounting officer? If the Executive has maintained him as a permanent secretary, it is upon the Executive but for us who pronounced ourselves that he mismanaged the Identity Card Project, to now allow him to be the accounting officer - I see it as very wrong to us as Parliament.

Can the Prime Minister clarify on that, Madam Speaker?

MR ODOI: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I have attentively listened to my colleagues and all they are saying is that one, we recognise the fact that there is presumption of innocence but when it comes to financial management, we are asking the Executive to move with an abundance of caution and entrust our funds to only those whose repute is beyond any reproach. It is as simple as that and that is not too much to ask for.

I request the Prime Minister to concede that he will look into this matter and give us accounting officers whose reputations can never be put to question. That is all.

DR BITEKYEREZO: Madam Chairperson, I am very sure that whoever was appointing these permanent secretaries and accounting officers was aware that the financial year was ending in June. When you look at the figures here, they are going to receive Shs 12 billion but the person to account for this money is not mentioned.

Two, I was reading in the papers that the contract for the Principal of MUBS, Prof. Balunywa, has ended. He is the accounting officer but we are still pushing money there.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Madam Speaker and comrade Members of Parliament, patriots, I rise to say that I understand the anxiety expressed by parliamentarians about putting money, which Parliament appropriates for public benefit, in the hands of people they are not sure about. I agree with you about that by the way but the question is, how do we handle this? To the best of my knowledge, as a nation, we have entrusted the responsibility of appointing accounting officers to the Secretary to the Treasury; he has the full powers. When the Secretary to the Treasury appoints someone as the accounting officer, that is the end of the job.

The Public Finance Accountability Act, Section 8 (1), which the Leader of Opposition knows very well, reads thus: “The Secretary to the Treasury shall, with prior approval of the minister - designate an accounting officer by name and in writing.” The other requirement is that they must present these to Parliament.

Madam Chairperson, I would like to suggest that if we have any questions about anyone, we can bring up these matters not by way of appropriation, but by way of seeking administrative actions to attend to the issues that we raise. My – (Interruption)

MR WAIRA MAJEGERE: Thank you, Prime Minister, for giving way. If Parliament does not have any say on the accounting officers and it is only the officer you have mentioned to appoint, then why is this list produced here in Parliament? I thank you.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Rt hon. Prime Minister, the Act says that an accounting officer shall be accountable to Parliament. What we are saying is that when these accounting officers came to us the other time, we got issues with them. So, you should not bring the same people with issues to us. Leave them as permanent secretaries, but appoint other people to come and account to us.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Okay, but I was still explaining that matter. You know very well that when Parliament speaks, we definitely listen and there is no doubt about that. However, as Government, we act in accordance with the laws that this Parliament passes, because they bind us. For example, this section 8 binds us in conjunction with other laws on how to handle presumption of innocence or when to smash it. There are very many laws and procedures on how this is done.

I want to confirm that I received a letter from the Minister of Finance listing people that the ministry thinks had a hand in what happened in the OPM and ought to be investigated. But I have not received any communication from the Officer in Charge of Police or anyone from Police – (Interjections) – I said, I have not received it –(Interjections)– Hon. Elijah Okupa, you cannot give me information that I received it because I am the one who either receives or not –(Mr Elijah Okupa rose_)– hon. Elijah Okupa, I will give way, but let me finish a sentence, please. 

Okay, as I was saying, the point is that I have not received any communication from the Police saying that anyone should be interdicted or anything of the kind.

I have stated to the Police myself and I have made public statements to the effect that no stone will remain unturned in investigating the occurrence in the OPM where there was impropriety in the management of public funds. And to the best of my knowledge, none of these people has refused to respond to Police and if information came that they have, we would handle them. (Interjections) I can assure you we would handle them. 

Okay, let me take information from hon. Elijah Okupa and hon. Odonga Otto.

MR OKUPA: I want to correct this. I stated it here that Police wrote to the Minister of Finance, hon. Maria Kiwanuka. It was on the basis of that communication that the Minister of Finance wrote to you sending that list of 72 people, which is waiting for your action.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Just two issues to inform you about. One is about what hon. Okupa has just said. The available information is that when the list of 72 people to be removed from office got to your office for onward transmission to the President, it did not leave your office.

Two, the Minister of Internal Affairs - through you, the Rt hon. Prime Minister - are you aware that Mr Pius Bigirimana and the Under Secretary, Ms Flavia Waduwa, have up to now refused to record even charge and caution statements before the Police?

MR KWIZERA: Madam Speaker, I am a member of the Public Accounts Committee of Parliament. I would like to inform the House that we got all the correspondences between Ministry of Finance and OPM. We have used them in writing our report. More than 100 officers – sufficient recommendations have been made. 
So, isn’t this pre-empting what is in our recommendations of the report or even what is in court? I am saying this because the Permanent Secretary should be charged for him to be suspended from office as a public officer; there must be a charge sheet. So, unless you have a charge sheet, you cannot interdict a public officer. And let me remind Members about the Severino Twinobusingye case. Thank you. (Laughter)

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Madam Speaker, I am glad that hon. Okupa has corrected himself because if there was that communication, I would be aware. If it was written to the Minister of Finance, she did not bring it to my attention and certainly, she did not make reference to it in the letter that she wrote to me.

Secondly, hon. Odonga Otto says that the Minister of Finance wrote to me wanting me to forward it to the President, but that is not how we work in Government. I am saying this because when the Minister of Finance wants to write to the President, she does so directly.

But having said all this, this is a question of fact; it can be established that they have been co-operating or not. To the best of my knowledge, I have not heard a complaint from Police that any of them has not co-operated. In fact, on the contrary, for instance, Ms Flavia Waduwa – I know that she has been to Police many times and I have not heard from Police that she is not cooperating in the investigations.

So, all I would like to ask my colleagues is, as the investigations go on, please, let the Police do its work. In the case of Kazinda, where they completed investigations, they acted. They went to court and you know it has been handled expeditiously. (Interjections) Well, five years is a different story. 

So, all I can say is that since it is the Secretary to the Treasury that is authorised by law to appoint accounting officers with the approval of the minister, and I assume what has been presented here is in conformity with that, I think if any of us has any reason to believe that the Secretary to the Treasury or the Minister of Finance ought not to have approved any specific name, then we can take it up at the individual level and it will be handled. But as far as I am concerned, Parliament should not act in a manner that breaks the cardinal rule of presumption of innocence on the part of everyone.

MR MATHIAS NSUBUGA: Dear colleagues, I think Parliament should rise above the normal standards for one reason; we are going to appropriate public funds and questions have been put on individuals. We are not saying that we will not appropriate funds to such and such a department or ministry, but we are saying, a question mark should be represented by someone else. We are not saying that we do it at the moment, but we are saying we cannot give you our funds. If somebody is being questioned, why should they be given public money? How can we say, “After what you did in the Prime Minister’s Office, go and do the same in the Ministry of Gender?”

My colleague, I used to call you “compatriot” you should be a compatriot indeed and ask the Secretary to the Treasury to appoint another accounting officer. If these people are exonerated, let them account in other financial years. 

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you, hon. Prime Minister. Some weeks back, there was a motion moved in this House by hon. Felix Okot Ogong and among the prayers was an amendment moved by hon. Cecilia Ogwal. This House overwhelmingly passed a resolution that Mr Pius Bigirimana should temporarily step aside as investigations are concluded. 

I just want to seek for your clarification; how do you think the public will look at this Parliament; the very Parliament which said that this officer should temporarily be out of his office until investigations are concluded is the same House that says he should handle funds? 

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: All I am asking of you, colleagues – Parliament has a right to express opinion. Once Parliament says we have information that casts suspicion upon the conduct of someone, then the natural thing to do is to let the investigative machinery of the State do that. 

If we wanted to do our own investigation as Parliament, we could do it; we could set up a select committee and use state machinery as well to carryout investigations. But for us to reach a position, which is tantamount to condemnation, when the investigation is still continuing and have not received a report, is not correct. (Interruption)

DR EPETAIT: The Prime Minister referred to an Act and said that the Secretary to the Treasury appoints and once he has done it, we have nothing to say. But look at Vote 138, on this list of accounting officers. We have a statement – “To be advised -”, that is for Makerere University Business School – it is still vacant just like Uganda Land Commission. 

We are saying that we cannot pass money to be accounted for by suspects. You can have the suspects as permanent secretaries; we have no problem with that. You can keep them there, but when it comes to the money, we are saying the accounting officers should be different; that is a simple request. And if the Secretary to the Treasury says, “To be advised -”, we are telling you that the Secretary to the Treasury should be advised that Permanent Secretaries Kagoda, Bigirimana and Asuman Lukwago should be replaced by other accounting officers; just for those three. 

We shall not refuse to appropriate the money. But forcing an accounting officer on us when we have issues with them may make us reconsider the way forward on appropriation, which may not be fair. We just want accounting officers for those three entities to be appointed.

THE SPEAKER: Prime Minister, is that a very difficult request; the Secretary to Treasury can appoint and disappoint. Is it really a very hard request?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, I know the Minister of Finance is very good and he has got up. This will send a signal to the others to work hard. In fact, we are just unfortunate that we do not deal with those in Local Government, we would also black-list them today. But when we get the Auditor-General’s report, we are going to blacklist more people. This will bring morals in this country. (Applause)

MS BINTU: I thank you, Madam Chair. According to the contributions and when you look at this list, there are those other accounting officers who have not been named but also according to the discussions, there is an agreement that there are those other accounting officers who do not have issues. I want in this same vein, to propose that we pass the list and the names of those accounting officers who do not have issues and then we stay those names of accounting officers who have issues until such a time when the Prime Minister comes back with a new list. I thank you. (Members rose_)

THE SPEAKER: No. Hon. Members, we are going to vote on the money and not on the accounting officers. We are voting on the money and not on the accounting officers.

MS KAWOOYA: I thank you, Chairperson.  I note that there is no issue that is making the honourable members say that they do not agree to pass the Vote-on-Account.  

What the colleagues are saying is one - that there are some names of the accounting officers whose names have been around in this House and there is a question on those names. They are asking the Minister for Finance and the Prime Minister, that yes, there is a problem with these officers and it has been clearly stated here by the Prime Minister and the Leader of the Opposition that you can be a Permanent Secretary but not an accounting officer and colleagues are saying, “Thank you but these two people” - [Hon. Member: “Three.”] - three people are questionable. 
Rt hon. Prime Minister, go and advise the Secretary to the Treasury that Parliament has raised this issue – what about these names and it is a concern and as the Prime Minister has said, administratively and as the Speaker has put it, the Secretary to the Treasury can appoint and disappoint. 

Now, for us to move, I pray that the Prime Minister and the Minister for Finance take the issue raised by Members and go back and say - because there is also the moral part of it. Parliament is saying there is a problem here and we are saying, “Okay, can’t we find out - of the a thousand accounting officers somebody is questionable and investigations are taking place?” 

So, Madam Speaker, I move that we pass the vote and the Prime Minister and the Minister of Finance take note of what has happened and then they come back and report to the House. I beg to pray.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, we are not going to have too much debate on this. It is clear. It is a simple request; can the Minister commit himself on the Hansard and we move.

MR MATIA KASAIJA: Madam Speaker, before I commit myself, which I will do, I would also like to give a word of caution to ourselves as managers – (Interjections) - just hold on, please, give me a chance –(Interjections) - no, I am not intimidating but I am giving a word of caution as Members of Parliament and as managers of this State. 

MR ODONGA OTTO: Can you respond to the Speaker’s request. You are out of order.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Then we shall not pass –

MR ODONGA OTTO: The Speaker has directed that you make a – 

MR MATIA KASAIJA: Now, we should not conclude on anybody simply because we have heard a word. That is all I am cautioning ourselves about. 

Madam Speaker, we definitely do share the Prime Minister’s side. We share your concern – all of us share your concern that we should not put our money in the hands of thieves. Absolutely. [Mr Odonga Otto: “Now you are talking.”] - I am agreeing with you and we will take this matter quite seriously and we shall go and report the concern of Parliament to the Permanent Secretary/Secretary to the Treasury [Mr Odonga Otto: “No, he is a civil servant. He is our subject. You direct him.”] - because the law gives him the power [Mr Nandala-Mafabi: “But the law also gives us the power.”] Yes, it also gives us the power. We shall report and appropriate action will be taken. That is all I can say. [Mr Odonga Otto: “Time Frame]. He will take appropriate action as the law so demands.

MR ODONGA OTTO: That is a vague assurance! Madam Speaker, I thank you very much. I am rising in my capacity as the Chairperson of the Committee on Government Assurance in this Parliament. Hon. Minister, what you have stated for lack of a better English word, is vague and we would have a problem as a committee of even extracting an assurance from what you have said. So, can you come and be an equivocal and tell us when because the Under Secretary is a civil servant and he reports to us? My presumption is that the Under Secretary is a subordinate. It is not like we are directing the President; it would have been different if we were vetoing the President’s power because he was elected by Ugandans. But for Permanent Secretaries, the law demands that they report to Parliament. 

I would request, Madam Speaker, that the minister comes and makes a time definite assurance other than the usual assurances because these are very serious issues. So, you need three days or one week so that it can help our committee to extract this assurance?

MR MATIA KASAIJA: We shall comply – (Interjections) - (Laughter) - but I have difficulty when you say that I give a definite date – (Interjections) – yes, we shall comply and as I said, in accordance with the law - and I really emphasised it that in accordance with the law.

MR ODONGA OTTO: There is no money.

THE SPEAKER: Can you move the motion? You know you have not moved the motion. We have been on preliminaries.

MR MATIA KASAIJA: Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the House dissolves itself into a Committee of Supply – [Hon. Members: “No.”] [Mr Odonga Otto: “Put a Question.”] [Hon. Members: “No Way.”] - to consider the Vote on Account for the Financial Year 2013/14. I beg to move, Madam Speaker.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Put the question.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I put the question that the House dissolves itself into a Committee of Supply to consider the Vote on Account for financial year 2013/14. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY

HON. MEMBERS: No. We are going away.

MR OTADA: Madam Chair, of course, I respect your ruling but it was also my understanding that some of us who stood up on this side were saying we need a count by a show of hands and it is really on that basis that I seek your indulgence, Madam Chairperson, because I personally rose to say “No” and the rules allow us to move like that. But I seek your indulgence.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, it was impossible for me to tell who is standing for “No” and “Yes” because everybody stood up. I assumed you stood so that I can come down for the committee stage and that is why I am here. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, we agree when our rules say that when Members stand up, they are protesting about what has been passed. Now we know the voices; we know that my brother, hon. Amama Mbabazi, has a big voice. You may have heard his and assumed that all of us said “Aye”. So, Madam Chairperson, given the circumstances, if we have not agreed, how are we going to proceed because we can see a fundamental problem and that is the one we are going to raise next unless we deal with the one that hon. Sam Otada has raised.

THE CHAIRPERSON: But hon. Members, are you saying you did not want to pass the Vote-on-Account?

MR OKUPA: No, Madam Chairperson. What Members are requesting for is clear commitment from the Ministry Of Finance or from Government that the three people are excluded and we proceed - (Applause) – you can hear the applause - that is all we need.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Minister of Finance, I gave you an example of this National Assembly. When Mr Tandekwire was here, he was the Permanent Secretary and the Clerk but was not the accounting officer and Parliament run effectively and efficiently. This is a simple matter; I do not know why you are – 
    
MR MATIA KASAIJA: Madam Chairperson, since Parliament has expressed grave concern on this matter like many of us have, and since there is a provision that being a permanent secretary does not necessarily mean you must be the accounting officer, we will take appropriate action - (Interjections) – okay, let me put it this way then. Can we listen to each other? Can I complete this statement? [MR OKUPA: “We are going to throw you out.”] May I ask this House not to throw me out but to love me more? (Laughter.) Can I suggest to this House to give me time – one week - I will then come back and report here with new names because I have to make consultations. There is no way I can be able to really commit myself without having consultations. So, Madam Chairperson, I request that I am given one week then I will return to this House with new names of accounting officers. (Mr Otada rose_)

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, we are dealing with the motion of the minister. We have not finished it. We are in the Committee of Supply. He has said he will come back in one week with new names. 

MR OTADA: Madam Chairperson, I do not want it to go on record that what I said meant that we are stopping the Vote-on-Account from going forward. We were not actually trying to do that but this debate is coming against the backdrop of a big question which is being asked. Is this Government serious about fighting corruption? It comes on the hues of that and some of us think that the request which we had actually made was just a moral question; a simple request on three people who are questionable and now that the minister has given the assurance of one week to bring the names of new accounting officers, I want him to correct it by saying that he is going to bring new names of the three because we are not complaining about all of them; we are complaining about the three accounting officers and not all of them. I think that would be more equivocal and personally, I will be satisfied by that. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: But, hon. Members, what about if he brings five, what will happen? 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, you may discover that from the list he has presented to us, there are some who have issues and he may remove them and bring new names. That is his job but for the other ones we have agreed on, he must. It is the others that he can add on or subtract. It is up to him. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: But, hon. Members, we really need to finish this work. I think we have agreed that within a week, the minister will return here with the names of the three new accounting officers. So, let us go to the Vote-on-Account.

VOTE ON ACCOUNT FOR FINANCIAL YEAR 2013/2014

RECURRENT EXPENDITURE FOR CENTRAL GOVERNMENT, LOCAL GOVERNMENTS, MISSIONS ABROAD AND REFERRAL HOSPITALS

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, I put the question that a total sum of Shs 1,678,452,677,000 for central Government, local governments, missions abroad and referral hospitals be provided for as Vote-on-Account for recurrent expenditure for financial year 2013/2014. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

DEVELOPMENT EXPENDITURE FOR CENTRAL GOVERNMENT, LOCAL GOVERNMENTS, MISSIONS ABROAD, REFERRAL HOSPITALS AND STATUTORY BODIES

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that a total sum of Shs 2,299,211,886,000 for central government, local government, missions abroad and referral hospitals and statutory bodies be provided for as vote-on-account for development expenditure for financial year 2013/2014. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (PLANNING) (Mr Matia Kasaija): Madam Chairperson, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of Supply reports thereto. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, I put the question that the House do resume and the Committee of Supply do report thereto.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding_)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY

7.10
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (PLANNING) (Mr Matia Kasaija): Madam Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the Whole House has considered the Vote-on-Account of Shs 3,977,664,563,000 for the financial year 2013/2014 and has supplied it with no amendments. 

THE SPEAKER: Also report about the three accounting officers.

MR MATIA KASAIJA: And concerning the list of accounting officers that has been submitted here, we will able to produce three new names instead of those accounting officers that have been questioned by this honourable House. I beg to move. (Applause)

MOTION FOR THE ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY

7.12
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (PLANNING) (Mr Matia Kasaija): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of Supply be adopted.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I put the question that the report of the Committee of Supply be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

BILLS 
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE ANTI-MONEY LAUNDERING BILL, 2009

THE SPEAKER: I do not see the minister here; is he still here? Hon. Omach had wanted us to quickly run through the Bill but I think we have assisted him by starting it. I do not know whether we are still in danger with the World Bank over the Anti-Money Laundering Bill. Hon. Omach, haven’t we given you some relief by starting on the Bill? Are you still in trouble with those people? At least, we started the debate on the Bill.

MR OMACH: Madam Speaker, since we are about to finish the Bill, I would pray that we complete it now.

THE SPEAKER: Unless we do it tomorrow; it is quite lengthy. But are you still caught by the deadline of the 30th on that Bill?

MR OMACH: Yes, if we do not finish it today and not tomorrow, then we shall be caught up with the deadline of 30th June. And we were actually given from August last year up to 30th June this year, which is quite a long period of time. It would not be appropriate if we do not finish it by tomorrow.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, yes, we are happy that we have started on the Anti-Money Laundering Bill and I am aware that it has been on our shelves for some time. I am also aware that the deadline is on 30th. But the fact that we have begun is a point you can tell them that we are about to finish and maybe, by two or three weeks, we will be done. Because, even if we passed it today –(Interjections)– we can finish it if you can push somebody. If you can wake up and do some work – if we believe that we can do it tomorrow, some of us have no problem because there are some five clauses up there, which are going to take about two or three hours.

THE SPEAKER: Do you propose that we take one more hour and see how far we can go this evening? [HON. MEMBERS: “Yes.”] Okay. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, those who are talking of one more hour – we have been here since morning but there are people who have just come in and are now talking of one more hour. Others have voted and even gone away. If you want us to continue with this Bill, let us do it tomorrow.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, hon. Members, the House is adjourned to tomorrow at 10 O’clock to continue with the Anti-Money Laundering Bill. Thank you for the work done since morning. (Applause) 

(The House rose at 7.17 p.m. and adjourned until Friday, 28 June 2013 at 10.00 a.m.) 
