
THE REPUBLIC OF UGANDA

IN THE PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA

Official Report of The Proceedings of Parliament

FIFTH SESSION - 14TH SITTING - FIRST MEETING

________________________

Thursday, 30 June 2005

Parliament met at 10.50 a.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Ms Rebecca Alitwala Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE LOCAL GOVERNMENTS (RATING) BILL, 2003

(General debate continued)

10.54

DR BALTAZAR KASIRIVU ATWOOKI (Bugangaizi County, Kibaale):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to take this opportunity to thank the committee, the last leadership and the new leadership, for a good report. Yesterday, many issues were discussed and I want to add my voice and make a few comments. I want to concur with members and question the rationale of the recommendation that the Physical Planning department should be shifted to the Ministry of Local Government. Personally, I think this is an issue of discipline and morals amongst local authorities, and there are examples to prove this even in urban centres, where physical plans have been developed and duly approved by the Town and Country Planning Board. 

When it comes to implementation, things have changed. On the ground, there may be an approved plan by the people and the local authorities. However in a short time, a 100 by 100 feet plot meant to be a residential plot is used to construct a church. You may have followed a story some time back that stated that in the neighbourhood of the palace of the Omukama of Bunyoro-Kitara, which is supposed to be a residential area, they had a church emerging there. There was a lot of noise and ultimately, the Abalusula who are the official guards of the Omukama went and took charge. There was a clash and all because people did not want to follow the physical plan indicated on the ground.  

To me, whether you shift the department of Physical Planning to Ministry of Local Government or leave it in Ministry of Lands does not matter. As long as those who are supposed to implement what has been approved do not, the problem will still prevail. I want to concur with the Minister of Lands, hon. Baguma Isoke who said yesterday that the question is in our will, to make sure the plans are implemented as approved. We must have a way to strengthen this department so that when a plan has been approved and areas designated as commercial, residential or for petrol stations, this is exactly what is done and people are sent around to monitor that what was approved is being followed. 

Otherwise, Madam Speaker, there have been complaints even here in the city, of buildings being knocked down and a petrol station fitted in. You can see this as you move opposite Embassy House. If you looked at the plan for Kampala city, did they indicate that the petrol station should be there? Certainly not. So what has happened? There must be a weakness elsewhere. As for me, where this department is located is not the problem, the problem is elsewhere.

Madam Speaker, I have taken interest in having several trading centres in my constituency conform to the Country Planning Act, so that we can develop a physical plan and give opportunity to those wishing to develop their plots to follow the plan that has been made. Physical planning takes a process. A physical planner must come, sit with the people around, discuss with them, exchange ideas, and he also gives them the professional advice. From there, he makes a draft, which he brings back; the draft is looked at and then there is the process of displaying and making comments and then adjustments and amendments, up to when the plan is approved. 

In this process, we need discipline because some local leaders may say, “let us first halt this exercise, get a plan, follow the plan and give people a chance to develop.” By the time the plan comes out, it is indicating something different and there is something different on the ground.  Can we have therefore, Government -(Interruption) 

MR PETER LOKERIS: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to inform my honourable colleague that because of decentralization, there is fighting for who is more important. In the district where I come from, a physical plan has been made, there is a Town Council and its Board, but whenever any construction is supposed to be undertaken, the chairman of the area and his council go and say, “We want it this way”. Currently, there is an office called a Health Office, which they have decided to construct on police demarcated land, distorting everything.  

I think there is a problem of who is supposed to have what power. Because everything is laid in the regulations, and even in the Statutory Instruments, there are instruments the minister made in 2004, which state that any government land anywhere, even in an urban area belongs to the Uganda Land Commission and it is that authority which should be able to re-locate this land for other purposes. I think it is the power centres which have a problem, which problems should be rectified. Thank you very much.

DR KASIRIVU: Madam Speaker, I want to thank the honourable minister for the information. This means that even after we have passed this Bill, which I think is in good faith, we still need to update the Town and Country Planning Act, as the Minister of Lands suggested. Above all, we need to have the ministries responsibility for Local Authorities and the Ministry of Lands coordinating in order to create good guidelines and serious sanctions which should be followed. This way, if a plan has been approved by Government, the local authorities should not deviate from it unless they have sought clearance from the Town and Country Planning Board and it is amended accordingly. Otherwise, we shall pass the law, but the implementation on the ground will be a different matter. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

11.03
MR GEORGE WOPUWA (Bubulo County East, Mbale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the committee for the report and I note that the main object of the Bill is to broaden revenue for Local Governments. Currently, I think 96 percent of local governments revenue is from the center and this in itself defeats the purpose of decentralization, because without financial autonomy, decentralization loses meaning.

However, I have looked at the report of the committee, especially recommendation 2. I do not know whether there is a mistake or that is what the committee wanted.  Recommendation two states that,“ The list of services to be provided by a property rate payer should be clearly outlined in the law”. I thought we were having this rate in order to raise revenue to increase services to the taxpayers. But the recommendation here requires property ratepayers to show the services they are going to provide.  I request the committee to make an observation on that later.

Secondly, the Bill talks about houses.  I have not looked at it thoroughly, but I was wondering whether this would include semi-permanent houses, grass thatched houses and those small houses in our places, because if it is put as a conclusion, it will kill the initiative to build. Many of our people, like in Bubulo East, do not have the benefits of Government reaching them easily. We watch Kenya television, listen to Kenya radio, we do not have electricity, and we do not have water. What magic will come as a result of introducing these rates? 

On the issue of the recommendation regarding the department of Physical Planning moving to the Ministry of Local Government, I think the problem is not the location of this department. Districts are now acting as planning authorities, but do we have enough physical planners? 

Secondly, the assumption is that Local Government will perform better when we transfer that function of physical planning. However, I have had opportunity to interact with Local Government and have observed that recently, they always avoid controversial issues.  

Madam Speaker, in Mbale we have had a problem with the Town Clerk since 2003 and when you talk about it with the Minister of Local Government, he says that is a Gishu affair. The other day, they threw out the Town Clerk and he was beaten. The ministry is observing and saying that the problem is the Municipal Council, while the District Service Commission, which is the appointing authority, has clearly indicated that the Town Clerk is the problem. Meanwhile, the ministry is keeping quiet. Therefore, I think it would not be wise to give the Ministry of Local Government more responsibility, because you would even confuse them more.

Madam Speaker, -(Interruption)

DR NDUHUURA:  Thank you, hon. Wopuwa, for giving way. The information I wanted to give is that the Ministry of Local Government has intervened a number of times in matters of Mbale Town Council, but the District Service Commission is banking on the law to actually block us from taking any action, and as you know, we gave a lot of powers to the districts. One of the reasons we are calling for re-centralization of disciplinary control over the CAOs and the town clerks of municipalities, is to address problems like the ones we are having in Mbale. As Central Government, we do not have enough powers over the District Service Commissions, to direct them on what to do. They are independent and not under the direction of any authority in the performance of their duties.

MR WOPUWA: Madam Speaker, the minister has just said what I was trying to say. The Ministry of Local Government, empowered by the District Service Commission, has acquitted an officer and said the officer is innocent. Now the Ministry of Local Government wants to override that decision and make its own. What would happen if we gave it another function? This is what I am saying. The ministry does not have the capacity to enforce the decisions of the law, especially if it disagrees with them. I also wanted to make a remark – but let me first develop this point. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, you will be able to respond later. You know, the point he is really making is that, yesterday a number of members said that they would be happy if the Physical Planning department was moved to the Ministry of Local Government. He is questioning that and saying, it is not just a matter of moving it. That there are other problems.  

MR WOPUWA: Madam Speaker, when I looked at the Bill, it gives a lot of authority to the valuers and valuation courts. I wonder how we are going to protect the ordinary people from these valuers, because the assumption is that as professional people, they will do their jobs properly and carry out subjective valuation exercise in order to establish costs. But I have had opportunity to deal with some of the technical people. They come out with bills of quantities which may prove difficult for an ordinary person to come out and disqualify. We have had situations like with district tender boards who come up with decisions that cannot be ordinarily disputed.  

Therefore, if the valuer is not properly handled, we may have a situation where ordinary people in the field will be cheated. We had the issue of assessment of graduated tax where, normally, the parish chiefs were in charge of assessment, and you found poor people paying more money simply because they were assessed more.  Somebody with a house, ten cows, and land would be paying Ugshs 6000 and another person who has a grass thatched house would also pay Ugshs 6000. So, this point needs to be addressed.  

On the issue of operating like businesses, hon. Nkuuhe and hon. Dora Byamukama were saying that in Zimbabwe, local governments operate like a business. That business approach has got both advantages and disadvantages. The colonial issue of Zimbabwe is different from ours. In Zimbabwe, immediately after Mugabe came to power, a re-organisation took place and this tended to empower the people. For us, if you allow the business approach to take root, local governments will be in a hurry to raise more money. 

Recently, when we tried to carry out the privatisation exercise of revenue collections, they sold parishes, villages, everything. For those ferrying matooke from Mbale to Tororo, by the time you reached Tororo, you had gone through ten roadblocks and paid at each one. If we leave this to become a business operation, we are likely to get problems because those doing the business will make money at the expense of the ordinary people who will suffer -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Wopuwa, is there no merit in a situation where local authorities put in place facilities like roads, water and electricity to attract you and is this not better than cutting your own grass? Is there no merit in such an arrangement?

MR WOPUWA: With due respect, Madam Speaker, there is merit. However, most of the money local governments have, are conditional grants. When you look at the purpose for this money, it is mainly for counter part funding for the Local Government Development Fund and therefore, by the time they start reaching remote places in villages, that may be 50 years from now. The benefits will not come straight away but over time, so we need to have a form of regulation so that people are not exploited.

MR BESISIRA: Thank you, hon. Wopuwa, for giving way and thank you, Madam Speaker. When we wrote this report, it included amendments that we intend to move. Some of the questions members are raising are catered for in those amendments which we shall handle when we come to committee stage. If members take the trouble to read the whole report including the amendments, I believe they will find that most of these questions have been answered, especially those on how rate payers are going to benefit and what is going to happen to the fund which we are proposing. 

MR WOPUWA: Madam Speaker, that is already a problem. The revenue that is being collected will become district revenue and how to apportion it will be the responsibility of the district council, which district council will use that money depending on the priorities that it has. How will we dictate to the district councils how to use this money? For example, we have the Local Governments Act which says that 25 percent of money collected or local revenue should go to villages. However when people get that money, about Ushs 200 or 100, they go and drink Malwa. The 25 percent which goes to local council villages, is supposed to be for development. The law does not point out that this money should be -(Interruption)

MRS BYAMUKAMA: Madam Speaker, I have been watching the screen as my colleague was giving his views. First and foremost, I would like to support the chairman. When you look at our proposal on the last page, it says that the minister shall prescribe a percentage from the property tax collected in a year, to be spent by the local government on administrative matters, but in any case, the percentage left for taxpayers services shall not be less than 75 percentage. 

Madam Speaker, I heard my colleague talk about Zimbabwe and I want to support your guidance. In the first instance, these local government units should be corporate bodies, independent and autonomous and in view of the fact that we want to raise more money, I think the proposal that they take on some commercial enterprises is not far fetched. I thank you.

MR WOPUWA: Madam Speaker, I do not want to argue with my senior colleagues but the fact is that the district councils are already body corporate. We are not going to make them so because they already are. If we consider the performance of graduated tax before the famous presidential elections, district councils were collecting more revenue from graduated tax, that is, until the campaigns came in.  We are proposing to have this law in place but how are we going to avoid politics coming in, especially when the local councils start enforcing sanctions on those who have failed. Madam Speaker, these are issues we want to highlight so that in the end when implementation takes place, we do not run into problems. Thank you.

11.16
MR RICHARD SEBULIBA MUTUMBA (Kawempe Division North, Kampala): Thank you very much Madam Speaker. I thank the committee for endeavouring to come up with the report. All of us are supposed to pay tax and we are obliged to do so, but the question that comes to anybody’s mind is, how is this tax utilized and how do we benefit from that tax? Before we write another law, how did the previous one fair, the one that Amin left in 1979, regarding the same rental property?  What was amiss and what did they fail to achieve?  

Madam Speaker, I want to join my colleague hon. Kasirivu, who was on the Floor, and express my reservations about transferring the physical planning function to Local Government. We can liberalize, decentralize and do a lot of things but we should not take on this responsibility from the Government but rather, let it happen gradually. 

Madam Speaker, you have heard what has happened in Katanga recently. You have heard about the cholera epidemic and what is happening to some buildings magnificent as they are. These buildings had no plans, and as we queried about this, the plans were brought and we discovered that they had built on sewer lines. I think we should not move at a fast pace. I support decentralization and devolution but there are certain cases where we have to receive this power gradually. You can imagine what will happen when these buildings collapse? 

Fortunately, my colleague hon. Dora Byamukama has just said she has been to Zimbabwe. I think Zimbabwe is well planned and everything is well taken care of, but in Uganda, in view of our history on decentralization, I beg and request that there be rules to that effect and that we do not give in whole sale. 

We have seen buildings coming up, for example on Luwum Street, with some approved to have underground parking lots, only to see shops instead. Cars have become so many and yet parking spaces are limited; day and night, petrol stations are being constructed. These are some of the issues we are saying should be left wholly to the Local Government but Government should also have a hand to play. I agree with decentralization per se but these are some of the things we are looking at.  

Madam Speaker, one of the complaints stated is that people are not willing to pay the tax. I am happy that the committee came up with what they called the cost centred budgeting. This is a good innovation and I applaud them but the problem is this mass valuation. How are you going to distinguish between a property owner who is an orphan, a widow or an aged person with no income at all? Imagine that my father left me a magnificent building as the heir, but I am not working. How do you expect me, with the rest of my siblings to care for, to pay for the tax? These are some of the questions that have been confronting us on this tax.  

Another example is if as hon. Sebuliba, I am a widow, my child died and left me many grandchildren and I peddle charcoal and groundnuts for a living. The house left to me may be good but how am I going to pay the tax? How are we going to cater for such situations? Mass mobilization is good but you have even heard of meter readers who just guess and give you a figure and we have been complaining as members of parliament. These are some of the things that water down that Act that Amin left. I know the committee has said that LCs must come in and help but we must consider another way of getting people to pay this tax.

About the penalties imposed on the collectors of these rates, when I was a chairperson, I had to send back four of them to the headquarters. Somebody would pay Ugshs 2 million and they write Ugshs 20,000. The man gets a receipt of Ugshs 2 million but on the record, there is Ugshs 20,000. That is why when you bring this aspect of cost centered budgeting, the people do not get value for money.

My colleague said this money goes to some kind of consolidated fund. Unless this fund is reinforced, how are you going to dictate terms when the district councils already have their financial regulations in place? Are you going to amend backwards so that they come in consonance with those regulations already in place? Because the moment the money comes into the collection pool, the upper level will take the 50 percent - I am talking about Kampala - and the lower one will remain with 50 percent. How are you going to redistribute this money? These are the kind of problems we have to look at. I think we need a master plan for urban areas, town councils and the like so that we can agree on how to approach this situation.

I would like to comment on another issue raised by the minister on the CAOs and policy makers who are going to implement this Act, together with the people helping them. The minister said that it is for this reason that the CAOs are being taken back to Central Government. Madam Speaker that will not solve the problem. What is wrong with the minister or the Government sending a representative to the District Service Commission to help and assist rather than pulling back the CAOs? We have already seen the infringement taking place between the RDCs, those from the Central Government and the local authorities. You have heard what is happening in Busia. The people are threatening the Aworis that they will eat snakes if Bageya is not chased away.

If another CAO is sent, how sure are you that they are going to be in tandem when they are executing their services to the people? I propose that the Government send a person to sit at the District Service Commission, to be its ear, so that they can work together to alleviate the situation. Otherwise, these power centers we are creating, are the ones we were talking about yesterday, that exist among the LDUs, the UPDF and in the civil society.

Lastly, Madam Speaker, I support the motion, but only if the people who are paying tax are first looked at before determining how much they are going to pay. As I wind up, let me use a bit of arithmetic and say that 45 plus 45 is 90, divide by 2 is 45. 70 plus 20 is 90, the average is 45. 10 plus 80 is 90. How is mass valuation going to be fair to people with low incomes? These are my contestations. I know that so many people who are supposed to pay very good tax like ambassadors, president’s office and churches have been exempted from paying this tax. I am not against churches or places of worship because they are supposed to be there but some are wretched. All things being equal, these people are the well endowed.  

If you look at the report on PEAP, our poverty levels have jumped from 34 to 38. If you calculate this by 24 million, it comes to over 8 million people living below the poverty line. This is throughout Uganda and we should look at this very carefully, involve the LCs and others so that people do not run away from another tax. 

I have also heard that URA is going to tax some commercial buildings and that both tenants and landlords are going to pay. How are these two taxes going to move in tandem? I may have my building and the URA man comes and says, “you have got so many tenants, so pay this much.” After I have paid, the city council people will also come for their pound of flesh. We must look into this such that the landlords do not shy away from paying these taxes and try to dodge or bribe their way out because at the end of the day, we will come to the same thing. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

11.27
MR CHARLES KOLUO (Serere County, Soroti): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the committee for this very good report.  In my observations, I came across some critical issues in this Bill, which I want to share and they relate to payment of rates and assessing of the bills. We have industrial or commercial buildings, which are assessed according to, say the rent that is expected in a year. The rent so levied or so considered is basically expected rent and not realizable rent. 

My fear in this regard is in those cases where buildings say in trading centers in the villages are seldom rented for 12 months. They can be rented for one or two months and even then, the rent may vary. If the net annual value is arrived at by considering the rent yet it may turn out to be only for only three months in a year, what would happen to the remaining period of the time? 

It is also said in the Bill that the tax will be assessed on an annual basis and the client will have to pay the annual rate so assessed, regardless of whether the rent is realized. This is tantamount to a common man in the village looking at his only asset - a building - to finance the Local government. 

I have also seen an allowance for an appeal but there is no mention of interest in case the common man in the village pays the Local government for a year and yet he has realized rent for only three months. That means that he will, in effect, have advanced his money to the Local government. Will the Local government consider paying interest on this money? That is the question I have and I ask the minister to clarify on this. 

It is common knowledge that the principle of taxation is for it to be realistic and acceptable to the clients so that the costs of collection are not adverse. I have noticed that the rates of this tax are acceptable and it is therefore not possible, as alleged, that it could be misunderstood as another way of bringing back graduated tax. This is a tax on its own and it is a tax which has been existing although it has not been common. 

However, it may not acceptable, in most cases, because of the method of assessing, that is, most of the rates are not assessed on a realistic value. I am even more worried when I see buildings which are not being rented because the minister will, by statutory instrument, come up with a value to be deducted from the gross value. 

This in itself opens up the tax to subjectivity because the minister will have to come up with a value and it is not mentioned what factors the minister will take into consideration when he does this. This is an important area that I feel we should look into and possibly include in the Bill. We should ensure that the minister’s hands are not open and that the tax is assessed objectively, in a way that is acceptable and determinable.  That is what I wanted to contribute, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Are there no further contributions on this Bill?

11.34
MR ANANG-ODUR (Kwania County, Apac): Madam Speaker, I must first of all apologize for not being able to go through these documents. However, I was looking at the Bill, for which I thank the minister and the chairperson of the committee for the work they have done. On page 5 of the Bill, part 2, Levy of rates by Local Governments, 3(3) says, “The rate may be levied under the section only in respect of an urban area”. This means that if I am staying in an urban area, my house will be assessed for rent payment. 

Madam Speaker, we have exempted the residences of traditional leaders and I wish to be told why this is so. If everybody is going to pay this rate, then a traditional leader with a house in an urban area, I am sure, should be capable of paying this rate. In fact, most of them are in a better position than many other people with property in urban areas. Why then should we extend this exemption? If you consider the fact that there are many of these people, are we not denying our people opportunity to get money for the development of these urban areas from which also these leaders will benefit?

Madam Speaker, I would like to take an example from another operation and many members have expressed their views on this. At one time, we were having a meeting of the Uganda Associates, Producers and Processors Association. One of the issues, which became very serious, was that of multiple taxation. For example, you may have produced your sunflower or soya beans and you want to move them to town for sale. As you move from your house, there are two or three roadblocks at which you pay taxes. 

The buyer, when he eventually removes the sunflower from say, Lira, Soroti or Mbale to Kampala for crushing, has to pay more taxes. There are people who collect money for various taxes and by the time the sunflower arrives in Kampala, if you calculate the amount of money paid in taxes, it is very discouraging, and in the end all these taxes have to be reflected in the price. This is because business people have to compute what they pay as taxes and add that to what they paid the farmer. I hope that this will not be the case since the tax is located in one particular place. But the unfair and unjust manner of assessment can be a serious matter.

Madam Speaker, if you go to my village, there are about two blocks opposite our local primary school and they are used as commercial buildings. I am happy the graduated tax has been abolished because the experience we have had in the past was that you would be assessed according to the Party you supported. The parish priest would determine how much money you were going to pay according to the Party you belonged to. This is a fact and was used as political leverage, because you had to show that you were on the right side. If you did not, you paid more.

This is the example my colleague is giving; that I can have ten cows and pay Ugshs 6000 and another person with two cows also pays Ugshs 10,000 because he is in the wrong group. I simply hope that the formula to be used will ensure that this sort of situation does not arise. Because if it does, it would distort the purpose of the law, which we are going to enact and certainly it will be very unfair. I also hope that when we come to putting this tax in the law, we shall be clear as to how the valuation and calculations will be done. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can I ask the chairperson to respond?  I think members have finished their contributions.

11.41
THE CHAIRPERSON, SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Mr Ignatius Besisira): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the members for the input. The members have raised many concerns, but most of these concerns were raised in the committee and it is with these in mind that we were able to come up with this report. 

Members are wondering about the timing of this Bill. I think this is for the Government to answer, but we believe that the Bill has come at the right time. As we said, this is one of the conditions that was given by our development partners, in order for them to avail more funds for Local Government Development Programme II.  

Some members have asked that in repealing, what are we trying to cure in the old law? The reason this new law has come is because the old law failed to meet some of the expectations; for example, it failed to raise revenue. I hope the minister will substantiate.  

Most members have raised an issue that people do not want to pay tax because when the property tax is collected, it does not go back to the community. That is why we are providing for an amendment, Madam Speaker. At an appropriate time, we shall move an amendment on Clause 37 of this Bill to ensure that a particular portion of this money goes back to provide services to the rate payers so that they really get value. They will see that after they have paid their money, there will be roads, electricity, and the sewerage will be handled. I would like to thank hon. Bamwanga, who appeared before our committee, for his input. His input, together with those of his colleagues, the valuers, were taken into account as we came up with the report that we have presented to this House.

On our recommendation that the physical planning component be transferred to Local Governments, Madam Speaker, we are saying this because we feel that most of the physical planning done is in Local Governments. We believe that since Ministry of Lands is the parent ministry that supervises Local Governments, it would be better placed to ensure that overall, physical planning is going on countrywide. Because most of the planning is done in Town Councils, municipalities and other urban centres, Local Government will be able to administer and supervise.

MR BIKWASIZEHI: I thank you, Madam Speaker and I thank the chairman for giving way. I am still concerned with the issue of shifting physical planning to Local Government. I want to understand, in your opinion, Mr Chairman, what the problem is? Is it the positioning of the physical planning section in the Ministry of Lands the problem or is it the non-functioning of the department? This is because if the present problems facing the physical planning department are not addressed, transferring it may not help. 

I think it is important that the problems facing the department, as outlined by the honourable minister and some other colleagues, are addressed and the department seen to function. In your opinion, is the problem not being in the Ministry of Local Government or is it because it is in Ministry of Lands? After all, physical planning is the same as land planning and the Ministry of Lands is the one dealing with the lands. What then is the problem, in your opinion?

MR BESISIRA: The problem is not where it is, as you say, but the speed with which our brothers in Ministry of Lands handle issues of physical planning. We are looking at them as a ministry that is concerned with the whole of Uganda, yet when they are handling issues in Local Government, they do not move at the speed with which we would want them to.  That is why we are suggesting that physical planning be transferred. 

Madam Speaker, in the Second Schedule of the Local Governments Act, the function of physical planning is a decentralized function, and all decentralized functions should actually be under Ministry of Local Government.  Madam Speaker -(Interruption)

MR ANANG-ODUR: Madam Speaker, the chairman has raised a very serious matter. The Ministry of Lands is part of Government and Local Government is also part of the same Government. I do not agree that it is the speed with which the Ministry of Lands operates that is the problem. I do not think that is true because if they did not have staff or whatever need, they would request Central Government to allocate them the necessary, requisite resources to make them efficient and operate as required. 

To me, this is not enough reason for us, as Parliament, to shift responsibility from one ministry to another because we are serving the same Government. Rather, we should insist that the responsible ministry does its work and does it efficiently. If the minister or the permanent secretary is not efficient, they should be removed and efficient people put in their place to do the work.  

However, Madam Speaker, the problem is wider than that. I remember in Lira, a few years ago, the town clerk and his people decided to portion out an area, which had all along been left as a public park. In fact, by then, it was an open space for the town. They allocated it out and people started developing it. Some people got concerned and when the matter was raised, there was a lot of controversy. 

In my view, what happened was because our Government is not firm on laws. You can do something wrong and insist on it as long as you have the right people backing you. Things go wrong and we cannot correct them because we do not apply the law the way we should. What we should agree is if laws have been made, they should be implemented without favour or fear and all these issues we are blaming on the Ministry of Land will not come up. Even if we give physical planning to Local Government, as long as we still have big people breaking the law, it is not going to help. We should have good reasons, not the one which has been given, if we have to shift this department. The way to save this country is not shifting responsibility from one ministry to another but insisting that the law be followed.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: For the benefit of the House, how many physical planners do we have in this country? Because if we have ten planners in the Ministry of Lands and you are taking them to Local Government, nothing will change. What are the resources we have for training physical planners in this country?

MR BAGUMA ISOKE: Madam Speaker, although my department and I appear to be on trial, I will explain. Yesterday, you did not give me adequate time to explain this matter and I took it that my explanation was adequate. However, now that I have come up on a matter of procedure, I would like to know the fate of the committee’s report. Are we first voting on the report and adopting it with this recommendation? I need advice on this so that everything is done to dispose of it appropriately. This is a procedural matter I would like handled before we consider the clauses of the Bill.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The committee has made a recommendation but I do not know whether it is part of the amendments because if it is not, the amendments will be considered on their own merit. 

DR NDUHUURA: I should clarify one thing. This idea of where the department of physical planning should fall has just been flouted yet it is something that needs to be addressed at the level of Cabinet. Much as it was the intention of the report of the committee to float this idea, I think we should be allowed some time to consider it. This is better than the Ministry of Lands coming here and saying something different. That is why I have not talked about this issue because it would appear as if we, in Government, are not properly coordinated. I request that this matter be referred back to us so that we can debate it in Cabinet and see how far we can take it, Madam Speaker.

MRS BYAMUKAMA: Madam Speaker, I was here when hon. Minister Baguma Isoke talked about this issue. He said that all districts have physical planners except two. I wonder which two he was referring to and whether we could have this information. The other information he gave was that he does not have enough resources for the physical planners to carry out their work. When I hear the honourable Minister for Local Government saying that they are going to take it up at Cabinet level and that he is concerned by the malfunctioning of this particular unit of Government, yet Parliament is the one which appropriates money, this renders us very ineffective.  

These questions are being asked in good faith. We would like to know how many physical planners we have, which districts do not have them, how much money is allocated to them and why they are not doing their work? Yesterday we put him to task to tell us what they have done, for example about taxation in urban areas and how they are being demarcated?  Is it very clearly outlined, which areas fall amongst the urban areas and which do not, so that we do not have tax avoidance? This is because some people are in the peri urban and others in the so called urban. These are the issues in this particular Bill, which we would like to hear the ministers address. 

MRS MWESIGYE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I think the committee’s recommendation about the functions of departments should lie purely with Cabinet. I thought I should make that clarification that while Cabinet can consider that recommendation, it is not the function of parliament to decide this.

MR MUTUMBA: Madam Speaker, I would like to inform the House that whenever a function is given to districts, the districts must be given money. I would like to know where the money is going to come from because I know we are depending on Government. Like my colleague said, how many planners do we have, because we need so many and how much money are we going to put in terms of resources?  

Recently as I was interacting with some of the planners, they were saying that they are few on the ground and they do not have resources. If all these functions are brought from the Ministry of Lands to other ministries, all this will involve money. If we are looking for resources or personnel, let them be available so that we can do something. However, I am not particularly comfortable with that recommendation. 
    A. 
I would like to ask the chairperson of the committee, about taxation of undeveloped land in urban centres and if any recommendations have been made.  

MR WOPUWA: Madam Speaker, I just wanted to seek clarification from the chairperson. At the time they made their recommendations, did they get an opportunity of inviting the Minister of Lands to share the type of information he is giving us here?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I do not know; perhaps he will tell us. Honourable members, I think this matter of the physical planning department goes beyond location to enforcement. As I have said, these are all recommendations, including voting on the report. However, the Cabinet can study it further and we can then follow it up during the policy statements. 

MR BESISIRA: Madam Speaker, thank you very much. This House has made a number of observations, which observations I hope the Cabinet has been listening to. I hope that they will take appropriate measures to ensure that physical planning is well handled and that there is development in various urban centres in this country. I am very grateful to hon. Dora Byamukama for her input, especially on their visit to Zimbabwe and I hope that members have also been enriched. She is a member of the committee and that is why as members, when one of us is holding the Floor, he/she does not look isolated, especially when you are a new chairman. You might not be very conversant so when you are supported by members, you must really be grateful. 

The other issues that have been raised by the members are for the Minister. Madam Speaker, as a Committee, we diligently considered this Bill. There is need for us to develop a culture of paying tax in this country. We shall not continue to depend on donations, grants and aid.  When shall we learn to pay tax?  We must start and this is one of the laws that we are bringing to ensure -(Interruption)

MR MUTULUUZA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The issue of waiving the payment of tax to me, should not arise.  The problem is that people do not see why they are paying these taxes and before we even send back this report for reconsideration, I want us to also consider recommendation number 2. This is where the list of services to be provided by Property Rate Payers should be clearly outlined.  It should be outlined before we pass the law, because I am not ready - yesterday I found a receipt from Makindye Division asking me for Ushs 400,000 as a property rate for my house.  I do not know why I am paying that money.  Firstly, I am the one who constructed the small road to my house with my neighbours. Secondly, I pay for the rubbish collection.  Why do I have to pay all this money?  

Therefore, the services that we are going to get must be clearly indicated before we pass this Bill.  We should put in more clauses to this Bill to provide for the services that will be provided for the taxpayers.  I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Chairperson, you will have to convince the honourable member about what he is getting out of the national cake in the local authorities.

MR AWORI: Madam Speaker, I beg your indulgence.  One, I am very sorry, I missed my turn because I had gone to mobilise numbers. I thought that we might come to Committee Stage before without a quorum. Two, I note with concern that there are simply a number of issues, which have not been addressed in the Bill and yet the Chairperson is winding up.  Now, seeking your indulgence; can I have an interjection before he winds up?  As I said, this is outside the Rules, but the person in charge of the House proceedings has discretionary powers to allow a person to make certain remarks.

MRS BYAMUKAMA: Madam Speaker, I appreciate what hon. Aggrey Awori has said, but I think we are getting into problems. Members are contributing and yet they are not referring to the report arising from the Bill. For example, when you look at what hon. Mutuluuza said, we are proposing as a committee that we delete Clause 37 and substitute it with a Clause, which says,

“All moneys collected from property tax shall be deposited on the account of the fund and subject to section 3(3) shall not be expended except for providing services such as road construction and maintenance, street lighting, anti-malarial drains, garbage collection, physical planning and such other services required by the taxpayers within their areas.”  

We were here yesterday and today since morning. You called for any other contribution, there was none. The Chairperson nearly concluded and now when hon. Aggrey Awori comes, I get a procedural problem whereby we should not open it up again.  Madam Speaker, I am seeking for your guidance.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Honourable members, we gave this morning for debate, I looked around and members did not look like they wanted to suggest anything new. The members who have not had an opportunity will make their contributions during the Committee Stage, this afternoon.

MR MUTUMBA: Madam Speaker, may I seek clarification from the chairperson of the Committee?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  But he has not finished.  Let him respond and if he leaves anything out, you will have reason to ask.  

MR AWORI:  Madam Speaker, once again, I seek your indulgence.  We may have technical problems; that is why we are trying to stretch the debate. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Let the chairperson first respond. You will raise any outstanding issues later.

MR MUTUMBA:  Madam Speaker, I would like to give this information concerning hon. Byamukama’s response to hon. Mutuluuza’s submission. For instance, I may use Ugshs 5 million for a road and yet the authorities use their scale say, from zero to 20 to ascertain the value of the property.  For instance, when it comes to cultural leaders, they may value their property say, at Ugshs 400 million and then subtract all the overheads of insurance, water and other taxes.  The valuer will look at the remaining total basing on scale zero to 20. Since the cultural leaders  are exempted they will in actual sense be valued at zero and zero percent times that value will come to zero.  

My property, which will have been valued at twenty, irrespective of the fact that I pay for garbage, construct roads, and all the other overheads. How are you going to calculate all these overheads?  I have made a contribution in the society, be it Kawempe, or any other region.  

Madam Speaker, when I help in building the drainage, construction of a road, replacing the bulbs and other overheads, must I expect to be given a ratable value, put over a certain percentage?  How will they calculate that? 

That is the question that hon. Mutuluuza was putting, such that it becomes tax friendly. I know they have recommended 75 percent, but I have gone an extra mile and paid for all this.  What formula will be used to enable us pay the tax without complaining?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  I think that question is for the minister, not the Chairperson.  The minister knows what he is planning. Honourable minister, this is a fundamental question, because the urban authorities have an obligation of doing everything where we live; roads, water, garbage and all the other overheads.  

MR BESISIRA:  Madam Speaker, thank you very much.  Some of the questions that are raised as you rightly put it are for the minister. I hope he give us answers because he is the mover of the Bill.

As a committee, we looked at what is available and what we thought was in the interest of the Ugandans that we represent here.  I would like to thank hon. Byamukama for the input. You have answered all the others and I would like to appeal to all my honourable colleagues to support us so we may pass this report.  Thank you, very much.

3.52
THE MINISTER OF STATE, LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Mr Richard Nduhuura): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I do not have a lot to add to the Chairperson’s response.  I would like to thank all the members who contributed to this debate.  Hon. Okulo Epak clearly said that this is not a new Law but an improvement of what has been in place.  He pointed out that there is need for sufficient sensitisation of the public. This will be done, specifically to explain that this will not replace graduated tax.  After all, the property tax will not be levied on residences outside urban areas where we have the majority of the poor population.  He also wanted to know the defects of this Law and I will respond as follows:

(a)	In the old law, the Chief Government Valuer is at the centre and responsible for evaluation of property.  In the new law have proposed that individual local governments will contract a qualified valuer and after he has prepared his valuation list, he will submit it to the respective local governments.  The law provides for appeals. I have heard hon. Epetait asking whether this valuer is going to do this work every year. The law is very clear. On this, what we are proposing is that once you have the first valuation list, then it will be reviewed, at least once in every five years. This work will not be done every year, except for updating new property that may have been constructed.  

Property tax payment has been confined to urban areas. The law will not concern rural areas. The money that was being collected, because this concerns most of the people, was not going directly into the services that were tangible or directly beneficial to the people. There was no incentive to enable them pay tax. That is why quite a number have often resented this tax.  But in our proposal, 75 percent of what is collected will go into a special fund, 25 percent will be left for administration and we feel that this way, because of this special fund, services will definitely be provided. What has been done is that the money that was being collected is put into one pool with other collections. Therefore, it was not be easy for them to know how much has been collected and accountability to the tax payer in terms of services provided was not easy. 

On the issue of mass valuation, there is concern that this law is- (Interruption)

MR KAKOOZA: Please clarify this. You said 75 percent would be for providing services. What I believe is that, there are some tenders in Local governments, which they give within urban areas. The beneficiaries of these tenders also go back and collect that money. How are you going to differentiate these two groups? Will you provide services after this property tax so that the people given the tenders will also be stopped? For instance, Kampala City Council gives tenders for collection of garbage and yet, in some regions, residents are made to pay for the services. So, how are you going to deal with this kind of imbalance? 

DR NDUHUURA: I explained that the money that has hither been collected was put in a pool. Because of this, it was not easy to apportion this money to the services that tax payers required. Therefore, it will now be specific. That is why there is a lot of concern that these services be specified in the law and this has been taken care of in Clause 37 of amendment. I have heard colleagues say,  “There has been paying for garbage, access roads, street lighting and many other services. With the new law in place, this will be outdated since the Special Fund will provide services thus mentioned.”

Hon. Bamwanga, is a Surveyor and a Valuer. He did attend the workshop that was organised for Members of Parliament. He also appeared before the Committee together with his colleagues of the Association of Valuers. His views were considered and most of the issues he raised in his document will be taken care of in the regulations to be made by the Minister of Local government.

Hon. Epetait’s concern was that some trading centres are very small, with only a few buildings.  He is worried that very little money will be collected from these few buildings, which will in the long run impact on the services. My response to him is that the small trading centres have correspondingly few requirements in terms of services. They could put such collections to services like security and other things that might attract more investors to such small centres. This will help such a centre to have more property and consequently the collections of Property tax. 

Appeals against valuations will not be made to the Chief Government Valuer, but to Valuation Court. If one is not satisfied, he or she may make an appeal to the High Court.

Hon. Kawanga talked of Aga Khan being exempted. I want to assure him that there is there is nobody who will be exempted in this law.  I am not aware of anything like that and it is unfortunate that he is not around to tell us the details.  Aga Khan owns a lot of property some of which may fall under the category of exemption.  Therefore, Aga Khan, as an empire is not exempted from paying property rates.  

I have already explained the issue of the Department of Physical Planning and where it should be. The idea has been floated and Cabinet will handle this matter appropriately and report to this Parliament.

Hon. Wopuwa blamed the Minister of Local Government for not taking action in Local Governments and he cited the example of Mbale Municipal council where a town clerk has been beaten and forced out of office. We were aware and even though we tried to intervene before he was beaten, we could not go beyond where the law does not permit; the reason we want disciplinary control over COAs and Town Clerks. We did all we could to advise and guide the Mbale District Service Commission on the sentence they had given the Town Clerk in view of the offences. He deserved more punishment than he was given. The Council of Mbale sat and resolved by two thirds to throw out the Town Clerk. Therefore, there has been that wrangle but because the law in place does not allow Ministry of Local Government to intervene directly and take action, we are handicapped. So, hon. Wopuwa –(Interruption)

MR WESONGA KAMANA: Thank you much, Madam Speaker. I have listened with interest to explanations in response to hon. Wopuwa’s communication. I want to disagree, in principle with the honourable Minister who is denying the fact that the Local Government Ministry is not responsible for the confusion and mix up of legal matters between the Town Clerk and the Permanent Secretary in the Ministry of Local Government.  

I am saying this because the Ministry of Local Government, specifically the Permanent Secretary, has had correspondences which conflict and mislead the local councilors in that municipality. I do not take it seriously when one says that the law has locked out the authorities in the Ministry of Local Government. The law belongs to Ugandans just as the Ministry of Local Government is in Uganda. It becomes more complicated when a judge directs that the Town Clerk be reinstated and the Permanent Secretary writes and says, “Do not reinstate him.” Further still, the Permanent Secretary advices the District Service Commission, which is an appointing authority, which in turn directs the reinstatement against the Permanent Secretary’s advice. The District Service Commission has failed –(Interruption)

MR BESISIRA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  We are on the Local Government Rating Bill and I appreciate the concerns of my colleagues from Mbale. We are now handling issues of Local Governments Rating Bill and this issue of Mbale is something that is connected to Ministry of Local Government, which should come as a question.  I would like to seek your guidance; are we moving normally when we start to bring Mbale issues into the Local Governments Rating Bill?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Wopuwa’s question to the Minister was that if he is unable to handle small disputes like the one between a Town Clerk and a few others how will the Ministry of Local Government handle physical planning?  That is what the member meant. He was just questioning the capacity of the Ministry to run certain things, but let the Minister conclude his statement.  

DR NDUHUURA: Madam Speaker, I am sorry for having sparked off that debate about Mbale but I think I will sit with Members of Parliament from Mbale and sort out this issue.  We have not failed because I have given the reasons.  However, I will have time to sit with hon. Wesonga Kamana, hon. Wopuwa and any other interested Member of Parliament from Mbale and so we can sort out this matter.

Hon. Sebuliba Mutumba was concerned that there are widows and orphans who are left with property but have no source of income.  The law provides for reduction on remission of payments by the Local Governments and the Minister of Local Government will spell out in the regulations how this will be handled.

Hon. Koluo raised the issue of commercial properties, which may not be occupied, and yet, the owner is required to pay tax.  Property tax is not an income tax. For instance, if you bought a vehicle and parked it, you might be required to pay the road licenses in arrears that accumulated when it was parked.

Hon. Nangodi is concerned about the exemption of official residences of traditional leaders. These are a few special people in our society who are entitled to privileges in accordance with Article 246 (3(c) of the Constitution. Madam speaker, I rest my case.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We shall proceed to the next stage in the afternoon.  However, before we suspend the House, I would like to welcome the students of Winston Boarding Primary School in Kawempe North.  They are on both sides of the Gallery, together with their teachers. Kawempe North is represented by hon. Sebuliba and honourable Commissioner Margaret Zziiwa.  Therefore, we thank them for bringing the children to Parliament. (Applause)  I hope one and a half hours is enough for members to sort out their small problems. The House is suspended until 2.00 p.m.   

(The House was suspended until 2.00 p.m.)

(On resumption_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I would like to welcome you to this afternoon session and to invite you to recognise students of Saku Senior Secondary School, Katikamu Sub-county, Katikamu South Constituency in Luweero.  

We also have students from St. Charles Lwanga Secondary School, Muko Sub-county, Rubanda County West, Kabale District, which is represented by hon. Hope Mwesigye and hon. Banyenzaki.  Thank you for facilitating the arrival of the students here.
  
MR AWORI: Madam Speaker, I seek your guidance on the safety, security and use of Parliamentary precincts outside the Chambers. One time, I raised the matter of filming of Parliamentary Buildings, or even using them for commercial purposes other than what is authorised in our Constitution.  

I noticed that there was a group of filmmakers two weeks back who used our facilities extensively.  Maybe they had your authority and consent or that of the Parliamentary Commission. I have never heard any apology except a small notice ton the effect that there would be some people making a film about Uganda or something about the last king of Scotland.  

As if that was not enough, I also noticed another group this morning. They have stationed satellite equipment in front of the Parliament Building. In my knowledge, Satellite equipment is for transmission of signals to distant lands, which the authority in the area where it is stationed must monitor.  I am not aware of this.

Madam Speaker, concerning the Last King of Scotland, when you make a film in a country, there are certain procedures one has should follow. I wonder if the Parliamentary Commission followed that procedure.  You should be given a script, be told whether it is documentary drama and know whether it is for or against the government of the country.

Again, using Parliament as a studio prop is very expensive.  In film production, when you have a studio prop, a mock or a mop of a Parliament or any other important building, it costs a lot of money.  If somebody comes here to make money using our property, are we not entitled to a fee of some sort?  

Today another group has come.  They are doing almost the same exercise. These people did a lot of harm to us in the past.  Only once did they do a promotional job, which was on Bwindi.  They have previously taken excerpts on Uganda and shown how bad things are.  

Madam Speaker, I seek your guidance. What is this exercise all about?  Are we benefiting anything from it?  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, you know my office is on the other side of the building. Therefore, I do not know much of what is happening at the front. However, I will cause both matters to be investigated and one of the Commissioners will give you a report shortly. I cannot give you an answer today.

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE LOCAL GOVERNMENTS (RATING) BILL, 2005

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think we have a technical problem because we need certain numbers to move to the next stage.  Maybe the Sergeant should ring the bell again.

MR AWORI: Madam Speaker, at the end of the morning session, I had requested your permission and I am glad due to the technical reasons you have already –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I hope you did not make arrangement for it.

MR AWORI: No.  I had said that in order for us to avoid that technical problem, we could continue with the contribution to the reports and some of the comments, which the minister was about to make or to complete. I had also requested that since I had a chance but had gone out to mobilise more members to come, I could use it now.  We went for lunch, so they disbursed again.  I wonder if I could get the opportunity of contributing to the debate, notwithstanding the Chairman’s completed report.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, honourable member, we actually completed the entire process, including the minister’s reply.  Therefore, I do not want to introduce strange procedures, which are outside our rules.  However, I said that you would be able to speak at Committee Stage.  

Therefore, while we are assembling our colleagues, and perhaps hon. Awori could assist us again, I suspend the House to ensure that all members come.  The House is suspended for 15 minutes.  

MR AWORI AGGREY: With your permission, could hon. Hope Mwesigye help me?

(The House was suspended at 2.40 pm)

(On resumption at 3.06 pm_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I am sorry we are unable to transact business today.

MS NANKABIRWA: Madam Speaker, I am standing on a point of procedure.  I understand we were supposed to finish this business today in the morning.  We agreed that we would come back in the afternoon and take this vote. When we came, you suspended the House for 15 minutes because we were few.  However, the few of us who have come are fulfilling our responsibility as Members of Parliament.  You have suggested that we do not transact Business because we are unable to raise quorum.  

Madam Speaker, I request that you call our names so that we put it on record. If we do not do that, we may go on like this and yet we have a lot of work to do. (Applause)  Our absent colleagues will know that when one is away, it will put on record, just as when you have laboured to come. We are sorry that we have not been able to make a quorum.

MR KATUNTU: Madam Speaker, the problem is pathetic.  We are all paid to come and work, but for some reason some members are not here. I think the problem is not to show the public that they are not here, but the responsibility of Parliament may have made it impossible for them to be here. I suggest that you use the authority and powers to caution our colleagues who are not in the House to make sure that they come.  Roll call cannot be an answer because the administration of this Parliament has that responsibility.  It is not provided for in our rules, although you are mandated to either warn or caution colleagues who are not in this House without explanation. They certainly have reason why they are not here. It is not deliberate; and they cannot explain by roll call, they can only explain when asked.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But how do I know who is not here?  

MAJ. GEN. OTAFIIRE: Madam Speaker, there is no way we shall know who is not here unless we know who is here.  That is why I humbly suggest that you take a roll call. We will then know who is here in order for us to know who is absent and hence irresponsible. I hope our request will be considered and I hope that it will make people more responsible. As you can see, the situation is improving; it is not as desperate as it was at the beginning.  

MR KAWANGA: Madam Speaker, while I understand why my colleagues are for roll call, I want to caution against setting a precedent.  Shall we be doing that every time we do not have a quorum?  

DR MALLINGA: Madam Speaker, it is our responsibility to attend Parliament. The regulations are clear.  If we are not here, we are supposed to notify the Clerk about why we are unable. This kind of behaviour is not proper and it should be stopped. There are people who are chronically absent from Parliament.  It has happened before and the only way it improved was to expose their names in the press. Their Constituencies knew that they were always absent from Parliament.  I think we should do the same.  

MRS MWESIGYE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to support hon. Abdu Katuntu who said that you should caution those who are absent.  Therefore, in order to caution them, you need to take a roll call so that we know them.  I have been running up and down with hon. Awori looking for people to come.  I suggest that we take a roll call so that we know whom to caution. 

MR KATUNTU: Madam Speaker, I concede. Let us take a roll call.  (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, when you came to this Parliament we gave you the Constitution and Rules of Procedure.  We have repeatedly appealed to you not to force us to use the powers vested in the Speaker to discipline you. However, it seems some members are incorrigible. I want to thank those who are usually here because I know them. In order to find out the errant members, we shall take a roll call.

(A roll call of the members was made)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Members, this exercise was in compliance with Rule 88 of our Rules of Procedure.  I know that there are a few people who are in hospital and others who are away with the leave of the Speaker. But we shall tally and let you know of the errant people.  Now that you are all on record, let us move to the second reading.

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE LOCAL GOVERNMENTS (RATINGS) BILL, 2003

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I put the question that the Local Governments (Ratings) Bill be read for a Second Time.

(Question put and agreed to)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Members, I would like to welcome our constituents from Bulinda and Nankoma in Bukooli County Central, represented by honourable Bernard Mulengani and honourable Lumumba.  You are welcome!

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE LOCAL GOVERNMENTS (RATING) BILL, 2003

Clause 1

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that Clause 1 do stand part of the bill.

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 2

MR BAGUMA ISOKE: Madam Chairperson, I wish to move an amendment on Clause 2, Sub-clause 1, to insert the following new definitions in the appropriate alphabetical order.  “Occupier,” includes any person in actual occupation of rentable property without regard to the title under which the property is occupied, and “owner,” means a proprietor whose interest in a particular piece of land is registered under the relevant laws of Uganda or any person who has a right to or concession over the particular land for an indefinite period.  The justification, Madam Chairperson, is for clarity of the words.  I beg to move.

MR AWORI: Madam Chairperson, I am seeking clarification from the honourable Chairperson of the Committee on the matter of ownership.  Have we considered the new occupants on the condominium?  A block of flats will have several owners.  Now, who is considered as the actual owner?  Is it the person who initially owns the whole block? Or you say that LR is for so and so- or you consider separate owners of each of the flat units?  Can you clarify?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Perhaps you should be asking the Minister.

MR BAGUMA ISOKE: On that point, the Condominium Properties Act provides that the individuals who own the different compartments, levels in a vertical building and in a horizontal building, but sharing common services and utilities form an association under which they cater for the utilities. For example: water, electricity, telecommunications, sewerage services, drainage, capturing and destroying rodents, night patrol and similar services and utilities.

Similarly, for the property rate, the same arrangement can cater for the payment arrangement.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Is that okay, honourable?

MR AWORI: Partly yes. I do appreciate the honourable Minister’s inputs. He has enlightened me.  However, there is a new development, Madam Chairperson.  I do not know what arrangements have been put in place to accommodate this particularly new situation.    I am referring to the properties owned by the National Housing Corporation, which have been eaten up, to 49 per cent by a foreign government.  How are you going to treat that matter?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: But doesn’t that property have owners? Even if it is 49 and 51 per cent ownership- does the shareholding affect the ownership?

MR AWORI AGGREY: Yes, it does, Madam Chairperson.  Because we have not been presented.  Madam Chairperson, I am raising this matter on the principle of questioning Government, which is giving away our property to foreign governments on the account of settling a debts.  I am bringing it up for the minister to enlighten this august House, because they are proceeding on a matter where some of us have very serious doubts. 

This is just a way of eliciting information from the government.  They should tell us exactly what is happening to this largest property owner in the country called, National Housing Corporation.  I am sure you know in terms of property, National Housing Corporation is the largest single owner of property in this country.  Tell us what is going to happen?

DR NDUHUURA: That we stand over this definition as I consult.

CAPT. (RTD) BYARUHANGA: The owners of that property have got a certificate in the percentages of the shares they own.  If it is a foreign company and our local company, they have a share certificate in percentages of which they own.  So they own that property jointly- they are joint owners.

MR AWORI: Madam Chairperson, it is not as simple as my honourable colleague simplifies it.  There are two components here, which may not be compatible: the Condominium Law, the PERD Statute, and Shareholding, all these factors have not been taken into consideration.  So I would like to go along the honourable Minister’s suggestion that we stand over it.  There are complications, which could take us into the courts of law for proper definition- three components, which may not be necessarily compatible.

DR OKULO EPAK: Madam Speaker, the Condominium Law does not relate to National Housing Corporation properties only, it relates to any property owned even by the individuals or by other companies, which have flats, which are to be sold.  So I appreciate his interest in this matter of the National Housing Corporation.  But we should not be led to think that it relates only to National Housing Corporation. 

Secondly, the intervention of the honourable Minister of Lands is good.  But you see, the services or the things he is mentioning have been mentioned specifically in the Condominium Law, which does not mention the question of payment of property tax.  So it cannot be covered indirectly, I would imagine so.  But the idea that we stand over this will probably overcome these difficulties in the course of time; we can find the best approach to it.  

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Okay, honourable Members, let us stand that over.   

DR NKUUHE: Before you rule on – they are using the word –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Nkuuhe, the mover of the motion says he cannot proceed unless he has consulted.  

Clause 3

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 3 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 3, agreed to.

Clause 4, agreed to.

Clause 5

MR KIWALABYE: When I read this clause I do not find any sense in it. Therefore, I suggest that the word “be” between “not” and “subject” be deleted so that the sentence makes sense; so that the whole clause reads” “The properties specified in the Second Schedule shall not, subject to the provisions of that Schedule, be liable to the rate”.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: He is deleting the “be” between “not” and “subject”. I put the question that clause 5 be amended as proposed by the honourable member.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 5 as amended do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MRS BYAMUKAMA: Madam Chairperson, I am sorry I missed out on clause 5. But when you look at the Second Schedule you find that No. 3 talks about exempted properties and it says, “Any property used exclusively for public worship together with the necessary cartilage.” My proposal is that we retain the part, which says “Any property exclusively used for public worship,” because when we say “together with a necessary cartilage” and we do not define the necessary cartilage, this may be a loophole for these places of worship, which are very rich and may get some of their many properties exempted.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Are you looking at the Schedule? We have not reached the Schedule; we shall do the Schedules separately.

MRS BYAMUKAMA: Okay, Madam Chairperson, it just says the properties specified in the Second Schedule, so I though that I would raise that issue now. But if we are yet to get there, then I will raise it then. Thank you.

Clause 6

MR BYABAGAMBI: We have decided to stand over the whole of clause 2, and clause 6 refers to clause 2, it is subjected to clause 2, then why should we continue with clause 6?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: It says sub-section (2) of the section (6).

MR BAMWANGA: Madam Chairperson, I want to find out whether there is a way we can really include the relief to be built within the law rather than leaving it to the minister to do it under the regulations. There are some people who may be unable to pay due to age or the property may not be occupied. But if you wait for the minister to do it in his regulations, some people may never access him. How can we build it in the law that we make? This relief will be exercised on those properties, which are not occupied, on those people who are unable to pay the rates.

MR BESISIRA: Is hon. Bamwanga trying to suggest that the minister may not include this concern in the regulations when actually in the morning, before lunch I made myself very clear that that concern would be addressed in the regulations to be made by the minister?

MR BAMWANGA: Madam Chairperson, I will be satisfied if it is clearly stated that in the regulations the minister will specifically include all those concerns of vacant positions of property and some areas, which may not qualify to be rated. The problem today is that people cannot access the minister to get this kind of relief at present.  

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable minister, if you recall an honourable member raised the same matters on widows and orphans who have got buildings, and people who do not earn. So what they are saying is, can it be built in here? Do they have that safeguard? Will put it in the regulations?

THE MINISTER OF STATE, LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Dr Richard Nduhuura): Madam Chairperson, I thought this sub-clause was very clear because is says in (2), “A local government may only reduce or remit the payment of any rate in any case prescribed by the Minister by regulations.”  So it is the local government. 

Hon. Bamwanga, the minister may have specified the areas of concern in the regulations. So, the right person to access is not the minister but the local government because your concern was that the minister might not be accessible because he is far drawn from the public.

CAPT. BYARUHANGA: Madam Chairperson, we could note all the properties or all categories of people who could be exempt and they will be in various local governments. The minister will give the regulations to local governments and the local governments will sit within their localities to review and assess the people who are unable to pay, like the widows, old people and following the regulations they will exempt those properties.  

Not that it will be accessible to the minister all the time because the minister cannot access all local governments. And the persons who are unable to pay cannot come to the minister themselves. It will be done by the local governments and it is within the regulations that the minister will make.

MR KAKOOZA: I want clarification from the minister. When you say that the local governments may only reduce or remit the payment of rates in a case prescribed by the minister’s regulations, I feel it can stand to be abused. There should be a particular percentage for instance when a property depreciates, that it attracts. When a percentage is instituted it cuts across everybody and somebody must know that this is a particular rate or percentage, which can be accounted for. But when you say that it can be any rate, it becomes a problem to anybody. Even the people who are doing this can use it to break this law. So, there must be a specific rate. You must qualify a rate, which cuts across so that it can benefit all.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: No, what this provision is saying is that the local government has no power to remit or reduce a payment of a rate unless the case comes from the minister. That is what it is saying. 

MR MUTUMBA: Madam Speaker, in the morning some of the points we raised touched on the URA tax regime on these properties. How is it going to be brought in line so that the owners of these properties do not feel overtaxed? Even in the morning we raised the issue of the property owners having to contribute some services to the local government of their areas, like on road lights. How are they captured when calculating the overheads on his house because if he paid money to tarmac the road or whatever, how then is he going to be assisted on this matter?

DR NDUHUURA: Madam Speaker, URA in this respect deals with income tax and this Bill is dealing with Property Tax. I am fully convinced that hon. Sebuliba, being from a city constituency, is very conversant with this subject. 

As for property owners who have been paying for services that should otherwise be provided by KCC, that is what this law is actually going to address because somewhere in clause 37 we will indicate the services due to a property owner who paid for the services that you enjoy. Therefore, when this law comes into effect the contract between the taxpayer and the service provider will be clear. There is going to be a special fund in which the collections will be put. The contract will be that the taxpayer enjoys the services, which the tax collector must provide. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Mr Minister, what members are asking is that after this law is made are you going to invite house owners to say which road they built and what lights they installed? That is their interest. If they have spent their money, how will it relate to the rates?

DR NDUHUURA: Madam Chairperson, my understanding is that if that was done before this law then there is not much we can do. But when the law comes into place the property owners who will have paid the tax will then have a right to demand for the services and this is exactly what this law talks about.

MR BAMWANGA: Madam Chairperson, I want clarification from the minister. There have been cases in Kampala and other urban areas where property owners offer services like road and lighting works, and garbage collection. When the local authorities come to collect taxes they do not ever refund the money that has been spent on those services. Where in the law are we going to make sure that these people can have that money off their property tax, or get the refund? 

There are already cases in the valuation court and precedents where people have spent so much money and the city council has not paid it back. They say that, “Before you did any job you should have asked us for permission”. When you go to get permission to do the job the city council officials refuse. That they want to be the ones to do the job; they then ask for the money that has been collected from the property owners so that they can go and do the job themselves. So where in the law are we protecting the people who carry out these services either to get a refund or to have their accounts credited on their tax liabilities? 

MRS BYAMUKAMA: Madam Speaker, I propose that we look at clause 6 more critically. When you look at 6(1) it is subject to sub-section (2). A local government may reduce or remit the payment of the rate in respect of any property. So here you are giving the authority to local governments to reduce or remit payment of the rate in respect of any property. But first go to (2), which says that a local government may only reduce or remit payment of any rate in any case prescribed by the minister or by the regulations. There is a slight conflict there. I think that the drafting should be that: “A local government may reduce or remit payment of rate in respect of any property as prescribed by the minister in the regulations”. 

Otherwise, when you subject the first one, which gives the local governments authority to the second one whereby the minister must prescribe regulations, you may have a conflict as to how this may be carried out. So, let the minister throw more light on that and we perhaps amend because there may be a problem in the interpretation. 

MR LULE MAWIYA: Madam Chairperson, just before he answers that, as the honourable colleague said about URA, when you are submitting accounts at the end of the year and your books on the property, he will depend on the percentages, which are made within a particular law. So if you leave it open and say under the discretion of somebody, it is likely to be abused. 

Two, the depreciation of the property as submitted by accounts cannot be the same all the years. One must have a basis. For instance when I am submitting for three or five years, the value cannot be the same. That is why in tax law we have percentages of depreciation. When you leave the rate open it becomes a bit ambiguous. So the minister should go back and locate a particular area where they can specify a percentage of it. It must be there.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, you know that this Committee Stage is supposed to be working together to improve on the text of the law. So, propose something instead of criticising this because you seem to have a solution. Can you propose something?

CAPT. BYARUHANGA: Madam Chairperson, these property rates are going to be determined by professional valuers and when they are valuing they put into consideration the depreciation for those five years because valuation is normally done every five year. When there is an improvement to the property that is also taken into consideration. So the professional valuers have a formula upon which they value the property rates - a particular number of years - and you cannot include it in this law.

MRS BYENKYA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I want to add information to Capt. Byaruhanga’s contribution. On top of the property rates having been done and the occupier is not satisfied, there is a tribunal of the local government to which you can committee your complaint. As far as garbage collection is concerned, the property rate is not supposed to include garbage collections. You are supposed to approach the tribunal and give in receipts, which show that you are getting these services from elsewhere, and it is supposed to be deducted. Therefore, the tribunal is supposed to cater for the complaints that the people might have as far as the property rates are concerned.

MR SEBULIBA MUTUMBA: Madam Chairperson, we are not trying to be stubborn but we want this tax to be understood by the people we represent. There is another question that I want to put to the minister. When we were making this draft Bill I think the tax on property by revenue was not yet in the offing. But now that it has come, how are they going to reconcile the two so that we can go and tell the people? There is going to be the tax regime from the URA, from the landlords, and this rateable tax.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Let us hear from hon. Okulo Epak.

DR OKULO EPAK: Madam Chairperson, I see sub-section (1) of section 6 as unnecessary. You give permission over “any property” and then in sub-section (2) it is subjected to those prescribed by the minister in the regulation. I think it is redundant. We can only improve on sub-section (2) and say: “Local Government may only reduce or remit the payment of any rate in any case prescribed by the minister by regulations”. That is all that is necessary in this clause. Otherwise, the statement in sub-section (1) is unnecessary. 

DR NDUHUURA: Madam, I have no objection to the proposal by hon. Okulo Epak to delete sub-section (1) of section 6.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Why? What is your objection?

DR NDUHUURA: I have no objection to it, I said.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: You have no objection? Okay. So, it can be re-formulated.

DR NDUHUURA: Exactly, Madam Chairperson.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: If we delete sub-clause (1), (2) will be sufficient because you say that they must get permission from you before they reduce. So, we delete sub-clause (1). Is that not so?

MR KIWALABYE: Madam Speaker, it is not all. I want to concur with the suggestion of hon. Dora Byamukama that the two must be reconstructed to become one. It is not a matter of deleting one and leaving the other; the two should be reconstructed.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Kiwalabye, sub-clause (1) says that the local governments may reduce or remit the payment of the rate in respect of any property. Then it says that local government may only reduce or remit in a case where the minister has prescribed. So sub-clause (1) is actually redundant. Unless he prescribes you cannot reduce. 

MR KIWALABYE: Hon. Okulo Epak was suggesting that (2) being redundant should be deleted but I share the view of hon. Dora Byamukama that (2) should be reconstructed so that –(Interruption)  

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: You propose a formulation. 

MR KIWALABYE: As she proposed.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Byamukama, can you say what the member is implying?

MRS BYAMUKAMA: I do not know who rejected it but anyhow -(Laughter)- what I was proposing is that we take 6(1) and say we take out the words “subject to sub-section (1)” and we start with “Local Government may reduce or remit the payment of the rate in respect of any property” and when it comes to 6(2) we cancel all the words and we include it in the issue of, “as prescribed by the minister in the regulation.” 

So it will read: “Local Government may reduce or remit payment of rate in respect of any property as prescribed by the minister by regulations.” That is what I proposed.

DR OKULO EPAK: Except for the need to do something with sub-section (1), what hon. Dora Byamukama has stated is exactly the same as what is in sub-section (2); it is exactly that.  

MRS BYAMUKAMA: We are saying the same things. We could have moved also that we delete (1) but what we are suggesting is that instead of having 6(1) and (2), we should combine them so that the clause reads that:  “Local Government may reduce or remit payments of rate in respect of any property as prescribed by the minister by regulations.” I beg to move.

MR KAKOOZA: I have a problem with the same thing because as you may remember, this Parliament refused some ministers to make exemptions within a law because you leave it to their discretion. Suppose I am a minister and I have a relative in Kololo, I will favour him! How do you leave it open like this? There must be a particular percentage, which cuts across the board for everybody. After evaluation a percentage must be determined and put across but when you say that it is under the discretion of the minister, it becomes problematic.  

CAPT. BYARUHANGA: The minister is making regulations, which will be across all local governments and boards, not making regulations for Kololo, Rwampara and Nyabushozi. No. It is across all local governments. So, how can you make a regulation favouring someone in Nakasero when there are regulations for all local governments? I really do not see the logic. 

MRS BYENKYA: After the regulations have been made, it is the local government to levy the tax, not the minister.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, let us move. If you want the regulations brought here, that will be a different matter but I think we should proceed as follows. 

I put the question that the clause be amended as proposed by hon. Byamukama.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 6, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 7, agreed to.

Clause 8, agreed to.

Clause 9, agreed to.

Clause 10

MR BESISIRA: Madam Chairperson, I wish to move an amendment to clause 10(1) paragraphs (a) to (g) to be substituted with the following:
(a)	Serial number
(b)	Detailed description of property including the plot number, street or road name of property and other relevant information, 
(c)	Owners’ name and address, 
(d)	Village and parish local council, 
(e)	Category of property use, 
(f)	Gross value of property, 
(g)	Rateable value of property.” 

The justification is to provide for more details in the valuation list. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Minister, I think you have no objection.

DR NDUHUURA: Madam Chairperson, I concur.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay.

MR KIWALABYE: I think the importance of this as the justification suggests is to give details of valuation lists. But under (b) as proposed by the chairperson, having named all this and saying “and other relevant information,” what is that other relevant information? I propose that if the list is exhaustive then that should be deleted.

MR BAMWANGA: I agree with the amendments being made by the chairman of the committee because sometimes when the valuers go out in the field, unless they capture all the details of the serial number, plot number and the owner’s names, you may find that in areas, which are not properly planned, they may put a property, which belongs to hon. Kadaga under the names of hon. Steven Bamwanga. So, we must make sure that all those things are listed as per the inspections to be brought back in the valuation list. These details must be included and that is how we normally approach it so that we do not confuse somebody’s property for another person’s. It will be wrong to assess you to pay rates for somebody else’s property.  

We have to get the plot numbers, the serial numbers and describe the property and the owner’s names so that everything that has gone on record is clear. If they make a mistake you will have to wait for the next five years to correct that mistake. That is why these things should be there.  

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Bamwanga, the objection of hon. Kiwalabye was under part (b) and “other relevant information.” That is what he is objecting to. I do not know whether hon. Epak can help us on that matter?

DR OKULO EPAK: Madam Chairperson, these details sound very plausible but some of them are not practical. If we are going to value all properties for instance in an urban area, not all properties have got plot numbers leave alone the fact that not all of them have got streets. So the list is good but supposing one of the requirements in the list is missing, what will happen? It could cause a query on the evaluation report because we are dealing with a law. If you are so rigid and information is missing, it can cause a query.

MR BAMWANGA: Madam Chairperson, this part talks about capturing. We are trying to say that while you are there you must capture as much information as possible. That is why they are including all these things but if something is not there, you do not have to create it but you capture as much information as possible when you are in the field.

DR OKULO EPAK: Madam Chairperson, then the alternative would be to use all.

MR KABAREEBE: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. What hon. Bamwanga is proposing is relevant. If the information is already known, for instance if a plot number is available then that subdues what hon. Kiwalabye is bringing about. Instead of using the plot number, if the plot number is not there, then we shall use any relevant information that is available, like a village, to define a place. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Bamwanga, what is the valuation list?

MR BAMWANGA: Madam Chairperson, the valuation list as put in the records includes all these serial numbers, plot numbers, names of the owners, location and gross value assessed by the valuers in the field so that any taxpayer can be able to assess that sheet at the local authority to verify whether the plot number is theirs or not, and they normally display it at the local authorities offices. So, it actually shows all the details of the property and the owners in an area.  

MR BADDA: Hon. Bamwanga says that we need as much information as possible and I agree with him. But as hon. Kiwalabye says, this part is not specific especially the words “other relevant information.” When we are making laws we must be very specific, who will determine the relevance? Some people may go and look even for irrelevant information calling it relevant information. I support the deletion of “relevant information”. Let us be specific.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Badda, supposing this property is mine and I have a mortgage, which I do not disclose?

MR BADDA: Let all these things be listed -(Interruptions)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: No, you cannot anticipate everything.

DR NDUHUURA: I invite my colleague, hon. Badda, to look at the phrasing of clause 10. It is specific. These are particulars in respect of any property and the list gives the particulars on location, nomenclature. In fact what is not mentioned by the committee and is taken care of by other relevant information is for example there could be a mailo interest on which there is a lease and sub-lease on top of the lease. All these cannot be listed here.  There can be a mailo interest or a freehold interest on which there is a lease for National Housing and a sub-lease for the condominium owners.  All this cannot be listed here. The relevant particulars on any property are what are covered by the “relevant information”.

MR KIWALABYE: Madam Chairperson, the construction of this clause is what is bringing problems because it says that every valuation list shall contain such particulars in respect of any property as may be prescribed. And that part would in fact cover any relevant information. But it goes ahead to say that a valuation list shall in any case include the following, and they are listed.  

Among the “following” listed you cannot include “any other relevant information,” because it is now mandatory that whatever is listed must be included specifically.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: So, what do you propose?

MR KIWALABYE: No, I already proposed something, Madam Chairperson. I said that this other relevant information should be deleted because it is already in the first part of the clause.

MR BAMWANGA: Madam Chairperson, you cannot limit yourself to only these items that are being mentioned. For example, when you go out in the field to do some inspections, some properties are under owner or occupier. Others are rented and sometimes the rates that are being paid, embassies that are occupying properties for example declare the rates being paid. So, if there is evidence in the field you should be able to record that information, which is relevant and can be crosschecked. It must remain there so that if the owner of the property is not declaring the information but you have managed to capture it from the tenant, you should have it.

MR KABAREEBE: Madam Speaker, supplement to that, you cannot make this law watertight when you know that it is going to take five years without it being touching at all. Suppose something happens after two years? That is why we are saying, “any other relevant information,” must remain there. It will remove the water tightness so that the five years can elapse safely.

MR BESISIRA: I want to convince hon. Kiwalabye. If I have land and property on leasehold, which belongs to Kampala City Council, when I am being valued for five years yet my lease expires in two years’ time, I must say that the reversion of three years goes to Kampala City Council. That is, “any other relevant information”.

DR NKUUHE: Madam Chair, I propose an amendment. From the discussion, we are not writing an evaluation manual. We are just writing a law. All those details should go in the Schedule. So I am proposing that it reads: “Every valuation list shall contain such particulars in respect of any property as may be prescribed - in fact - as prescribed in the Schedule”, and all these things should be listed in the schedule.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: No, honourable members, you cannot anticipate everything and put it in the law today. This is not feasible.

MR ANANG-ODUR: Madam Chairperson, I listened to my honourable colleague’s explanation. If you read the two sub-sections we are talking about, the first one says, “you have to have the items on the list,” but the second one is specific, “those items, which must be there.” So, it is a matter of grammar because the first one has given the broad mandate that there must be a list but this one is specific and if you have to talk about the specifics, you can now put others, which are covered in the first part.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: No, there is no first part. The first part is going completely and is being substituted with this. That is what the chairman proposed and what the minister agreed to.

MR MIKE SEBALU: Madam Chairperson, I really do not see the problems raised by hon. Kiwalabye because he seems to create an impression that it is a repetition but for purposes of avoiding doubt, we should have an enabling clause to cater for the unforeseen circumstances. It must be provided for in a good law to be able to pass the test of time and for flexibility. Otherwise, if you are restrictive you are bound to have problems and litigation because if someone cannot be handled in a restrictive manner, it creates problems. I think the idea proposed by hon. Dora Byamukama takes care of our concerns.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 10 be amended as proposed by the chairperson.

Clause 10, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 11, agreed to.

Clause 12, agreed to.

Clause 13, agreed to.

Clause 14, agreed to.

Clause 15, agreed to.

Clause 16

DR NDUHUURA: Madam Chair, I am proposing to delete the word “court” between valuation and the comma after quote, and substitute with it the word “list”. This is just a correction so that it becomes “valuation list” and not “valuation court”.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: These are objections to the list.

DR NDUHUURA: The justification is that this is just a correction because what is stated there is, “valuation court” instead of “valuation list” on the second line and in the marginal note. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Okay, I put the question that clause 16 be got out of the marginal note be amended as proposed by the minister.

DR NDUHUURA: Madam Chair, the marginal note is okay and it was okay until hon. Byamukama –(Interjection)- it is okay. I had been misled by hon. Byamukama.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: No, I put the question that clause 16 be amended as proposed by the minister. He said the word “court” is a mistake. It should be left “valuation list”.

Clause 16, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 17

MR BESISIRA: Madam Chair, I wish to propose an amendment to clause 17(1), to substitute the word “two” with the word “four” appearing at the beginning of the second line. 

The justification is that we are proposing a reduction in the number of members of the court to make it more efficient and manageable. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: What is the rationale for 2?

MR BESISIRA: Madam Chairperson, the Bill proposes: “the valuation court shall consist of a chairperson and four members and shall be appointed by the local government.” We are proposing that the valuation court shall consist of a chairperson and two members.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: What is the justification?

MR BESISIRA: We looked at –(Interruption) 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: But if one member is not present, how will the court sit? Suppose one member is sick?

DR NKUUHE: Madam Chairperson, I am opposed to the amendment because this clause has a number of problems. The valuation court having three members is very dangerous because they are just too few! What is the quorum going to be? What sort of court is that?

Secondly, are the members of that court engineers or architects or such persons? Valuation is a professional discipline and there are valuers so my concern is the number of –(Interruption)

DR NDUHUURA: Madam Chairperson, the membership we are referring to is of the valuation court of qualified people would have done the valuation itself.  

MR WACHA: Although our rules do not permit anticipation, the quorum of the court is provided for under clause 18. The quorum and the decision making process is provided for in another clause.  

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: You are saying that three people are okay?  

MR WACHA: I am saying this amendment is okay because then the court will not function unless all of them are there.  

MRS MASIKO: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson.  I would like to support those who are saying we should retain the provision that was there in the original Bill. As the quorum already has been defined, it does not mean all members. It means a certain portion of the people who are supposed to transact business. Therefore, I request the committee to withdraw reducing people to three and they keep them at five.

I would like to move an amendment to read: “Whether they are three or five, at least one should be a woman.”

MR SEBALU: The justification given by the committee does not apply if they claim that they want to make it more efficient and yet they are making it more restrictive in operation. It should be flexible in order to operate efficiently. So, I beg that the chairperson considers the justification and withdraws that amendment, since it does not simply apply. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Chairperson, if one of these members is sick for a whole year that court will not sit. If the third person is sick for the whole year, the other two will not sit.

MR BESISIRA: Madam Chairperson, I am withdrawing my amendment.  

MRS MASIKO: Madam Chairperson, allow me to move an amendment to clause 17(1): “The valuation court shall consist of a chairperson and four members and a-third of whom shall be women and shall be appointed by the Local Government.” 

MR BYABAGAMBI: I am opposing her proposal because I do not see how we are going to start legislating for sex wherever we go –(Interjection)– I am entitled to my views –(Interruption)

MS NANKABIRWA: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. With due respect to my colleague holding the Floor who said that we cannot sit here and legislate for sex, the Constitution, which is the supreme law of this land, has special provisions talking about gender. Is he in order to mislead the whole world, which is listening to us, that we cannot sit here and put right things that went wrong a long time ago?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable member, you are out of order. The Constitution is very clear.

MR WACHA: I really do not have any problem with hon. Masiko’s amendment but I am finding it difficult to do the arithmetic. What is a-third of five?

MR EBALU: Madam Chairperson, I think when we go into numbers we may get complications but we can say: “There should be a consideration for gender”. If we put consideration for gender they could all be even –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, let us be serious. Do you really want percentages?

MRS MASIKO: Madam Chairperson, I would like to defend what has been put forward. To get a-third of five you divide it by three and then if it does not make a whole number, you approximate it to the nearest whole number.  

MR WACHA: Madam Chairperson, can I amend her amendment to say, “The valuation court shall consist of a chairperson and four members, at least one of whom –(Interjection)– please, protect me. I am the one amending; they can amend it later.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, do not irritate the commissioner.

MR WACHA: At least one of them should be a woman because all of them could be women but I am providing for at least one position for a female.

MRS OKURUT: Madam Chairperson, what hon. Wacha is proposing calls for vagueness; there will be a lot of vagueness. So we should say: “Two should be women.” But when you say “at least”, that is vague. Two of them should be women, period. Thank you.

MRS BALEMEZI: Madam Speaker, I think we should be consistent with the laws. The Constitution talks of a-third. So let us maintain that because the Constitution states that any legal committee in Uganda should have a-third of the membership as women. So let us maintain that and if the one-third means one and a-half or one and a certain fraction, let it be rounded off to two. This is what is even happening in our local government committees and councils.  When they talk of a-third being women, on the councils, where it would mean three and a certain fraction, we have come up with four women.  

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, we should not really be arguing about this matter. The principle is accepted that they should be –(Interruptions)

MR BAMWANGA: I agree with you to have a lady there. But to say that out of the five we have two ladies, becomes very complicated because - let me give an explanation - what my sister Balemezi has said is about political appointments and executive offices. We are now talking about professional appointments. I am a member of the technical professions and we have got very few ladies. All members are engineers and architects.

MS KABAKUMBA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I am constrained to put this point of order. Is it in order for the honourable member to insinuate that there are no women who are qualified to sit on this board and technically evaluate whereas we know very well that they are there and can affirmatively be identified? 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: No, he is out of order.

Honourable members, I can find these two women: a grade I magistrate and a valuer. You cannot say they are not there! Even the third woman could be found, whether a magistrate or an architect.  

MS NANKABIRWA: Hon. Ben Wacha moved a motion over hon. Winnie Masiko’s motion. I would request that we dispose of hon. Ben Wacha’s motion and pass hon. Winnie Masiko’s motion.  

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Usually when they say, at least one, you end up with one. That is where the appointing authorities stop. That is a practice. So I put the question, hon. Wacha, are you saying something?

MR WACHA: Madam Chairperson, I withdraw.

DR OKULO EPAK: Will there be only one valuation court? It is not clear to me whether there will be only one valuation court to deal with petitions from all localities.  

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable minister, how many valuation courts do you have?

DR NDUHUURA: Madam Chairperson, it is with every local government.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Then that might present a problem. Now that the minister has advised us that there are many courts, we may have as many as 60 courts or probably more. We may have a problem of getting the two women for each of the 60.

MRS MASIKO: Madam Chairperson, my comment was on that. The law is very clear. Even those who made it said there will be engineers or architects or such other persons as the local government may think fit to appoint. So, it is so flexible that such other persons can be got.  

MR LULE MAWIYA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. Your statement was very important. I would like members to know that Kiboga District has up to now failed to get a woman representative on the District Service Commission. So what you are saying is very right and we are likely to face the same problem.

MS NANKABIRWA: Is it in order for hon. Mawiya to mislead this House that Kiboga District has failed to get a woman member of the District Service Commission yet we are still identifying which woman can best address the prevailing corruption in the district? The former chairperson has been a lady, she is there and she is still capable but because of other factors, which I cannot reveal here –(Interjections)- I cannot because we are still investigating, but the women are there. Is he, therefore, in order when he knows that you can even serve in any district in Uganda? It does not have to be from that very district - if Kampala has got excess, why not?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Some of those matters are under investigation so I do not know. However, members, let us be clear. This provision says we shall have engineers, architects and such other persons. The members are saying among the other such persons, we can find the women.  

MR BAMWANGA: Madam Chairperson, I want to give you the information. Much as we want to have the ladies on these valuation courts, it is going to be countrywide and in all regional governments. As you are passing this law I want to remind you that I happen to be on the Kampala City Council Valuation Court. In the first court we were only three people. One is a lawyer, hon. Sebalu, another member, an engineer and I, a surveyor. 

Then in the second court there are also three people and unfortunately, they all happen to be men. If you are going to have these courts in all local governments and you want to have five people, two of whom must be women, basing on my experience, there are very few ladies in those technical professions. I have a list of all the ladies in Uganda who are architects, surveyors, and valuers. So, please, take my advice. I am not being emotional. I am only trying to guide you. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable minister, how frequently does a valuation court sit? Is it a full time job?

DR NDUHUURA: Madam Chairperson, you ask whether this was a full time job and my answer is very precise, it is not a full time job.

DR WABUDEYA: Madam Chairperson, thank you very much. I would like to note that although this committee needs some technocrats, we have got a provision for such other persons. When we have principles we should abide by them. In our local governments we have talked about a-third representation of the women so I do not see the problem here. We cannot settle for anything less than one-third. There are many women out there who are educated, we have a specific programme for the girl-child education and I do not see how we can fail to raise female members for these courts. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: What the members are now saying is that we may have few girl engineers and architects, but have teachers, doctors and lawyers who are not chief magistrates and other professions.  

MS TUBWITA: Madam Chairperson, if we abide by the Constitution and talk about a-third, a-third of five is 1.7, corrected to the nearest whole number is two.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I am going to put the question.

MR KIWALABYE: If every small town in the districts, municipalities and town councils of Uganda is going to have this court, did the committee and the minister think about the cost vis-à-vis the revenue to be collected? In small towns the property to be taxed is meager. You put there a court and yet the court at the district would do the job, just like a District Service Commission is doing the job for the town councils. Would this cost not be reduced if we reduce on the number of courts?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable minister, you talked about all local governments having this valuation court. But my LC III is a local government, are you going to put a valuation court in my sub-county?

DR NDUHUURA: Madam Chairperson, this Bill defines what a local government is on page four: “Local government means a district council, a city council, a municipal council or a town council within the meaning of the Local Government Act.” So the district council will cater for the sub-county. The town council is defined as a local government in this Bill.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: But the honourable members raised a valid point. When we were making the Land law we provided for tribunals everywhere and then failed to implement it for some time. Have you taken into account the financial implications of these?

DR OKULO EPAK: Madam Chairperson, first of all the number of districts is becoming uncontrollable. Let us say we have 70 districts and town councils, municipal councils, city councils maybe are going to be about 40; that is already 110. Now you have 110 courts, where are the magistrates, advocates and grade I magistrates? This is going to suffer the same fate the land tribunals did and that is why I asked that question. But since we are still haggling with the question of gender representation. I did not want to raise this question whether it is a viable proposal. We could stand over this and go and look at it again and come back.  

DR NDUHUURA: Madam Chairperson, rather than standing over this very issue I would propose that we have a valuation court at the district to cater for the town councils as well. It would require us to go back to the definition of local government –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: We stood over that clause.

MRS MASIKO: Madam Chairperson, I just want to see if the principle is accepted so that even if we stand over that in form of numbers we still take the principle of a-third. That way even if they are three it is one of them if they are more then it is a-third of that. So if that principle is taken we do not have to revisit it.

MR WACHA: Madam, there was a motion on the Floor.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Yes, I was going to put the question. Mr minister you said you are coming back to us on the number of courts or have you already decided that we shall deal with it under clause 2 on numbers? 

DR NDUHUURA: Madam Chairperson, I am seeking clarification from you. Are you talking about the number of members on the committee or the –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: The number of courts.

DR NDUHUURA: The level of courts?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Yes.

DR NDUHUURA: Having realised that this is going to be almost an impossible job having these many valuation courts, I agree with the majority of the members in the House that we scale down and have one valuation court for every district.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable minister, can’t you do it at the region since they do not work everyday –(Interjections)- the valuation court does not sit everyday? You could think about it.

CAPT. BYARUHANGA: Madam Chairperson, we have had a problem with land tribunals at regions and most districts have been complaining. So, it would be better if they were based at the districts. Some districts have not accessed these land tribunals and there are very many outstanding cases. So, they are better at the district.

DR OKULO EPAK: Madam Chairperson, you have them at the district level but are they going to deal with cases from municipalities, cities and town councils? Who is going to pay them? Will the districts accept to carry the burden of sustaining the valuation court on behalf of all these other local governments? Let us stand over this, go and think about it. Why the hurry?

MR KABAREEBE: We have a similar situation in the Local Government Act where we have District Tender Boards when they do a job of a municipality that municipality pays for that day, so it is a delegated kind of job. Thank you.

MR BIKWASIZEHI: As the case has been of land tribunals, which are at regional level but have been handicapped because of lack of resources, they are few but not properly catered for. So, in view of the fact that we are moving towards a regional tier, we could peg this to the regional tier. Maybe it will be budgeted for because it is becoming too expensive at LC V. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: This area requires a little more thought. I do not know where you are –(Interruption)

MR BAGUMA ISOKE: On a serious note, objection to valuation is not a daily occurrence like land disputes are. Valuation is done once every five years and when the list comes out, the particular property owner, to whom a value applies, if the valuation is objectionable, applies to this court. 

The land tribunal hears disputes that arise on a daily occurrence, therefore, the court we are considering here is a part-time court and it may sit once in five years. After the valuation is done and the list is published then objections arise. Therefore, it is not too much to have a court at every district fully constituted in the way we have done one plus four. It is a part-time job. Tribunals are full time jobs. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Okay.  

MR KIWALABYE: I did not get the honourable minister clearly. Is he supporting his fellow minister that we have one court at each district? We are objecting to having very many courts.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable member, he is saying that the valuation court is not as expensive as a tribunal because it does not sit everyday and objections come once every five years. So, he says it is manageable to have it at the district level. Also, we agreed on five members of the court –(Interruption)

MR KABAREEBE: There is a case, which I understand very well. There is a stand off usually between municipalities and districts, which is very big. Yes, why I said that we had tender boards for example in the Local Government Act there was a stand off between Entebbe and Mpigi for example because the districts were now collecting the money but then failed to remit it to the municipalities and yet municipalities are completely independent of districts. Now that these courts are not regular and the municipalities, by the way have money, I would suggest that we have districts and the 13 municipalities. I beg to move, thank you.

DR NDUHUURA: Madam Speaker, I beg to propose that we stand over this matter so that we can consult and come back tomorrow with a clear answer.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Okay, clause 17 is stood over. I think clause 18 is also stood over –(Interjection)- no, we shall deal with them tomorrow.

Clause 18

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Clause 18 relates to 17 so we also leave it for the time being.

Clause 19, agreed to.

Clause 20, agreed to.

Clause 21, agreed to.

Clause 22, agreed to.

Clause 23, agreed to.

Clause 24

MR BESISIRA: I am proposing an amendment to insert the word “or” between the words “owner” and “own” appearing at the beginning of the third line. That should read: “Local Government may be on its own motion or on the application of an owner or on the request of the minister.” The justification is to make the sentence have sense.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Read the sentence again.

MR BESISIRA: I also wish to move another amendment to 1(a) to insert the word “supplementary” between the words “the” and “valuation” so that it reads: “Any property omitted to be included in the supplementary valuation list.” 

Justification: there is one valuation list in a period of five years. All additions are supplementary lists, and I wish to propose the deletion of paragraph 3(b) in the same clause 24(1). The justification is, the ratable period is five years. New properties are to be included because they have been upgraded in range. This may be abused to include properties, which are not ratable. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that Clause 24 be amended as proposed by the chairperson.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 24 as amended, agreed to.

Clause 25, agreed to.

Clause 26, agreed to.

Clause 27, agreed to.

Clause 28, agreed to.

Clause 29

DR NDUHUURA: I am proposing to delete the word “the” between the words “under” and “sub-section” and the justification is that it is redundant. So 5 will now read: “Every warrant granted under sub-section (4) shall be executed as if it were a rate of execution issued by a court of the Magistrate granting it.”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 29 be amended as proposed by the honourable minister.
 
(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 29, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 30, agreed to.

Clause 31

DR NDUHUURA: Madam Chairperson, on 31(2) I am proposing to delete the word “the” between “under” and “sub-section” so that it will now read: “The notice to be served under sub-section (1)….”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 1 be amended as proposed by the minister.

Clause 31, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 32

MR BESISIRA: Madam Chairperson, I wish to move that we delete the words “purporting to be” appearing at the end of the line and beginning of the fourth line. The justification is that the extract is not just purported to be an extract but it should be an extract of the evaluation list, which is certified by the CAO. So, it should read: “The contents of the valuation list” – let me finish because I have another one on the same. 

I also wish to insert the word “town” between the words “all and clerk” appearing towards the end of the fourth line. The justification is for the clarity that it is the Town Clerk we are referring to. So the clause should read: “The contents of valuation list as for the time being enforced or an extract from any such list may be proved by the production of a copy of the list or the extract of it certified by the Chief Administrative Officer or Town Clerk of the Local Government to be a true copy.”  I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 32 be amended as proposed by the chairperson.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 32, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 33, agreed to.

Clause 34, agreed to.

Clause 35, agreed to.

Clause 36, agreed to.

Clause 37

MR BESISIRA: Madam Chairperson, I wish to move that clause 37 be deleted and substituted as follows:

“Property Tax:
1.	A local government shall establish and administer a property tax fund, which shall be separate from the other funds from the local government.
2.	All monies collected from property tax shall be deposited on the account of the fund and subject to sub-section (3) shall be not be expended except for providing services such as road construction and maintenance, street lighting and anti-malarial drains, garbage collection, physical planning, and such other services required by the taxpayers within their areas. 
3.	The minister shall prescribe a percentage from the property tax collected in a year that may be spent by a local government on administrative matters, but in any case the percentage left for taxpayers’ services shall not be less than 75 percent.”

The justification is to ensure that money collected from property tax is as far as possible utilised on providing services to the taxpayers. I beg to move.

DR OKULO EPAK: This is a very plausible idea but if you expend valuation and rating to districts, some of the services to be provided or which a taxpayer may anticipate may be well beyond the money collected from valuation. We should be very careful about this provision. It may sound correct in terms of any urban area but once this facility is extended to districts, this provision is too ambitious.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: So what do you propose hon. Okulo Epak?

DR OKULO EPAK: What I am proposing is that perhaps say in relation to urban areas, you can respect it to that extent. I mean, you will collect a property tax from a house from somewhere in the village and the man is going to say, “I want a tarmac road here”. How would you do it? 

MRS BYAMUKAMA: Madam Chairperson, when you talk about urban and rural areas, here we are talking about town councils as well and town councils are in rural areas and the clause we are proposing states that –(Interruption)

DR OKULO EPAK: By law a town council is not a village. It is an urban area and it is gazetted. Location is different. The whole embodiment of what is called a town council is that it is an urban area; it is not a village. (An hon. Member rose)- maybe I just give her as information she withdraws the order. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON:  Let us hear from the other planner.

MS TUBWITA: Just for information, a town council can be a town council but when it has some undeveloped areas. But the town council itself is always considered as an urban area.

CAPT. BYARUHANGA: The import of this amendment is to ensure that money collected from property tax goes to service provision because we have had situations where money is collected from property tax and it is spent on administration and the taxpayers end up paying for the services. That is why the committee is very careful. It is using services such us road construction and maintenance, street lighting and garbage drains, and other services required by the taxpayers in those areas. 

Those in the urban councils require particular services and those in rural areas also require particular services. But the justification is that once I pay the tax I want it to go to service provision, because property tax is for service provision, so that people do not spend it on foreign tours and some other administrative expenses; and I continue paying that property tax.  

MRS BYAMUKAMA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I am really worried. I am wondering why hon. Okulo Epak came out with a point of order because when you look at clause 3(4) it says, “Notwithstanding sub-section (3), the rate maybe levied in any area outside the urban area in respect of a commercial building.”  

In rural areas of Kyenjojo issues to do with garbage collection and like hon. Capt. Byaruhanga said, we are talking about provision of services - like we had explained before, these services would provide an incentive for people to pay this particular property tax. Providing for it in this way does not mean that it is only for places where you may not be able to get street lighting immediately but where you can have a murram road, which is passable. You can explain that we collected the Shs 5 million being used on road construction in the area, from land. People would appreciate what the particular local council or what the particular entity is able to do for them.

MR ANANG-ODUR: Madam Chairperson, as it has been stated, the purpose of this law is to enable those who are going to collect the money to provide for service provision. In my neighbourhood I have got a very small trading center with two blocks. I understand they are going to assess them and pay rates. The nearest small town is over eight kilometers away. When the money is collected from these two owners of properties there, what service will be delivered to those two people in my area?

MR SABIITI: I am happy with this clause but for emphasis’ sake, the identification of these important services should be highlighted in this sub-section. For example, you have left out sewage disposal and water supply. In my opinion we should identify the most important services that are really needed in these areas. Leaving out sewage disposal and water supply in my opinion pushes them to seem secondary.

Secondly, I have a similar problem with my brother Anang-Odur. We are coming up with these rates because we have services. There are areas where you find that services are not provided. What will the residents of that town do? Because this is a very important matter, if they collect this money, not much is coming up in the city, you are continuing to pay these rates. Can a citizen have an option to withdraw from paying these taxes since you cannot provide these services? 

So in the case of the two or ten blocks outside a town or a municipality, are you saying these blocks can be valued and then you start paying rates yet there is no service provided for such people? I would like the minister to rectify this.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: But don’t you agree that there should be a certain minimum, which somebody should expect? There should be a certain minimum. So, this should be mentioned. Are our villages static? Don’t they change? Are the two blocks remaining there for the next ten years?

MR SABIITI: What I meant was, there are certain services that are required in the city. Then you can say “any other” taking into account that tomorrow given technologies and whatever, such services will also be required. But for the moment I expect certain services like sewage disposal, garbage collection, water supply and lighting to form a core of the services that we need.

MR WACHA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I want to take off from where hon. Jack Sabiiti left off. I am a member of the committee and I raised this matter in the committee but I am surprised it is not here. It is very nice to have provision 37(2) but then there must be an oversight clause because if you say these services should be provided, what happens if they are not provided? 

I proposed to the committee that there should be clause 4. In Zimbabwe property owners formed themselves in an association to see that the services for which the tax are collected are actually provided. Therefore, I would want to move an amendment.

MR KABAREEBE: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Thank you very much hon. Wacha. I want some clarifications from hon. Wacha. As much as we are targeting 75 percent, we know generally that taxation is non quid pro quo. In Kampala if they are collecting this tax, the accountability should be provided. For example, if you are collecting taxes from Kololo, Kololo has electricity, water and drainage systems are connected to the sewer and the roads are maintained. But now if you go down to Kamwokya, some of the roads there are impassable; some of them are murram with a lot of ditches; there is no water supply down there and no lights. Now what Kampala does, it collects money from Tororo and does the maintenance that is required in Kamwokya.  

The general percentage you are talking about is not for every specific location. That is why I am saying, as much as we are attaching this figure, it is general for the development of the whole area. We know that taxation by the way is one way of distributing wealth and it is non quid pro quo. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

MR WACHA: I thank hon. Muzoora for that comment but I still maintain that there has to be some revision for oversight. It doesn’t matter whether the money is collected and then used somewhere else. As a ratepayer I am entitled to the provision of taxes from the rates I am paying. That is basic. It does not matter what the principles of taxations are. I am paying rate and I insist that my road must be maintained and I am entitled to street lighting and disposal of sewage. That is the basic point. So, as ratepayers we can come together and say, “Look why are you not doing this in our area; why are we being discriminated against?” That is the purpose for the provisions. I am going to propose, if you can accept.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Please do, certainly the proposal is welcome because –(Interruption)

MR BAMWANGA: I want to support hon. Ben Wacha’s proposal.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: He is going to move it. When he is ready, he will move it.

MR BAMWANGA: I know what he is going to move.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Are you ready to move now?

MR WACHA: Madam Chairperson, I accept people to develop my proposal.

MR BAGUMA ISOKE: Madam Chairperson, the innovation of the committee in as far as it provides for a fund to be accounted for by the recipient urban authority, I support it. However, let us look at clause 37 as it is in the bill. It says: “The proceeds of the rates levied under this Act shall be accounted for and applied in accordance with the Local Government Act, 1997 and any regulations made under that Act.”  

The Local Governments Act, 1997, is more comprehensive than what the committee is providing in the amendment. For example, it is providing for 26 areas of service delivery that a property owner has to demand from urban authority. If you can allow me, I will read them. They are: lighting of streets and public places, fire brigade services, ambulance services, clinics, dispensaries, inoculation centres, cemeteries, crematoria, mortuaries, omnibus stations, offices, workshops, disposal buildings for purposes for public use, public halls, libraries, galleries, museums, slaughter houses, cold storage facilities, premises for inspection, markets and piers, jets landing places, botanical, zoological gardens, public baths, swimming pools, laundries and other public places for washing, canteens, social centres, clubs, including such facilities for employees and staff, public lavatories and urinals, grounds for stray animals and clinics for treatment of sick animals and pets. Others are camping and grazing grounds, dipping tanks, disinfecting stations, public weighing machines, public monuments, sanitary services for removal and disposal of night soil, rubbish, carcasses of dead animals and all kinds of refuse and effluent, water supplies outside jurisdiction of National Water and Sewerage Corporation, education services, which cover primary and secondary schools, special education, trade, technical schools, maintenance of roads - that is one category. 

There are other categories two and three, which are very comprehensive in the Local Governments Act.  

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: But, honourable minister, all those services are supposed to be rendered from the other income, the general income of the local government, not necessarily from the property tax. There are things, which are specific to the property rates.  

MR BAGUMA ISOKE: I agree but provision of the services, even the minimum that the committee has listed requires more funds than the rates that are being collected. We run into a danger of the local governments only committing the money collected from the rates for the provision of these services. One member mentioned -(Interruption)

CAPT. BYARUHANGA: The information is on clause 37(2). We said, “Such other services required by the taxpayers within their areas”. Those services are very clear and I actually welcome the import of hon. Wacha where we have the associations of property owners and occupiers so that they can demand these services. 

The only problem I had with hon. Jack Sabiiti was about the sewage disposal and the water supply. We have a problem that not all these services are provided by the local government. The sewage disposal and water supply are under National Water and Sewerage Corporation, which is an independent corporation and it is not under the local governments. This is where we have the problem. 

The lighting can be provided but still, is it UMEME now or what? It has also to come in but we are trying. I do not know how we shall harmonize these corporations with the local governments, but the import is that at least we wanted a bigger percentage of the property tax to service the properties where it is being got, because the problem we have been having is that property tax has been collected and people provide their own services. That is why there is resistance. So, we want the money to go for the services for which we are paying for rather than paying for them and I repair my road and I collect my garbage. It would not sound well.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Minister of Lands that list takes away my right to demand. I might say I want a road and the mayor would say, “I built a library”. Yes, he built a library this financial year, why are you talking about a road? I might say, “I want street lighting,” and he says, “No, we have been disposing of a dog”.

MR BAGUMA ISOKE: Madam Chairperson, the institutions that collect this tax are public institutions to which leaders are elected periodically and are answerable to the people who elected them. That alone will ensure that the representatives of the people in the councils as proposed go for this service delivery. We need not to legislate it, otherwise –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Mr Minister, you are saying that this property tax should go to the general funds of the local authority? This is why I am saying you are taking away our right to demand for services arising from property tax.

MR MWONDHA: Madam Chairperson, the Minister of Lands has the right approach. Budgeting is a central function, you are now asking each individual taxpayer to budget for his own taxes, or her own taxes, which is not possible. There are services that will come from other monies collected from elsewhere. We are not saying that sewerage and what have you will be met from property tax alone; we cannot say that. Therefore, the provision as it stands in this Bill is okay.  We can add a pressure group - as hon. Wacha has proposed – an association of taxpayers simply as a pressure group, but we cannot go into budgeting here in this Bill.

MRS MASIKO: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. I also need some clarification especially from the committee. I do realise and agree that the reason why they put all this is to check the misuse of funds. I do totally agree with them because most of the money goes to capacity building. But then if you put it here in detail, I think it might not really be as good as you have put it. I want to bring a scenario from my district. I guess we are going to get money from some of these commercial buildings. Suppose you have only one commercial building situated deep in one of the villages and that is the only big building that is there, and most likely that is what is going to attract the property taxation. If the money is got from that building and is taken to a fund and you leave part II as it is, don’t you think you are likely to make it difficult for planning purposes? 

Don’t you think if I come and say, “I had this building, you have already taxed it, I need a road, I need electricity, is that possible?” Don’t you think it is stretching it a bit too far? The reason is that you could perhaps have clarified how to make sure that this money is not abused but legislating and saying this should be used for such purposes, I think you are going into much detail, which may be difficult to undo in case it is put down and somebody in a rural area demands for such services.  

I just want to be clarified on how you can really make sure that rural districts do not fall into a problem in trying to make people understand this kind of law you are going to put in place.

MR ARUMADRI: Madam Chairperson, the complication arising from this is that there is too much of Zimbabwe in this Bill. The committee visited Zimbabwe and the settlements there are different from ours. Zimbabwe and Kenya were supposed to be white settlements, colonies, not protectorates like Uganda. Their settlements are kind of urban; ours are scattered villages, uncles are this way, brothers are on the other side. So to say that we are going to provide certain services out of the rates is going to cause complications. If there is a leeway in a legal manner somebody can raise the issue and say, “I have paid this tax, I want services here or else next financial year I am not paying any money.” So, we need to do re-study this particular matter. Thank you.

MRS BYAMUKAMA: Madam Chairperson, I am surprised that when we use certain countries as samples for educating purposes it becomes an issue. We made several consultations with other people and Zimbabwe is just a case in point. We know that in principle we pay tax in this country in order to get services. So, what we are developing here is a culture, which would make people pay tax without looking at tax as being punitive. 

At the end of the day what we are saying is that – and the Minister of Local Government had said it yesterday - when you pay tax and it goes to a pool, it is very difficult for the local government to show cause to people as to why they should pay tax. That is why we thought that apart from the list, which hon. Baguma Isoke has read, which is very general and comes from other taxes, when a person pays property tax and there is a fund and that person is able to sit with others and say, “Look in our little fund I understand there is so much money, why can’t we have this road periodically maintained?” This is why we have come up with that idea. 

Whatever examples we may be citing from Zimbabwe or elsewhere are really educative and they are to show us how organized we can be and maybe how better as a country we may be. So when we cite examples, this is not because there is so much in Zimbabwe. It is really learning and using best practices as benchmarks for our law and coming up with a better law for all of us.

CAPT. BYARUHANGA: A property tax elsewhere in the world is a service related tax. For property tax to be paid and to be accepted by the people paying that tax they demand services and once their properties are not serviced they resist the tax. So, property tax is not only in Zimbabwe, it is throughout the world. Go to the United States and other countries you will find that property tax is a service related tax. So, there is no way – the budgeting in Uganda I know is based on cost centres but not on service delivery. But if we have to say that we are putting property tax into law now, it must be based on service delivery otherwise people will resist the tax like they were resisting graduated tax. That has to be borne in mind. 

MR BAMWANGA: Madam Chairperson, we are looking at a social contract between government and the civil society that you do not get something for nothing. Already people are struggling to put up these small houses for either owner occupier or for renting out and if the property is not accessible, if the property is in a slum area, it will not attract that rateable value you are you trying to access. Therefore, it is important that we list the minimum of the services that the ordinary Ugandan should expect. Let us forget about Zimbabwe because that is a very established system with all the infrastructure. 

For an old man retired from the civil service living in Katwe, if city council comes and knocks on the door of that old person and says, “Pay property tax”, the area is surrounded by mosquitoes, you cannot access the place; the whole thing is shanty. What property tax are you paying for? I can understand paying graduated tax and income tax, but the tax should be commensurate to the services that are being delivered to that property. I thank you.

MR KABAREEBE: Madam Chairperson, I can see a conflict arising now because of the 75 percent mentioned here. In the Local Government Act there is already a formula for distributing resources. The 25 percent is virtually for LC I and the minister is aware that that 25 percent has no work. So until that law is harmonized with this one, you are talking of 75 percent, where is it used in the area? Are you talking of the district or you are talking of 75 percent at the sub-county? Are you talking 75 of 25 percent? Until you harmonize that it will not be possible to distribute that money. Otherwise, the only solution we can have is to say that all the money from property tax must be conditional on service delivery.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable member, that is the amendment, which the chairperson brought. He is saying they want the property fund specific and separate from all the other accounts. That is what the chairperson was proposing.  

MR WAMBUZI: Madam Chairperson, we have debated this adequately. It is true that even some ministers in this country are resisting to pay property tax because –(Interruptions)- oh, the Minister of Works, he told us himself that, “We in Naguru we are not going to pay property tax because these guys have refused to give us any service. So, what is the reason for us to pay tax?” Therefore, something has got to be done about the proposal of hon. Wacha and the chairperson. 

I beg procedurally that we have to resolve this in one way or the other because there is a crisis. Even if we pass this law as it is, until we have built in the mechanism for actually people to complain in an orderly manner, that money is being squandered and the service is not being delivered. This law is going to be the same as the old law. Procedurally we should encourage hon. Wacha to move his amendment or resolve on what the chairperson is suggesting so that the debate goes on.  

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I do not know whether you are aware that the Vice-President and I have been blamed for failing to repair a road, which belongs to Kampala City Council. Many letters have been written, “The Deputy Speaker passes here every day, even the Vice-President, can you imagine!” They are asking us to repair the road. So, there is a proposal from the chairperson that property tax be put in a separate tax fund to deal with the services, which he has mentioned.  

The honourable commissioner said that the minister should not only just prescribe how it is done but we the taxpayers should be able to have a say on whether things are happening or not happening. So, do you accept that we should have a separate property tax?

HON. MEMBERS: Yes.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Okay, let the commissioner move his amendment.

DR OKULO EPAK: Madam Chairperson, meanwhile may I give this information? In practice the amount of money expected to be used to provide initial services for any development is premium, not property tax. If you apply for lease of any property you pay a premium and in a well-calculated system the value of the premium must be sufficient, reasonably and adequate to provide initial services.  

The ground rent would be expected to provide maintenance if you want, but not to provide initial services. So, we are dealing with several taxes, which are relevant. So far there is a provision of services like roads, water, drainage and street lighting. If you wish you would have to go back and say the premium must also be deposited in a separate fund. This is why we are saying that when you develop this industrial estate, they will value the land in such a way that if they are selling or if they are leasing the premium should be able to cover it. 

The only problem we have is the category of people who have land and do not develop it, and that is why hon. Bamwanga was saying we should not think of introducing such a tax on undeveloped land because this land on which a lot of money has been spent you are not getting any premium from it.

The other category, which is creating problems are the people who own freehold and mailo land, which are basically freehold and now customary. These are now assumed owners of the property and they will only be leased from them, not from a local authority and you will not benefit from their premium and ground rates. So may be this property tax will be of great value in harnessing resources for providing services. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, let us deal with the hon. Wacha’s proposals. If you have agreed with the principle of a property fund separate from the other graduated tax, let me read the proposal by hon. Wacha. They proposed section 37(4), which reads: “Property owners and occupiers in any locality may form themselves into a ratepayer’s association to oversee the provision and delivery of services under sub-section (2).” What is unconstitutional?

MR KABAREEBE: There is a structure of administration. Administrators are there and then we have got the elected people representing those people you are talking about. You are now bringing another element of the structure into a law. To start from the top, constitutionally they do not have associations to do that. So when you go down you zero down on the service delivery. These people you are talking about have got their representation and councillors. This is why they are there so that they can now lobby for their properties. You cannot bring an association in law. How?  

MR KAKOOZA: When you look at the essence of property tax in areas or neighbouring countries, the essence of it is just to generate local revenue to be utilized in those particular, local areas. For instance in Kenya there are local authorities who get the revenue and cater for the services within those particular areas. That is why within those areas they are called rates and property taxes. When you say that they provide streetlights, roads and the rest, that is a different tax whereby it is given as general. The property taxes lose a meaning.  

The main purpose, as a principle in taxation, is that property tax is supposed to generate revenue to be utilized because the corporate bodies within those areas make a provision and provide services depending on that amount generated from that particular area. That is what it means. When you use it in another meaning then you are corporating, as hon. Muzoora said, it becomes a different tax altogether.

DR NDUHUURA: I have failed to understand the contribution by hon. Kakooza because all we have been saying is that property tax will be levied and collected into a special fund for the purpose of providing services. I think this is agreed and at least some of the services have been mentioned in this law. The only thing I am waiting for is the enforcement and how to ensure that services are going to be provided to the taxpayers, and hon. Wacha has come in handy. So I want to plead with colleagues that we look at the amendment being proposed by hon. Wacha and improve on it. But in principle we should have something in this law that forces the local governments to provide services using the funds they have collected and put in a special fund. This is how I feel we should proceed.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I think you are right because surely, how can you say that because I have a councillor I should keep quiet?  

MR MADADA: Madam Chairperson, I agree with the amendment proposed by hon. Wacha but at the same time I want to move an amendment to sub-clause (2) whereby I would like us to delete the examples given and move as follows: “All monies collected from property tax shall be deposited on an account of the fund and subject to sub-section (3), and shall not be expended except for –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Madada, we are handling the proposal from hon. Wacha, a new sub-section (4). That is what we will be addressing.

MR MADADA: Yes, I am saying to be able to support that proposal. I would like to move an amendment to sub-clause (2) and delete the examples given and say that: “Services that shall be required by taxpayers within these areas.” It is general because these services differ and when we say, “required by taxpayers within their areas,” we will be solving the problem of the various services that may be coming in.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: A manager of a property must provide certain basics. There must be a minimum that you expect from the manager of the property because you are going to put in place markets.  

MR WACHA: Actually, what hon. Madada has said is provided for under sub-clause (2), the last two sentences: “and such other services required by the taxpayer will then …”. It is already there. So I think that caters for – these specifications are just examples. Can I propose that you put the question to my amendment?

MR BAGUMA ISOKE: This is a good innovation as I said but how do we cure the inadequacy of the collectable fund to provide the requisite services of even a single service? I know what percentage of the value of a property is rateable, just as I know what ground rent is paid on a property. This money is not much. How do we cure the inadequacy? 

One way would be that since this is becoming a statutory fund, just as the land fund is, let us adequately provide for it. The rateable tax is one source and appropriation may be another source. Let us look for other sources. Otherwise establishing a statutory fund to provide a service will cripple service delivery because elsewhere I know what percentage of a property is rateable.

MRS BALEMEZI: Madam Chairperson, in addition to what the minister has said, I want to get clarification. This property tax had some rates, how much should be demanded from some properties? We are aware it is the Town Clerk or the accounting officer to be the signatory to this account and he is the one to say withdraw, discharge and direct as to where these services should be done. 

If we introduce another body who will be the overseers of the association to be formed? I think we are creating another body within the established administrative body to be overseers over almost the same funds. I look at these funds as funds, which were thought of - since we withdrew this graduated tax we should be aware that our local councils as of now have very little revenue collected. So the property tax is going to be sort of the supplementary income for local councils.  

I come from a town council, which has already started collecting property tax and –(Interruption)

MR WACHA: The person holding the Floor is our vice-chairperson. I am surprised that she is taking a different line. This small matter, which I have just introduced on the Floor, was discussed in the committee. The minister accepted it, the Permanent Secretary accepted it, and the technical people accepted it. This is why you saw me going to them and they said they did not know why it was omitted. Really, Madam, this is your baby so do not throw it out with the water.

MR KAKOOZA: Madam Chairperson, what we are trying to do and what the honourable member is saying, even if she is the vice-chairperson is that what we want to do is a practical part of it, which can be implemented. When you say that graduated tax was removed –(Interruption)

MRS BYAMUKAMA: I really feel very perturbed especially when I have been closely following the discussion of this particular Bill since it began up to this point in time. I have heard very clearly the minister who is the owner of the Bill agreeing to the three principles we are deliberating on: establishment of the fund, provision of services, and accountability. Therefore, is it procedurally right for us to keep on going backwards and forwards on issues, which the minister has already supported? I find a problem with this.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: No, it is not. Let us not give the wrong signals. This Bill came here in 2003. I do not know whether at that time the graduated tax had been removed so as to make it a substitute. The other day I heard the President saying just recently that there is going to be no tax. So, let us not give the idea to local governments that this is the solution. A property tax is a property tax.

MR KAKOOZA: Madam Chairperson, to emphasise my point, which I feel is happening –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: No, honourable members, we are considering hon. Wacha’s motion. This is what we are doing. You speak for or against it –(Interruption)

MRS BALEMEZI: Madam Chairperson, I want us to get a clarification especially on - because we are introducing the association. I want us to get a clear clarification on the accounting officer, the person who will be receiving this money and this monitoring board. 

Hon. Wacha’s suggestion is bringing in the association instead of the monitoring board. This is what I want to get a clear clarification on. How shall we be handling these two bodies in the same council as far as these funds are concerned?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I did not understand him to mean that the ratepayers will sit in the council, no. I thought what the amendment means is that where things are not working the ratepayers are entitled to ask questions, not to sit in the council. Do not throw away your rights –(Interruption)

DR NDUHUURA: I want to make it very clear that the establishment of the ratepayers’ associations is not in conflict with any law. It is being proposed in good faith. The ratepayers are entitled to the services for which they have paid. So, I do not see any problem with having an association putting pressure on the service providers. They are not part of the local council system we have in place, so there is no conflict.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I am going to put the question. I put the question that a new clause 4 be introduced as proposed by hon. Wacha.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 37, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 38, agreed to.

Clause 39, agreed to.

Clause 40, agreed to.

Clause 41

MR BAGUMA ISOKE: Madam Chairperson, I wish to move an amendment to clause 41(2) to have it replaced as follows: “Notwithstanding the repeal effected by sub-section (1) any rate levied by a local government and anything done under the repealed decree shall continue in force and a tax shall be collected as if that decree had not been repealed, until a replacement is made under this Act.” 

The justification is that the original provision caters for only tax levied and leaves out other actions taken under the decree. All actions taken under the decree should be saved under this Act. I beg to submit. The original one says: “Notwithstanding the repeal effected by section (1) any rate levied by a local government under the repealed decree shall continue in force and shall be collected as if that decree had not been repealed until replaced under this Act.” Here we are saying that there are other things apart from the taxes. This is why we are replacing it.

CAPT. BYARUHANGA: Some ratings were done in Kampala City Council and some other towns and they have already submitted the valuation lists. So we say before we effect this Local Government Act and make up a new valuation list, those ones that have already been done by the valuation committees, which were set up, which were paid for by the local governments should continue in force until we make new valuation lists. So, it is like a transitional provision.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: There is no problem; it is a transitional provision. I put the question to clause 41 as amended by the chairperson.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 41, as amended, agreed to.

The First Schedule

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that the First Schedule do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

The Second Schedule

MRS BYAMUKAMA: I had moved a proposal on the Second Schedule, on exempted properties, part 1(3), which says that: “Any property used exclusively for public worship together with the necessary cartilage,” should be amended to read, “The only exempted properties should be any property used exclusively for public worship”. 

When you look at the issue of “together with the necessary cartilage” unless we define what the necessary cartilage is, this particular clause may be used to avoid tax. So, in the spirit of the debate that has hitherto been supported in this House, I beg to move that we amend this particular item accordingly.

CAPT. BYARUHANGA: Madam Chairperson, some of these churches are just commercial churches –(Interjections)- and they collect a lot of money. They put on a small church for worship and they have other –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable member, can you say the place of worship? (Interruption)

CAPT. BYARUHANGA:  Some of these places of worship have commercial interests other than having Godly interests only. They have got commercial properties, which they rent out and from which they collect a lot of money. So, unless the place of worship and these other commercial properties are charged, we shall not have done good service to these properties. I am supporting it.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Supposing a cemetery is attached to this facility?  

MRS BYAMUKAMA: Madam Chairperson, when you look at 4 it says: “any property used exclusively as a cemetery or as a crematorium.” Therefore, if there is a Church and it has a cemetery next to it, then this is also exempted.

MR BYABAGAMBI: Most of these worship places are registered as NGOs; they are not supposed to be making profit. But then they go ahead, for instance if you look at the Catholic Church you find that they have got estates but the money they get from these estates they use it to support other organizations like orphanages. So, why should we tax them? I do not support her motion. It should remain as it is here.

MR SABIITI: May I know from the chairperson or the minister what they mean by “necessary cartilage”? Because I agree with hon. Byabagambi that these Churches are a social service, they help in re-engineering the moral characters of our people. Therefore, if a Church for example the Catholic Church, Protestant or Mosque, has certain businesses, which businesses are clearly defined and it is for collecting money to help the poor, surely there is no way we can come here and start taxing them. So I want to know from the chairperson or the minister what “necessary cartilage” means?

MR WACHA: I think my colleagues are not reading this thing exhaustively. If you read part V - hon. Byabagambi, I am talking to you - part V of the Schedule says: “Any property used exclusively for purposes of any charitable or educational institution of a public character supported only by endowment of – this covers what you are talking about. My brother, Jack Sabiiti, honestly you are much better than that!

DR NDUHUURA: Madam Chairperson, the mover of the amendment, hon. Byamukama, proposed that we make this deletion or define what “necessary cartilage” is. I am in support of defining “necessary cartilage” under clause 2, which we stood over, so that when we come next year we shall have the definition of “necessary cartilage”. When we come here next time we shall come with a definition of “necessary cartilage” under section 2, rather than deleting it from the Schedule. In other words I am proposing that we maintain the necessary cartilage under 3, part I but then define “necessary cartilage” under -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: You are asking us to stand over the clause because if you are opposing that we maintain section (3) we must vote before you come back to the definition. So, we either stand over –(Interruption)

DR NDUHUURA: Can I harmonize my position with hers? In her contribution she said or she stated that we define “necessary cartilage” or delete it. I am saying that we should maintain it and instead define “necessary cartilage” under section 2.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: What is “necessary cartilage”? You inform this House now. What is it so that we know whether it is necessary to wait until tomorrow or we finish it?

DR NDUHUURA: My understanding of the phrase  “necessary cartilage” is that apart from the house of worship, there are other properties, which are used by the institution like the residences of the pastors and the bishops, which properties do not generate income or if they do, it is for purposes of running the Church. That is my understanding of the phrase “necessary cartilage”. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: So, would it not fall under 5?

MRS BYAMUKAMA: Madam Chairperson, when we debated this yesterday, I want to be very frank and I know this is very sensitive, it was noted that we have very many places of worship and elsewhere in the world there is imposition of some minimum tax. Because when they are very many it means that the neighbours will have to supplement some of these services that the Churches enjoy. So, it is not that we do not appreciate what the Churches do but where you have very many places of worship and you have cartilages in the range of I do not know how many properties, then the subsidizing can become ridiculous and those who are paying property tax will be over burdened by virtue of having undefined properties in form of necessary cartilage. So, it is really in good faith. I know people who go to these public places of worship believe in the principle of sharing. Therefore, they should share the burden with the rest of the community. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I think this is a rate paid once in five years. Can that really be so painful for places of worship?

HON. MEMBERS: Every year.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Every year?

HON. MEMBERS: Yes.

MR BYABAGAMBI: Madam Chairperson, the rate is paid every year. The rate is only determined after five years but every year they are paying those taxes.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Only once a year, not every month? I do not know.

DR NDUHUURA: Although we have not gone to part II, under (2) it states that, “Notwithstanding the provisions of part I, nothing in this schedule shall be taken to exempt the owner of any property from the payment of rates on property from which he or she derives a rent or income used for any purposes indicated in paragraph 2, 3, 4, 5, or 6 of part one.” This cartilage is used for income so it ceases to be a cartilage under the provisions of this law. So I do not see any conflict.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Then you delete it. What do members think?

MR KABAREEBE: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, and honourable members. I think it is now understandable because in the extension of the law elsewhere, any business being made by the Church is taxable. The radios, the hostels, the lodges, the hostels, health centers; all those are taxable. It would be absurd if a tax collector went to the Bishop’s house where he resides and then he begins saying, “Excuse me, we must value the house and you must pay.” So this is the cartilage, the accompaniment that he is not earning any money in terms of business but is associated to the Church, to assist the priests. So long as there is no money payable, it ceases to be a cartilage. 

For example, if there were a toilet near the Church and a member enters it to ease himself or herself and pays Shs 100, that one ceases to be a cartilage. A cartilage must be free of payment and if it is so then we must not tax these Churches via the cartilages. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: In that case we must actually define “cartilage” because some of these areas have got hostels, they have got cinema halls, and they have got canteens. So, Mr Minister, may you define it.

MR BYABAGAMBI: I want to seek some clarification from the minister. In a situation where everybody in Uganda has turned into a pastor and he creates his own Church, what is going to be the cartilage?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Mr Minister, do you not agree that we should stand over this part and you go and define it?

DR NDUHUURA: Madam Chairperson, I propose that we stand over this matter and then I come back here with a definition of cartilage.

The Third Schedule

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that the Third Schedule do stand part of the Bill. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

6.38
THE MINISTER OF STATE, LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Dr Richard Nduhuura): Madam Chairperson, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the Whole House report thereto.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that the House do resume and the Committee of the Whole House report thereto.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Deputy Speaker presiding.)
 
REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

6.45
THE MINISTER OF STATE, LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Dr Richard Nduhuura): Madam Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the Whole House has considered the Bill entitled the Local Government (Rating) Bill, 2003 and stood over clause 2, clause 17, clause 18, and Second Schedule of the Bill and has passed the rest of the Bill with some amendments. I beg to report.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF
THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

6.46
THE MINISTER OF STATE, LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Dr Richard Nduhuura): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the report of the Committee of the Whole House be adopted.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I put the question that the report of the Committee of the Whole House be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I want to thank you very much for the tremendous work you have done today. We will reconvene tomorrow at 10.00 0’clock to complete this Bill.  

CAPT. BYARUHANGA: Madam Speaker, for purposes of the Hansard, since we started with the roll call we should end with roll call and we see whether people did not come here just to be counted.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, I took a roll call and I know how many members are here and we have done business. The House adjourned to tomorrow at 10.00 O’clock.

The House rose at 6.47 p.m. and adjourned until Friday, 1 July 2005 at 10.00 a.m.)


