

Thursday, 1 June 2017

Parliament met at 10.09 a.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Jacob Oulanyah, in the chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this sitting and thank you for making it here today in the morning. Thank you for yesterday. We were able to accomplish something that had looked almost a challenge. We were able to finish it with the help of hon. Ssewungu and all the other members; that should be the spirit.

We need to look at the way we do business in this coming financial year especially on the budget process. A lot of things delayed in the committees and we had to work towards at the end deadline which was not good. If there were things which required to be changed, we were not able to do it because we did not have the time to do it. 

Therefore, it would help in the next round of the budget cycle if we finish everything in time to give the Budget Committee sufficient time to finish the work. It will also give us enough time to raise all the concerns and deal with them so that the budget is more accommodative of all the issues raised in the committees because not all Members go to the committees. 

However, if the matters were here and we debated the budget for three days, all the concerns would be raised and we would be able to deal with them to the satisfaction of all Members. This time, it has been exceptional and I pray to God this is the last experience we have of this nature. We should learn from it and see how we can make it better for the next financial year. 

Today, we have things to finish with the previous financial year which Parliament did not close because of some challenges. The matter is coming up today and we should be able to close the Financial Year 2015/2016 the way it is supposed to be closed. There is a supplementary schedule we need to complete so that the Supplementary Appropriation Bill is brought and we close that financial year. For this year, we also have a schedule that we need to handle. It is also coming a little after we have finished with the business before us. 

Thank you Members for the resilience. Today, we hope to be able to prorogue Parliament and send the House for a very short recess because on the 6th of June 2017, the State of the Nation Address will be delivered by the President to now commence the second session of this Parliament. Let us try and rollup this business today and we prorogue Parliament. Thank you.

10.13
MS MOLLY LANYERO (NRM, Woman Representative, Lamwo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance in regard to the people of Lamwo. 

Mr Speaker, the lives of my people and their livestock are at risk. The people of Agoro and Madi Opei have been attacked by the militia from South Sudan. On the 5th of May 2017, one man was killed from the village of Mutugu in Madi Opei at 10.00p.m. He was brought out of his house and shot dead by the militia from South Sudan.

On the 25th of May 2017, militia from South Sudan came and raided the central village in Kal Parish, Madi Opei sub-county and went away with 30 heads of cattle. Mr Speaker, the RDC said the members of the Anti-Stock Theft Unit (ASTU) are deserting because of hunger. There is delayed distribution of food and because of hunger most of the army men are deserting. On one occasion, the RDC went to one of the units and where there were supposed to be 15 soldiers, he found only four. 

Mr Speaker, there is need to increase operation capability of the ASTU members on the ground. Secondly, there is need to take food to these people in time so that the lives of our people are protected. 

Mr Speaker, the RDC also told me that whenever he calls for a security meeting, the ASTU members do not attend because they claim they do not have transport. I pray that the line ministry takes this up so that the ASTU people are provided with transport. 

Thirdly, the security roads that link Palabek Ogili, Lukung, Agoro and Madi Opei has overgrown and the district says that is the work of the Central Government. I also appeal to your office that UNRA takes up the opening of the security road from Agoro, Madi Opei to Lukung so that the ASTU members and the army can have access to protect our people.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Government, this issue of this area is becoming complicated. Could you respond to it, please?

10.17
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Mr Speaker, if you can permit us, we will engage the Minister of Internal Affairs to get in touch with hon. Lanyero and then come back to solve those issues.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: If the minister is coming here, he should be alerted to come and deal with these issues when we are still here. If we go on recess, how are we going to co-ordinate the follow up?

10.17
MR JOSEPH SSEWUNGU (DP, Kalungu County West, Kalungu): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am also rising on a matter of national importance. In the Ninth Parliament, we had a lot of issues on the Committee of Education about Kyambogo University and we spent a lot of time on it. Yesterday still, there came a strike of lecturers of Kyambogo University and they are demanding their allowances for research and examinations. 

Mr Speaker, Kyambogo has a lot of issues and of all of them - at least paying lecturers should not appear. The lecturers have now put down their tools after the students finished their exams. Now, who is going to mark the exams if these people are not paid?

Mr Speaker, this matter is very serious. As a professional teacher, we shouldn’t be seeing the issue of failing to pay lecturers when parents have paid tuitions. That is why we need an answer. 

The issue is with the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. This time, it is not Ministry of Education and Sports. The university is saying the Permanent Secretary of the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development had refused to sign for this fund and yet their money is in the Consolidated Fund. What is exactly happening about Kyambogo? Meanwhile, I can now allow the information I was getting -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, it is not information. She is going to contribute on her own. 

MR SSEWUNGU: Okay. Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

10.19
MS MARGARET RWABUSHAIJA (Independent, Workers Representative): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank hon. Ssewungu for raising this very important matter. 

Mr Speaker, the issue of Kyambogo is also pertinent to me because I represent workers and it is them who have gone on strike because of the issues he has mentioned. However, I was one of the honourable members who visited Kyambogo on oversight and we found that they had a lot of issues. For example, the teaching staff they have is less than 50 per cent meaning that they even need money to make sure that they get part timers right now and when the money delays - because I am aware that the money that has been released to them is a subvention; it can only cover two months: January and February and was sent at the end of May. That means that for the three months: March, April and May Kyambogo has not been catered for. Therefore, even if they get that money, we are going to have challenges.

The other issue that we noted is that Kyambogo University still has challenges of sanitation because we talked to the learners, and they said that they have been restrained. They feel enough is enough and are also likely to go on strike; they were sounding a warning –(Interruption)

MR KASIBANTE: Thank you very much, my colleague. Mr Speaker, the information I have is that the on-going strike is affecting the students who had gone for internship and school practice - for those offering education. It means therefore that the expense on them is going to double because there are no lecturers to supervise internship and school practice. It warrants that Government should come up and address this before we have to spend more than what we could spend if we had not gone into a strike. Thank you.

MS RWABUSHAIJA: I thank you very Much. Mr Speaker, another reason for the strike is that they cannot get the money for research supervision. We cannot have a university without research. The Government sends very little money for research and they cannot also get enough from abroad yet without research, the university is irrelevant. Something has to be done by the ministry of finance to make sure that we get the desired output as far as the university is concerned. I thank you.

10.21
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, in order to improve accountability of university funds, we took a decision that the money they collect should be banked on the Consolidated Fund and then it is appropriated and given to them on a quarterly basis. That has been on-going but sometimes, universities do not collect enough to run their affairs so we sometimes give them advance and as they collect, they pay back.

The situation at Kyambogo University is being handled and we hope that by end of next week, they should have been resolved.

10.23
MR MBABAALI MUYANJA (NRM, Bukoto County South, Lwengo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of national interest; sometime on the 17 May 2017, the Uganda Coffee Development Authority (UCDA) came to my constituency in the trading centre called Kinoni and they closed 40 factories engaged in coffee production. This has put on standstill businesses of our business community within the area; the reasons being that they are producing coffee with high moisture content, which is against the recommended moisture content for coffee export.

However, above all, the UCDA never sensitised the coffee producers and coffee factory owners about this kind of high quality production of coffee. This has rendered my constituents unable to take their children back to school because the only survival for their school fees as parents is coffee. They have tried to dry the coffee but up to now, the factories are still closed.

Therefore, I appeal to the House and to you, Mr Speaker, so that UCDA immediately opens the 40 factories. Besides, each factory employs an average of 50 people; all of them are stranded. On Monday this week –(Interruption)

MS NAMAYANJA: Thank you very much, colleague, for giving way. Mr Speaker, this is not only happening in Bukoto South, it has been extended to Bukoto East where I represent. After the closure of Masaka Co-operative Union, we are getting a lot of problems with the farmers not getting the benefit of Uganda Coffee Development Authority. The information I would like to give is that the point you are raising is affecting most Ugandans.

MR MBABAALI: Thank you my colleague. The UCDA has a point; but they need to sensitise the factory owners of what they need regarding the control of coffee. At the same time, they should also involve farmers to encourage them to keep their coffee in a better way so that the quality of coffee is high. However, closing down 40 factories at Kinoni trading centre has harmed parents; they are seated with their children without going to school because the fees is locked up in the factories and the coffee is not sold. I thank you.

MR BAHATI: Mr Speaker, as we have handled the issue of the honourable colleague who raised the issue on security, we are going to call the minister of agriculture so that he can brief the House before we close today. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That will also be today. Let us get these responses so that the people can know the way forward on this matter –(Interjections)– honourable member, you need to consult with the Speaker before you stand up to raise any matter of the type you are about to rise. I need to know what you are going to talk about but we cannot do it here now –(Laughter) If we are able to go to the afternoon, you will have consulted with the Speaker and then raise it in the afternoon. Okay. Let us handle it that way. 

MR KASIBANTE: Mr Speaker, about a month ago, you instructed the minister in charge of environment to come up with a statement regarding the degradation of Busega wetlands along Masaka Road. Since then, we have not heard from the minister yet the degradation is continuing. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We are not getting statements because of what we are doing right now, but there is a pile of statements that are ready for presentation to Parliament. But you know the situation we are in right now, we are trying to finish with what we are doing then we can deal with all those things that are pending.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE FORTHCOMING SOLIDARITY SUMMIT

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is it going to be the Prime Minister or the Deputy Premier. Is the Prime Minister coming?

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE STATUS OF IMPLEMENTATION OF GOVERNMENT ASSURANCES

10.28
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON GOVERNMENT ASSURANCES (Mr Hassan Fungaroo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Honourable members, I salute all of you. This statement is uploaded onto the ipads. The statement is provided to you in accordance with Rule 167(3) of our Rules of Procedure.

Methodology

In coming up with this statement, we compiled and categorised all Government assurances by sector and region. We carried out oversight visits in the selected districts of Buyende, Kaliro, Kamuli, Tororo, Busia, Nakaseke and Luweero to assess the level of implementation of Government assurances in those districts.

We also held a meeting with the ministers and officials from the ministries of Works and Transport, Health, Water and Environment to discuss the level of implementation of assurances that fall within their respective sectors.

We also interacted with Members of Parliament to receive updates about the implementation of Government assurances from their respective constituencies. Some Members gave us written statements to that effect. 

The committee inherited a huge workload of assurances dating from as far back as 1986 to 2016. However, the committee has been considering assurances from 1986 to 2014 given the heavy backlog.

We wanted to start from the beginning and consider up to 2014. Others are being processed. The details of all the assurances are provided in the annex which is in your document. It is a big document but if your ipad can handle the download you will see it there.

We have given a summary on the table indicating the number of assurances per sector. Works and Transport has the largest number followed by Energy, Education, Health, Agriculture, Water and Environment, and Local Government.

During its scrutiny of the outstanding assurances, the committee focused on the sectors with the most unimplemented assurances and these are Works and Transport, Health, Education and Sports, Energy, Agriculture, Water and Environment.

It noted that most assurances had been pending for more than 10 years and none of the ministries had implemented a third of the assurances pledged under them. Citing inadequacy of funding see the details in the annex attached.

Water and Environment had 48 they only implemented one which forms 2.1 per cent. With Health they only implemented 14 out of 136 and the list continues. This information is available with us we collected it from the responses, which the ministers presented when they appeared before us.

Most assurances were not being implemented at the time the committee visited the districts. For example, in Buyende out of the 18 assurances within that district alone, only one had been implemented. In Kaliro District alone one was implemented fully out of the 17 assurances; it was only the road connecting Kaliro to Pallisa through Saka Bridge that was being implemented. 

There is no well sought out sequence for the implementation of outstanding assurances, some of them that date as far back from 1986 have never been touched. And yet recently when the assurances were being implemented, for example, the work on the tarmacking of Kapchorwa-Kween-Suam road has never been started and yet this pledge was made in 1986, 31 years ago by His Excellency the President. This is compared to Kagamba-Ishaka road pledged in 2014 and the works were completed by the end of 2016. This is according to the report we got from the ministry.

With those which were even attempted in being implemented for example in Kaliro District; the Saka Bridge we talked about much as it was good had not yet been completed and was supposed to be tarmacked. 

An ice plant to be constructed in Buyende District was started but abandoned without being completed after sinking over Shs 2 billion into that project. Some of the machines which were supplied there were defective. The ice plant, the three phase generator is not working some things are missing. 

In Nakaseke District His Excellency pledged to rehabilitate Nakaseke Hospital in 2015. When the committee visited the project it was noted that the implementation of this assurance was in progress however, the work was characterised by (a) alteration of the initial plans and designs; (b) substandard works and materials for example the iron sheets given were substandard and rejected. Some of them were taken back to the supplier. (c) Very poor workmanship with several defects including peeling off of the roofs, the iron sheets, joints, the floor had cracks. The solar pump installed with a huge capacity of solar but cannot pump water.

Most of the assurances especially with big budgets are funded with loans but loans have a lot of defects. Loans with defects are listed in your statement.

Mr Speaker, the committee faces challenges in its work as a result of gaps in the law and Parliamentary Rules of Procedure. There is for example lack of a comprehensive Government Assurance standard including benchmarks, yard sticks, norms, gauge criterion specifications and scale of measurements. 

What does the ministry consider in selecting any assurance to be implemented? For example, the Kapchorwa-Suam road pledge which was made in 1986 up to now it is 31 years down the road when others have been implemented; what is the criterion for selecting? 

There is also a problem of impunity and abuse of public trust; when a promise is made you win public trust and people support the Government. After taking their trust you do not pay back. 

This appears like deception and statements of tricksters and yet they are supposed to be made by a Government respected and honoured by the people. 

To address the challenges faced by the committee the committee recommended as follows: Rules 167, 168, 63 and 211 of the Rules of Procedure and section 11 (i) of the Anti-Corruption Act 2009 should be amended to create the necessary remedies as follows: 

Amending rule 167 the functions of the committee on Government Assurance and Implementation sub rule (b) to provide for monitoring and evaluation standards -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Mr Chairman, did you submit that particular one to the rules committee?

MR FUNGAROO: Yes, we submitted all these to the rules committee. We even requested for permission from you for a retreat which we held in Mbale. It was extensively discussed and all these were submitted to the rules committee except that we have not received a feedback.

Make funds available for timely implementation of Government assurances. Quite often we hear about no funds. However, if you look into the budget, there are areas where you could pick money especially from the sector of State House, Office of the President; because it is the President making these pledges to the people and the ministers on behalf of the President.

Why does the Office of the President have non-wage and development budgets, taking a lot of money in the sector, but it forgets to budget for this assurance which he made himself. This puts the President in ridicule; sometimes, he goes around and people ask him questions: Your Excellency, when you speak, we take it to be the final word and we are supposed to trust you. You make people lose trust in the President.

Therefore, money should have been got from nonwage development budget classified expenditure in the area of State House, Office of the President, Ministry of Defence, Internal Affairs and particularly Police. We collected these resources and it comes to a total of approximately Shs 7 billion; if it was relocated to the implementation of Government assurances, we would be moving very far. Government officers responsible for poor implementation of Government assurances and the private companies contracted to do the work should be held responsible for doing shoddy work. 

There is an example in the Ministry of Health, Mr Speaker, the case of Nakaseke Hospital. Even when money is made available, the work does not go to the expected area. This is partly because of supervisory problems in the Ministry of Health and changing of designs. Another issue is about the contractor who picks substandard materials from the supplier; such companies should be blacklisted and finally found guilty.

Government should also look into the problem of loans. The loans with defective problems, especially from counterpart funding should be addressed so that once a Government assurance has been made to the people and money got through loans there should be no stopping of the project due to the problems associated with counterpart funding. You can look at the disbursement of loans, which we have given here.

Finally, public trust is a foundation of any democratic Government and it should not be abused in anyway. There is great need to sensitise, mobilise and organise the public through public meetings, radio and television talk shows to empower them so as to hold leaders and Government accountable for promises they make and for any abuses of public trust.

Therefore, Mr Speaker, Parliament as a whole and Members of Parliament individually in their constituencies are hereby requested to fully support the committee in the next programme we will take to sensitise, organise and mobilise the public to hold Government responsible for the promises they make. 

We found in Buyende that people were in pain but many of them did not know how to hold Government accountable for the promises made and not implemented. 

Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I pray that you support the committee of Government assurances because it is about you. Some of these places are within your constituencies; if you strongly support this committee – Mr Speaker, even in Omoro I am sure there are things there. Support us to support the Omoro people. Thank you very much. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, this is one of those reports that is required by our Rules of Procedure that at least in one session the Committee on Government Assurance should file a report in the House and we also missed out on that until we made it possible. 

Honourable members, there was a discussion on this the last time the matter was raised in the House, and there was the question of what amounts to Government assurance? There was a distinction made and I do not recall how far we went with the discussion whether a President making a pledge in some village in the country becomes a Government assurance. If that were the case, then the Committee on Government Assurance would not be able to do anything because they are many, scattered and all over the place. 

A Government assurance by definition in the commonwealth is that assurance that is given to Parliament not to anybody else; therefore, if a statement is made somewhere, you have to find a way of bringing it and it is made in Parliament.

Most people in the commonwealth believe that the pledge is made somewhere and they come and use the Prime Minister’s Question Time to extract an assurance from Government and then it becomes an assurance to Parliament and that is how the smart people do it. They come and say, “Rt Hon. Prime Minister, there was this issue that happened like this” and if the Prime Minister is aware then he can make a commitment to the House and it becomes a Government assurance within the meaning of how it is understood in the commonwealth. In that case, then Parliament can pursue it because it is captured on the record of Parliament and it is easy to pursue. 

However, if you are to go to Buyende and other places, asking what the President said, then you will be told even what he did not say and that can be very complicated.

If you went and called for a meeting and said when the President was campaigning here, what did he pledge to do? You will end up with 100 pledges and yet some of them may not have been even made at all. Therefore, thank you very much; we will extract this. I would like to ask the Clerk to extract it and forward it to the Leader of Government Business to see how the follow up can be done and then we can come back to the House at a later day he tells us the steps that have been taken on those assurances that were captured by the record of Parliament. Thank you.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE FORTHCOMING SOLIDARITY SUMMIT

10.46
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Rt Hon. Ruhakana Rugunda): Mr Speaker, I would like to make a short statement to this august House on the forthcoming solidarity summit. Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me an opportunity to brief you and honourable colleagues on the forthcoming Uganda’s Solidarity Summit on Refugees that will be held in Kampala from 22 to 23 June, 2017. This will be at Speke Resort at Munyonyo.

I wish to thank this august House for having authorised Government to borrow $50 million from the International Development Association of the World Bank Group to support the development of response to displaced impact project in the Horn of Africa. The project is an important milestone in improving the livelihood of refugees and also host communities.

It is important honourable colleagues to be updated on the purpose, objective and preparations for the summit so that in turn, you can inform the various stakeholders that get in touch with you about this summit. Mr Speaker, the summit is convened jointly and also hosted by President Yoweri Museveni and UN Secretary General Antonio Guterres with the support of the United Nations High Commissioner for refugees Filippo Grandi. 

The summit is the follow up of the New York conference that took place in September 2016 at which President Yoweri Museveni called on countries and development partners, to avail resources for countries that are carrying the burden of hosting refugees within the comprehensive refugee response framework.

The main goal of the Uganda Solidarity Summit on refugees is to support and strengthen our country’s progressive and transformative approach to refugee protection. This will be through mobilising new funding to meet the ever increasing cost of meeting the humanitarian and long term needs of the growing number of refugees, and support to the host communities. 

The summit aims at specifically achieving three things:

    1. To mobilise significant new funding towards responding to the urgent humanitarian and development need of refugees and host communities; as well as supporting the ongoing resilience initiatives that required amounts for the next four years estimated at $8 billion which is an equivalent to $2 billion per year.
    2.  To showcase Uganda’s refugee management model that integrates refugee’s issues in the national development agenda. 
    3. To build new partnerships, investments and innovation for the benefit of refugees and host communities. 

Mr Speaker, as you may be aware, Uganda currently ranks among the top refugee hosting communities in Africa and the world. During the second half of 2016, a large movement of refugees from South Sudan more than doubled the refugee population from half a million to now over 1.2 million refugees in our country. 

On average, Uganda has been receiving 2000 refugees per day for the last six months. The above numbers are placing a huge strain on our already stressed ability to cater for the food, water, sanitation, health and education needs of the refugees and host communities. Yet, we have to keep our borders open to our brothers and sisters who are forced to flee their homes and countries due to war, starvation, violence and also persecution. Uganda maintains an open border policy and approach which provides refugees with the land to till, education and a chance to work, but the continued influx is putting pressure on the economy and infrastructure, as well as the environment. 

We maintain this approach because we know that no one chooses to be a refugee. Not so long ago, many of us were fleeing Uganda to countries such as Kenya, Rwanda, Tanzania, Democratic Republic of Congo, Sudan, Zambia, Europe and North America because of the turbulence that our country went through. Many of us know all too well what it is like to have your family, friends, relatives and community torn apart and separated by violence. 

Mr Speaker, preparations for the summit are already in high gear. On 9 May 2017, we officially launched the public awareness campaign about this solidarity summit. 

While in London, during the conference on Somalia last week, President Yoweri Museveni and the UN Secretary General Antonio Guterres held discussions about this summit. With the pressure of the increasing numbers we are currently hosting, we call upon the international community to endeavour to match our efforts towards people who have lost the protection of their home countries. 

It is critical that refugees and host communities are provided with an environment in which they co-exist in safety and also in dignity. That is why this forthcoming solidarity summit is important for raising awareness and mobilising additional resources for Uganda to adequately continue responding to this humanitarian situation. 

We are hoping that through the generous giving of governments, foundations, private sector and other agencies, we will be able to raise the two billion from the summit. That is the short term immediate funding gap we are currently facing for one year. The summit will be the start of sustained efforts to continue raising funds to meet the development needs of the refugees and of the host communities. 

We expect the summit to bring together heads of government, heads of UN agencies and heads of other regional and international organisations, foundations, humanitarian agencies, philanthropists, business people and NGOs. 

During the summit, we will also discuss finding lasting solutions to the root causes of displacement such as war and violence that force people to flee their homes and their countries. 

Mr Speaker, I thank you and thank Members for listening. (Applause) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Rt Hon. Prime Minister, for this statement. I think we did our bit yesterday when we dealt with the loan that we were required to deal with; we finalised it and that will be the contribution of Parliament. 

I did not hear you mentioning Parliament among the list of the categories of people to participate in this summit. You should probably deliberately also have some Members, especially specified committees; take part in the summit so that they follow up from the beginning.  When the matter comes here, you will have people who already understand the issues. Thereafter, we shall be able to proceed.

10.51
MR HASSAN FUNGAROO (FDC, Obongi County, Moyo): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for this opportunity. I also thank the Rt Hon. Prime Minister for this statement about the solidarity summit, more so, to raise funds for management of the refugees and host community affairs in Uganda here. 

The problem we face is not only lack of funds. I come from Obongi County and we have refugees there. As we prepare for this summit and possibly raise the necessary funds, we should take note of the following: 

One, the policy framework for the management of the affairs of the refugees is lacking or defective. What we have been seeing as the Uganda refugee policy framework is a draft, which has not even been submitted to the Committee for Presidential Affairs that handles matters of refugees. 

As members of West Nile under the West Nile Parliamentary Caucus, we looked into these problems; we attempted to organise a meeting bringing together all the stakeholders including the Office of the Prime Minister, the Minister for Disaster Preparedness and Refugees and all the stakeholders from United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), local government, subcounties and the local communities. The problem of the policy framework for Uganda should be put in order. 

Secondly, down in the villages; there is also need for a memorandum of understanding between all the stakeholders involved. Some of the stakeholders, who play one of the key roles, are not recognised and not involved. For example, the people who give the land; in West Nile, land is owned by the communities. We are also informed that in western Uganda, land used for providing service to refugees is Government gazetted refugee settlements. 

Therefore, the role of the community in West Nile needs to be included in the memorandum of understanding through stating the terms and conditions under which land is given to the refugees. The right of land ownership during and even after the refugees have left is to address fears of land grabbing. 

Mr Speaker, we have experienced three times of hosting refugees from the same country, South Sudan, whereby people claimed ownership of the refugee settlements; during Anyanya war 1, SPLA war with Khartoum and during the current SPLA war. 

However, in the previous one, after the refugees left, we saw people emerging claiming ownership of the refugee settlements including property that was left there by the service provider organisation UNHCR and the Office of the Prime Minister. 

In my office, I have a document of a profile of a farm called Itula Mixed Farm; somebody submitted a document to a bank to obtain a loan with security as the land of the refugee settlement, the buildings, warehouses, schools and those things, which were left during the time of the refugee hosting.

Therefore, the owners of the land found someone claiming ownership of the land, which was given only to the Prime Minister or the Government of Uganda for hosting refugees. We fear the re-occurrence of the same. 

Thirdly, the refugees and host communities live together, Mr Speaker. Actually, it is like I have an additional village in Obongi Constituency because they use the same roads, health centres and all other facilities. However, if no proper provision is made to care for the host community in terms of drugs, ambulance services – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable, this is information about the summit. Can we do it properly? Can we task the Prime Minister that after the summit, whatever they have discussed in there - and I am asking him to invite our Committee on Presidential Affairs to be part of that discussion - he can then come back to the House and brief us? We can then have a discussion on all these issues in a more involved way because this housing is not sufficient to carry the issues you are raising.

MR FUNGAROO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I will summarise by saying that as we prepare for the summit, let us put our house in order. We need to address these details because we can get the money but if we are not vigilant, corruption is there. If the UN agencies and NGOs are not supervised properly, you may get leakages down here. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much - Why don’t we take the guidance I have given? 
 
MR OKUPA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. First of all, I would like to thank Parliament for passing the law for the host communities yesterday. You remember when I was making a presentation here on the World Bank Day, I brought up this matter.

The other group that the Prime Minister needs to invite is the Parliamentary Network on the World Bank to allow us engage at that level. 

In addition, the issues that were raised here yesterday, which discussions you are going to have in this solidarity summit, includes the issue of increasing funding for the host communities. We heard from the Members here, who were really opposed saying, can we increase funding for the provision of services to the host communities? I think those are key issues that you need address in the summit. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I have guided on this matter. Let us wait for the Prime Minister to come back and we have a discussion, when it is on the Order Paper that we are going to discuss issues concerning refugees. We have committed ourselves and passed the money, they are going to have a summit and then we will have a framework where we can have a discussion. We have business that is urgent, let us stick with them and work on them, I beg you. 

Honourable members, I will alter the Order Paper to accommodate a document that has to be laid by the minister.

LAYING OF PAPERS

ADDENDUM TO WAGE SUPPLEMENTARY SCHEDULE NO. 2 AND STATUTORY REVISION OF THE PENSION BUDGET FOR FINANCIAL YEAR 2016/2017

11.03
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONIMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, I beg to lay an addendum to wage supplementary schedule two and statutory revision of the Pension Budget for Financial Year 2016/17.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. It stands committed to the appropriate Committee on the Budget to come back, if they are going to examine the supplementary, and see how they can advise the House to proceed.

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I think you should ask the Prime Minister when he will come to brief us as issues of the refugees are very touchy. I am a member of the Foreign Affairs Committee and we went to the Ugandan border with Sudan. The Sudanese that came to Uganda as refugees have taken over our land and we are held hostage in Uganda. Therefore, the Prime Minister should come as soon as possible so that we discuss these issues of refugees in Uganda. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We are going by your guidance of “as soon as possible”. (Laughter)

MOTION THAT THE HOUSE RESOLVES ITSELF INTO A COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY TO CONSIDER THE SUPPLEMENTARY EXPENDITURE SCHEDULE TWO FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2015/16

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, before this motion is moved, there is a situation about this particular issue. I am sure Members are hearing strange dates 2015/2016. Those are very strange dates today. The reason is simple that, that supplementary schedule should have been handled at the beginning of last year. What happened is the issue of formation of Government – remember the debate where they were saying, who is going to read the Budget and they said that they were going to ask a Member of Parliament for Kibaale to come and read the Budget. That debate was there so there was no proper coordination in Cabinet because there was no Cabinet then. 

There was a second mistake that the technical people did not bring the instructions to the Clerk, which instructions should have come earlier to Parliament. It ended up coming in December of last year. Therefore, it caused this problem that Parliament could not pronounce itself on those estimates. That is the reason why we are coming back to this. 

I am, therefore, going to ask the minister to move the motion and then the committee will report and we see how to deal with this matter. That is the background I wanted to give so that you know why it is 2015/2016 when we should be dealing with 2016/2017.

MR OKUPA: I think we are thinking alike because I have a copy of that document. When I read it, it was received on 20 December, 2016 but laid on the Table on 10 January, 2017. I do not know whether there are any legal issues because passing the supplementary for 2015/2016 in 2017 – I do not know whether there are any legal issues and if they are there, how are we addressing them? 

To the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and to the Leader of Government Business, we understand this period between December and January. However, what measures have you taken to address such a scenario so that it does not repeat itself?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can we deal with that in the debate?

11.07
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the House resolves itself into a Committee of Supply to consider the supplementary expenditure schedule two for the Financial Year 2015/2016.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The motion is seconded by Kinkizi East, West Budama North, Ngora and Tororo. Please speak to your motion. Was there a secondment from the Opposition side? There is the Member for Kasilo and the Member for Butambala. (Laughter)

MR BAHATI: Mr Speaker, this supplementary was meant for additional expenditure amounting to Shs 18.8 billion, purposely to cater for wage shortfalls during that financial year. As you have said, because of the circumstances that pertained at that time when Cabinet was forming, we could not bring this in time. 

Mr Speaker, on behalf of Government, I would like to register apologies to this House and also to say that in future, this will not be repeated. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, this matter was referred to the committee and the committee can report to kick off the debate. I will then take the Member for Kasilo to start.

11.09 
THE VICE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON BUDGET (Mr Wamukuyu Mudimi): Mr Speaker, as you may be aware, Parliament approved a total budget of Shs 23.972 billion for Financial Year 2015/2016 of which Shs 16.1 billion was appropriated by Parliament under Appropriation Act and Shs 7.7 billion was statutory expenditure.

You will recall that under Supplementary Schedule 1, Parliament approved expenditure of Shs 870 billion and a statutory revision of Shs 170.3 billion. This supplementary expenditure amounts to 3.6 per cent of the total Budget by then.

Mr Speaker, like you have indicated, on 16 December, the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development submitted to Parliament, through the Office of the Clerk, the Supplementary Schedule No. 2, 2015/16 for approval by Parliament, as required under the Constitution and Public Finance Management Act. The Minister of State for Finance (Planning) laid the same on the Table on 10 January and it was referred to the committee.

Justification for this supplementary

The minister informed the committee that additional supplementary expenditure under schedule 2 amounting to Shs 18.6 billion was purposely to cater for wage shortfalls at the end of the Financial Year 2016/17. There is an annex attached.

This came as a result of - 
    i. transfer of employees by Ministry of Education to Local Government votes without adequate budget provisions;
    ii. recruitment of health workers by Local Government under instruction of Ministry of Health for which no budget appropriation had been made;
    iii. salary enhancement for headship of secondary schools and harmonisation of primary head teachers and their deputies to salary scale 4 by Ministry of Education;
    iv. payment of salary arrears for Financial Year 2014/2015 against Financial Year 2015/16 budget with a budget revision.

The committee notes that the practice of moving employees, recruitment of new staff and staff promotions and payment of salary arrears are a decision that should have been anticipated during the process of preparing the budget for 2015/2016 in order to avoid the need for a supplementary.

The minister explained that in future, efforts will be put into consideration by decentralising the wage system to eliminate wage avalanche and disciplinary action would be taken against any accounting officer who would recruit staff without corresponding wage bill.

Mr Speaker, we looked at the sources of the supplementary. The committee noted that the supplementary expenditure was financed by funds appropriated in the Budget. The supplementary requirement of Shs 18.62 billion, under this schedule, is a technical supplementary as a result of reallocating funds across votes but within the overall wage bill.

Recommendation

The committee observes that the expenditure request to meet wage shortfall was genuinely required and justified on account of avoiding salary arrears, and compromising the welfare of the beneficiaries. 

In short, it is a statutory expenditure. However, there are two fundamental legal requirements for this expenditure.

    i. The expenditure being beyond the mandatory threshold of three per cent of the approved Budget violates amended section 25(1) of the Public Finance Management Act, 2015.
    ii. Laying on the Table the supplementary estimates was made way beyond the mandatory four months after the money was spent. That is under section 25(2) of the amended Public Finance Management Act, 2015.

The explanation given by the minister for the lack of compliance in the above is that by 13 June, Cabinet ministers were not sworn in and in order to avoid accumulation of arrears, the PS/ST had to request the Attorney-General to allow this supplementary expenditure.

Conclusion

The need for funding wage shortfall was indeed justified. The explanation given by the minister notwithstanding, a supplementary expenditure is not compliant with the provisions of the law.

Mr Speaker, the committee therefore is constrained to approve the supplementary request schedule No. 2 of Financial Year 2015/2016 amounting to Shs 18.862 billion. I beg to submit.

Mr Speaker, we have a minority report attached but since we are constrained by time - I do not know what the minority report will talk about but it is attached to the report. I beg to submit.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, there is a minority report. Can the mover of the minority report present it? 

11.16
MR MUHAMMAD KIVUMBI (DP, Butambala County, Butambala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I will be as brief as possible and I think when this is uploaded - I am going to speak for what is on our iPads.

Our areas of dissent are two:

    1. Failure to satisfy the requirement of the Public Finance Management Act, 2015.
    2. Non-compliance to the supplementary criteria.

Dissenting observation 

The explanation by the minister responsible for finance that there was delay to submit the supplementary request to Parliament because Cabinet had not been sworn by 13 June, 2016 is unjustified.

Mr Speaker, the accounting officer for Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development/Secretary to Treasury was on duty and the Office of the Clerk to Parliament remained open. Besides, Parliament approved the appointment of the Prime Minister who is the Leader of Government Business in Parliament on 14 June, 2016. Therefore, there was no technical or political vacuum hence, the Secretary to Treasury should have submitted to Parliament the supplementary schedule 2 for FY 2105/16 to be laid by the Prime Minister within the mandatory four mouths as required by Article 156(2) of the Constitution.

Section two of the Public Finance Management Act, as amended, and regulation 18 of the Public Finance Management regulation demand that supplementary estimates showing the sums required or spent shall be laid before Parliament and in case of excess expenditure, within four months after the money is spent.

The use of the word “shall” in both the Constitution and the Public Finance Management Act and regulations connotes compulsive language. The required action is mandatory. 

The use of the compulsive word “shall” rather than the permissive “may” imposes a mandatory obligation on the minister to submit the supplementary expenditure schedule within four months after use of the money.

The issue of the compulsive nature of the word “shall” in legislation has been interrogated by the East African Court of Justice in Attorney-General of Uganda v. Tom Kyakurenda, case No. 1 of 2014, where it is found to be imposing a mandatory obligation.

It is important, therefore, to highlight that the supplementary schedule 2 for the Financial Year 2015/2016, which was considered by the committee, was submitted to Parliament on 20 December, 2016 by the Secretary to Treasury. A copy of the submission letter is attached in appendix 1.

The supplementary schedule was laid by the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development on 10 January, as indicated on the submission letter in appendix 1. This was six months after the money was spent, contrary to the four months as required under Article 156(2) of the Constitution, section 25 of the Public Finance Management Act and regulation 18 of the Public Finance Management Regulations.

Based on the above, the Secretary to Treasury, being the accounting officer, should have submitted to Parliament the supplementary schedule within the mandatory four months. This is premised on the fact that the Secretary to Treasury is responsible and personally accountable to Parliament for activities of a vote, as provided for in section 45(5) of the Public Finance Management Act. 

Submission of supplementary expenditure schedules in time to Parliament is one of the activities of the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. Hence, failure by the Secretary to Treasury, as accounting officer, to submit the supplementary schedule to Parliament within the mandatory time contravenes the Constitution and the Public Finance Management Act.

In light of the above, Parliament is duty bound to:

    a) Reject the supplementary request for the action of the minister introducing the supplementary schedule no. 2 for the Financial Year 2015/2016 two months after the constitutional and regulatory deadline. It is, therefore, illegal as per Article 2 of the Constitution. The Article stipulates that the Constitution is the supreme law of Uganda and any action inconsistent with any provision of the Constitution is void.
    b) To treat the monies spent as additional supplementary expenditure as a loss of public funds in line with regulation 18(7) of the Public Finance Management Regulations, 2016 and section 80 of the Public Finance Management Act, for the expenditures were not made in accordance with the law.
    c) Hold the Secretary to Treasury responsible, personally accountable to Parliament and require him to make good of the loss of funds as required under sections 45(2), 79(1) (m), 79(2) and 80 of the Public Finance Management Act.

Non-compliance with supplementary criteria

Mr Speaker, much as these payments were meant to go towards the payment of salaries for the staff that were recruited in Local Government, we note that the Public Finance Management Act states that any payment in a supplementary must be –

    a) un-absorbable – an expenditure that cannot be funded through a virement;
    b) unavoidable – an expenditure that cannot be postponed to the next financial year;
    c) unforeseeable – an expenditure that was unforeseen by a vote at the time of preparation of the vote or an expenditure that should have been included in the budget of the vote.

Therefore, the recruitment of staff is not unforeseeable or unavoidable. It is something they ought to have planned for and known. To treat it as a supplementary is to go against the regulations that were passed by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and what this Parliament decided when we made the Public Finance Management Act.

In light of regulation 18(5) and (6) of the Public Finance Management Regulations, 2016, the supplementary schedule fails the test because its items are clearly foreseeable and avoidable. Hence, transfer of employees, recruitment of health workers, salary enhancement and payment of salary arrears do not satisfy the supplementary criteria. Unfortunately, the majority committee report does not indicate whether the expenditure satisfied the supplementary criteria.

In conclusion, Mr Speaker, Parliament should reject the supplementary schedule no. 2 for the Financial Year 2015/2016 because it does not conform to the legal requirements of the Constitution and the Public Finance Management Act.

In line with sections 45(5), 78(2), 79(1)(m), 79(2) and 80 of the Public Finance Management Act, the Secretary to Treasury, as an accounting officer for the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, should be held personally liable and make good of the loss. 

We fault the majority committee for using the word “constrained”. The word “constrained” is cowardly and cannot be entertained by this Parliament. The mandate we have before us is to either approve or reject and Parliament cannot be constrained to do what it has been mandated to do. 

Therefore, I beg to move that the only way to proceed is for Parliament to reject an illegality. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you.

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I have listened to the chairperson of the committee as well as hon. Kivumbi. Apart from trying to interpret “constrained”, my understanding of a minority report is that when a committee sits and considers a matter and probably at the time of making recommendations, you differ in terms of how you are recommending, you write a minority report.

However, after listening to both sides, in my view, what hon. Kivumbi is recommending is the same as what the committee recommended – (Interjections) - I am saying “in my view” not yours. 

The procedural guidance I would like to seek from the Speaker is, you need to guide the committees on what really constitutes dissenting from the opinion of the main committee report. What I see is that both the minority and majority reports are basically saying the same things but using different words. 

I would like that guidance so that in future, Members do not take much of our time to present the same things using different words. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, by listening to both reports, you almost come to the same conclusion that there is no big difference between the report of the committee and the minority opinion that has been given to the House. The question that the Member raised, which is a point of departure is, can a committee be constrained to give guidance to the House? I think that is where the point is. 

Usually, when a committee is unable, for whatever reason, to make a direct recommendation, what the committee does is to say, “We were unable to make a conclusion on this matter. We recommend that the House takes a decision on this matter”. However, the committee can never be constrained and neither can this House be constrained. (Applause)

For whatever reason, whether you have a split vote or you do not want to disintegrate the committee, you can say, “At a committee level, our decision is not final. However, these were our findings but the final decision will be made by the House because we were unable to take a decision on this matter at a committee level”. That would be a good way to get out of this situation rather than tying up your legs and saying, I cannot jump. I wanted the minister to specifically respond to these issues and then we can open it up.

11.30
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, first of all I would like to thank members of the Budget Committee for the report and the minority report by hon. Muwanga Kivumbi, who had earlier supported the motion. I thought he was going to support me even in the final decision.

Mr Speaker, I would like to remind colleagues that overtime, we have been experiencing the issue of payroll management. We sit here but different accounting officers budget for salaries of their employees. In the middle of the year, you hear of revisions and ghosts and I am glad to inform you that the measures we put in place have been able to save Government resources to a tune of over Shs 200 billion, over the last four years. We have made some good progress.

In the middle of the year, you see accounting officers recruiting and promoting yet they never budgeted for these issues. For this particular one - (Interjection) - I am giving you a background so that you can understand this – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: First listen and then you will respond. 

MR BAHATI: You find Government in a very tight situation. These employees need their salaries but their salaries have not been budgeted for. I remember before we ended FY 2015/2016 that it was a huge debate in this House and the ministry was directed to clear all the arrears when actually the Budget had been passed. What we did was to go ahead and make this provision. This money went to the pockets of employees; it did not go anywhere else. People received their salaries and they were working. 

Therefore, it is unfortunate that this supplementary was never submitted in time. To that, I once again apologise. We have given the reasons and one of the reasons, as stated in the Speaker’s communication, was that even reading the Budget was a huge problem. The President had to appoint, on the advice of the Speaker, the Member of Parliament from Buyanja and it was extremely difficult. 

Mr Speaker, this supplementary was never submitted in the required time and we apologise for that. The circumstances have been stated. However, to whether this money did the rightful purpose, all of us should know that this money was meant to pay salaries and we paid salaries to the employees who worked. 

I would like to thank you, Mr Speaker, for the opportunity to explain this situation and I would like to plead to Members that given the fact that these were salaries of employees who worked and they were paid, if you do not approve it, what will the situation be? I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, there are three words: un-absorbable, unavoidable and unforeseeable. Which one of these was it? 

MR BAHATI: This was both unforeseeable and unavoidable. We did not see this coming but it came. When it came, we could not avoid it. Thank you.

11.34
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Serere): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to start by clarifying. The honourable minister wants to use your words to justify the illegality, which was - (Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Those words are in the law. They are not my words.

MR OKUPA: Not those words you had stated earlier on in your preamble to the debate on this matter that there were challenges during the budget time. Mr Speaker, I would like to say that, that was a different matter. The issue of the minister dates back to December 2016 but issues of swearing-in and reading of the Budget were in June 2016. Honourable minister, do not bring the Speaker’s communication to this.

Mr Speaker, I do not want us to be constrained to make a decision on this. We are going to take a decision on this and we shall not shy away. Both the majority and minority reports have stated what we should do. We cannot be accomplice to an illegality. What we can do is to reject this and wait for the Auditor-General’s report since these matters are going to be audited and later, we shall deal with the people who did not follow the law at that time.

Mr Speaker, we know that this money has already been expended and people have ready been paid but we cannot be party to supporting an illegality. The accounting officers and the people responsible will be brought forward by the Auditor-General in the audited accounts. 

Mr Speaker, we should not be wasting time on this matter because it is an illegality and we cannot continue debating it. The Auditor-General will investigate it. People have been paid and if it was because of their inefficiency or if they violated a law, the report of the Auditor-General will come to this House and we shall deal with the people who violated the law.

11.36
MR JACK WAMANGA-WAMAI (FDC, Mbale Municipality, Mbale): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. This Parliament makes laws and we cannot turn around and break the laws that we have made. The custodian of all financial regulations is the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and the Permanent Secretary/Secretary to the Treasury (PSST). He could have come to this Parliament but he ignored it.

Mr Speaker, I would like to agree with the minority report of hon. Muwanga Kivumbi. It is in the law that you cannot turn around and say, you did not know that this expenditure would be there. All accounting officers and permanent secretaries budget and send their budget to the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. They know how many people they are going to promote and recruit. Therefore, you cannot confuse the House and say, this was unforeseeable. You knew that the money was to be spent but you ignored and brought in a supplementary, four months later from the time required.

Mr Speaker, I request the House to reject this. However, as my colleague has said, the Auditor-General has a long hand and he is going to find out who committed this and we must hold the Secretary to Treasury liable for having committed this error. 

However, this Parliament, being the legal custodian, cannot go ahead and pass the illegality. Therefore, we should reject this, as the minority report suggests. Even the main report says they cannot accept that. Let us reject this and hold those responsible, especially the Secretary to Treasury. Thank you.

11.38
MS JOVAH KAMATEEKA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mitooma): Thank you, Mr Speaker. We are coming to the end of the financial year and it is important that matters that have to do with people’s salaries and wages are expeditiously dealt with.

Mr Speaker, imagine that – (Interruption) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, this is for Financial Year 2015/2016. 

MS KAMATEEKA: Mr Speaker, it is still very important that these matters be retired as we move into the new financial year. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

11.39
MS HELLEN ASAMO (NRM, Representative of Persons with Disabilities, Eastern): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Whereas I would sympathise with the ministry, it is a bit difficult to understand how recruitment is really not in a plan. When we passed the policy statements, we were given information about the gaps, which are going to be filled and how it will be done. Now you bring a recruitment issue for the Financial Year 2015/2016 when the audit is already supposed to be on. I find myself constrained to support this supplementary. Even if I sit on this side, I am not ready to do that. Thank you. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, let us separate the issues, please. We should discuss the issues that both committees have agreed upon. The issue is not whether the situation was unforeseeable because on that one, they have agreed. The debate was here in 2015 where in the middle of the financial year, they did recruitment, which was not known at the beginning and that is a fact. I presided over it here. Salary shortages arose in the middle of the financial year because the districts had recruited when it was not planned for. I am informing you that it happened.   

MR OROT: Mr Speaker, I came from a local government and I was a district chairperson of Kumi District for 15 years. Recruitments in local governments were not predictable. For example, a need could arise from the Ministry of Health and they would write to the district asking them to recruit 32 health workers in a certain category.

Recently, the Ministry of Education and Sports wrote to Kumi District Local Government and asked them to recruit 40 primary teachers at this particular time. As we talk, they have just concluded the interviews. Therefore, the payment –(Interruption) Mr Speaker, I need to be protected as I submit. 

MR ANYWARACH: Mr Speaker, I was a district councillor and the practice of this Government has been that before you start the budget process, Government sends Indicative Planning Figures (IPF). In the IPF, they will indicate the wage bill for you. I am therefore constrained to accept the assertion of my former LC 5 chairman and find out whether it would be in order to allow him to proceed in misleading the House. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, these are factual things. I presided over this matter. It was a debate from both the committees on Education and Sports and Local Government that there were issues with salaries. We asked how this arose and they said, it came from the recruitment that was done mid-term. Honourable members, let us not bury our heads in the sand on this. 

Even as I speak, they had to write to my district specifically saying, there will be no recruitment. This is not the issue we are debating because that was improper practice and it caused a problem. The issue here is, the recruitment was done and the expenditure was unforeseeable. Why didn’t you inform Parliament in time? I would like to separate the issues for you so that the debate is smooth. Let us not go into the issues of unforeseeable and unavoidable; those ones are not material at this time because I presided over that debate in 2015.

The question is, why didn’t the accounting officer, having spent this money on these things that were unforeseeable, alert Parliament, according to the law, on how money was spent and within the stipulated four months? That is the matter we should be debating. [Mr Orot: “I was still on the floor.”] No, you were still on the floor but that matter is resolved. (Laughter) That is the only issue we are discussing and if you start anything else, I will stop you. 

11.45
MR GEOFFREY OUMA (NRM, Bukooli Island County, Namayingo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. A suggestion from a boss is always an order and you have made it clear that the issue is, regardless of all that came in, why was Parliament not informed? In fact, the only person with a good answer to give should be the ministry before we continue with the debate. 

Mr Speaker, can the minister inform the House why they did not inform Parliament at that time?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, an offence has been established. The timeframe of four months was not followed and the needful was done in December, which was over six months after the event. That is the issue. If that is the issue, is there a remedy to it? 

Honourable minister, why didn’t the accounting officer send a report to Parliament in time? Is there an explanation that you can give to the House? (Mr Kasibante rose) You need to respect the Chair because you might be barred from speaking for the rest of your time here. (Laughter)

MR BAHATI: Mr Speaker, we have said that at a political level, the situation, which was pertaining then was that Cabinet was not fully constituted - (Interruption)

MR OKUPA: Mr Speaker, I thought that the minister had understood us. We have all gone to school and we know the calendars, time and procedures. In December of that year, which Cabinet are you talking about? We know that Cabinet was constituted in June but this matter happened in December. 

Therefore, is the minister in order not to tell us the truth and to confuse us that the Cabinet was not constituted in December of 2016? If he does not have an answer to that, let him concede and apologise so that we proceed. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, the issue is clear. Please, you might get some sympathy from the House if you admit that an illegality was committed.

MR BAHATI: Mr Speaker, a mistake was made. For the third time, I would like to apologise to this House.

11.49
MR ANTHONY OKELLO (NRM, Kioga County, Amolatar): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The honourable minister has apologised to the House and I would like to thank him for accepting the mistakes because the illegality has already been committed.

Mr Speaker, I also wanted an assurance from the minister that this matter will not repeat itself and be brought back to the Floor in the similar manner it has come. What remedies do we have so that we do not repeat this kind of thing again? I hoped that the honourable minister would explain the measures they are taking, as Government, so that we do not see this scenario happening again.

11.50
MR OJARA OKIN (Independent, Chua West County, Kitgum): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am the Vice Chairperson of Local Government Accounts Committee and my strong belief is that this has already been captured in the Auditor-General’s report for FY 2015/2016. How are we going to proceed – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are you sure it has been captured? 

MR OKIN: My strong belief is that it has been captured. If the Auditor-General has already handled the matter, which will come for the - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Where is the report? You are speaking as if you have seen the report.

MR OKIN: In fact, we are going to start handling this report on the 12th -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Has this Parliament received audited accounts for Financial Year 2015/2016? Please.

11.51
MR JOSEPH SSEWUNGU (DP, Kalungu County West, Kalungu): Mr Speaker, I would like to thank you very much and indeed thank the minister. First of all, hon. Bahati, you are doing a good job in that ministry. However, the most important issue is, some of the technocrats and accounting officers seem to think that they are above Parliament and they want to take themselves stronger than ministers. Your apology has weight and my prayer is, let us ask these accounting officers to know that ministers are above them.

They should not think that Parliament is a mere institute where one comes to get a salary and to rubber stamp. That is what is happening in Treasury and I am going to say the PS/ST thinks that he is above the rest of the people. We have seen so many people like the late Kasami who was a composed person. It is the work of the technocrats to bring such records and then you move. There is no justification for what you are saying.

I would like to thank hon. Bahati for trying to steer the ministry. Kindly work but please, let the PS/ST know that it is hon. Ssewungu Joseph Gonzanga saying this. (Laughter) We have had a lot of issues.

Mr Speaker, you can imagine the situation of the Speaker, Members of Parliament and yourself. That is what is generating a minority report -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, an authority of an Act of Parliament has not been honoured. That particular responsibility was owed to Parliament. The sanctions to the persons concerned would not fall under the category where you paid the money yourself because that is not part of this. It is a violation and usually, where such violation is done by a person who is not a Member of the House, this House can agree to call that person to apologise to it directly from the bar there. We can agree to say, this is one of those matters where we need a direct apology from the officer to the House. (Applause)

Then we will invite him on an appointed day and draw the bar and he renders the apology from there and the House will accept the apology and let him go. Would that be a good way to go? It is not a financial matter and the committees have agreed on this. Both the minority and the main reports have agreed that it is not a financial breach; it is an issue of this particular - This might be a good way to handle this situation.

MR SSEWUNGU: Let me conclude honourable members –(Interruption)

MR CENTENARY: Thank you, honourable, for giving way. The information I would like to give is that a very bad precedent is likely to be set by this honourable House if we allow those public officers to continue with impunity. I had a very nasty experience at one of the committee sessions where an officer came and told us, the money is already spent so why should we waste our time? It is up to us to approve the supplementary or not. This is not acceptable and it does not reflect well on relationship between Parliament and Government ministries and agencies.

MR SSEWUNGU: As I conclude, Mr Speaker, I would like to thank you for your wise guidance. Even with the Contingency Fund, Parliament rules with all the authority we have here and someone refuses. When you see me standing here to represent the people of Kalungu, it is not about going for prayers alone. I am legislating and when we direct, we must be respected.

Mr Speaker, I would like to thank you very much for what you have stated; that can sort out those issues. Imagine in the Auditor-General’s report, where they have refused to expend from the Contingence Fund and people are suffering because of one person. We start panicking because when we talk about one particular person, he will send people to stand against you. That should not arise here. We must fight and make this country move. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

11.56
MS CECILIA OGWAL (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Mr Speaker, I would like to seek clarification. I appreciate that the minister has apologised to the House but he has not apologised to the law. 

I would like to draw the attention of this House to section 78(2) on the offence: “Where it is established that the institution or department did not meet the requirement of this Act or contravened the Act due to negligence or misconduct of a public officer of the institution or the department the public officer shall be held personally liable in accordance with section 79 or 80 of this Act.”

However, now that the minister has apologised, how do we apply this law? I would like clarification on that.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, that is it. This breach is not financial; it is a matter of conduct and the section quoted by hon. Ogwal is the applicable section. What I would like to propose to the House is that the minister has apologied but the minister is not the one liable. The solution can be what I have proposed, as a sanction, because this is what we can do as Parliament.

We can say, go and write in the papers and apologise but that is not for us. What I am proposing is what can be done. It can be done to a member of the press or anybody from the public who has offended Parliament in anyway. You call them and they render an apology from the bar. That would be how you handle the provision of section 78(1). Would that be acceptable? If it is acceptable then we deal with the financial matters and then appoint a day when the officer will be called. If he does not come, there are implications. Would that be a good way to go?

I am not pushing this on Members; I am just making a suggestion, which is –

MR OKUPA: If Members of the House accepted that, does that mean that we go ahead and adopt or reject the recommendation of the report or we wait until he comes and makes the apology?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What I was saying is, the violation is not financial. Therefore, we can deal with the matter of the finances and finish; but if you think that the officer is so errant that he might not come after we have approved, then you can take an appropriate decision. But my suggestion is that no officer, who has been given this way out, would object to coming to render an apology to the House.

MR OKUPA: Mr Speaker, I would like to seek clarification before we make a decision. If we do not past this supplementary, will it be injurious to anybody or not? I think whether we pass it or not, it is not injurious to us because this money was for the last financial year. It was for salaries and has already been paid to the people who were recruited. Although it was an illegality we do not want to be party to it. If we go by the committee’s report, it is not injurious to anybody because the money is there. So, as we wait for the permanent secretary to appear here as well as the accountability committee to deal with it, let us not justify this illegality because it is of no consequence.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the illegality is not on the money; it is on the conduct of not informing Parliament early. So, that is why I am proposing – because you see, it is this Parliament that closes the accounts of a financial year. I am not even sure whether the Auditor-General can audit accounts that are not closed. It would be partial and incomplete because Parliament has not closed them – but you will still see it coming back to Parliament saying that you did not close the accounts of this financial year. 

Why don’t we deal with what we are supposed to do and have the person who caused that non-financial illegality to come and render an apology to the House? Let us close the financial year instead of leaving it open.

12.02
MS CECILIA OGWAL (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Mr Speaker, I object to the idea of bringing the technical person to the House because we do not have any direct supervision on those people. We have appointed persons whom we deal with here on a daily basis.

We do not only have one minister; we have several ministers who supervise this sector. When we call this person here, we will be demoralising him. He is doing his normal duty and he has got political supervisors to monitor him on our behalf.

Mr Speaker, I do not want this Parliament to intimidate people who are professionally trained and are doing their job professionally. If they do it outside the law, we have got ministers - I would like the minister responsible for this particular docket to come and apologise; I mean the minister of finance not Keith Muhakanizi.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the section that the member for Dokolo read said that a public officer shall personally be held liable in accordance with that section. What is personal liability? If this is a way we should go, can we proceed?  They are personally liable and the minister has done his political part of rendering that apology for the mistake. We need to finish with the finances and leave that issue. If the member who read the minority report -

12.04
MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI (DP, Butambala County, Butambala): Mr Speaker, I know that we are trying to treat a vice and a behaviour that has been consistent; an abuse where we are literally losing a lot of money. It has forced the President of the Republic of Uganda, in the declaration of kisanja hakuna mchezo, to write to the Prime Minister about this irregular recruitment and gave a very strong directive because he was informed that the country annually loses approximately Shs 200 billion upward, which disrupts normal budgeting.

However, the person we are talking about is the secretary to the treasury who is at the pinnacle of our financial matters. Bringing him to this Parliament to apologise will send a statement to any accounting officer in this country - (Interruption)

MR ARIKO: Thank you very much, honourable for giving way. Mr Speaker, I agree with your guidance to the House and just like hon. Muwanga-Kivumbi has said, it is indeed something that honourable members should not fear. I found it very touching that the minister of finance had to stand and apologise over culpability and negligence of a public officer.

The apology here does not negate the fact that additional disciplinary procedure can be undertaken by the supervisors of the permanent secretary. 

The Uganda Government Civil Service Standing Orders provide for a procedure under which, after taking the apology here, the minister who supervises the permanent secretary can still follow-up and ensure additional measures are taken against such a public officer. Thank you.

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: Mr Speaker, now with your indulgence if Parliament finds it within its wisdom to have the accounting officer come here and apologise, my humble opinion is that we would have sent a huge signal and statement of intent that Parliament will no longer tolerate this kind of behaviour. And it will be a milestone in the history of this Parliament.

Secondly, the minister who is responsible should also follow suit with an apology in writing. We will be kind enough to let him lay it here on the Table. We will not subject our colleague to that level because he is not an accounting officer and the law is very clear; it does not talk about the supervisor; it talks about the accounting officer who should be capable for this offence. So, to make sure that we hold those who are politically supervising these officers responsible the minister should come with a humble letter of apology.

Mr Speaker, for a punishment to be felt, it should be immediate. I studied management where we talked about reward and punishment procedures. If you want to punish somebody, it should be immediate, lest they will feel as being victimised.

Even at home, as you punish a child for wrong doing it should normally be immediate. The House is still on and we have other matters that are pending. Let the accounting officer come here today and tender his apology before Parliament can pronounce itself on this matter. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Practically speaking, suppose he is not in the country?

MR MUWANGA-KIVUMBI: Mr Speaker, if the accounting officer is not in the country -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Because usually what happens is that we take the decision and extract the minutes, transmit them and appoint a date when this can be done. We should not do it like now – because these breaches were committed three years ago. Hon. Kamateeka, from whom are you seeking clarification?
 
MR KASIBANTE: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. You have always guided correctly that we should not debate in anticipation. Today is a working day and it is before lunch time. This is a very important matter because Shs 18 billion is a lot of money. We have all accepted that there is an illegality that was committed and the minister was candid enough to come and apologise.

Mr Speaker, is it not procedurally correct for you to suspend the House for few minutes to allow time for the accounting officer to come and apologise before we proceed? Thank you very much.

MS KAMATEEKA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Would it be procedurally correct to require an accounting officer to come to this House when the very accounting officer reports directly to the minister and that minister is in this House? Would it rather not be -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, you should calm down when we are trying to find a solution that is okay for the House. I think that we should be sensitive when the guidance being given is to find middle grounds so that we can move. This is not a personal matter because the law talks about personal liability and we are trying to deal with the issues raised by the minority report in a way that does not impose other charges on the accounting officer.

MS KAMATEEKA: Mr Speaker, the accounting officer can be required to write a letter, through the minister or rather than required him to come here and access Parliament.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The honourable member is not in order if that is the order you are raising. (Laughter) Can we now proceed? We have found a solution to this matter - a decision has been taken by this House after we got to realise that there is a problem with the conduct of a particular officer in relation to transmission of a particular report to Parliament within the time proposed by the law. And there are sanctions imposed for such conducts in the law under section 78 and 79 of the Public Management Act. We have proposed and could agree that the punishment that this House will give will be for the officer to a render an apology to the House. Is that what we have agreed? 

HON. MEMBERS: Yes.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, if that is the agreement, Clerk, please extract the minutes and notify the accounting officer and an appropriate date will be found when the officer will come and render that apology. Can we finish with the issue of the appropriation because we said that the misconduct was not financial, but in relation to other issues of procedure. I would like to ask the minority report mover to confirm if there is a problem with the money or the chair.

MR MUWANGA-KIVUMBI: Mr Speaker, you guided earlier and said – because I put another criteria and said that the criteria for a supplementary was not also followed. However, as you have said sometimes we have to be sensitive because these were officers who were recruited in our local governments and they do a good job; there are health and district officers, but they happen to have been paid. Much as the criteria was unforeseeable, unobservable and unavoidable could have also been faulty, but that is something we can live with.

MR WAMUKUYU: Mr Speaker, paragraph 4.0 talks about sources of funding. We noted that this was a reallocation within the approved budget; they were just transferring staff from one department to others. Therefore, it was within the approved budget. So, Mr Speaker, I do not think that we can go again to re-appropriate because that money was already appropriated at that time. I am talking about the technical reallocation.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, there is a supplementary that has just been requested for and that is what we are talking about. Was there any problem with the supplementary? 

MR WAMUKUYU: There is no problem with the finances too.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, thank you. Honourable members, can we take a decision to supply the supplementary and finish with it as we wait for this other part to be done? Would that be a good way to continue? I will now put the question to the motion that the House resolves itself into a Committee of Supply to consider the Supplementary Expenditure Schedule 2 for the financial year 2015/16. I put the question to that motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)
        
COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY

Supplementary Expenditure Schedule No.2
Recurrent supplementary expenditure for financial year 2015/16 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that the total sum of Shs18,862,390,075 under recurrent wages be provided for as Supplementary Expenditure for the financial year 2015/16. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

12.18
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Chairperson, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of Supply reports thereto.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the motion is for resumption of the House to enable the Committee of Supply report. I put the question to that motion.

(Question put agreed to.)

(The House resumed and the Deputy Speaker presiding)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY

12.19
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati):  Mr Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of Supply has considered the Supplementary Schedule 2 and passed it.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY

12.20
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati):  Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the House adopts the Report of the Committee of Supply.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question for adoption of the Report of the Committee of Supply.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable members and minister. However, the order will be extracted and transmitted as stated. Thank you.

MOTION THAT THE HOUSE RESOLVES ITSELF INTO A COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY TO CONSIDER THE SUPPLEMENTARY EXPENDITURE SCHEDULE 1 AND 2 FOR FINANCIAL YEAR 2016/2017

12.21
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the House resolves itself into a Committee of Supply to consider the Supplementary Expenditure Schedules 1 and 2 for the financial year 2016/2017. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, do we have a report for Schedule 2? Okay, if Schedule 2 report is not there then can you amend your motion, honourable minister, please because it is only Schedule 1 that is there? 

MR BAHATI: Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the House resolves itself into a Committee of Supply to consider the Supplementary Expenditure Schedule 1 for the financial year 2016/2017. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the motion seconded? Okay, it is seconded by the Member for Kinkizi East; the Member for Samia Bugwe South; the Member for Sembabule District as well as the Member for Amolatar District. And on this side, it is also seconded by the honourable member for Aruu County. Would you like to speak to your motion, honourable minister?

MR BAHATI: Mr Speaker, it is true Parliament appropriated the budget for the financial year 2016/2017. However, during its implementation, the country was faced with some unavoidable expenditure that we had to incur in order to implement the budget and fulfil the priorities, which were set by this House and by Government. A schedule was submitted here and the Budget Committee has considered and it is ready to present its report to this House for debate. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister. Honourable members, the motion that I propose for your debate is that the House resolves itself into a Committee of Supply to consider the Supplementary Expenditure Schedule 1 for the financial year 2016/17; that is the motion for your debate. This matter was referred to the committee to start our debate. Can the committee report?

12.22
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON BUDGET (Mr Mudimi Wamukuyu): Mr Speaker, on 21 December 2016, Government laid before Parliament Supplementary Expenditure Estimate Schedule 1, amounting to Shs 255,722,000,000 and it was referred to the committee for scrutiny and report back. Mr Speaker, the report is in the iPads. 

Methodology
We interacted with agencies, which were receiving the supplementary expenditure.

On the legal framework and the status of compliance; the one we have been discussing - the supplementary estimates were laid in accordance with Section 25 of the Public Finance and Management Act, 2015, which states thus: “(a) The total supplementary expenditure that requires additional resources over and above what is approved by Parliament shall not exceed three per cent of approved budget for financial year, without approval of Parliament. 
(b)Where funds are expended under subsection (1), the supplementary estimates showing the sums spent shall be laid before Parliament within four months after the money was expended.”

Mr Speaker, the committee notes that Parliament approved the total budget of Shs 26,360 trillion for the financial year 2016/2017. A total sum of Shs 255,722,000,000 under this schedule represents 0.97 per cent of approved budget, which is within the law. 

Out of the supplementary, Shs 91.601 billion, representing 35.8 per cent is for recurrent expenditure and Shs 164.12 billion for development expenditure, representing 62.2 per cent of the expenditure. 

We have the agencies receiving the money on page 2. The schedule is there in Table 1 and members can read that. The next page has development expenditure figures, which members can also read in Table 1 (b).  

Sources of funding the supplementary expenditure 

The committee was informed by the minister that the supplementary expenditure under Schedule 1 2016/2017 has been financed through suppression of allocation to other votes and reallocation. The suppression and reallocation were duly endorsed by Cabinet. 

Therefore, Mr Speaker, Members can read the justification on those votes that received the money and they are: 
    a) Vote 001 - Office of the President - received Shs 5.6 billion for classified expenditure; 
    b) Vote 002 - State House – received Shs 15.66 billion; 
    c) Vote 003 - Prime Minister’s Office - received Shs 10 billion for emergency procurement of food relief in famine-stricken regions in the country; and
    d) Vote 008 - Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, which received Shs 6.25 billion. There was appropriation in aid as well as money to kick-start the Ministry of Science and Technology and Innovation.

The other votes are:
    a) Vote 015 - Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives, it received Shs 0.477 billion; 
    b) Vote 111 - Busitema University, it received Shs 1.825 billion; 
    c) Vote 127 - Muni University got Shs 0.895 billion; 
    d) Vote 128 - UNEB got Shs 7.2 billion; 
    e) Vote 136 - Makerere University got Shs 22.1 billion;
    f)  Vote 137 - Mbarara University received Shs 1.87 billion; 
    g) Vote 138 - Makerere University Business School received Shs 3.15 billion; 
    h) Vote 139 - Kyambogo University got Shs 4.4 billion; 
    i) Vote 140 - Uganda Management Institute got Shs 0.894 billion; and 
    j) Vote 141 - Uganda Revenue Authority - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: There is Gulu University. 

MR WAMUKUYU: Yes, Mr Speaker. 

Vote 149 - Gulu University which had Shs 3.3 billion;
Vote 141 - Uganda Revenue Authority was given Shs 6 billion for bonus payment to the Government team that successfully represented Uganda in the case against the said Heritage Oil and Gas Limited in London. The payment was challenged and the matter was referred to Committee on Statutory Authorities and State Enterprises by the Speaker for further investigation. The House is yet to receive the report. 

Mr Speaker, other entities that received money are: Vote 159 – External Security Organisation (ESO) - Shs 1.085 billion; 
Vote 214 - Permanent Mission to Dar-es-Salaam received 0.159 billion; and 
Vote 214 - Permanent Mission to UN – Geneva, which received Shs 0.8 billion. 

Development expenditure 
Vote 016: Ministry of Works and Transport received Shs 24 billion for upfront fees and insurance for the purchase of Japanese moving equipment for districts and urban authorities. 

The payment was made in respect to a financing agreement between Japan Bank for International Cooperation and Sumitomo Mitsui Banking Corporation, as a lender and the Government of Uganda as a borrower to provide a buyer credit to facilitate the borrower with the requirement to pay a non-refundable upfront fee and insurance fees against political and commercial risks. 

Honourable members, you recall that Shs 22 billion was provided in the budget of 2016 for counterpart funding for the above activities. However, it did not include both upfront fees and insurance as a prerequisite for accessing the facility.

The Minister of Finance had Shs 95.9 billion out of which Shs 77.251billion was payment for tax expenditure to URA companies that had been granted tax waver by Government. The breakdown is as follows - there is Table two however, for emphasis:
    i) BIDCO got Shs 5.5,000,855, 236,312 as corporation tax;
    ii) Aya Investments got Shs 3.74,000,000,000 as import tax;
    iii) Steel and Tube Industries Limited got Shs 1.5billion as corporation tax;
    iv) Quality Chemicals got Shs 29.83,000,000,000 as corporation tax;
    v) Southern Range Nyanza, got Shs 6.747,000,000,000 as import duty;
    vi) Uganda Electricity Generation Company Limited, got Shs 5.3bilion as stamp duty; and 
    vii) Uganda Electricity Transmission Company got Shs 4.2,000,000,000. That is stamp duty.

Mr Speaker, evidence availed to the committee in the support of expenditure was as follows: 

    a) BIDCO

An agreement between Government and BIDCO oils refineries Limited was arrived at after an open bidding. Either party, there was an agreement - a series of negotiations were held since 1997 to the time the agreement was signed on 4 April, 2003. 

The project aimed at producing and processing palm oil on Kalangala Island is reported to be fully operational and now expanding to new areas, including Buvuma Islands. Article 5 of the agreement awards a range of incentives to BIDCO including corporation tax for 25 years, from the first year of the project activities. 

Mr Speaker and honourable members, when you looked at the agreement, we realised it only talked about other taxes not corporation tax because this was not mentioned. So, the committee recommended that circumstances and procedure followed by granting the exemption are not legally supported.

    b) Aya Investment Limited

We came across a letter dated 29 July 2015 written by the Minister of Finance to the company, extending the period of exemption of payment of taxes and duties on hotel equipment and materials for Hilton Hotel Project up to 31 December, 2015. The circumstances and procedures also followed were not legally supported. 
 
    c) Steel and Tube Industry - we do not see any supporting document.

    d) Quality Chemical Industries Limited

A letter dated 31 May, 2010, communicating the Government decision to pay on behalf of the company taxes on their business, chargeable income for a period of 10 year effective 1 July 2009 was seen. We noticed that exemption does not meet the legal requirements as Article 154(1) stipulates.
 
    e) Southern Range Nyanza

A letter was also raised confirming the decision by Government to pay VAT and import duty on raw materials for textile manufacturers but it did not meet the test of exemption.

The committee declines the approval of tax waiver for BIDCO, Quality Chemicals, Aya Investment, Steel and Tube and Sothern Range Nyanza, which amounts to Shs 47,000,705,980,630. Since this expenditure has been already incurred, it should be treated as a loss to Government.

Uganda Electricity Generation Company Limited, and Uganda Electricity Transmission Company Limited - the committee was informed that funds paid by Government were in lieu of stamp duty, although no supporting documents were available to the committee.

Mr Speaker and honourable members, this stamp duty was in respect of transfer of land for sub-stations, which Government is constructing and there is one along Queen’s way and many others. 

The committee approved this expenditure as an intervention to extend power supply to the population. Government is urged to budget for this tax expenditure in the normal budgeting process. 

There was Shs 2 billion as a payment to Uganda Investment Authority for compensation of squatters in  Industrial Park and Shs 16.5,000,000,000 was payment to facilitate the completion and the operationalisation of a pilot banana processing plant under PIBID. The break down and amounts pay are in Table 3.

The committee was informed that an outstanding debt of Shs 6.8 billion to commission Phase I was requested for but not provided by the ministry of finance. This would delay the commissioning of the project. The committee was further informed that the land title pertaining to the ownership of this project had been handed over to the minister of finance. The documents are all here, Mr Speaker. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

MR WAMUKUYU: The Ministry of Local Government was given Shs 1.7 billion to cater for the outstanding balances under the International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD) Loan. Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development was given Shs 2.5billion for National Oil Company for its management and core board activities. UNRA was given Shs 33billion to complete projects like Fortportal-Nyakahita Road, Kampala Express Highway and civil works on Mukono-Katosi Road. This was necessitated by the Government commitment to pay the project affected person, by November 2016, as agreed by World Bank. UNRA did not however, have sufficient fund in their budget hence the supplementary request.

Uganda Land Commission was given Shs 6.9billion and the payment was made for the outstanding compensation claim to Kampala Archdiocese, regarding the land occupied by Entebbe International Airport. To date, Shs 27.475billion has been paid to Kampala Archidiocese.

Observations and Recommendations

    i) Most MDAs explained that their supplementary expenditure needs were foreseen but unfunded and absorbable through the environment, yet they could have avoided them. It is against this background that they requested for an additional funding which was granted by the ministry of finance. 

Committee was concerned that the MOF had not exercised sufficient due diligence in granting approval for some of the expenditure requests. The committee advised the minister that in future, he will be required to exercise maximum restraint in granting future supplementary approvals to avoid unnecessary distortion in the budget appropriated by Parliament. 

    ii) PBID

The committee observed that PBID and ministry of finance dully complied and they submitted the documents, the ones I have laid - the land title was given. 

The committee also looked through the documents but noted that there was no legal instruments for PBID to operate as the Executive Instrument issued by the H.E, the President on 7 December 2010 for a period of five years expired. 

The committee therefore withholds approvals of this expenditure amounting to Shs 16, 651, 128,028.

The committee observed that Government in support of tax incentive to these strategic areas - but we have seen some documents on these tax expenditures, after the committee scrutinizing the documents noted that majority of these companies do not meet the requirements of the law, particularly Article 159 (5) of the Constitution, which provide thus: “Subject to the provision of this Constitution, no agreement contract, Treaty, convention or document by whatsoever name called to Government is party or in respect of which, Government has an interest shall be concluded without legal advice from the Attorney General, except in such cases and subject to such conditions as Parliament may, by law prescribe.”

Based on this provision, only Uganda Electricity Generation Company Ltd and Uganda Electricity Transmission Company Ltd qualified because they are Government entities.

Accordingly, out of 77.2 billion released for tax expenditure, the committee recommends only Shs 29, 551,990,324 for that the House to approve. The balance of Shs 47,705, 980,630 should be treated as loss of Government public fund and should be recovered from companies that benefited from the waiver. (Applause)
For avoidance of doubt, the schedule below summarized a list of companies and the amounts recovered by URA; the ones I read in Table 3.

The committee recommends that the approval of Shs 6 billion provided for bonus payment to the Government team that represented Uganda in the case against Heritage Oil and Gas in London be stayed until such a time the House pronounces itself on the findings of the investigation by COSASE in this matter.

Conclusion 

Mr Speaker and honourable members, the total amount applied for appropriation is Shs 255,722,150,265 out of which Shs 91,601,666,341 is for recurrent expenditure and Shs 164,120,483,924 for development expedition.

From the committee’s analysis, Shs 6 billion applied for URA - because the matter is still under investigation, our recommendation is that we should stay the approval.
The committee therefore, recommends that a sum of Shs 185,365, 410,608 comprising Shs 85,601,666,341 as recurrent expenditure and 99,763,375,267 as development expenditure under Schedule No. 1 of 2016/17 financial year be approved for supplementary appropriation. I beg to submit.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman for the clear report and giving good guidance to the House. Honourable members, it is the normal time we break and resume at 2 o’clock.

The House was suspended at 12.45 p.m. until 2.00 p.m.

 (On resumption at 2.05 p.m., the Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, presiding.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we had received the report of the Committee on Budget on this particular supplementary expenditure estimate schedule 1, for the financial year 2016/2017. Let us proceed with the debate.

2.06
MR BENARD ATIKU (Independent, Ayivu County, Arua): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to support the committee on the recommendation to stay the exemptions for BIDCO, Aya Investments, Steel and Tube Industries Limited, Quality Chemicals, Southern Range Nyanza, etcetera. 

Mr Speaker, these are private companies that have stayed in the country for more than five years now. I know hon. Migadde is one of the hosts of one of the beneficiary companies but the fact remains that as private companies, I am sure these companies benefitted before and, therefore, exempting them from paying this corporate tax will be additional benefits that will not benefit this country. 

Therefore, I support the committee on this recommendation that these monies be paid because that is the only way the taxpayers of this country will benefit from these companies’ existence in our country. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I am sorry. There was a matter from Kumi. Honourable, let me finish this debate and consider you so that the debate is not interrupted.

2.08
MR GIDEON ONYANGO (Independent, Samia Bugwe County North, Busia): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I thank the committee for the report. I agree with the committee that these companies ought to pay their taxes. I would like to urge the ministry concerned to come up with clear guidelines and policies on how these companies should proceed with these. Otherwise, waiving taxes on companies that are outrightly doing business is not going to help us at all, especially in a situation where the public is facing a serious economic crisis.

Mr Speaker, we are all aware of our current economic situation as a country. For us to waive taxes now on companies that are supposed to stand with the public in terms of paying taxes is really uncalled for. I, therefore, strongly urge the ministry concerned to come up with a clear policy. I think it is rally necessary. I beg to move.

2.10
MR DANIEL MUHEIRWE (NRM, Buhaguzi County, Hoima): Mr Speaker, I propose that we go case by case and Vote by Vote –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: This is a general debate.

MR MUHEIRWE: For the general debate, Mr Speaker, we have heard that there was a memorandum of understanding or an agreement signed about a waiver for 25 years for BIDCO since 1997 – today we are just 20 years and the committee has also highlighted it – I think we shall be making a mistake going against the agreement that was signed.

When it comes to Aya, I have reservations. Since the times of CHOGM, we have never had any tangible results from Aya. I do not see why we should continue aiding Aya yet we have not seen anything out of them. 

On the Presidential Initiative on Banana Project (PIBP), I think the housing of this project does not fit. It seems like an initiative for the President and it should actually be on the prerogative of the President to find where to get this money but not touching the coffers of the Government.  Otherwise, I thank the committee for coming up with this detailed report.

2.13
MS JESCA ABABIKU (NRM, Woman Representative, Adjumani): Thank you, Mr Speaker. My concern is on the recommendation about the Shs 47 billion, which is supposed to be recovered from the beneficiaries. My concern is that before a decision is taken to waive tax, there are many stakeholders involved. The stakeholders who processed the waiver have been left out. As we agree to recover this money, we should also hold all the stakeholders who were involved in the processing of this waiver, which the committee has found was a mistake. 

These stakeholders are responsible to offer custody of our resources. The Shs 47 billion is not a small figure to this country. Therefore, I propose that all the stakeholders who were involved in facilitating the waiver that was not fit should be brought to book. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

2.15
MR JACK WAMANGA-WAMAI (FDC, Mbale Municipality, Mbale): Mr Speaker, I worked in the Ministry of Foreign Affairs for 25 years. One of the job descriptions was to invite investors to Uganda. Instructions were given that investors would get a five-year tax holiday on plants and equipment. I am surprised that some of these companies have been given a 25-year tax holiday.

Mr Speaker, we have got Ugandan companies here and they are not even given a waiver on the materials they import, moreover they also employ Ugandans. What is worst is that these companies that employ Ugandans pay them a minimum amount - about Shs 100,000 per month. Government is waiving taxes and yet these people are exploiting Ugandans and some of them are even harassing our girls. 

Mr Speaker, Shs 47,705,980,630 must be recovered. We cannot accept the grace period of 25 years given to Steel and Tube Industries Ltd, Aya Investments Ltd, Bidco Uganda, Quality Chemicals Ltd and Nytil.

Mr Speaker, the people of Bukedea, Busoga and Lira used to grow cotton and the industry was booming. Nytil was booming but they killed the industry because they allowed these people to import cotton and textile material yet they are not paying taxes. This is not fear to Ugandans. Our people are suffering in hospitals. People are hungry and they have nothing to eat. When you go to the hospitals, there is no medicine yet these investors are sitting on our Shs 47 billion. This money must be recovered.

I would like to agree with the committee’s recommendation on the Shs 6 billion. The other time I heard the President say, “I will pay the Shs 6 billion.” Is he getting it from his pocket or from Government coffers? If he is getting it from Government coffers, that is Government money. The people who took this money must be answerable. We cannot tolerate this. Where is the President getting the money that he says he is going to pay? If he is getting it from his pocket, that is something different but the people who got the Shs 6 billion must refund it.

Mr Speaker, for the first time, I would like to agree with the findings of the committee. You have done a wonderful job and this money must be recovered. 

2.17
MR ALLAN SSEWANYANA (DP, Makindye Division West, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. When we talk about taxes, we should not forget the type of country we are in because it is not a very rich country. Every amount of money that is lost by Uganda is a serious loss to the country because we have very many problems.

Mr Speaker, if we can recover money from a Chinese company, why can’t we recover money from a company which is based in Uganda? These companies have been here and with all the problems that we have, Shs 47 billion is too much money.

I support the ideas suggested by my colleagues of recovering this money by all means. Uganda Revenue Authority (URA) should do everything in its power to recover this money for the benefit of our country because we have many problems. The people in Makindye do not have roads. We only needed Shs 14 billion, in the previous year, to construct some three or four roads in Makindye and other areas in Uganda. 

We also need money to solve other problems. For instance, in schools, children are not fed. Therefore, to say that we waive Shs 47 billion is too much for Uganda. I thank you.

2.19
MR NATHAN NANDALA-MAFABI (FDC, Budadiri County West, Sironko): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Objective 26, of our Constitution talks about accountability; that anyone who is involved in a wrong act when holding a public office will be held liable. People have tried to define corruption but they think corruption is when a contract is available and it is given a kickback. Corruption comprises of a series of things including waiving tax and stealing.

Mr Speaker, I am going to structure my debate in four ways: one, there are questions I will put forward to the committee. Vote 008 - Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is asking for Development Fund amounting to Shs 95,902,093,954 and that includes taxes paid by Aya Investments Ltd and Bidco Uganda. When did that money that was paid to the finance ministry become a development fund?

Secondly, under Vote 017 - Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development, there is a letter from the President directing that no recruitment must be done midway because it distorts the budget. He said that there will be action on anyone involved.

Mr Speaker, some people really abuse our President. He directed but they went ahead and did it against his directive. Did these people involved see the letter of the President? If they did, - this money is about recruitment in the Uganda National Oil Company - action should have been taken. Since the President directed, unless action on those people is taken, then I will not allow this to be approved.

Mr Speaker, it is only Parliament that is authorised to waive taxes. No one has the authority to sign an agreement and say they have waived taxes. That is why you see them running here because they know that the agreement they made was wrong. If it was right, why are they running here?

Assuming, as an example, Bidco Uganda paid Shs 6 billion per year and you multiplied it by 25 years; how much would that be? Hon. Jack Wamanga-Wamai, who was among one of those who brought investors, said that we passed a law here of giving five years’ grace period, where investors are exempted from withholding tax, import tax on materials and even the staff that they bring along. You have enjoyed five years and you want to add 20 more years? These people who were involved should be held liable.

Mr Speaker, you know what Aya Investments Ltd did. They even took over land of former Uganda Television (UTV). We gave them money and just recently, they made one of our minister’s lose a job. These are groups of criminals who have been on the block and you are saying that we should also pay for their taxes. This is very wrong. I wish Kabafunzaki stole this - in fact, what they gave him was part of our taxes yet they arrested him –(Laughter)

I would like to agree with my honourable colleague. First of all, they must refund but also, the people involved under Objective 26 of our Constitution - this is a corruption act. The staff and whoever is involved whether a minister or not must be held liable. An investigation must be carried out to see what motivated them quickly to do this write up.

Mr Speaker, the report recommends that the Shs 47 billion must be returned. How are you going to return it? If you go to the bank and borrow, you do not return money without paying interest. These people must be charged interest on our money. This is theft and it should be double interest than what the bank charges. 

If you gave Shs 47 billion to the people of Acholi - I have just been looking at the budget of Gulu District and it is Shs 20 billion. If you gave them this money, they would run their budget for three years. There is collusion with our colleagues in the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. This is unacceptable. Therefore, they must return the money with interest and those involved must be held liable. 

On UNRA, when they talk about roads, everybody says we should give them money to make roads. However, we are giving money to people who are going to steal. Mr Speaker, this time, we must analyse the road compensation and costs. Why do we give all these billions and get nothing from them? 

For example, we made the four-lane, 52-kilometre Entebbe Express High Way. However, we are going spend to $474 million in addition to what they have asked. Kenya did a 54-kilometre Thika Road with eight lanes but spent only $260 million. Unless we get up here and agree to deal with this, we are finishing this country. They will come here and say we want roads. 

I have warned colleagues in this House that whenever you say “aye” and the people on the backbench behind the Speaker clap, you know a deal has been struck. (Laughter) We must say, “aye” carefully. They bring loans and when we say, “aye” and they walk away happily. You do not know what you are doing but you are killing our country because of those people.
They want to blackmail us. 

I met somebody who told me I would get some emoluments if I don’t fight the supplementary. I told him I am entitled to my salary and gratuity and he cannot blackmail me on them. 

Mr Speaker, finally, I would like to agree with hon. Wamakuyu. I am happy for the first time hon. Lugoloobi’s committee seriously asked people to refund money. I have been here with him for a long time and he had never talked about a refund. It is good he has done so and we must support him. We should go further to say those who are refunding the money must do so with interest and those staff who were involved must be investigated and held liable because they have caused a financial loss to the people of Uganda. If this money was put in hospitals, many lives would have been saved.

Mr Speaker, the issue we are discussing is not about the Opposition versus the ruling party. It is about the people of Uganda. I would like to plead with colleagues that sometimes when we object to issues here, we don’t do it for the sake of it but because we are advising you to be careful as you say “aye” because there is an invisible hand behind. Therefore, kindly always listen to us. Even the Constitution of Uganda says the minority must also be listened to - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Nandala-Mafabi, when Parliament says “aye”, which is the invisible hand holding Parliament? This Parliament is independent. Please, mind your language.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, thank you very much. I started minding my language immediately after mentioning that. (Laughter) I said we should cautiously say “aye” with clear minds. We need Uganda to develop for all of us. We all need roads, hospitals and everything else but let us do it the right way.  Thank you, Mr Speaker.

2.28
MS BETTY AOL (FDC, Woman Representative, Gulu): Thank you, Mr Speaker. If you add the classified expenditures of vote 001 and vote 002 and compare them with Shs 91 billion, you will find that it is more by Shs 20 billion. It is important to also explain this to us; for example, Statehouse and Office of the President’s budgets went up by Shs 5.4 billion and Shs 15.6 billion respectively. For us the lay persons, these expenditures are unforeseen and they are something that go into what is not known.

If we compare other votes with these two, it is very unfortunate to see the two taking priority. Therefore, we need an explanation on that. I am very happy with the insistence of the committee on the Shs 6 billion. That means even the Shs 91 billion will have to go down to Shs 85 billion?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, it is already deducted.

MS BETTY AOL: I am very happy with that but I need an explanation on those two areas, which actually take a very big chunk of money compared to other votes. Thank you.

2.32
MR KENNETH EITUNGANANE (FDC, Soroti County, Soroti): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the chairperson of the committee for the report. This country, as you may be aware, is looking at Parliament as one of the institutions which are going to save the country from corruption. I remember last year, when we had our end of year celebrations, there was a strong statement that we are ready to bite. We have made a note. You can see the good work from the COSASE team. 

I would like to appeal to Members that the money we recovered is a lot and this is one area where we need to step in. Mr Speaker, corruption takes different forms and Ugandans have learned to be very smart whenever they see a gap.  I recommend that a committee be set up to quickly investigate into this and we recover this money. To make matters worse -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The committee has already brought recommendations to you; do you need another committee? 

MR EITUNGANANE: Mr Speaker, what I am trying to emphasise is that even when you look at these groups of companies that have been compensated, they pay their workers very little salaries. Very few Ugandans are benefitting and most of the people they employ are foreigners. That is why there is a very big outcry that this tax waiver should be stopped.

Mr Speaker, this country is mourning. Every day, we talk about losing money. I would like to implore that this money is refunded. I thank you.

2.35
MS SANTA ALUM (UPC, Woman Representative, Oyam): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. I also join my colleagues to thank the committee for recommending the recovery of this money. If you were doing it more, we would not be seeing the issues of unfunded priorities. 

Mr Speaker, I would like to start with the Shs10 billion, under vote 003 - Office of the Prime minister. This money was provided for emergency procurement of relief food for many sub regions including Lango. However, to my dismay, this money was provided and it was used some time back but up to now a district like Oyam and other districts which were supposed to benefit from this money have not benefited.

Therefore, if we are to pass this supplementary and some districts have not yet got the money which was provided for, where did this money go? Perhaps the honourable Prime Minister should answer this question because my people are asking for the food to date and it has not been delivered.  

Secondly, in vote 001 - Office of the President, there this Shs 5.4 billion to cater for unforeseen expenses under classified expenditure. I thought there is always money for emergencies. Now if we begin on unforeseen expenses under classified expenditure and many more; by this I do not know where we shall go and yet there is money for this. Perhaps this is why there is a lot of money in question under the Office of the President.

Finally, on the Shs 47 billion that has been recommended for recovery; URA should recover this money and we have so many unfunded priorities including the SAGE money for the elderly persons. I propose that if this money is recovered, since this is a very hot issue in this country whereby some districts are benefiting and others are not, such money should be given to the elders other than these people doing things intentionally and wasting money. Let us give to the elders of this country who have not benefited before. I thank you.

2.38
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasiro County, Serere): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to call the House to have a lively debate by involving both sides of the House. I hope all honourable members understand what I am talking about. 

Mr Speaker, from the committee’s report, they have told us the source of the funding -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Okupa, what did you mean by both sides of the House?

MR OKUPA: Mr Speaker, I have looked at the debate and the people rising to speak are mainly from one side; so, I would like everyone to be involved in the debate of this nature - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I am choosing from both sides and both sides are very active in this matter. Proceed with the issue.

MR OKUPA: The message is delivered, thank you. Mr Speaker, they are saying that the source of funding is through reallocation by suppression of other votes; can we know which votes were suppressed in order to get this money to fund these other activities? It could be the Ministry of Health meant for drugs for Hepatitis B. Can we know specifically which votes were suppressed?

I would like to thank the committee because they have raised the issue of regaining the taxes. All these companies listed here benefited from the exemption of VAT, withholding tax, customs tax or the import tax. Ugandans were only going to benefit from the corporation tax and now even the corporation tax is being waived for BIDCO.

Just a week ago, this Parliament approved a tax waiver for the Bujagali power project. When did this matter for BIDCO come to this House to be approved? What we know is what was provided for were the other taxes but we have never approved corporation tax. We need to know from the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development what happened. 

We were also told by the committee in this report that in the agreement, that was the only tax remaining to be paid by these companies –(Interruption)

MR MUHEIRWE: Thank you, hon. Okupa. This is not a waiver, Government has paid. That is why there is an EFT because they have paid for them. BIDCO’s EFT is 11914545.

MR OKUPA: It is the same thing, my colleague. Whether a waiver, an exemption or Government has paid, it still affects the common person. However, we are looking at setting some target for Uganda Revenue Authority then midway; you waive or exempt some companies from paying taxes. It affects the collections because this had already been budgeted for. How do you expect Uganda Revenue Authority to meet their targets –(Interruption) 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, I would like to thank you and hon. Okupa. Uganda Revenue Authority will collect and hit the target if that is part of the budget? The problem is, you are going back to the Consolidated Fund to pick Shs 47 billion and give to URA, which returns it again to the Consolidated Fund. In short, there is zero income for Government. 

You have cleared URA with income and they have hit their target but we, the people of Uganda, have lost because those who should have paid us have not.

MR OKUPA: Honourable colleagues raised the matter that we have been giving waivers to Aya and now we are waiving the corporation tax; is that hotel operational now for them to start paying the corporation tax? I need clarification because originally, it was the Hilton Group taking over but they have withdrawn. I understand it is a new hotel company that has come in. 

Mr Chairperson, it is not right for you to say the Hilton Group. It is no longer Hilton but a different company that has come in. Therefore can we be informed what the new hotels group of company is and are they now operational to the extent that we need to waive them of the corporation tax on profits? We need clarity on these things.

Mr Speaker, I was looking at the supplementary budget regarding the Shs 6 billion - Uganda Revenue Authority. I need clarification because in the explanatory notes for the Shs 6 billion, which the ministry of finance submitted to us here, the explanatory notes talk of vote 141 - Uganda Revenue Authority; Shs 6 billion. This funding is to cater for the arrears on salary enhancement of non-teaching staff. That is what we have here. When did URA become a teaching institution? That is what you presented to us here on the supplementary request which you delivered to this House on the 21 December 2016. 

Therefore, we would like to know from the minister because we do not have that -(Interjection)- I know honourable member, you are not part of the front bench member to answer or given me information. I am well informed and I remember we are the ones who brought up the issue of the handshake, so, just hold on.

I would like to hear from the minister of finance what happened. This is what we have and also to the committee, did they have a change of mind? How did they end up telling you it was for facilitation yet what they submitted here is for the non-teaching staff of Uganda Revenue Authority? Mr Speaker, there is a compensation issue.

This matter came to this House about the court award for the compensation for Madam Irene Kalibala, who was a staff of our embassy in Geneva. At that time I was a member of the Committee of Presidential and Foreign Affairs. It was wrong to discontinue that lady from that office; people argued against it but as you have seen, she won the case and Government has had to pay.

The officials who were responsible for sacking Irene Kalibbala should be held responsible for this matter because this House had objected to it. We said she should be reinstated but they did not listen. They fired her and she went to court and now the Government of Uganda has to pay. I am happy that they have compensated her but the person who caused the unnecessary sacking should be held responsible for this loss that has cost the Government. 

Honourable colleagues, I would like to agree with the committee recommendations that we cannot be party to the issues of corporation tax, which is provided here; the issue of the Uganda Revenue Authority of Shs 6 billion for the non-teaching staff, after all this matter is still before the committee. They will produce a report and give us a verdict.

However, the committee should not just say that this is a loss; it cannot be until we have found that it cannot be recovered. The committee of COSASE was able to recover the money which was illegally given to a Chinese company including that which was meant to compensate the beneficiaries. How could the Government of Uganda give a foreign company money that is meant to compensate Ugandans? They deposited the money in a fixed deposit account in their country to make profit. 

Let this come to an end. Most of the companies you are giving this money are foreign; they do not even invest here. At least if it was a local company that continues employing, expanding and re-ploughing this money in this country, we wouldn’t be affected. (Interruption)

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you, Mr Speaker and hon. Okupa, for giving way. Yes, you are making a strong case for those several companies but I am seeking clarification on whether you have very strong views on Quality Chemicals Limited, which is a local company.

I served briefly as a Minister of State for Health. This is a company which manufactures ARVs and when WHO changed the thresholds required for people to be started on ARVs, it became too huge and Government has been requesting it to produce in mass quantities but also to make the cost affordable.

Quality Chemicals makes ARVs, anti-malarials but also at the height of the Hepatitis B epidemic in parts of eastern and northern Uganda; we requested them to start producing and anti-retroviral drugs which are used for the treatment of Hepatitis B; both the adult and pediatric doses. I recall when I was a Minister of Health, the engagement was that they wanted Government to help them so that the cost of these ARVs, anti-malarial drugs and drugs for Hepatitis B could come down. 
 
Therefore, do you hold a very strong opinion on a company like Quality Chemicals Limited, whose services we know have greatly helped in the improvement of the quality of life of Ugandans?

MR OKUPA: Thank you, honourable minister. If you listened to me carefully, I said that majority of these companies are foreign. I was very particular in that area. However, getting to the cost of production and to help you understand it much better is that if you want to reduce costs you attack the productivity level not the profit. The tax that is being exempted is corporation tax. 

Government, including this Parliament, had it that we must give them a chance to produce more; that is why we exempted them from import tax, stamp duty, VAT which was to cater for that. However, corporation tax is based on profit. 

Assuming it was a local company they would plough this money back here and reinvest. However, most of these foreign companies - sometimes I get worried that Uganda’s economy is going to collapse because about 35 per cent of our money goes to the construction industry; but how many local construction companies do we have? Ninety five per cent are foreign, which means that 35 per cent of our money goes back to China because most of the foreign companies are from China and nothing remains in this country.

Last time you heard about Karuma where they brought 2,000 Chinese laborers including the drivers. No local person is benefitting from this company. Look at MTN, Airtel; these are very successful companies but how much investment have they put in this country? Tomorrow, if those companies collapse, Uganda will be adversely affected. 

We must start looking at helping the local companies to develop Uganda in line with the “Buy Uganda, Build Uganda” project; that is what should be driving us. However, this business of giving tax exemptions to foreign companies, I take exception to it. 

Mr Speaker, let us all support local companies. However, for foreign companies, we have given them enough exemptions. Thank you. 

2.53
MR ANTHONY OKELLO (NRM, Kioga County, Amolatar): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The issue of exemption and the irregularities that go with it is not a new discovery. If my memory serves me right, in Financial Year 2013/2014, this matter came up as part of the policy statement of the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and the Committee on Finance examined it. We recommended, in our ministerial policy statement report that these exemptions should not be effected. 

As a committee, we relocated the funds that were meant to cover these exemptions. However, little did I know that the technicalities would come in and this money would come back in form of a supplementary request because even though we rejected it in the policy statement, it has now featured in the supplementary request. 

We probably need to investigate whether from 2013 to date and in spite of the committee report, this money has been paid as a supplementary request. Indeed the irregularities are glaring and taking action that is not supported by legal documents would be illegal and this is a practice that we need to end.

Secondly, on the Presidential Initiative on Banana Industrial Development (PIBID) which is on page 10 of the report, I would like to appreciate the committee for making the observations here. We have a land title in the names of PIBID with the ministry.

We also have the Executive instruments issued by H.E the President; we have a strategic plan, a business plan and also the Attorney-General’s opinion on PIBID’s patent. However, my concern is - I think the chairperson of the committee could probably help us understand. What was the opinion of the Attorney General on the patent because this is an intellectual property and it gives the authority to the creator of the property to use his or her creation for a period of time? 

What is the current status of this intellectual property of PIBID and what is our status as a country because we keep appropriating funds to this organisation?

Therefore, can you help us to understand the Attorney-General’s opinion in relation to these products? 

In the report, the committee declines to approve Shs16 billion. Mr Speaker, I wonder whether this money is not expended already because if it is expended, then it would be proper for us also to think about including this money for PIBID that is already expended, in funds to be recovered. I do not know whether that would be a wise decision but probably not, but if it were, then it would be wise to include this Shs16 billion in table 3, which talks about funds to be recovered by Uganda Revenue Authority. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

2.57
MR JAMES ACIDRI (NRM, Maracha County East, Maracha): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have decided to join the debate because hon. Okupa thought that our side is quite passive; and I would like to make the following observations. I thank the committee for a job well-done because their observations, in my opinion, are right.

First of all, about the Shs6 billion golden handshake which is yet to be brought before the House, the committee’s recommendation should be stayed. 

Secondly, concerning the Shs47 billion, when you talk about companies like BIDCO and AYA Investments Limited, I think at this stage of the debate, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development will give us more evidence into how these companies are contributing to our economy. The motivation behind exempting them from taxes, drawing money from the Consolidated Fund to pay them; we would like to know how profitable these companies are so that there is a clear justification.

Mr Speaker, we do have a liberal policy in terms of capital flight. We are unable to hold many of these companies to account in terms of the resources that they make in our country and we go ahead to offer them tax exemptions to a tune of Shs47 billion, when we know that we are struggling with local revenue to fund our budget. 

One of the issues that I am concerned about is the fact that in the report, it is stated the exemptions are not legally supported. Who is initiating of these exemptions? A few weeks ago, I asked the minister of finance and the Government Chief Whip about who initiates tax exemptions in this country.

However, now that the committee has stated that these exemptions are not legally bound, can we hold those who made those decisions accountable? Again, I would like to join the rest of the members in requesting for more accountability after all we have offered more incentives to these companies. For example, companies like BIDCO have enjoyed incentives like free land, they are destroying our forests yet we are struggling with the issue of rain and we know that in these islands, we are growing palm oil and we do know the impact of this palm oil globally and yet we continue to exempt these companies. When shall we start benefiting from these companies? 

I thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity.

3.01
MR GEOFFREY MACHO (NRM, Busia Municipality, Busia): Mr Speaker, I would like to thank the committee for a wonderful report and I agree with all my colleagues that enough is enough for the companies mentioned here, for tax exemption. Colleagues, truly, the majority shareholders in most of the companies mentioned here are not Ugandans and the profits that they earn in Uganda benefits people back in their respective countries. 

It is high time we stopped this as Government so that instead of getting money and giving it to these foreign companies to build their base in their countries, we better give to our companies. Today in Uganda, we do not have sound indigenous companies that we can count on that we can be proud and parade in other countries so that they recognise that Ugandans also have the capacity to develop their country.

In addition, Mr Speaker, I looked at the committee’s report about foreign missions. Foreign missions in other countries market their countries. Here in Uganda, we have given them money in almost all budgets and many times; however, the conditions are always the same. In fact whenever we go out of the country, you find officers in foreign missions very miserable than the indigenous people in those countries. 

I, therefore, suggest that something special must be done. The Minister of Finance should tell the House today about a programme that Government started, called diplomatic foreign marketing and how it has benefited Uganda. Thank you, Mr Speaker.                               

3.03
MR NOAH MUTEBI (NRM, Nakasongola County, Nakasongola): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to applaud the committee for the good work. It is absurd, at a time like this, when this Parliament has never gone through a single month without seeing a request for a loan from the Ministry of Finance and most importantly waiving a corporation tax.

A corporation tax is a tax charged on profits; I do not know what we are going to tax if we cannot tax profits. We have Ugandan companies that are limping and they need recovery and they cannot be assisted but here we are, rewarding foreign companies, some of which are under investigation.

A few weeks back, this Parliament resolved to investigate the steel industry because they have been operating under the guise of manufacturers yet they are wholesalers of other companies abroad. However, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is rewarding them by paying money, which has been collected by the Uganda Revenue Authority through very expensive tax administration. 

This morning, Parliament moved that some public servants have to come here and apologise but with this, I think it is beyond apology. Therefore, we need to think through the integrity of some officers in this country. There is no justification for paying the hard earned tax collected to foreigners which money is appropriated. I therefore wish –(Members rose_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members –(Interjections)- please, continue. You have already spoken.

MR JACOB OPOLOT: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. It is painful that we are talking about paying back of monies, yet they were available for us to sort out the very many problems we have. Unfortunately, we gave it back. 

Mr Speaker, I would like to remind you that we committed to pay the elderly Shs 25,000 per month and for this year, we have arrears of Shs 3.6 billion. Yet a small bit of quality chemicals would solve that problem for this financial year.

Again, not more than 36 hours ago, we were trying to grapple with the Chairman of the Budget Committee to find Shs 11.65 billion to clear the Government commitment on SAGE; Government committed to pay Shs 29 billion. It has forwarded Shs 17 billion and we have a shortage of Shs 19 billion but we said there is no money. However, we have got money and given it to those outsiders. We have deprived our people, who are wallowing in poverty. 

Mr Speaker, not very long ago, the Ministry of Education and Sports closed over 1000 private primary schools for falling below standards because we do not have money for inspection and enforcement of standards. When we were trying to get that money in the recent budget engagements, we were told there is no money. However, there is Shs 29 billion from one company that was given back. If only they had given us another Shs 9 billion, we would have been able to fix this. 

Mr Speaker, when you talk of education as a backbone of the human resource base, most of our secondary schools do not have science teachers. We would have recruited them if we had money and we needed to add just Shs 5 billion to get more teachers recruited. Unfortunately, we were told the envelope is miserable.

Mr Speaker, again, not very long ago, we brought to you the concern about the plight of the School of Dentistry in Mulago, which wants only Shs 1.3 billion to revamp its operations. In the next academic year, the Vice Chancellor of Makerere University said they are more likely not to admit students in that school because they are not in position. 

All these requirements would fit in less than the Shs 29 billion returned to Aya Group of Companies but most importantly, when a committee observes that the payment or the refunds have no supporting documents, one would start asking on what basis was the money paid back? 

If the law says that no agreements involving Government should be undertaken without the advice of the Attorney-General and all those cannot be provided, then was that a refund to Aya Group of Companies or Quality Chemicals? Or was it something hidden into that guise in order to enrich them - by the way, we laugh when our colleague, hon. Nandala-Mafabi, talks. Sometimes, he cracks jokes and we laugh but these are serious issues. 

I used to sit at that corner where the yellow man is and every time we were passing or even actually debating, we would see the minister receiving chits. Those were answers to the questions Members were raising. Sometimes, these are not national but personal issues. It is painful but I wish we could all think the same. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the minister deal with the issues raised so far and then we will see how we to continue.  

3.11
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati):  Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Thank you chairperson of the committee and members of the committee for the report and for the issues that you have raised. 

As we discussed them at the committee level, some of the issues are genuine and they need to be resolved by all of us. However, I just wanted to say that our philosophy of the economy that we are managing is a private sector led economy. That is the philosophy that we are pursuing. We tried managing companies ourselves, as a Government, over the years and we got problems. You remember issues to do with Uganda Railways Corporation and all the companies that were running that collapsed and we decided to move the path of a private sector led economy. 

For us to achieve the objective that we intend to achieve, which is prosperity for all Ugandans, we must remove the four costs that hinder the private sector. The first one is the cost of power, which all of us have been working on including the action that we took a few weeks ago. 

The other one is the cost of money (interest) and I am happy that yesterday, we passed a budget of Shs 50 billion to capitalise UDB in order to contribute towards accessing long term capital. The other one is the cost of transport, which again yesterday; we passed close to Shs 4 trillion to invest in infrastructure and ease transport costs. The last cost is the cost of decision making, which one could say has issues to do with corruption and the rest. 

Therefore, on each of these costs, we have been making some progress and working long and hard to attract direct investment. It is not easy as you know. There are not many countries are doing the way Uganda is doing; so, getting private direct investors in the country is not easy. If it was easy to invest in our economy as locals, we would not go for foreign investors but because we value them, they come with some conditions. 

One of the strategies we have been using to attract investors was to give tax holidays; so, an investor comes, you give them five years, you renew the contract but along the way this Parliament suggested and passed laws that it was no longer tenable and it was not proper to give tax exemptions as an executive. Therefore, the minister’s power to give tax exemptions was removed. 

What did we do then to be able to continue achieving the same objective? We said instead of a minister exempting taxes, you would rather budget for those taxes and bring them here for appropriation. That is what we did. For instance, last year, we budgeted for 23 billion, which you approved as Parliament. This is what we have been using. That will not be given as an excuse in case there are some things which are not okay during the process.

However, I would like us to look at the principle. Along the way, we had also to spend through supplementary, which is also appropriation. Appropriation is through the main appropriation that we did and also supplementary. We therefore, had a long time understanding with some of these companies, for example Bidco Oil Refineries Ltd to attract them to go and start the oil production that they have doing. I was expecting a Member from Buvuma to give a testimony to this House on what this company is doing in that area; the jobs, the income of the farmers, among others. I think Members from this region could support the Minister by way of information (Laughter) – because they are on the ground. (Interruption)

MS AOL: Thank you, honourable minister for giving way. I would like to get a clarification from you. You just said this foreign company meets the criteria you set, since this country is private sector-led. Our local companies here do not meet the criteria you set. What are these requirements that you set which our local companies cannot meet and yet, the foreign companies can meet them?

In the report of the committee, some of these companies you budgeted for never met the legal requirements to be supported. Why can’t we also try to help our local companies to meet those requirements? I cannot believe that our local companies are too low to be supported or they should never be given incentives to come up and be like foreign companies? We need to plan for them.  Can you clarify on that?

DR BARYOMUNSI: I am providing information and he has granted me permission. Thank you, Mr Speaker. I just wanted to inform the House and hon. Bahati that investments in Uganda are guided by the investment code, which was passed by this Parliament.

Section 21 talks about exemption of investors from import duties and sales tax, and in section 1, it says “an investor importing any plant, machinery, equipment, vehicles or construction materials for an investment project shall benefit from the concession rates of import duty and other taxes, as may be specified in the Finance Act from time to time.” In section 22, it basically sets the conditions of which company qualifies and has conditions for both the foreign companies, as well as local companies.

Section 22, it talks of enterprises which qualify for incentives

    i) An investor in a business enterprise who commences operation after the coming into force of this code shall qualify for the incentives under this part if, (i) if he or she satisfies three or more of the objectives specified in section 12; (ii) in the case of a foreign investor, that investor makes a capital investment or an equivalent in capital goods worth at least $ 500,000, by way of capital invested or in the case of an investor who is a citizen of Uganda, the valued of his or her investment is at least $ 50,000. (Mr Elijah Okupa rose_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable, you rose on the point of information. Please, respect the procedure of the House.

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for your wise ruling. The information I was providing to the House was that there is the legal – (Laughter)

MR OKUPA: Mr Speaker, earlier on, I thought that I would be friendly to a friendly colleague, but now that they have changed – is it in order for the honourable minister to read part of the investment code which was amended and we removed all those that he is reading? Is he in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: If it was amended and what you are reading was amended and removed – (Laughter) – can we be advised that it is true? Were those provisions struck off by this House? You need to go back and check and then come back to advise the House properly.

DR BARYOMINSI: What I know is that the Investment Code has been presented for amendments but I do not recall -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: There was an amendment earlier - [Members: “Withdraw”]

DR BARYOMUNSI: I will not withdraw until I check. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: For now, it is not on the record until you cross-check and you bring the new and proper thing.

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Thank you, honourable minister. Can you tell the House how much Bidco Oil Refineries Ltd is paying the workers on the Islands? We brought a Bill on minimum wage on this Floor and it was not accepted. Secondly, in yesterday’s budget, you were hitting taxes on the locals – Ugandans that have been borrowing money from Housing Finance Bank to put buildings on Kampala Road. You are going to tax them heavily, while you are exempting foreigners. This is not fair to Ugandans who are going to pay very high taxes; moreover these companies are being exempted. Can you clarify to Ugandans? Property owners are going to pay very high taxes, and yet they are borrowing money at very high interest rates.

MR BAHATI: Mr Speaker, in the case of Bidco Oil Refineries Ltd – let us take an example of another company, say Quality chemicals. Quality Chemicals, at a time when our people were at the risk of losing lives because they could not afford ARVs, we entered into an agreement with Quality Chemicals to reduce the cost of the ARVs and among the conditions that we gave them was to give them free land, tax holiday for 10 years and to ensure that they have 15 per cent local content, to cater for the local business people. It is because of the agreed conditions that millions of Ugandans have been saved. At least, they can live longer than they should have lived. We have agreements – (Interruption)

MR NANDALA MAFABI: The procedural issue I am raising is that the minister appeared before the committee and he was asked to present the agreements. Article 119 (5) of the Constitution of Uganda clearly talks about the Attorney-General, “…no agreement, contract, treaty, convention or document by whatever name called, to which the Government has an interest, shall be concluded without legal advice from the Attorney General, except in such cases and subject to such conditions as Parliament may by law prescribe.”

In addition, there is a ruling of a case between Bank of Uganda v Banco Arabe Espanol on page 14, which says in my view, the opinion of the Attorney-General is authenticated by his own hand and signature regarding the laws of Uganda. It means the person who knows the laws of Uganda is the Attorney-General and I am sure he cannot sign an agreement, which contravenes any of the laws.

Therefore, Mr Speaker, are we proceeding well when the minister was asked to deliver documents, agreements with Attorney-General’s authority to the committee and now, he is coming to tell us he delivered them?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, it is a procedural point that has been raised but all discussions we are having here is a discussion of symptoms of what is happening with our economy. We should have a more structured debate on actually what is happening with our economy.

Our planning framework is based on what we call the Washington Consensus Tripartite Policy. Sometime back, we adopted that; privatisation, liberalisation, and de-regulation. Those who are Christians, we have held that as if it is the Bible; no deviation is permitted. However, what is happening as a result? The result is that the country like Uganda, we did not have original capital like other countries had. Other countries in Africa and other places had original capital to help their people.

Now, we have adopted private sector-led development and growth and the financial fund base to support the private sector, without the affordable capital to support that private sector. Therefore, when you bring these two groups into competition, those coming with original capital will, of course, outcompete and they come with all these negotiating powers to force Government; “we are coming to do you a favour”, because our own local companies cannot compete. They cannot get capital. It is too expensive to borrow from the bank. Therefore, they cannot compete.

Therefore, this is the discussion we need the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to bring back to the House and we have a discussion on because we are just dealing with the symptoms of the problem. Now, when these companies come and there are gaps that this country need filled, they come and negotiate terms. If you do not agree, they go, if you agree, it hurts us.

Between hard place and a rock, that is where we find ourselves and that is the challenge we have. Honourable members, look at it carefully, if Bidco Oil Refineries Ltd negotiated what it negotiated, did the people who negotiated have a choice at that time? No, they did not, because no local company would have gone there without Government intervention.

Government had decided to fold its hands from investment and the only investment is private. Therefore, that is why the discussion we need to have is whether Government should not strategically support the local companies with the budget so that they can come up and do these things. Therefore, that is where we are.

The procedural point you have raised, honourable members, this debate is helpful to the extent that we get very angry, we mobilise our national spirit that is all it does.

However, in terms of solving the real problem that we face as an economy, it does not. Therefore, let us have this discussion and find out how best to settle it. I want the Minister to respond because I want to defer this debate and then we find a way of dealing with it better.

MR BAHATI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. On that particular issue of clearance from the Attorney-General, we have a copy of a letter from the Attorney-General, which we submitted to the committee and I have copy here referring to the draft agreement between the Government of Uganda and Bidco Oil Refineries Ltd for the palm oil development in Uganda, dated 18 March 2003. I can lay it on the Table.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can I look at it?

MR BAHATI: Mr Speaker, as I conclude - (Interruption)

MR OPOLOT: Did you say “draft agreement of 2003?”

MR BAHATI: Yes.

MR OPOLOT: And it is still in draft and we are dealing with a draft?

MR BAHATI: No, they cleared a draft.

MS ANN NANKABIRWA: The clarification I wanted, Mr Speaker, the committee looked at the agreement. We do agree that when we are negotiating with these companies, we may give incentives. However, it defeats some body’s understanding; I will give you an example of Bidco Oil Refineries Ltd in the same supplementary we are talking about land and we are giving them money for land to go to Buvuma and acquire land for the company.

Now, the issue here is corporation tax, it means you have made an income. For Bidco Oil Refineries, the corporation tax is Shs5.8 billion but when you assess, it means that this company has made a profit of over Shs 19 billion. You are now going to the pocket of the hard-earned income of that other Ugandan who has paid revenue to again top up for that company.

Let us go to Quality Chemicals. Let us not try to show that this House is against the other members of society who need ARVs. This company is getting other incentives. Now, we are giving them corporation tax of Shs 29.8 billion. This means this person has already earned an income of Shs 90 billion. We are now getting again to our own other revenues and keeping up.

The clarification I wanted from you is, we asked for those agreements, we looked through them but there is nothing like corporation tax. Somebody is taking advantage because we are talking about investors, when you talk against it, then you are against investors. You need to show this House or even if you need time, to examine and study those agreements; there is no corporation tax. (Applause) I do not think any good Ugandan would negotiate such agreement.

Mr Speaker, maybe this House may have to pronounce itself. We are treating symptoms in all; we have just treated Bujagali, and all other bad agreements. That is why we asked for the third schedule to be amended in this House and we are putting you on notice that if the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development does not, we are going to initiate a Private Members’ Bill.

Maybe even in negotiation of these agreements, Parliament may need to resolve to ratify any agreement. We are tired of treating symptoms. (Applause)

MR BAHATI: Thank you very much. If that decision is taken and Parliament adds value to the process of developing our country, it will be very welcome. However, the point that Speaker made on behalf of all of us is that you are in a situation, you do not have your own money or company to invest in an area, you get  foreign investors who have their own terms and these terms were negotiate and these are the terms we are talking about.

We said we are going to give them –(Interjections) yes and I have the letter here. In the agreement of Bidco Oil Refineries, the country committed that Bidco Oil Refineries Ltd will not pay any taxes. That is why we are budgeting –(Interruption)

MR OKUPA: The clarification I would like from you, do you mean to say that the chairperson and the committee are lying when they said that that was not provided for in the agreement?

MS AMONGIN: Honourable minister, I need a clarification because you just mentioned here that when we negotiate with investors, they come because of what is favourable for them. The clarification I want to get is when you negotiate with the investors, you negotiate in the interest of the people. When an investor comes here and is enjoying tax holidays and all the other incentives, I would imagine that by the time an investor is coming here, Uganda is benefitting more than that investor.

MS KARUNGI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The information I am giving is that the minster has also told us that we are benefitting from the local content. I am very disturbed because I visited that factory and talked to some of the employees. Most of them are not given appointment letters and when they decide to leave, they go as if they have never worked anywhere. Mr Minister, we need to look at that and not just say “we are benefiting through local content.”

MR BAHATI: Mr Speaker, as I conclude, this agreement – for example, the one of Bidco Oil and Refineries – was made in 2003 and I was not even in this House. What am I doing when I came in case there was something wrong? –[Mr Odonga Otto: “I was there.”]- (Laughter) You were there –(Interruption)

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Speaker, I was in this House in 2003. I was also there in Kalangala when H.E the President went to mobilise the community and launch the Bidco Oil Refineries Ltd project. I remember the MPs then, hon. Lwanga and hon. Badda went to Kalangala to mobilise their constituents to give millions of acres at Shs 700,000 per acre. The President even appointed a Personal Secretary to camp in Kalangala. 

During the official launch, the President said; “You investors, you should not take my people for granted.” He said; “I know there are only three places like this in the world where it rains almost three or four times a day.” The President mentioned two other locations, one in the Himalayas and the other one towards Turks and Caicos. 

The information I am giving is that even the President himself was on record that these investors should not take advantage of Ugandans because Ugandans did them enough favours to give them land. 

The information I am giving the minister is that you have the powers to spend 3 per cent of the budget upfront and come to Parliament retrospectively. Why should it be your priority to use that 3 per cent to pay taxes for these companies and not send food to the people of Teso? Why should your priority be that we remove 3 per cent before I go to Parliament to pay these taxes and then - What are you talking about? (Laughter)

MR BAHATI: Mr Speaker, we have a duty to perfect what those who came before us did. The agreement is here with us. We committed our country but what we are trying to do now is amend the Investment Code Act so that all these issues that we have been experiencing can be sorted. I want to plead with the House that if you want more information on this particular issue, we can get the agreement and gain more information –(Interruption)

MR ANYWARACH: Mr Speaker, the minister is making a submission to impute bad motive on Parliament in line with foreign direct investors. He is saying that if we reject the supplementary in line with the exemptions to the companies he talked about we would be against foreign direct investors coming to this country. Therefore, it takes us to first address our minds to the investment authority as he is stating.

Are we proceeding rightly when we are actually insisting that out of this money, which is being requested for in the supplementary, as recommended by the committee, the Shs 47 billion is the one, which is questionable. However, whatever is included and have no questions is allowed for other investors. Is the minister proceeding well to impute bad motive on Parliament that we are against foreign direct investors? Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I was not able to read that line of argument from the minister that we are being against foreign direct investment. However, honourable minister, you need to advise the House on the issue. There are issues that the committee has recommended – that some of them should be stayed because they did not have sufficient documentation to support them. Is it possible for you to select those ones on which you think you can give further information to the committee to deal with and have these that are ready and have no issues and we handle them?
Is it possible?

MS CECILIA OGAWL: Mr Speaker, I think it is unfair for the minister to take the House backwards. Parliament mandated the Committee on Budget to scrutinise the documents and bring the report to the House. For this particular agreement the minister is talking about, we read the agreement in detail in the committee. We established that there is nowhere in that agreement that talks about waiver or anything to do with corporation tax. The House is now well-informed that corporation tax is on profit. I want the minister to talk on matters which can help this House and Government. 

As far as Bidco Oil Refineries Ltd is concerned, we scrutinised the agreement – and the members of the committee are here – and there was nothing mentioned in the agreement concerning the corporation tax. If the minister can, let him lay that agreement at the Table so that we can have legal minds to address it again. However, I do not think we need experts to help us understand the difference, for example, between import and corporation tax. I want the minister to talk from an informed position. Read the relevant section to the House. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, this is the report of the committee. I would like you to look at page 7 of the report – under Bidco Oil Refineries – in that paragraph where there is Article 5. Article 5 of the agreement awards a range of incentives to Bidco Oil Refineries Ltd, including corporation tax for 25 years from the first year of the project activities. The circumstance and procedures followed in granting the exemption are not legally supported. 

Therefore, if I am to rely on what the committee has written here, it is not that there is no provision for corporation tax. It is there among the incentives, according to what I am reading here. Let us not be misadvising on how we are going to proceed with this matter. Here is the report, which the chairperson has laid on the Table and it is saying among the range of incentives to Bidco Oil Refineries Ltd, it was including cooperation tax for 25 years.

MR BAHATI: Mr Speaker, the honourable member from Dokolo District says I am speaking without information. The same agreement on page 8, talks about incentives for investment - “The Government shall pay company taxation for which Bidco Oil Refineries Ltd are liable and when it arises for a period of 25 years commencing from the first year of the project activities”. (Interjections) – “Without resources to Bidco Oil Refineries Ltd, companies shall file their respective yearly return of income to Uganda Revenue Authority”. 

Mr Speaker, we have already put that five in the report. I would like to suggest that –(Interruption)

MS AMONGIN: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Aware that the mood in the House is quite shaky in terms of– 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I have not noticed the shaky mood.  

MS AMONGIN: Aware that this issue of allowing a waiver to some of these companies is of an interest to any Ugandan and representatives in this House, wouldn’t it be procedurally right, that we look at the other components of the supplementary and resolve them and then, defer this particular issue?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I posed that same question to the minister.

MR OKUPA: Mr Speaker, the minister is reading for us the agreement and that agreement names the taxes. However, the minister is dodging to read those taxes which are –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: He is not dodging. He has not reached there –(Laughter). Can he reach there very fast? We ask him to reach there. Can you reach there, honourable minister?

MR BAHATI:  Mr Speaker, you know that when you are reading any legal document, you must read it in totality. Raising one item and leaving the rest could be misleading.

I would like to propose as you suggested that we stay on Shs 47 billion, which has issues. I am convinced that we can give more evidence to the committee and if you are not satisfied, we can take that decision. However, if we can get a second chance to give you more information about this issue, we would probably have solved this problem. Therefore, we can stay on Shs 47 billion, and move on with the rest. I beg to propose.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, there are issues here that are clear especially, the expenditure lines that have no issues. That is why I was asking the opinion of the minister that since the committee observed that some of them did not have sufficient support documents, can we stay that on Shs 47 billion? If they can prove it, then they can come back later. However, if they cannot proved it, it will stay out forever and we wait on the - 

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: Mr Speaker, because I agreed with this committee report, I have been very reluctant to comment.

Mr Speaker, in this country, there is a word called “honesty” and sometimes it is in short supply. The committee interacted with the ministry officials and requested them to give every document on earth. They gave us all that they had. We went through this document one by one including, the section he is attempting to read. We even went with them through the various taxes that were waived in the agreement. Corporate Tax was never there on Bidco Oil Refineries Ltd. Bidco was particular because the chairperson of the committee, before he came to Parliament worked with Uganda Investment Authority. He knew a little detail and he was very passionate about it. It took a lot of time. Literally, we all agreed that corporate tax was never any tax that was to be exempted.

Secondly, even if it were like it was done on Bujagali, it had to be brought to Parliament as a waiver. That was not done. Mr Speaker, any more time you are going to accord for any committee, even if it is not the Budget Committee, nothing will suffice. For example, on Shs 16 billion, for the Presidential Initiative on Banana Industrial Development (PIBID) –Can you believe that the instrument of the President expired in 2015?  Now, whose fault is it that they bring to us as a supplementary when the instrument of the President long expired? Even the legal opinion of the Auditor-General was clear that this project should have transited from a project to a legal entity. Up to now, it is not a legal entity and the instrument of the President has expired.

Mr Speaker, hands of the committee and Parliament are tied on this. This is an expenditure that was wasteful in all material terms. Any more time we accord it, would be time not well unutilised. I do not want to use the other word.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the way to proceed which is suggested is that we deal with the ones that the committee and the minority have no issues. Give the minister and the committee a second chance. If it does not work, we are still here and we will deal with it. You do not lose anything by doing that because we have not closed the financial year. We still have Schedule 2 coming. So, it is not like the matter is beyond control. Let us deal with the issues that the committee and the minority have agreed upon. Leave the other one and send it back. If you can correct it, bring it back but if you cannot, stay with it wherever you want. That is what I am suggesting.

Can I now pause it here and ask the people concerned to go and extract this issue from the figures and prepare the right figures for us to move forward with? They should go and extract the actually figures which we can supply and leave the ones which we cannot supply.

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: Mr Speaker, the committee did that. The figures that we can supply are well –(Interruption) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: There is a process for Parliament. The documents that are there are different. That is why I am saying we need the technical team people of Parliament to do it. We do not take from the committee. The document will come from Parliament now. Those are the documents I am saying. I need a short deferral to enable my technical people prepare the exact ones which corresponds to what you have agreed upon as the minority and majority of committee and then, we shall deal with it at supply but leave the others out.  If they want to bring it back, let them justify, and then bring it back. 

Honourable members, let us not complicate this issue. It is already clear. Let us deal with the issues that have been agreed upon and correct them. The rest we leave out. It stands deferred. Next item –(Interjections)- I know but we are taking a decision. It is not like we have wasted all the time.

MR ANYWARACH: My point of procedure is that there is a committee report and we have not even pronounced ourselves on that report.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I have already ruled on that if you were following. At the second reading of a Bill, we do not vote on the committee’s report. The motion before the House is for supply. The different reports are advising the House on the decisions to take. 

The report of the committee on the Bill will advise the House on whether to vote for the second reading of the Bill or not. We do not vote on the report, but it will advise us on what decision to take. We have taken advice from the report and that is why we are going to do what we are going to do.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, thank you very much. On that one, we have documents and we shall deal with it at an appropriate time. The only problem we have with it is that the current Deputy Attorney-General was a state minister for finance who signed the agreement. I do not know how we shall handle it. 

I raised an issue on recruitment and before the minister goes to work on the recruitment, I mentioned a letter from the President. This letter is dated 31 March 2016 where the President says, “Rt. Hon. Dr Ruhakana Rugunda, Prime Minister, Kampala.” - I am going to summarise it - “Irregular Recruitment of Staff without Authorisation” and he goes on elaborating and he concludes by saying -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Nandala-Mafabi, I have a copy of that letter. How is it helping us in what we are going to supply?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: It is helping us because there is the issue of money.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, then let us do what we need to do.
	
MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, the reason I am saying this is because there is money we are going to supply of Shs 2.549 billion for recruitment. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the things that the minority and majority had objections on have been delineated. Please, let us again not bring other things which will - what I am saying is that the minority and the majority have agreed on what should be removed. On this, there is no minority. So can we proceed?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, if we are going say what the committee has agreed on and Parliament cannot discuss, then we should not come here. 

I am bringing a new issue which says the recruitment midway is not allowed and anybody who does it is punishable. There is money here for the midway recruitment under Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development. What I am raising is that we to deal with the additional to what we have discussed because they may not have seen it, but we have.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, what do you say on that one?

MR BAHATI: Mr Speaker, the supplementary for wages is a combination of so many things, not necessarily recruitment. Part of it is recruitment and the others could be arrears, pension or promotion. Therefore, it is a combination of all these things and we are in agreement with the President. 

We have been discussing this issue and that is why the President, as part of the reform, decided to write to the Prime Minister to inform all Accounting Officers so that this bad habit stops. That is the point we are talking about. 

We have been facing this challenge. As we speak now, you will see in the next schedule Manafwa, Katakwi and others in the same situation. Therefore, until we resolve it, we will continue to face this problem. The salaries we have are arrears - (Interruptions)-

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, I hate people who lie. This is salary. [MR BAHATI: “No, please, do not stretch my respect.”] You also do not stretch mine. It says the ministry requested an extra Shs 2.5 billion to facilitate the purchase of Uganda National Oil Company following the appointment of management core staff and Board of Directors. 

Mr Speaker, the President was clear and said there is no recruitment of officers midway and disciplinary action must be taken on those who do not comply. Any Accounting Officer who goes ahead and recruits staff midway should not be reappointed. We must treat this as a serious matter. For now, it is recruitment which hon. David Bahati is not agreeing on –(Interruption)

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Speaker, I rise on a point of order. Our rules are very clear that the Speaker’s ruling and advice is binding on the House. 

Our rules also provide that in case you are disagreeing with the Speaker, you challenge by having at least 40 Members of Parliament standing at ago. That is when the Speaker knows his decision is being rejected.

Mr Speaker, I have witnessed a tête-à-tête between hon. Bahati and hon. Nandala-Mafabi in the spirit which defies the decorum of the House. 

Are we in order to proceed in such a manner as if we are being disrespectful to your chair? If there is now no room for order, then allow people to roll their sleeves, cross to the other side and sort out these issues. Can the two members apologise to this House and your Chair for being so disrespectful and acting in contempt of your Chair? (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, these kinds of situations were anticipated by the rules and the people who structured the way this Parliament is built because we inherited it from the British. 

The distance from the Government frontbench to that of Opposition is a measure of two swords spread so that if a member on the government side and the one on opposition bench are angry at each other, their swords cannot meet. That distance is very scientifically determined because all these things were anticipated.

Honourable members, let us try and respect the decorum of the House even if matters are very intensive and exciting. Use of certain words and flares may not be helpful. (Laughter). Do not worry. Some of those issues are not on record and so they did not affect the decorum of this House. 

Honourable members, can we agree on this issue of the salary, hon. Bahati? Does it violate the directive of the President that the recruitment should not be midway the financial year? If it happens and it is necessitating a supplementary, don’t you think this House should be one of the institutions to advise against such procedure by doing what they are proposing so that we can move with the rest?

MR BAHATI: Mr Speaker, there are situations that come. For example, we formed the National Oil Company Board that came into effect in the middle of the year. While the President issued that directive, there are situations which must be handled along the way. It was not like a straight-jacket that nothing should happen from day one or two -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are you saying this particular case is distinguishable from ordinary recruitment that is prohibited?

MR BAHATI: Yes. Now, I hope hon. Nandala-Mafabi knows that I am telling the truth. Thank you, Mr Speaker. (Laughter)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, first of all, hon. David Bahati and I used to be good friends when we were backbenchers. When he became a minister, he changed. Sometimes, we exchange words which can easily be swords. Therefore, hon. Bahati, if I have offended you, please, forgive me. [Mr Bahati: “Order.”] - (Laughter) - I just asked for your forgiveness.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can I ask the two honourable members to go outside and sort themselves out and then come back? (Laughter)

MS CECILIA OGWAL: Mr Speaker, I have enjoyed the way the minister is exchanging friendly fire with the former Leader of the Opposition. They are used to this kind of thing. However, I would like to propose that we move forward. 

We have resolved the issue of BIDCO. We have said that we take the advice of the Budget Committee and we go by it. The issue of recruitment, particularly because of the importance of that oil sector, even the Budget Committee debated it and we reached a consensus that we allow it to go, for very good reasons and it is on record. You can access our minutes and understand why we did that. I am, therefore, wondering why you are insisting on BIDCO, which we also reached by consensus.

Mr Speaker, if the minister could agree on this proposal, we could go by what has been tabled by the committee, including the one Nandala-Mafabi is very hurt about. In all those things, when you are driving national interest there is always give and take. I think that hon. Nandala-Mafabi will be very happy if something good comes out of this oil recruitment. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the figures have now been harmonised. The Shs 47 billion has been removed and the final figures are ready. Can I put the question for supply on the agreed figure? 

Honourable members, I now put the question to the motion that the House resolves itself into a Committee of Supply to consider Supplementary Schedule No.1 for Financial Year 2016/2017, as amended?

(Question put and agreed to.)

COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY

Supplementary Expenditure Schedule No. 1 for Financial Year 2016/2017 – Recurrent

MR OKUPA: Mr Chairman, I would like to be very clear in my mind because I heard the members of the committee talking about Shs 47 billion then Shs 16 billion. Can they clarify to me? I heard hon. Muwanga Kivumbi talk of another Shs 16 billion. Is it only Shs 47 billion or Shs 47 billion plus Shs 16 billion? Which one are we excluding? 

MR WAMAKUYU: Mr Chairman and honourable members, we are excluding the Shs 47 billion and Shs 16 billion.

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: Mr Chairperson, we are excluding the Shs 47 billion, Shs 16 billion and Shs 6 billion for the handshake. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Those are not in these figures? 

MR WAMAKUYU: No; they are not.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Are we okay now? Honourable members, I now propose the question that a total sum of Shs 85,601,666,341 under recurrent be provided for as supplementary expenditure for Financial Year 2016/2017. I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 85,601,666,341, under recurrent, be provided for as supplementary expenditure for Financial Year 2016/2017.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Supplementary Expenditure Schedule No. 1 for Financial Year 2016/2017 – Development

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I now propose the question that a total sum of Shs 99,763,375,267 under development be provided for as supplementary expenditure for Financial Year 2016/2017. I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 99,763,375,267 under development be provided for as supplementary expenditure for Financial Year 2016/2017.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

4.11
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the House resumes and the Committee of Supply reports thereto.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the motion is for resumption of the House to enable the Committee of the Supply to report. I put the question to that motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Deputy Speaker presiding.) 

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY

4.12
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of Supply has considered Supplementary Expenditure Schedule No.1 for Financial Year 2016/2017 and passed it with amendments.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY

4.12
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, I move that the report of the Committee of Supply be adopted.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion is for adoption of the report of the Committee of Supply. I put the question to that motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable members and chairman. (Applause)

Honourable members, I have been advised that the Supplementary Schedule No.2, which was also on the Order Paper but was not ready at the time, is now ready. Is it true that it is ready? Can the committee confirm? I have a copy of the report here; we could deal with it.

MR WAMAKUYU: Mr Speaker, it is ready and I have the report here. We discussed both schedules.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, this was schedule No.1 and this is schedule No.2.

MR OKUPA: Mr Speaker, in the morning, I remember the minister laying some addendum here. Is that what forms part of it, because it was what was supposed to be part of this?  I do not know whether the committee has looked at it. There is what the minister laid here.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It was a formality for capturing but I am advised by the chairperson and the minister that they already had the document in the committee and had analysed it.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Speaker, I would like to seek your guidance. Now that we have supplied, what is the current status of those companies because it looks like I am not following? (Laughter) Are they paying tax? What is the status quo as on now after the vote? What is going to happen?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We are still within the financial year and the status quo is that the minister now has to come back. If he does not, URA will have to proceed and recover those monies because Parliament has to approve it.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Most obliged.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: There was a matter from Kumi which I had deferred. Please raise it now and then we move on with these matters.

4.15
MR ISMAEL OROT (NRM, Kanyum County, Kumi): Thank you, Rt Hon.  Prime Minister – (Laughter)

THE DPEUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the Member referred to me as Prime Minister because I referred to him as the member for Kumi and yet he is from Kanyum. Now you can refer to me properly. (Laughter)

MR OROT: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for allowing me to raise this issue of national importance. Last Saturday, three people died in my constituency, Kanyum County, Kumi District. When the cause of their death was investigated, it was discovered that they ate poisonous cassava. This issue was earlier raised in this House and the agriculture minister seems to have turned a deaf ear. 

I suggest that the minister visits the area with a technical team to ascertain which cassava is killing people. Among the dead were an adult woman and two children. Mr Speaker, I stand here on this matter because losing people because of lack of food is not good. 

Lastly, I would like to thank you, Mr Speaker, for steering this House right from the morning session.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, leave that alone.

MR OROT: I wish to emphasise that this Parliament is the eye of the country and it should guide the Government to achieve -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can we receive that statement when we have a general debate on some issue? Thank you very much. Can Government comment on the issue of the poisonous cassava in the greater Kumi?

4.17
THE FIRST DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND DEPUTY LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali): Thank you, Mr Speaker. First of all, I would like to convey the Government’s condolences for the loss of the mother and children in Kumi.

Secondly, we are going to inform the ministries responsible to send a team, as requested, to investigate and come up with a report as soon as possible.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you.

4.18
MS ELIZABETH KARUNGI (NRM, Woman Representative, Kanungu): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for the opportunity. I rise on a point of national importance. 

Kanungu District has recently been badly affected by hunger. On Sunday in Kibimbiri Parish, Kihihi Subcounty, Kinkizi West Constituency there was a hailstorm which came with a lot of force; I do not know whether it wanted to finish all the hungry people but it destroyed about 30 houses. We are happy that so far no death has been reported. However, many people were injured and taken to nearby health centres and the health centre IV in Kihihi Town Council.

Mr Speaker, the situation is very serious and I pray that Government intervenes immediately because these people have nowhere to stay as their homes were destroyed. They do not have iron sheets to reroof their houses and therefore they continue to sleep outside. The situation is terrible.

Mr Speaker, I pray that Government acts fast and rushes to Kanungu to relieve some of these people before they start dying because this is the same area that was affected by hunger and sunshine. This hailstorm has now finished everything. I beg to request. Thank you. 

THE DEPPUTY SPEAKER: We can hear from the honourable member for Kinkizi East before the Prime Minister speaks.

4.20
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (HOUSING) (Dr Chris Baryomunsi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I thank my Woman Member of Parliament and I stand here to confirm the report she has given. That part of the district had been hard hit by famine and inadequate food and then this calamity where houses were destroyed. 

I requested the CAO to convene the District Disaster Committee and furnish the Office of the Prime Minister with a report so that action can be taken. I will also visit as the minister responsible for housing since houses have been destroyed so that I work together with the Office of the Prime Minister, particularly the Department of Disaster Preparedness, to see how services can be taken to that area.

THE FIRST DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND DEPUTY LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali): Once again, I would like to sympathise with the people of Kanungu on behalf of Government. 

The housing minister has just said a bit of what I was going to say. The fastest and sure way of handling this type of disaster is for the District Disaster Committee to quickly go to the site and assess what is required to mitigate the problems.

Since the minister spoke to the CAO, who is usually the chairman of the disaster committee, if the Member of Parliament can come tomorrow to my office at around 10 o’clock, I will link her with the Commissioner for Disaster Preparedness to see how fast they can rescue these people of Kanungu District. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Mr Prime Minister, you should not use the House to make your appointments. Now you are making an appointment including the time of the meeting. (Laughter) However, thank you. 

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESOLVE ITSELF INTO A COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY TO CONSIDER THE SUPPLEMENTARY EXPENDITURE SCHEDULE 2 FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2016/2017

4.24
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the House resolves itself into a Committee of Supply to consider the Supplementary Expenditure Schedule No.2 for the Financial Year 2016/2017.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The motion is seconded by several Members. Could you briefly speak to your motion, honourable minister? 

MR BAHATI: Thank you. Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues, this is schedule 2 and it arises out of some of the pressures that we received during the implementation of the budget for 2016/2017. 

Among them is the implementation of our infrastructure programme by UNRA; they have some arrears to clear and yet some of their projects are not moving at a speed we would have expected them to do. Therefore, what they are requesting for here is to reallocate money from those areas that are not performing at the expected speed and then clear the ones that are already being implemented. It is sort of a technical reallocation that requires prior parliamentary approval. We have gone beyond the three per cent -   

MS CECILIA OGWAL: Mr Speaker, the minister is using the committee report and I do not know when he became the chairman of the Budget Committee. The report he is referring to as he is speaking to his motion is the report of the Budget Committee. Therefore, Mr Speaker, can you ask him why he does not have official documents from the finance ministry, so that he can formally ask the Budget Committee to lend him their report?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The minister has attached his notes in the same report. (Laughter)

MR BAHATI: Mr Speaker, we thank God that Mama Cecilia Ogwal still has very sharp eyes because she is able to see what I am reading here; it is amazing! 

Mr Speaker, we also received pressure from State House and Mbarara University. However, the only expenditure that requires prior approval by Parliament is the one from UNRA; the rest are under the three per cent as required by the law. We presented this to the Budget Committee and they considered it and are ready to report to the House for debate and final approval.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion that I now propose for your debate is that the House resolves itself into a Committee of Supply to consider the Supplementary Expenditure Schedule No. 2 for Financial Year 2016/17. To start off the debate, I would like to ask the chairperson to report, briefly.

4.28
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON BUDGET (Mr Wamakuyu Mudimi): Mr Speaker and honourable members, this is a report of the Budget Committee on Supplementary Expenditure No. 2 of 2016/17. On 4 April 2017, Government laid before Parliament supplementary expenditure estimates under schedule No. 2 amounting to Shs 523.935 billion. In addition, there were addenda which were laid before the House. The report was referred to the Budget Committee for scrutiny.

The committee interacted with the agencies which were receiving the money. On page 3, the committee notes that Parliament approved a total sum of Shs 26.3 trillion for Financial Year 2016/17. A supplementary request of Shs 523.935 billion, under this schedule, plus Shs 10.234 billion in the addendum, plus what we have passed already, is within the three per cent threshold. 

In addition, Government requested that Parliament grant prior approval for the following items because they are above the three per cent threshold:

    a) Vote 002, State House - Shs 23,187,068,000 for shortfalls on utilities, insurance, classified expenditure and travel.  
    b) Vote 137, Mbarara University - Shs 3,253,673,000 for construction of hostels.
    c) Vote 113, Uganda National Roads Authority - Shs 212,122,895,310 to meet costs of road construction.

Mr Speaker and members, the detailed allocations are on page 4 in table 1 (a) - recurrent estimates. Members can go through them, and they go up to page 8. Those are the receiving agencies, districts and municipal councils. On page 9 we look at the development estimates. The receiving agencies are listed on pages 9 to 11. The total development estimate is Shs 326,714,363,758.

Sources of Funding for the Supplementary Expenditure

The committee was informed by the minister that the supplementary expenditure under Schedule No.2 of Financial Year 2016/17 had been financed through suppression of allocations to other votes and reallocations as endorsed by Cabinet. 

a) Recurrent Expenditure
On page 12, the receiving agencies are listed. They are:
1) 	Vote 001 - Office of the President. 
	It received Shs 1,041,487,000 to cater for outstanding bills from hosting official delegates in the Commonwealth Hotel.

2) 	Vote 002 - State House
	State House received Shs 2,920,000,000 under classified expenditure and Shs 200 million as initial capital for Isingiro Fruit Factory.

3) 	Vote 003 - Office of the Prime Minister
	The Office of the Prime Minister received Shs 15 billion as additional funding to purchase food for people in hunger stricken areas.

4) 	Vote 004 - Ministry of Defence and Veteran Affairs.
	They received Shs 60,000,000,000 under classified expenditure. 

5)	 Vote 005 -	Ministry of Public Service
	They received Shs 471 million to cater for medical treatment for the wife of the former Rt Hon. Prime Minister.

6) 	Vote 008 -	Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development

	The ministry received Shs 7,776,777,000 to collectively cover shortfalls under the National Lotteries and Gaming Regulatory Board to carry out its mandate; appropriation raised by the Uganda Investment Authority for completion of the E-One Stop Centre for investment registration; and clearance of liabilities under Phenix Logistics Ltd following the handover of their assets to Fine Spinners.

7) 	Vote 012 - Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development
	The ministry received Shs 2,366,958,000 to facilitate activities of the Commission of inquiry on Land Matters.

8) 	Vote 013 - Ministry of Education and Sports
	They were given Shs 2 billion as facilitation for Uganda Cranes’ participation in the Africa Cup of Nations 2017 in Gabon.

9) 	Vote 116 - National Medical Stores
	National Medical Stores received Shs 27 billion towards urgent procurement of blood collection supplies and anti-malarial drugs which were out of stock. 

10) 	Vote 122 - Kampala Capital City Authority (KCCA)
	Kampala Capital City Authority was provided with an additional funding of Shs 1.5 billion towards hosting the International Association of Athletics Federations (IAAF) World Cross Country Championship.

11) 	Vote 129 - Financial Intelligence Authority
	They received an additional Shs 223 million for subscription to Eastern and Southern Africa Anti-Money Laundering Group (ESAAMLG). 

12) 	Vote 145 - Uganda Prisons Service
	They received an additional Shs 19.5 billion to purchase food for prisoners. 

13) 	Vote 302 - Uganda National Meteorology Authority 
	Uganda National Meteorology Authority received Shs 1.67 billion as appropriation in aid for payment of contract staff salaries.

14) 	Vote 233 – Uganda Embassy in Ankara 
	They received Shs 70 million. 

15) 	Vote 303 - National Curriculum Development Centre 
	They received Shs 466 million. 

16) 	Vote 512 - Kabale District 
	The district received Shs 100 million for the purchase of a car. 

17) 	Vote 519 - Kanungu District 
	The district received Shs 257 million towards wage payment of six doctors at Bwindi Community Hospital.

18) 	Votes 127, Muni University; Vote 136, Makerere University; Vote 138, Makerere University Business School; Vote 140, Uganda Management Institute; and Vote 149, Gulu University. They all received Shs 279 million, Shs 577 million, Shs 1,949,020,000, Shs 1,379,288,000 and Shs 1,428,514,000 respectively as technical supplementary on teaching and non- teaching staff. 

19) 	Vote 793, Apac Municipal Council; Vote 795, Bugiri Municipal Council; Vote 615, Omoro District; Vote 616, Rubanda District; Vote 517, Kamuli District; Vote 790, Kapchorwa Municipal Council; Vote 613, Kagadi District; Vote 526, Kisoro District; Vote 784, Kitgum Municipal Council; Vote 797, Kotido Municipal Council; Vote 787, Kumi Municipal Council; Vote 786, Mubende Municipal Council; Vote 555, Wakiso District; Vote 780, Makindye-Ssabagabo Municipal Council; Vote 558, Ibanda District; Vote 563, Koboko District; Vote 783, Mityana Municipal Council; Vote 788, Lugazi Municipal Council; Vote 792, Njeru Municipal Council; and Vote 609, Sheema District.

The above listed local governments collectively received Shs 5,704,997,000 to cater for the local government technical supplementary on Universal Primary Education (UPE) and Universal Secondary Education (USE).

20) Shs 80,094,420,000 was collectively given to the following votes as technical supplementary on wage:
    a) Vote 001 - Office of the President;
    b) Vote 008 - Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development;
    c) Vote 010 - Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries;
    d) Vote 011 - Ministry of Local Government;
    e) Vote 012 - Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development;
    f) Vote 016 - Ministry of Works and Transport;
    g) Vote 021 - East African Community Affairs;
    h) Vote 101 – Judiciary;
    i) Vote 103 - Inspectorate of Government;
    j) Vote 112 - Ethics and Integrity;
    k) Vote 119 - Uganda Registration Services Bureau;
    l) Vote 120 - National Citizenship and Immigration Control;
    m) Vote 122 – Kampala City Council Authority;
    n) Vote 146 - Public Service Commission;
    o) Vote 156 - Uganda Land Commission;
    p) Vote 161 - Mulago Hospital Complex;
    q) Vote 229 - Uganda Embassy in Juba;
    r) Vote 236 - Mission in Mombasa;
    s) Vote 302 - Uganda National Meteorology Authority; and 
    t) The following local governments (districts): Adjumani, Apac, Arua, Bugiri, Bundibugyo, Bushenyi, Busia, Gulu, Hoima, Jinja, Kaberamaido, Kalangala, Kanungu, Kasese, Kayunga, Kiboga, Kisoro, Kumi, Kyenjojo, Lira, Masaka, Mayuge, Moyo, Mubende, Nakasongola, Nebbi, Pader, Sembabule, Sironko, Soroti, Ibanda, Kaabong, Kaliro, Kiruhura, Koboko, Amuria, Nakaseke, Amuru, Buliisa, Bukedea, Bududa, Amudat, Buyende, Lamwo, Otuke, Alebtong, Buvuma, Gomba, Kiryandongo, Luuka, Namayingo, Serere, Kyankwanzi, Kalungu, Lwengo, Bukomansimbi, Rubirizi, Napak, Kibuku, Nwoya, Butambala, Buhweju, Agago, Kween, Kagadi and Rubanda; and 

The following municipal councils: Arua, Entebbe, Fort-Portal, Jinja, Lira, Mbale, Mbarara, Moroto, Soroti, Kasese, Hoima, Mukono, Iganga, Masindi, Ntungamo, Busia, Bushenyi-Ishaka, Nansana, Makindye-Ssabagabo, Kira, Kitgum, Koboko, Mubende, Kumi, Lugazi, Kamuli, Kapchorwa, Ibanda, Njeru, Apac, Bugiri, Sheema and Kotido.

b) Development Expenditure

i) Vote 001 - Office of the President

They received Shs 255 million towards the purchase of a vehicle for the Director of the Manifesto Implementation Unit.

ii) Vote 002 - State House

State House received Shs 23,187,068,000 to cater for a shortfall, as indicated earlier, on utilities, insurance, classified expenditure, travel inland and abroad. 

iii) Vote 004 - Ministry of Defence and Veteran Affairs

The ministry received Shs 6,534,000,000 towards development of a solar plant. The committee was informed that the ministry had decided to explore installation of solar power in order to reduce on operational costs associated with electricity. The installation project is supposed to start at Kololo and later roll out to Bombo Barracks and other military units.

iv) Vote 008 - Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development

The ministry received Shs 3,201,190,000 as additional funding towards appropriation in aid raised by Uganda Investment Authority for completion of the E-One Stop Centre for Investment Registration, to ease business and for key infrastructure developments including a road and power line in Kampala Industrial and Business Park; and clearance of liabilities under Phenix Logistics Ltd following the handover of their assets to Fine Spinners Limited. 

v) Vote 010 - Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries

The ministry got additional funding of Shs 16 billion towards part payment for Government commitments on land acquisition in Buvuma for oil palm development, and for emergency control of bird flu. The ministry further requires an additional Shs 2.1 billion for emergency control of the army worm.

vi) Vote 016 - Ministry of Works and Transport

The ministry was given Shs 30,971,249,000 to cater for mandatory requirements by Bank of Uganda to pay opening fees and insurance for a letter of credit for M/s Sumitomo to enable supply and delivery of Japanese earth moving equipment, and also as a down payment to complete the Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) at the new Kampala port in Bukasa.

vii) Vote 017 - Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development

The ministry was given Shs 12,000,000,000 towards acquisition of way leaves and land for substations for the Lira-Gulu-Agago project.

viii) Vote 019 - Ministry of Water and Environment

The ministry was given Shs 39,066,026,000 to cater for the completion of Nyamuranda Town Water Supply System in Kibaale District. The committee was informed that Shs 35,781,000,000,000 was provided to meet the shortfall in counterpart funding under the Lake Victoria Kampala Water Sanitation Project, arising from Government commitment to increase counterpart funding from €30,000,000 to €66,000,000. Shs 3,284,000,000 has been provided for completion of Nyamuranda Town water supply system and also for drilling 75 wells to address the water shortage in Kamuli District.

ix) Vote 022 - Ministry of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities 

The ministry was given Shs 5,593,000,000 as additional funding to cater for the redevelopment of Namugongo Martyrs Shrine.

x) Vote 113 – Uganda National Roads Authority 

They are requesting for additional funding of Shs 212,122,000,000 for meeting requirements under contract for various roads. 

xi) Vote 122 – Kampala City Council Authority

Shs 2,000,000,000 was given to KCCA towards settlement of outstanding obligations to Safinet (U) Ltd for the purchase of Usafi Market.

xii) Vote 137 - Mbarara University

The university is requesting for Shs 3.2 billion to cater for utilisation of funds received from Uganda Electricity Transmission Company Limited (UETCL) as compensation for the passage of a transmission line through the university land at Kihumuro Campus, for the construction of hostels.

xiii) Vote 144 - Uganda Police Force

The Uganda Police Force received Shs 8.155 billion for the purchase of the National Telecommunication Intelligence Monitoring System (10 per cent) on works deposit and classified expenditure.

xiv) Vote 155 - Cotton Development Organisation

It received Shs 1,764,000,000,000 as additional funding, which went towards the construction of a cotton seed processing plant (phase 1) at Pajule, Pader.

xv) Vote 156 - Uganda Land Commission (ULC)

The Uganda Land Commission received Shs 13.664 billion to cater for part payment of land belonging to Church of Uganda and land compensation claims by M/s American Procurement Company. The Uganda Land Commission requested for an additional Shs 300,000,000 to enable reallocation of occupants of plot 26-28 Port Bell Road, Kampala. 

The committee was informed that Plot 26-28 Port Bell Road is located on the right hand side, just after and adjacent to Capital Shoppers complex, Nakawa. It currently accommodates the Nakawa Disabled Vocational Training Institute. This land was purchased by ULC and is titled under KCCA, and has a lease of 15 years effective 6 June 2008.

xvi) Vote 213 - Uganda High Commission in Kigali

Shs 500,000,000 went towards the purchase of security enhancements for the new chancery and apartments.

xvii) Vote 142 - National Agricultural Research Organisation  

They require Shs 162.5 million for emergency control of the army worm.

xviii) Votes 500-609 - Local Governments

The following local governments require Shs 4.611 billion to cater for the Transition Development Grant for 30 districts, to cover the shortfalls for the Uganda Sanitation Fund Project - The districts are listed in the report. 

Observations and Recommendations

The committee noted with concern the frequency of supplementary requests from various Ministries, Departments and Agencies (MDAs), which distorts and makes the budgeting process almost meaningless. Further, it was noted that most supplementary requests do not meet the criteria as outlined in the Public Finance Management Act regulations, as being un-avoidable, unforeseeable and un-absorbable. 

The committee, therefore, recommends and urges the Minister of Finance to carefully scrutinise the supplementary requests before authorising payment.

The committee also noted that although the budget for State House had previously been increased from Shs 256 billion to Shs 305 billion to avoid frequent supplementary expenditure requests, the committee was informed that the supplementary requests arose out of a of number unforeseen expenses, given the nature of the office. 

The committee was concerned about the Ministry of Defence and Veteran Affairs’ supplementary request of Shs 6.5 billion towards development of a solar plant at Kololo Airstrip with just a few days to the close of the financial year. The committee was informed that this was a pilot project to be rolled out to different military barracks, to save energy costs. The pilot project would inform the roll-out in Financial Year 2017/2018. 

The committee noted that Shs 19.5 billion, as additional funding towards feeding of prisoners and inmates, could have been avoided if the Ministry of Finance had released funds geared towards irrigation to Uganda Prisons. 

The committee also noted that the funding for feeding of prisoners is becoming unsustainable due to the growing level of case backlog leading to longer remand periods. The committee further noted that the huge number of prisoners and inmates was due to delayed justice arising out of the inadequate number of judges to hear these cases.

The committee recommends that Government prioritises irrigation schemes at prison farms to promote self-sustenance in food production and feeding of prisoners. 

The committee further recommends that Government addresses the problem of case backlog by providing more resources to the Judiciary and other related institutions. 

Conclusion

The committee recommends that Shs 775,413,965,309 as required under schedule No. 2, be approved as supplementary expenditure for 2016/2017. This figure is broken down as follows: 
a) Shs 241,244,358,091 for supplementary expenditure that requires prior approval by Parliament. The breakdown is as follows:
    i. Vote 002, State House – Shs 23,187,068,000 for shortfalls on utilities, insurance, classified expenditure and travel;
    ii. Vote 137, Mbarara University – Shs 3,253,673,000 for the construction of hostels;
    iii. Vote 113, Uganda National Roads Authority – Shs 212,122,895,310 to meet costs of road construction;
    iv. Vote 605, Kibuku District - Shs 17,630,000 for pension;
    v. Vote 001, Office of the President - Shs 483,360,614 under  wage;
    vi. Vote 522, Katakwi District - Shs 220,556,585, wage;
    vii. Vote 523, Kayunga District - Shs 142,096,091, wage;
    viii. Vote 546, Ntungamo District - Shs 78,650,390, wage;
    ix. Vote 561, Kaliro District - Shs 445,222,236, wage;
    x. Vote 566, Manafwa District - Shs 1,060,668,095, wage;
    xi. Vote 586, Otuke District - Shs 85,524,492, wage;
    xii. Kabale Municipal Council - Shs 147,013,278, wage.
The total is Shs 241,244,358,091.

b) Shs 534,169,607,218 for expenditure as described above - that falls under three per cent of the approved budget category. I beg to report.

Mr Speaker, we have a minority report attached to the committee report, authored by hon. Kivumbi.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Kivumbi, please proceed with the minority report.

4.58
MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI (DP, Butambala County, Butambala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rarely comment before I present a minority report. However, we do this with a very large spirit, with a view to make Government deliver efficiently and effectively. I think it is to the credit of the ruling party if its systems work better.

Mr Speaker, we have literally three grounds of dissent: UNRA, the solar project and State House. For the one given under (b), where I had earlier indicated that I would have a position of dissent, I was informed by the chairperson of the committee that the various documents that were required were availed and they were fairly satisfactory. Although it appears in the report, we now remain with just three grounds of dissent: UNRA, the solar project and then State House utilities.

Mr Speaker, UNRA is requesting for Shs 212 billion to clear accumulated debts on various projects. Committing Government beyond the funds appropriated for a given activity is an abuse of a commitment control system. Nevertheless, UNRA does have sufficient funds. The schedule we are considering was laid before Parliament by the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and this is what he wrote: “Section 25 of the Public Finance Management (Amendment) Act, 2015 states that…” (Interruption)

MR ODONGA OTTO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a point of procedure concerning a habit, which I see developing in this House lately. Our rules provide that minority reports shall be affixed to the main report and shall be presented by the committee chair in a certain order - the minority report and then the main report. 

Notwithstanding the contents of the report that my good friend, hon. Kivumbi, is raising, which I agree with, the procedure and practice this House is adopting where the minority reports are presented differently is what I seek your guidance and indulgence on, Sir.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That had initially been the practice but you know, when the committee chair has to present the report, he does not have the correct attitude to articulate for the minority. (Laughter) Therefore, the burden was passed to the person who has the belief and conviction to do it for himself or herself. That is why it is now done this way. Please, proceed.

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The minister moved under section 25 of the amended Public Finance Management Act, 2015 and he wrote: “‘(1) The total supplementary expenditure that requires additional resources over and above what is approved by Parliament, shall not exceed 3 per cent of the total approved budget for that financial year without approval of Parliament.

(2) Where funds are expended under subsection (1), supplementary estimates showing the sums spent shall be laid before Parliament within four months after the money is spent.’ 

In line with the above section of the Public Finance Management Act, 2015, Shs 523,905,000,000 has been authorised by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development as supplementary funding under schedule 2, financial year 2016/2017. In addition, Shs 212 billion supplementary has been submitted to Parliament for prior approval.

The purpose of this letter, therefore, is to request the minister to do the following…”

Mr Speaker, our bone of contention is that UNRA moved under a requirement for additional resources and when the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development appeared before the Budget Committee, they still affirmed they needed additional resources. Later, as the committee was proceeding with the processing of this, the story changed; UNRA appeared and said they never required additional resources. Instead, they said they had the money in their own vote and all that they needed to do was to shift money from projects that would not take off fast to those that will take off.

Mr Speaker, in that regard, we had to go back and look at what the law clearly states. Section 22 of the Public Finance Management Act is very clear; if you are going to move money within a given vote, that is done under a virement and it requires the approval of the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. Even in that case, that virement is capped at 10 per cent in a given financial year.

Mr Speaker, that is the legal background as to why we contend that this Shs 212 billion being sought for in this very budget does not conform to the requirements and standards set in the law, and therefore it is wrongly placed and unlawful.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Just for clarification, if the proposed virement exceeds the percentage allowed, what remedy would be available under the law?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, we put a cap of 10 per cent so that when you are budgeting, you do not sacrifice projects; for example, if you have a project going on and you pull out money anyhow, it will go down. If the virement you are asking for is more than 10 per cent, that means you over-budgeted for a project which does not exist. What happens is that this money is supposed to be returned to the Consolidated Fund.

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: Secondly, Mr Speaker, section 22 of the Public Finance Management Act raises conditions on virement; it says,
“(2) A virement made under subsection (1) shall not — 
(a) 	be more than 10 per cent of the money allocated for an item or an activity of a vote where the virement is from one item or activity to another; 
(b)	 be contentious; or 
(c)	 result into a future liability for the vote or the Government.”

We asked the Executive Director of UNRA whether this money had contractual obligation and she said it did. Therefore, shifting this money will lead to a future liability to Government and even under virement that causes serious problems. Therefore, it does not pass the test. 

Additionally, Mr Speaker, as hon. Nandala-Mafabi has clarified, the Public Finance Management Act was made to impose discipline and to facilitate clear budgeting. We sacrifice money for health, schools, agriculture and pay our people poorly in order to give agencies money for development. To pile it up there and later say, “After all, I can shift this money,” is what the Act intended cure. 

If you read the President’s letter, much as it was in regard to recruitment he also said that this is a big problem; agencies should come to this Parliament to request for money that they are able to absorb.

Mr Speaker, this is wrongly placed and in our humble view, it should go to the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development where they will do a virement. Our hands are tied because Parliament does not approve virements.

Solar Project

Mr Speaker, the Ministry of Defence and Veteran Affairs requested for Shs 6.5 billion to develop a pilot solar plant in Kololo and later roll it out to Bombo Barracks. However, it was established that the project lacked a feasibility study. The ministry confessed, first of all, that they had not received the money, which is good. Secondly, this project lacks a feasibility study.

Due to the absence of a feasibility study, the ministry was unaware of the actual cost of the project and production capacity. Nevertheless, the ministry also informed the committee that the project was to supply power to the national grid. 

The committee, therefore, established that the ministry had not yet spent funds and the request does not satisfy the supplementary criteria. The criteria for a supplementary, as we have said the whole of today, is: unavoidable, un-absorbable and unforeseeable. A pilot project can be placed or planned for during the process of budgeting. For a pilot project to attract a supplementary, where we are going to suppress other critical needs, is to extend what we permit under the law. 

Therefore, Mr Speaker, it is our humble opinion that the Shs 6 billion should not be given to the Ministry of Defence and Veteran Affairs. This is a pilot project; let them roll it out during the normal budget process.

State House Utilities

Mr Speaker, the presidency is the fountain of honour in this country and we must take care, even when we want to articulate the needs concerning the Office of the President. This is because one day, hon. Cecilia Ogwal or Nandala-Mafabi may be the occupant of that office. Therefore, we have got to maintain its unique place even when we want to point out things we disagree with. 

Mr Speaker, I am mentioning issues to do with State House with a heart of stone. I would not bring up the presidency in a plenary of this nature, but we have to cure a disease and we are left with no option but to find a remedy. While we were budgeting, we took care to give the Office of the President all the money because we did not want the presidency to feature in these matters of supplementary all the time; it speaks badly of our presidency. 

However, this is the story: State House requested for Shs 1.2 billion to settle utilities arrears as follows: Telecommunications, Shs 615 million; electricity, Shs 220 million; water, Shs 365 million. In essence, this indicates that the accounting officer committed Government beyond the funds appropriated for a given activity. This contravenes section 15(3) of the Public Finance Management Act. It is an abuse of the Government commitment control system and a sign of poor planning, yet the presidency must set a good example.

In the final budget call circular dated 7 March 2017, all accounting officers were instructed to submit verified domestic arrears and ensure that they have the first call on available resources for financial year 2017/2018. It is important to note the fact that utility shortfalls in State House have been increasing in the past three financial years as indicated in figure 1. Arrears have risen from Shs 528.9 million as of 30 June 2014 to Shs 1.08 billion as of 31 June 2016. This translates into a 105 per cent increase over the last three years. 

There is a figure that further elaborates the arrears but I do not want to go into it. However, I will give the example of the vice-presidency. If we give additional funding for water, the home of the Vice-President will require Shs 1.5 million additional resources. That means per day, the home of the Vice-President uses 633 20-litre jerricans of water - (Interjections) - I am leaving out the figure of the President but the figures are there - State House offices will use 10,350 jerricans of water per day. This is absolutely excessive by any extent. Even if it is toilet; is it from Lake Victoria? -(Interjections)- I am leaving out the details because I am talking about the presidency; Members will read the figures.

Mr Speaker, based on the instructions contained in the final budget call circular, verified utility arrears should be settled in the financial year 2017/2018 by taking first call on the available resources. The State House accounting officers should be held responsible and personally accountable, as required under sections 45(5) and 79 of the Public Finance Management Act, 2015, for committing Government beyond the funds appropriated for a given activity and flouting of the commitment control system. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable member. You have outlined the areas where you do not agree with what the majority has proposed. To help us, the minister could respond directly to those issues and then we see how we can handle the debate. Honourable minister, respond to the specific issues raised by the minority report.

5.18
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, it is true the Public Finance Management Act, 2015 provides for how the ministry and the accounting officers can handle virement, which limits us to 10 per cent, to move from one vote to another. It is our interpretation that beyond the 10 per cent, the people who have the authority to appropriate should take that decision. That is why we are coming to Parliament.

The second issue is about the utilities of State House and the supplementary for State House. I must state that in the past, this issue has been raised time and again. However, supplementary requests for State House for the last two years have reduced to less than 10 per cent of their budget. There are times when it was just above the average and we raised this issue in the House. The State House comptroller has now been very strict.

Mr Speaker, this is the President of the country. I think to the extent possible, we must facilitate the presidency of this country to do the work that they are supposed to do. People should understand that sometimes there are things that you can project and see during appropriation. However, if it goes beyond, that is when we come through the supplementary, and supplementary appropriation is also a supplementary. I think the most important thing is: is there value for what you are appropriating for?

Mr Speaker, the last issue is about the solar power pilot project at Kololo by the Ministry of Defence and Veteran Affairs - (Interruption)

MR OKUPA: Honourable minister, could you please clarify on the issue of the 34,430 jerricans of water in State House. Is that calculation correct or is he being an alarmist? We know that there are two State Houses – Entebbe and Kampala. Is that for all of them or for one? Do the two State Houses use those litres on a daily basis? Even if it is the average, the figure is still astronomical. Can you clarify that?

MR BAHATI: The State House comptroller is in charge of State House affairs. State House is not only restricted to Entebbe and Nakasero; we have state lodges in Kabale, Gulu, Soroti, everywhere - (Interruption)

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. We have been given figures here. State House Entebbe uses 34,430 jerricans a day; State House offices use 10,350; and the upcountry lodges use 9,979 jerricans a day. This is surprising because the President has a home in Entebbe, Nakasero, Rwakitura, Kisozi, and even in Mbale but when he is here, no one uses 9,979 jerricans of water in Mbale.

Mr Speaker, what we are saying is that, it is possible the accounting officer made a mistake. Last time we met the President in State House Nakasero, the President admitted that he does not know some of these figures. If the President saw that he was using 34,430 jerricans per day, he would get shocked.

Mr Speaker, what we are saying is that - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You rose on a point of order.

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Can the minister clarify whether these figures are right or wrong?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You rose on a point of order.

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Is it in order for the honourable minister to say that 34,430 jerricans of water cover State House and upcountry state lodges?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Wamanga-Wamai, you are completely out of order because you rose on a point of order yet you have no order to raise. So, you are out of order. However, there are some clarification points that he has raised, honourable minister. Why this breakdown of water in State House and all these places? Where is it?

MR BAHATI: Mr Speaker, the figures hon. Muwanga Kivumbi has need to be verified. I think it will not be –(Interruption) 

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: Mr Speaker, I have a letter in my hands, which I can lay on the Table, from the State House comptroller, Ruth Nakyobe. It elaborates which water is used in which lodge. All we did was to factor in the cost unit which National Water and Sewerage Corporation charges – (Interruption)

MS KARUNGI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. All of us here know that a normal person goes to the toilet to urinate at least five or four times a day. Some people sometimes have running stomachs and they can even go six, seven or ten times a day. (Laughter)  Most people who visit State House eat food and drink tea. Some of the people from the villages are not used to eating these kinds of food and they can go to the toilet many times. 

Is it procedurally right, Mr Speaker, to talk about this water as though if somebody goes to the toilet, we should count how much water he or she uses to flush the toilet? If they are washing plates in the kitchen, should we be counting how much water they use? State House receives so many people. If you go there today, you will find people waiting there.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, let us find a solution to this thing.

MR OKUPA: Mr Speaker, like hon. Kivumbi stated, the presidency is a fountain of honour. If there are things which have gone wrong, we do not want to bring them up here so much. However, between you and us, hon. Bahati, there could have been some exaggeration but can we handle these things in a more decent way without vulgarising it? 

This is a simple arithmetic calculation that we can do in a normal way. Can we have a decent way to sort this matter out without complicating it? This is because the more you insist, the more you provoke me to bring up more things which will not be necessary at this point. I would not love to do that.

MR BAHATI: Mr Speaker, the point I raised is that they need to be verified. Yes, it is true the State House comptroller gave a letter, which I have not seen - probably, I will read it. However, from the figures the minority report has pointed out, they said they used about Shs 30 million. 

If we had got the calculations like you did and then maybe you also told us what is reasonable for a State House like ours where the President hosts over 10, 15 or sometimes 1,000 visitors, that would help us. However, if you just calculate and say the average figure is this, without giving us the standard you think we should be using – I do not believe, Mr Speaker, that State House can be unnecessarily excessive on the use of water. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: How much water does Parliament use per month?

MR BAHATI: The Clerk is here; she can tell us.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Madam Clerk, do you have the figures there? Could you assist us because Parliament is one such institution that is not small? It could give us an idea. Honourable members, they are saying the average consumption for Nakasero State Lodge is Shs 22 million and Entebbe State House has an average consumption per month of Shs 81 million. Therefore, I wanted to see how much we use in Parliament per month. Honourable members, with these utilities which are charged by National Water and Sewerage Corporation, you never know.

MR BAHATI: Thank you. I think we have almost built consensus that it is a reasonable figure given the State House – (Interruption)

MS ALUM: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Is it in order for the minister to say we have almost built consensus and yet I have an issue about the State Lodges which are outside Nakasero and Entebbe? 

The data here shows that State Lodges outside Kampala and Entebbe use Shs 22 million and yet the President rarely stays there every day. He rarely visits those places and we even do not have water from National Water and Sewerage Corporation in some of these places, for example in the State Lodge in Otuke. Therefore, is the minister in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: All the minister was trying to do is to urge honourable members to come to a consensus. I think that is the spirit he is trying to promote. Honourable members, according to the Clerk, the Parliament Building uses roughly about Shs 15 million per month. 

MR BAHATI: With that standard, I think we can go to another issue; these figures are reasonable. 

The last point is on the solar pilot – (Interjections) I have concluded on the issue of State House.

MR OKUPA: Mr Speaker, I thought the minister would quickly calculate the figures for State House given the rough amount you have for Parliament. On average, when you consider the staff of Parliament, Members of Parliament and all the visitors, the Parliament Building has 1,200 people per day. I thought the minister would tell us on average how many people –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let us be reasonable. The cars in Parliament are not washed with Parliament’s water. I do not know what size of fleet the President has, but his cars are washed from the State House. They also water the compound and that is why it is green throughout the year. That is the difference. Let us leave little matters and concentrate on big issues, please.

MR ANYWARACH: Mr Speaker, please protect me from the minister who thinks he represents Padyere. As far as I know, there is only one person who represents Padyere and that is me. (Laughter)

Mr Speaker, when I looked at the figure my colleagues presented, it is actually a figure from 2014 to 2016. I am therefore not sure whether in his conversion he calculated the utility bills per year. If it runs from 2014, then you are talking about 2015 to 2016 -(Interjection)- That is what it indicates and that is what we are catering for here. 

If it does not cater for only a year, then much as we are going to agree here, there will be more eyebrows raised – that there is no way officials of State House should take advantage of such a presentation and behave like Oliver Twist begging for more and now even asking for much more. We will be taken for granted. Therefore, it should in a nutshell that when considering supplementary, it must be for a period of a year on the unforeseeable, unavoidable, etcetera.

Lastly, Mr Speaker, my problem with supplementary budgets has always been this: if it does not serve the purpose, what happens? I did not hear this come up because I was outside, but in the minority report there was the issue of M/s American Property -(Interjection) – Okay, he withdrew it. However, once a supplementary does not serve the purpose, aren’t we beaten hands down? 

This also relates to section 17 of the Public Finance Management Act. Our technocrats know very well that the Act says parliamentary appropriation is for one year and any other unspent money must be sent back. These people probably foresee with that eagle eye that a certain amount will be sent back. Therefore, they start creating a lot of reasons to stampede Parliament with a lot of requests, and there will be no way they will fail to have a reason.

I sit on the Committee of Gender, Labour and Social Development and we have been clamouring for that Shs 10 billion or Shs 42 billion so that we do a national rollout for the Social Assistance Grants for Empowerment (SAGE). I expected it to come as a supplementary but it is not here. It does not warrant a supplementary but what matters most are the repayments to Phenix and things like that. That is my concern. Thank you very much.

MR BAHATI: Thank you, Mr Speaker and colleagues. What we need to understand-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, you need to deal with the solar issue.

MR BAHATI: I thought that I could also make a point on resources because every year-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You will make that as a general comment; first deal with the solar issue.

MR BAHATI: The solar project is a pilot project under Ministry of Defence and Veteran Affairs. This solar project is going to help solve the utility problems that we are discussing here. Ministry of Defence and Veteran Affairs has been paying a lot of money in their barracks-(Interruption)

MS CECILIA OGWAL: Mr Speaker, the committee generally did not have serious objection to the purpose of this solar project. However, we are saying that this is a pilot project which ought to have come in the budget. There is nothing unforeseeable, of an emergency nature or which fits within the description of a supplementary.

Therefore, Mr Speaker, the minister should not take us for a ride. We do understand the importance of that project and we all support it, but we are urging you to put it in the budget. This is because there is nothing of an emergency nature or unforeseeable; everything was planned otherwise it would not have been a project. That is the plea.

Therefore, I would like us to speed up the process of the meeting. Let us agree that this is a project, which does not fit within the description given to us as a committee to pass any vote under supplementary.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What would your advice be on the others?

MS CECILIA OGWAL: On the utilities, personally I told the State House comptroller that about two to three years ago, we gave them an extraordinary amount of money to stop them from ever coming for a supplementary. Indeed, he is right to say that for the last two years, they have not demanded for a supplementary. It is not because they did not want to demand for a supplementary but because we had given a lot of money within which to operate and which was able to absorb any shock, tremor or excessive demand they would have.

Mr Speaker, maybe you can give us time as a committee or a special committee to sit down with State House and discuss some of these things because when we discuss in public, it may be misunderstood. However, it is important that we sit down and get State House to operate in a manner that protects the image of the President. (Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you, Mama Cecilia Ogwal. The information I would like to give is that water and electricity are metered and there must be real consumption figures according to the meters. Since this has come up and it is a contentious issue, the Auditor-General should pick interest in utilities usage in State House and also in all ministries but use State House as an opening example.

I am raising this because in some ministries, or maybe even in State House, you will find that the water which is being billed and paid for by State House is being consumed by other people and the bills are registered in the name of State House. That is where the problem is. This happens even with Mulago Hospital, Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, etcetera.

Therefore, Mama, yes we can set up a committee but for now, this is a clear eye opener and we should urge the Auditor-General to really audit bills for utilities in all ministries-(Interruption)

MR ODONGA OTTO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I know I am under duty of non-disclosure but I happen to be represent a client in one the properties State House is occupying. Three months ago, I got a request that they need to expand the tank in the building because the existing tank was small. We went and inspected and we had to double the capacity of the tank.

The information I would like to give, therefore, is from the perspective of this annexure which my client owns and the bills you are talking about. We have rubbed shoulders with many individuals who want their bills squeezed in -(Interjection) - Yes! Therefore, when they are bringing the client’s bill, they also bring their bills like a pamphlet so that they are accommodated in one figure. That is the information I wanted to give.

MS CECILIA OGWAL: Thank you. Mr Speaker, let us be sensitive about what we are talking about. The President is the fountain of honour and some of us feel very uncomfortable discussing some of these details in public. However, we want the people who run the activities around the presidency and State House to be mindful of the fact that if this Parliament is pleading to have some money for the old people, who are about to die anyway, and we cannot find money but we are discussing the issue of the use of water in State House to that magnitude, it makes you and I to be judged wrongly. That is our plea. 

Therefore, Mr Speaker, I would like to say that enough is enough. There must be an end to this matter. Let us find a solution, and the minister should suggest to us what we can do to scale down. Of course, the Auditor-General is one of the solutions but I know that there are some accountants who are well trained that they know how to hide some of the sensitive matters; I know that. We may employ very good accountants-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are you now giving professional advice in that area?

MS CECILIA OGWAL: I am also giving them advice, that they should be careful not to hide-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You are an accountant yourself.

MS CECILIA OGWAL: Not yet. Mr Speaker, I advise that we should bring this matter to an end because this has been a very long exercise. We need to start on another-(Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I would like to seek clarification from Mama because she is a member of a committee. Under UNRA, they want you to approve Shs 120,022,000,000 for compensation of land along Entebbe Express Highway. However, I remember before the highway was constructed, we compensated everyone. Where is this request for Shs 120 billion coming from? Have you created another highway on Entebbe Road? Hon. Fox Odoi, a former MP here, was one of the beneficiaries of the compensation. 

MS CECILIA OGWAL: Fortunately, I am not the Minister of Finance; I hope that he has heard so that he can explain to hon. Nandala-Mafabi about that demand. However, even the committee was not very comfortable with the issue of UNRA. My plea is that we can decide and allow them to use what is feasible or practical between now and 30 June. This is because if they do not use that money now, it will be returned and it will not be given back to them -(Interjection)- Through another system but not directly. Therefore, we have to be very careful as to how to manage this money. 

I therefore plead with the honourable minister to agree with the committee so that we find a way of giving UNRA what is practical for them to use between now and the end of the month. The rest of the money can be used elsewhere, where there is more demand. That is my opinion, Mr Speaker. 

MR BAHATI: Thank you. Just to correct the record, the Ministry of Finance’s utilities have not been paid at any one time by State House. Hon. Nandala-Mafabi had referred to it in his presentation. 

Secondly, this solar project, if fully implemented, will reduce the cost of utilities under the Ministry of Defence and Veteran Affairs by 35 per cent. A decision was taken in the middle of the financial year because we thought the cost of utilities under Ministry of Defence and Veteran Affairs was becoming unbearable. It is not right to continue putting the welfare of our soldiers in a situation where they are dealing with arrears and such issues in the barracks. We need them to be comfortable to serve the people of Uganda; that is why we had to take that decision. Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, can we put a closure to this issue one way or the other, and I propose- Honourable members, I came here at 10.00 a.m., left at 12.45 p.m., came back at 2.00 p.m. and I have been sitting here. You have been up and down all through but I have been sitting here. I also have issues that I need to -(Laughter). That is why sometimes when we are bringing matters to a close and then you say you have a small matter, some small matters are not small.

Can I put the question for supply and then we can see how to handle this issue? If they are saying that in 30 days this money can be absorbed, the audit will reveal that it has been absorbed. Can we for now deal with it, let it go and then we see later what comes from the audit? Please, let us find a way of closing this matter and we move on.

MR ANTHONY OKELLO: Mr Speaker, mine is in relation to a parliamentary resolution which was made on 16 March 2017 and this supplementary request came on 4 April 2017. It was a resolution about paying three former heads of state of the Presidential Commission. Parliament had resolved that Shs 1.2 billion be got during the supplementary appropriation for 2016/2017 and another Shs 1.2 in the budget of 2017/18. I can read the resolution of Parliament -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I am advised that this item is in the budget and not in the supplementary budget. It is already in the budget.   

MR ANTHONY OKELLO: Most obliged, Mr Speaker.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to also thank you for being patient. We agree that you must be tired; at least for us we can get out to make a phone call. 

Mr Speaker, the money we are talking about is not little. I am more concerned about UNRA. We compensated people for land and now they want us to give them another Shs 120 billion. In fact, the road is supposed to have been handed over to us by now-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, also practically speaking, there is a portion of that road that has not been done because they have not compensated people. These are the practical things that we need to deal with. That issue was published in the press and there was also a demonstration. There is a portion that has not been worked on because they have not compensated people.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, we are aware of that part – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Why are you saying that it has been fully compensated? 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, I am saying so because I have been reading the agreements which have been done and how the money was sourced. I have been interested in that road so much; I have been interested in the costing and the benefits Ugandans will have. 

I have read the agreements, and I have seen how the compensations and the diversions have been done. The report we have, as we speak now, is that all persons who were affected have been compensated. That is why you saw that when it was supposed to pass on somebody’s land, they diverted it because they never wanted to pay Shs 44 billion.

Mr Speaker, I would like to inform you about this with certainty, because I have been involved and I know what I am raising. The reason I am raising all these concerns is because we have only 29 days to go and within 29 days, it is practically impossible to have Shs 200 billion spent.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It will go back to the Consolidated Fund. If it is not spent, it will go back; that is the rule.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, the reason we are raising this is because at the end of every financial year is when people want to spend money. This is because they have realised money will remain and now they want to take –(Interruption)

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Speaker, I went to the East Committee Room last week and found the Minister of State for Works and Transport, Gen. Katumba, and the Executive Director of UNRA appearing before the committee that was being chaired by hon. Lugoloobi. If the statements hon. Nandala-Mafabi is making are that serious, I think that it would be of help for the chairperson of the committee to allay the fears of the House about what hon. Nandala-Mafabi is raising, because we cannot sweep it under the carpet. 

Some of us have been waiting for certain monies, but it is coming now to two years and yet others want theirs in 30 days. Therefore, the chairman of the committee could really allay fears that this Shs 240 billion is for that purpose; otherwise, we could just be facilitating people who will toast with glasses of wine in the bar tonight.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can we hear from the chair?

THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON BUDGET (Mr Amos Lugoloobi): Mr Speaker, payments to claimants are made on the basis of verified claims. Each time they verify, they pay accordingly. However, sometimes it also depends on the availability of money. Therefore, all these issues put together, there will always be money probably that has not been paid for some reasons, whether the owner of the land or kibanja owner has not been properly verified. 

However, there is a long process that takes place before they decide to pay someone; the valuers do the valuation, a report has to come out and they have to verify all these people. Therefore, it is difficult for us to sit here and claim that we can start auditing this whole process –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: From what you were told is what we are asking. 

MR LUGOLOOBI: From what we were told, there are still claimants to pay.

MR BAHATI: Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues, we too have information. These people who have done work come to our ministries with certificates of completion, but they have not been paid. We have been told by UNRA that if we give them this authority to spend, they will spend this money in two weeks because all the activities that are supposed to be paid will be paid. Two weeks is not far from now. Also, as you said, Mr Speaker, if the money is not spent, it remains on the account of Government.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker if you listened very well to hon. Bahati’s submission, there is a schedule showing how the money will be paid. Muyembe-Moroto-Kotido Road will be allocated Shs 29.5 billion; the upgrade of Ibanda-Fort Portal Road, Shs 4.8 billion, etcetera. However, my interest is in the Entebbe Express Highway land which has been allocated Shs 120 billion. Hon. Bahati, if they said that they want money to pay people who have finished and have got certificates, it would be understandable. Do you also have certificates for land?

Secondly, Mr Speaker, do you know why the Chinese were refunding money? They compensate people on every piece of land where the road will pass. For those whom they cannot reach, they get the money and give it to the contractor. That is why contractors were refunding money because they had not paid people. 

Even on the Entebbe Express Highway, for those who have not been compensated, the money for compensation is on the account. So, where is this Shs 120 billion from? You may say that the money will go back to the Consolidated Fund, but receipt and expenditure is very easy, debit and credit is very easy; as Mama Cecilia Ogwal said, they will transact a debit and credit and when they credit, Shs 120 billion will go away in a minute. 

What does it take for this to happen? If in the Office of the Prime Minister it took only two days to use Shs 58 billion during Kazinda’s time, what about this Shs 120 billion; it will take only half a minute because there are many agencies involved.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, this will be an area where we need to look at carefully when the time comes for us to review these matters. Can I put the question? I now put the question to the motion that the House resolves itself to a Committee of Supply to consider the supplementary expenditure schedule 2 for the financial year 2016/17. I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY

Supplementary Expenditure Schedule No. 2 for Financial Year 2016/2017 – Recurrent

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now propose the question that the total sum of Shs 259,763,774,619 under recurrent be provided for supplementary expenditure for Financial Year 2016/17. I put the question that a total sum of Shs 259,763,774,619 under recurrent be provided for as supplementary expenditure for Financial Year 2016/17.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MS CECILIA OGWAL: Mr Chairperson, the National Medical Stores (NMS) made a request and this Parliament requested the minister to explain where the money for National Medical Stores has gone. However, they came by mistake to us not knowing that Parliament had already given them money under the PTA Bank. We were also able to prove that the PTA money came. We were now trying to find out: if the money has arrived, why again are these people coming for a supplementary? 

I thought that the minister had taken care of that but I am surprised that he is allowing us to give them a supplementary and at the same time he has not come to Parliament to explain where the PTA money has been taken. Thank you. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairperson, if we are tired -


Supplementary Expenditure Schedule No. 2 for Financial Year 2016/2017 – Development

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I now propose the question that the total sum of Shs 515,650,190,690 under development budget be provided for as supplementary expenditure for financial year 2016/17. I put the question that total sum of Shs 515,650,190,690 under development be provided for as supplementary expenditure for financial year 2016/17.

    (Question put and agreed to.)

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

6.03
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Chairperson, I move that the House do resume and the Committee of Supply reports thereto.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the motion is for resumption of the House to enable the Committee of Supply report. I put the question to that motion. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Deputy Speaker presiding.)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY 

6.04
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of Supply has considered the supplementary expenditure schedule 2 for the financial year 2016/17 and passed it.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY

MS CECILIA OGWAL: Mr Speaker, while we rush this, I would like to draw the attention of the House to rule 211 which is about contempt of Parliament. This Parliament ruled that the minister comes to the Floor of Parliament and explains what happened to the money meant for the National Medical Stores. However, we are now giving money to National Medical Stores through a supplementary budget and the minister has just declined - in fact I would call it contempt of Parliament - to come and explain as instructed and directed by this House. 

Therefore, Mr Speaker, I would like to put it on record that I am against us including National Medical Stores under the supplementary budget when the money from PTA Bank is also available. Thank you.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, what we are raising are serious matters. Before I raise my procedural point, I would like to say that issues of the budget concern the people of Uganda. We are here to appropriate money for service delivery for the people of Uganda. If we are going to do this, we have to be very careful because it is quite dangerous not to be. 

I raise this also in light of what happened yesterday. The budget report was brought when we were almost in the House and so we could not do much. We have gone through the supplementary budgets and hon. Odonga Otto talked about the three per cent which is spent and we pay taxes, and this is not allowed. 

I feel that I must be on record and say that we have dealt with this budget and the supplementary but I am not happy with the way it has gone. However, if the majority of Members make a decision, I have nothing to do but to abide by the decision. The procedural issue I am raising is: given the numbers here, are we really enough to make this decision on behalf of the people of Uganda? Do we have quorum? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, can the whips ascertain if there are Members around the building or in the lobbies so that if they are not there, we see what to do next. 

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Speaker, in the meantime, before the minister goes out, I think I was even going to vote that this supplementary schedule be passed but the issue hon. Cecilia Ogwal has raised is very serious. Mr Speaker, you must protect the few Members in this House. Hon. Cecilia Ogwal has said that we gave money to National Medical Stores under PTA Bank and now we are again giving them money under this supplementary budget. 

I think you should help us, Mr Speaker, because we are in good moods and we want to pass the supplementary schedule. The country should not be stifled in any way; life has to continue in one way or another. However, the minister should clarify on that particular aspect so that we do not have unnecessary hard feelings just because we may not have all requisite information. I seek your indulgence, Mr Speaker, so that we keep the euphoria we started with and end the same way we started.

MR OKUPA: Before the minister takes to the Floor, Mr Speaker, as we pass this supplementary schedule, I would like to bring this to the attention of the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development: Given what we saw in the Committee on Commissions, Statutory Authorities and State Enterprises (COSASE), where people passed on monies to the contractor in order to beat the deadline of 30 June, I think an “eye” should be on this money if we pass this today.

We do not expect this money not to be expended. That is what the accounting officers at that time in UNRA did. During that time, they pushed that money very fast and when they went and looked at the books, they claimed that it had been paid to the beneficiaries and yet they had given it to the contractors who had put the money in fixed deposit accounts. I would like us to be very cautious and take keen interest if we pass this budget today here. It is very important for us to take note of that, Mr Speaker. 

6.09
THE FIRST DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND DEPUTY LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali): I have only two points to make. One, I would advise that the issue raised by hon. Cecilia Ogwal can still be handled to take care of her concerns and at the same time the House can pass the budget. 

That particular allocation for National Medical Stores can be passed on condition that the minister comes back and clarifies whether the money, which was supposed to have been dispensed there, had been allocated so that we do not have double payment. If not, then the money we pass here will not be sent. If that one was sent, then this one is cancelled. I think that would remove the impasse and all of us will be happy. 

Two, I just want to advise us all. Mr Speaker, now we are using our own mistakes, if they are mistakes at all, against us. If we now turn round and say that we are very few in this House, it is our own mistake- 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, we are sorting out that matter; it is not for debate. 

GEN. (RTD) ALI: I think we have used too much time and it is the same people- 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Rt Hon. Prime Minister, that is not an issue anymore, please. 

GEN. (RTD) ALI: It is an issue, Sir. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It is not. 

GEN. (RTD) ALI: It is, Mr Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, resume your seat.

GEN. (RTD) ALI: I will sit, but it is- 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, resume your seat.  

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Speaker, I rise on a point of order. I was at Law Development Centre with Gen. Moses Ali and I know he has a diploma and a degree in law as well, and he is also an enrolled advocate. 

Is he in order, given his size alone, - (Laughter) - to start throwing his hands in the air and arguing with the Speaker? This is because it can be scary to the Speaker; he is a General, an advocate, a Member of Parliament, tall and massive and he is the Prime Minister. Is he in order to throw his hands to the Speaker? Is it in order for a General to scare people in this House?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Right honourable, let us enjoy the spirit of the House. Honourable members, I do not think we should take anything too seriously, but let us deal with these matters. We have been able to solve the issue that has been raised by the honourable member for Budadiri West and now it is not an issue. 

I do not want the records to show something that is not anymore. I am protecting my records. We have solved that issue, so you should not bring it back again when it is already solved. It might look as if it is not solved when it is already solved. 

GEN. (RTD) ALI: All of us here are human beings. If you are a Member of Parliament, you must be a human being and if you are a Speaker also, you must be a human being. You have a name to protect and the Deputy Prime Minister also has a name to protect. I believe if you handle me in a humane way, I will do the same. However, as I stand here, if you shout at me the way you have, with all the power that you have, then I do not think I have an alternative but to react automatically. (Laughter) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Rt Hon. Prime Minister, if the Speaker says leave that issue and you insist, then you are the one violating the order of the Speaker. The Speaker can therefore use whatever means to try and stop you and it is permissible. 

Are we properly constituted so that we can now take a decision on the matter? 

HON MEMBERS: Yes.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We can take the decision now. I put the question to the motion that the report of the committee of the whole House be adopted. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. An apology to the Rt Hon. Prime Minister for the excess excitement that almost came up because we are trying to protect the image of the House. However, that should be taken in the stride of the leaders of this country, that we try and protect the image of this House. We will put it in that order.

Honourable members, I need some reports to be just laid on the Table today because the chairpersons have been here. We shall then see how to proceed with the next item. Thank you, Rt Hon. Prime Minister, minister and honourable chairperson for this. Honourable minister, do you want to say something again? 

MR BAHATI: Mr Speaker, I just want to thank you and honourable members for the support you have given us as a ministry and the Government during this budgeting process. I am especially grateful for the support and advice we have received from both sides of the House, in particular the Opposition through minority reports. We value them and we will continue to depend on your support. Obviously, the support we have got from this side of the House is overwhelming and we shall forever be grateful for it. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, if the chairpersons are here, they could lay the reports on the Table and then we see how to proceed.

MOTION FOR THE PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE SECTORAL COMMITTEE ON EDUCATION AND SPORTS ON COMPLAINTS ABOUT DENIAL OF REGISTRATION OF GRADUATE NURSES BY THE UGANDA NURSES AND MIDWIVES COUNCIL

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the chairperson here? Please, just lay the report on the Table.

6.17
MR OPOLOT JACOB (Independent, Pallisa County, Pallisa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I beg to lay on the Table a report by the sectoral Committee on Education and Sports on complaints about denial of registration of graduate nurses by the Uganda Nurses and Midwives Council. I beg to lay.

THE SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. We will find an appropriate time to have the debate on this important matter arising from the concerned citizens of this country.

MOTION FOR PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON EDUCATION AND SPORTS ON THE CLOSURE OF PRIVATE SCHOOLS BY THE MINISTRY OF EDUCATION AND SPORTS

6.17
MR JACOB APOLOT (Independent, Pallisa County, Pallisa): Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the report of the sectoral Committee on Education and Sports on the closure of private schools by the Ministry of Education and Sports. I also beg to lay the record of our proceedings during the handling of the two. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Let the records capture that. Honourable members, we will find an appropriate time to have a debate on this particular report.

MOTION FOR THE PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON HIV/AIDS AND OTHER RELATED MATTERS ON THE STATE OF THE HIV/AIDS RESPONSE IN UGANDA

6.19
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON HIV/AIDS AND OTHER RELATED MATTERS (Ms Judith Alyek): Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the following:
i) 	The committee minutes;
ii) 	The National HIV and AIDS Strategic Plan, 2015/2016-2019/2020; 
iii) 	The National HIV and AIDS Priority Action Plan 2015/2016- 2017/18;
iv) 	The National HIV and AIDS Monitoring and Evaluation Plan, 2015/2016-2019/2020;
v) 	The report of the standing Committee on HIV/AIDS and Other Related Matters on the state of the HIV/AIDS response in Uganda.
I beg to lay.

6.21
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. Honourable members, these reports are important. We will find time and have a debate on them and adopt them as the motions have stated. Thank you. 

Honourable members, we have come to a close of today’s business, and this being the last day for this session of Parliament, I am required to issue a proclamation.

Proclamation by the Rt Hon. Jacob L. Oulanyah, Deputy Speaker of the Parliament of the Republic Of Uganda.

“WHEREAS clause (3) of Article 95 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda provides that the Speaker may, after consultation with the President, prorogue Parliament by proclamation;

AND WHEREAS the necessary consultation with His Excellency the President has been carried out and it has been agreed that Parliament be prorogued;

AWARE that the First Session of the Tenth Parliament commenced on the 19th day of May 2016;

NOW, THEREFORE, in the exercise of the powers conferred upon the Speaker by clause (3) of Article 95 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, it is proclaimed that Parliament shall stand prorogued with effect from the 1st day of June 2017. 

The pending business before the House and its committees is hereby saved.

Given under my hand and the seal of Parliament at Parliament House, Kampala, this 1st day of June 2017.” 

Thank you. This House stands prorogued.

(The House rose at 6.22 p.m. and adjourned sine die.) 

