

Thursday, 8 June 2017

Parliament met at 3.25 p.m. at Serena Conference Centre, Kampala.

The National Anthem

The East African Community Anthem

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair)

The House was called to order.

PROCLAMATION BY THE SPEAKER

THE SPEAKER: “WHEREAS under Article 95 (2) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, a Session of Parliament shall be held at such place within Uganda and shall commence at such time as the Speaker may, by proclamation appoint;

AND WHEREAS the President of the Republic of Uganda has indicated to the Speaker that he will present the national budget for the financial year 2017/2018, under Article 101 (2) of the Constitution and Rule 10 (4) of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament;

COGNISANT of the fact that the financial year 2016/2017 will end on the 30th day of June 2017;

AWARE that it is expedient that the President addresses Parliament and the nation on the national budget for the financial year 2017/2018 at the Kampala Serena Conference Centre;

NOW, THEREFORE, in exercise of the powers conferred upon the Speaker by clause (2) of Article 95 of the Constitution, I hereby proclaim that Parliament shall sit at the Kampala Serena Conference Centre on the 8th day of June 2017 at 1400 hours, to receive the presidential address on the budget for the financial year 2017/2018; 

AND FURTHER in exercise of the powers conferred upon the Speaker by the Constitution, the Parliament Powers and Privileges Act, Cap 258, and the Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of Uganda, it is hereby proclaimed and declared that the said Kampala Serena Conference Centre, including its forecourt, the yard and the gardens, be the precincts of Parliament for the aforementioned purposes.

Given under my hand at Parliament House, Kampala on the 11th day of May 2017.
Rebecca A. Kadaga (MP)
Speaker of Parliament of Uganda.”

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Your Excellency the President of the Republic of Uganda; Mrs Janet Museveni, also Minister of Education and Sports; Your Excellency the Vice-President, Mr Edward Sekandi; My Lord the Chief Justice of Uganda, His Lordship Bart Katureebe; the Deputy Chief Justice; the Vice-Chairman of the NRM; your highnesses the traditional leaders; the Rt Hon. Prime Minister and deputy prime ministers; honourable ministers; the Leader of the Opposition; ministers of state; judges of the courts of judicature; honourable Members of Parliament; the Chief of Defence Forces; the Inspector General of Police; the Commissioner General of Prisons; the Governor of the Bank of Uganda; leaders of political parties; religions leaders; the business community; and all our invited guests.

Your Excellency, last Tuesday we sat for the opening of the Second Session of the Tenth Parliament and you delivered to Parliament an address on the state of the nation. Today is another important occasion in the parliamentary calendar, as provided by the Constitution. I welcome you, Your Excellency and all the dignatories in your various capacities, to this occasion.

We expect His Excellency the President to cause to be presented to Parliament the estimates of revenue and expenditure for financial year 2017/2018 as provided for under Article 155 (1) of the Constitution. As honourable members will recall, during the occasion of the State of the Nation Address, the President outlined the achievements registered in the preceding year, indicated some plans, programmes and priorities of Government to be undertaken in this financial year, and he also indicated the legislative business. 

Parliament is expected to receive from the Executive, for consideration and approval, the President’s intentions outlined in the State of the Nation Address to be translated into action by the provisions of the budget, which is to be presented today.

Later, Parliament’s task will be to evaluate whether the pronouncements made in the State of the Nation Address match with the financial provisions in the Budget Act and advise accordingly.

Your Excellency, I believe honourable members are anxiously waiting to hear what you have to say through the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. However, although this is the day for the Budget Speech, I would like to invoke my powers under rule 24 (1)(2) to permit the Minister of Works and Transport to present, for first reading, a critical piece of legislation, which is intended to be handled expeditiously. I would like to therefore invite the Minister of Works and Transport to present the Bill for the first reading.

BILLS 
FIRST READING

THE CIVIL AVIATION AUTHORITY (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2017

3.36
THE MINISTER OF WORKS AND TRANSPORT (Ms Ntege Azuba): Madam Speaker and honourable members, I beg to present a Bill entitled, “The Civil Aviation Authority (Amendment) Bill, 2017” for the first reading. I beg to move.

Madam Speaker and honourable members, I also beg to lay on the Table the Certificate of Financial Implications to accompany the Bill.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the Bill is sent to the Committee of Physical Infrastructure for expeditious perusal and report back. Thank you.

PRESENTATION OF THE BUDGET SPEECH BY H.E. THE PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF UGANDA IN ACCORDANCE WITH ARTICLE 101 (2) OF THE CONSTITUTION OF THE REPUBLIC OF UGANDA AND RULE 10, (4) (a) OF THE RULES OF PROCEDURE OF PARLIAMENT

THE SPEAKER: May I now invite the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to present the budget.

3.38
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Matia Kasaija): Your Excellency the President of the Republic of Uganda, the First Lady and Minister for Education and Sports, Your Excellency the Vice-President, the Rt Hon. Speaker of Parliament, His Lordship the Chief Justice, His Lordship the Deputy Chief Justice, the Rt Hon. Deputy Speaker of Parliament, the Rt Hon. Prime Minister, the deputy prime ministers, the Leader of the Opposition, honourable ministers, honourable Members of Parliament, Your excellences ambassadors and high commissioners to Uganda, ladies and gentlemen.

Madam Speaker, in accordance with Article 155(1) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, I presented, on behalf of His Excellency the President, the budget for financial year 2017/18 to Parliament in April 2017. In line with the Public Finance Management Act, 2015, as amended, the Budget was approved by Parliament on 31 May 2017. I salute Parliament for this approval. I am now honoured to present a statement outlining the highlights of the approved budget.   

Madam Speaker, in my presentation today, I will cover the following:

i) 	Report on the state of the economy and spell out the immediate and medium term strategies that will stimulate our economy and propel Uganda to middle income status; 

ii) 	Update Parliament on the performance of key selected sectors in the financial year 2016/17 budget, and the priorities for the next financial year; and

iii) 	Highlight the financial year 2017/18 revenue and expenditure framework and measures to enhance domestic revenue mobilisation.

Madam Speaker, Uganda’s development achievements provide a renewed confidence in the NRM Government’s strategy to transform Uganda from a peasant to a modern and prosperous country, as stipulated in our Vision 2040. In this regard, according to the latest statistics, many Ugandans are now living longer and better lives. Let me give you a few examples:
 
i) 	Life expectancy today is 63 years, up from 48 years in 2002.  You should clap for that because you are living longer now. (Applause)

ii) 	Literacy rates for adults now stand at 74 per cent, rising from 68 per cent in 2002. 

iii) 	Seventy-nine (79) per cent of the population now accesses safe water compared to only 59 per cent over the same period. Can I invite you to go to UNBS and get these statistics, please? Honourable members, let us not show ignorance of things.

iv) 	Immunization of children against measles is now at 82 per cent, up from 62 per cent 15 years ago. (Applause)

v)	 Per capita incomes in real terms have more than tripled to $773 in 2016, up from $250 in 2002. This is despite an increase in the population, from 26 to 36.9 million people.

Madam Speaker, despite the progress on these socio-economic outcomes, a lot more needs to be done. Per capita income has been growing at only two per cent annually, compared with population growth at three per cent annually. This needs to be reversed. There is growing unemployment, especially among the youth. We are increasingly faced with the prolonged droughts as a result, partly, of environmental damage arising from the destruction of wetlands and deforestation. Land fragmentation is another challenge. Agriculture, the mainstay of the vast majority of Ugandans, is now at risk because of excessive reliance on rain-fed farming. These challenges require immediate redress, as you will hear. 

Madam Speaker, as such, Government plans to turn around the economy by enhancing agricultural production and productivity, as well as increasing the pace of industrialisation; for example, the vagaries of climate change will be tackled by, among others, fast-tracking irrigation –(Interjections)- Even irrigation by the bottle is irrigation; take note of that. I am a farmer, so I know what I am talking about. (Applause)   

As regards industrialisation, Government will, first and foremost, vigorously promote agro-processing and mineral beneficiation. Through this double pronged approach, we shall be addressing the problem of unemployment. 

It is for these reasons, therefore, that the theme for the financial year 2017/2018 budget is “Industrialisation for Job Creation and Shared Prosperity.”

State of the Economy
Why don’t you wait and I tell you? These friends of mine from the Opposition - 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, you will have time to discuss these matters. 

MR KASAIJA: Absolutely! Thank you for protecting me, Madam Speaker. Before I report on sector performance and spell out the priorities for the next financial year, let me give an account of the state of the economy as it stands today. What are the factors that have affected Uganda’s economic and social progress and may impact our future prospects?

Global Factors

Global factors that have negatively impacted on our economy include the following:

i) 	Slow economic recovery in Europe. This has translated into lower demand for our export commodities. Don’t you know that? – (Interjections) - If you do not know that, then you do not know economics, so leave that matter to us who know. 

ii) 	Economic recovery in the United States of America. This has led to a reduction in capital flows to Africa, as investors prefer to invest in USA markets. 

iii) 	Rise in interest rates globally. This has resulted in the high cost of capital and borrowing. 

Regional and Domestic Factors

Madam Speaker, regional and domestic developments that have affected the state of the economy include the following:

i) 	Civil conflicts in parts of the East African region. This has disrupted export markets for our goods and services. Additionally, these conflicts have led to an influx of refugees into Uganda, putting pressure on our social amenities.

ii) 	Effects of climate change and environmental degradation. These have undermined food security and economic growth.

iii) 	High interest rates and non-performing loans. This has constrained private sector growth;

iv) 	Undue delays and inefficiency in execution of Government programmes and projects. These have dampened the anticipated positive impact on the economy; and 

v) 	This is what you would not like to hear and you think we are not handling it - corruption. This has held back projects and programmes in some sectors. This disease has turned into a cancer, which has hampered service delivery, and we must find a solution and cut it off, including you people. – (Interjections)- We know what happens in Parliament; please, let us not wash our dirty linen here. That is a subject for another day.

Madam Speaker, despite these challenges, Uganda’s economy is not in recession but is only growing moderately. The size of the economy this financial year is projected to rise to Shs 90.5 trillion, equivalent to US$ 25.7 billion. This represents a real annual economic growth rate of 3.9 per cent. Although this is lower than the target growth of 5.5 per cent, Uganda’s performance is higher than the average Sub-Saharan Africa growth rate this year, which is estimated to be only 1.4 per cent. We are doing very well compared to others but we are not going to sleep just because we are doing very well against others.  

Growth in agricultural output slowed to 1.3 per cent this year compared to 2.8 per cent in the previous year, the main reason being the unusually prolonged droughts. Industrial sector growth also dropped to 3.4 per cent this year against 4.7 per cent last year. This is because of contraction in mining and quarrying activities. The construction subsector also slowed down.   

Growth in services also slowed down to 5.1 per cent compared to 5.9 per cent last year as a result of marginal growth in trade and transportation, and contraction in financial services. However, on a positive note, aggregate demand, though subdued, has grown at 2.7 per cent this year, compared to 1.0 per cent last year. 

Madam Speaker, while the financial sector remains well capitalised, a sharp rise in interest rates in 2013 led to increased non-performing loans, which peaked at 10.5 per cent of total loans in December 2016, but have gladly reduced to 6.3 per cent as at the end of March 2017. 

Uganda’s external and domestic public debt amounted to US$ 8.7 billion as of 31 December 2016. In nominal terms, this is equivalent to 33.8 per cent of our GDP. However, when future debt payment obligations are discounted to today’s value, our public debt to GDP ratio is at 27 per cent. For those who have been saying that we are borrowing carelessly –(Interjections)– Madam Speaker, can I be protected from - 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, please concentrate on your speech. 

MR KASAIJA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. This is much lower than the threshold of 50 per cent beyond which public debt becomes unsustainable. Uganda’s public debt, therefore, is sustainable over the medium to long term.

Reserves, Exchange Rate and Inflation

International reserves at the end of December 2016 stood at US$ 3 billion, equivalent to 4.2 months of imports of goods and services. This is close to the target of 4.5 months of import cover to be achieved in 2021, as agreed in the East African Community Monetary Union Protocol. 

Madam Speaker, the exchange rate has remained broadly stable for much of the financial year, averaging at Shs 3,532 to the US dollar. Inflation remained within single digits, at 6.8 per cent, despite pressure from food crop prices.

The Economic Outlook and Growth Strategy 

Future Economic Outlook

Madam Speaker and honourable members, Uganda aims to graduate to middle income status by 2020. Average incomes, or GDP per capita, will therefore need to rise to US$ 1,039. Given a population estimate of about 40 million people by 2020, the size of the economy will need to grow by an additional US$ 17 billion for us to attain that target. In order to attain this target, the following must be done:

i) 	Immediately re-organise the agricultural sector to increase production and productivity; (Applause)

ii) 	Address the impact of climate change to eliminate reliance on rain-fed agriculture, protect and restore the environment;

iii) 	Harness the huge tourism potential that we have got;

iv) 	Aggressively industrialise the economy anchored on agro-processing and the extraction of minerals, oil and gas; 

v) 	Reform the financial sector to provide long term capital and reduce interest rates; 

vi) 	Speed up execution of Government projects and programmes;  

vii) 	Ruthlessly, within the law, deal with corruption of some elements in the public service that frustrate investment.

Madam Speaker and colleagues, as result of these actions, the economy is expected to rebound to annual growth rates of seven per cent in the medium term, as a minimum. I would love it to be more but when I take into account parameters – maybe the President will guide me on this one. If we can go to seven per cent, that will be excellent. 

In summary, our economic growth strategy therefore rests on four pillars. These are:

i) 	Increasing production and productivity in the key primary growth sectors of agriculture, tourism, and minerals, oil and gas;

ii)	Industrialisation through value addition; 

iii) 	Enhanced private sector development; and  

iv) 	Increased public sector efficiency.

Production and Productivity in Key Primary Growth Sectors 

Madam Speaker, the primary sectors where Uganda has competitive advantage are agriculture, tourism, minerals, oil and gas.

Key Primary Sector Challenges

In the agricultural sector, which provides food security and export earnings, in addition to creating gainful job opportunities for Ugandan youth and women, these are the challenges: 

i) 	Climate change, arising partly from the destruction of wetlands and deforestation. The consequence of this is prolonged droughts and in some cases, floods;

ii) 	Low survival rates of distributed seedlings currently estimated at about 40 per cent. This is the result of poor quality inputs, a mismatch between input distribution and planting seasons, weak extension services, and excessive dependence on rain-fed agriculture;

iii) 	Inadequate post-harvest handling infrastructure that accounts for over 30 per cent loss of production; 

iv) 	Inadequate compliance with and enforcement of standards right from farms to processors; 

v) 	High cost of financing for agriculture enterprises with some agricultural projects being charged interest rates as high as 30 per cent per annum;

vi) 	Lack of coordination among institutions in the agricultural sector.

Madam Speaker, Uganda has a huge tourism potential but is constrained by poor infrastructure to access these tourism sites, inadequate skills in the hospitality industry, and low visibility to attract national and international tourists. In addition, tourist products are underdeveloped, and protected areas suffer human encroachment, with wildlife endangered by illegal hunting and trade. 

In the minerals subsector, the current problem is a fragmented legal framework. This partly leads to low investment.  As far as oil and gas are concerned, key projects such as the Oil Refinery and the East Africa Crude Oil Pipeline need to be fast tracked.

Strategic Interventions

Madam Speaker, in agriculture, measures to address the challenges I have mentioned will include reforestation, restoration and prevention of wetlands destruction and enhancing irrigation. In addition, re-organising the procurement and distribution of planting materials for better quality and timely delivery is a must. In tourism, measures include increased promotion and marketing of tourist products and building skills in the hospitality industry. 

To promote commercial production in the minerals subsector, the legal framework will be reviewed to improve governance. As for the Oil Refinery and Crude Oil Pipeline projects, this will necessitate fast-tracking to produce the first oil by 2020. I will elaborate details of these priority actions when I delve into sector priorities. 

Industrialisation through Value Addition

Madam Speaker, Uganda’s industrialisation will be anchored on agriculture, agro-processing and value addition. Linking agriculture to industry is the strategy in which the economy will be transformed to deliver inclusive growth and development. The strategic objectives to achieve the industrialisation strategy are the following:
i) 	Promoting processing of agricultural raw materials; 

ii) 	Building linkages between agro-industries and farms; 

iii) 	Adapting farmers to meet industrial and market needs by increasing production of quality raw materials in sufficient quantities; and 

iv) 	Developing agro-industrial clusters in agro-ecological zones –(Applause)– He is doing a wonderful job; you should emulate him. We should emulate him in our constituencies. 

Madam Speaker, these industrialisation strategic objectives will be met through the following actions:

i)	Agricultural zoning, as already defined by the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries;

ii) 	Support to innovation by building a critical mass of highly skilled ICT, science, technology and engineering professionals to drive industrialisation. 

I have, therefore, provided Shs 43 billion to establish an innovation fund, of which Shs 13 billion will finance talented youth in the ICT sector;

iii) 	Provision of fully serviced, demarcated industrial and business parks. This means provision of adequate electricity, water, telecommunications, starting with Luzira, Jinja and Namanve/Bukasa areas; and

iv) 	Skills training, business incubation, work spaces – you heard what the President said the other day – work spaces provision for our youth, and financing of Small and Medium Enterprise (SME) product start-up kits. This will promote value addition by small and medium-scale enterprises. 

Private Sector Development 

Madam Speaker, the private sector, as we all know, plays a key role in production, trade, export promotion and employment creation. Concerted efforts by the heads of state of the northern corridor have eliminated non-tariff barriers along the corridor, consequently reducing the costs of doing business and improving trade; for example, port transit and border clearance times have improved significantly. Clearance of goods at Mombasa Port has been reduced from 13 to 5 days. The transit time for goods from Kenya has reduced from four to two days. It now takes an average of four hours to clear through Malaba customs, compared to 24 hours previously. We should clap for ourselves when we have done very well. (Applause) 

Key Private Sector Challenges

Madam Speaker, on the downside, however, private sector activity has slowed in the recent past with a number of businesses suffering distress. The key causes, which we shall address, include the following: 

i) 	Continued accumulation of domestic arrears by Government departments; 

ii) 	Limited access by the private sector to credit, and its high cost;

iii) 	Low savings and absence of long term financing;

iv) 	Insufficient local content especially in major infrastructural projects; and

v) 	High cost of electricity and transport infrastructure that makes manufacturing expensive and our exports uncompetitive.

Strategic Interventions

Madam Speaker, to deal with the challenges to the private sector, Government will undertake the following measures: 

i) Domestic Arrears

In order to provide an immediate boost to the economy, Shs 300 billion has been allocated to settle domestic arrears. This amount will be released in the first quarter of next year, which is next month. I have also established a hotline at the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development for suppliers to report delays in payments of approved and verified bills. 

Government departments that delay payments for goods and services supplied by the private sector for more than 14 days will have their future releases withheld until such payments have been made. The business community should be cheering on that one –(Interjections)- This is not theory because when I speak, I never speak theory. 

ii) Access and Cost of Private Sector Credit 

In order to increase the private sector’s access to credit and reduce its cost resulting from crowding out the private sector from credit markets, Government will reduce domestic borrowing from two per cent of GDP to one per cent of GDP in the short to medium term. To provide for new financial products, the Financial Institutions Act has been amended to provide for, among others, Islamic Banking and Agency/Mobile Banking.

iii) Enhancing Domestic Savings 

The reform of the pensions and insurance sectors will be expedited to mobilise domestic savings for long term capital. This will also enhance financial inclusion. To promote savings, enhance inclusion, build confidence of the public and good conduct of microfinance institutions, including SACCOs, money lenders and credit institutions, the Microfinance Institutions and Money Lenders Act was passed to regulate their activities. I thank you, Members, for having acted fast on this law.

iv) Availing Long Term Capital

In our continued effort to increase the availability of long term capital, I have provided an additional Shs 50 billion to the Uganda Development Bank Limited (UDBL) for capitalisation in next financial year. This will bring the total capitalisation of UDBL to Shs 150 billion, the target being Shs 500 billion. Additionally, Government recently guaranteed a US$ 26 million loan (equivalent to Shs 93 billion) from the Islamic Development Bank (IDB) for on-lending.    

Madam Speaker, implementation of the local content strategy will be enhanced with the “Buy Uganda, Build Uganda” initiative to allow local contractors to participate in infrastructure projects and other key Government investment programmes. This will require amendments to the PPDA Act, for which consultations are being concluded. 

Madam Speaker, to improve private sector competitiveness, Government will speed up execution of ongoing projects in the energy and transport sectors.

Public Sector Efficiency 

Government will continue to improve public sector efficiency and eliminate corruption through the following actions:

i) 	Amend the PPDA Act to eliminate delays in procurement; 

ii) 	Take disciplinary action against accounting officers who either intentionally or out of negligence delay procurement processes;

iii) 	Integrate public information databases using the National Identification Number (NIN) as the reference in order to improve efficiency and effectiveness in public service delivery;

iv) 	Enforce the preparation and implementation of sector strategic plans. Quarterly releases of funds, commencing with this coming financial year, shall be tied to the implementation of these strategic plans. To the accounting officers that are here, listen very well on this matter. If you do not know that, we can bite and we shall bite this time. 

v) 	Adequate preparation and appraisal of projects before funds are allocated;

vi) 	Build capacity across Government to improve project cycle management;

vii) 	Create a database of bankable projects in line with the National Development Plan; and 

viii) 	Undertake annual project portfolio reviews to assess project portfolio execution and provide timely remedial action.

Sector Performance and Priorities

Madam Speaker, I now turn to the performance of key sectors for the financial year 2016/17 budget, details of which are contained in the Background to the Budget for financial year 2017/18, which I gave you in Parliament. I will also spell out priority actions and allocations that have been approved in next financial year’s budget.
 
Agriculture

Madam Speaker, during the year, actions in the agricultural sector have included distribution of inputs under Operation Wealth Creation (OWC), market infrastructure development, and the rehabilitation of major irrigation schemes. Planting materials distributed include 72 million coffee seedlings, 148 million tea plantlets, 10 million citrus seedlings, six million mango seedlings and four million cocoa seedlings. 

In addition, seven urban markets have been reconstructed and works on 11 additional markets will commence this coming financial year under the Market Improvement Programme (MATIP).  To further improve market access, 11,000km of new community access roads were constructed, covering 90 districts and 158 subcounties; 77 rural markets were constructed in 35 districts; and 297 agro-processing facilities were established under the Second Community Agriculture Infrastructure Improvement Project (CAIIP II).

Madam Speaker, during this year, an additional Shs 23 billion was allocated for recruitment of agricultural extension workers, bringing extension staffing levels to 78 per cent. I have allocated a further Shs 39.6 billion next year to increase the effectiveness of agricultural extension in improved delivery of the Operation Wealth Creation programme. 

Madam Speaker, the priorities in the agriculture sector next financial year are: Government is, in addressing the adverse effects of climate change, commencing construction of five irrigation schemes. The irrigation schemes are Mubuku II (480 hectares) in Kasese; Doho II (1,178 hectares) in Butaleja; Wadelai (1,000 hectares) in Nebbi; Tochi (500 hectares) in Oyam; and Ngenge (880 hectares) in Kween. In addition, designs for irrigation schemes will be completed in the Acomai River system in Bukedea and the Atari River system in Kween and Bulambuli districts.

Madam Speaker, Government will also continue demarcation of wetland boundaries targeting 320km and restore 300 hectares of critically degraded sections of wetlands in 117 local governments. Solar-powered water irrigation systems will be established in all nine zonal agricultural research and development institutes as a pilot before replicating and rolling out across the entire country. I have provided Shs 23 billion to construct 520 valley tanks to increase availability of water for agricultural production at farm level, with areas affected by the recent drought and food shortages being given priority. 

Government will also pilot fertilizer provision to a targeted 10,000 farming households using subsidised electronic vouchers, for which I have allocated Shs 14.6 billion for pilot fertilizer application.  Shs 297.6 billion has also been allocated to fund continued distribution of planting and stocking materials. 

Madam Speaker, in order to encourage value addition to agricultural produce, Government will support investment in milk and other dairy products, oil palm, oil seeds and cotton. Furthermore, equipment for medium-scale fruit processing, motorised maize milling and rice milling will be purchased and distributed under National Agricultural Advisory Services (NAADS). Under the Cotton Development Organisation, I have provided Shs 4.4 billion for a new cottonseed processing plant to be established in Pader District. 

Government will also increase productivity by implementing the following interventions:

i) 	Support the establishment of post-harvest handling storage by the private sector, together with cooperatives at parish level;

ii) 	Expand bulk water irrigation infrastructure on major lakes and rivers, and tackle climate change through afforestation, and prevent wetland destruction; 

iii) 	Roll out the agricultural insurance scheme across the country to subsidise agriculture insurance premiums for both small and large scale farmers; and

iv) 	Strengthen security of land tenure by formalising land ownership and household acquisition of titles.

Promotion of Agricultural Exports

Madam Speaker, unleashing agriculture’s potential can eliminate Uganda’s trade deficit currently at US$ 2.8 billion. Immediately addressing commodity specific constraints faced in the coffee, tea and fish subsectors alone can triple export earnings from US$ 615 million today to US$ 1.8 billion annually. In this regard, Government will implement the following priority actions in the coffee, tea and fisheries subsectors:

Coffee Subsector Interventions

In the coffee subsector, Government will-
i) 	Rehabilitate the existing 320,000 hectares of coffee with fertiliser application and irrigation, while intensifying agriculture extension for proper management of the 260,000 hectares of new coffee planted between 2009 and 2015; 

ii) 	Generate sufficient disease-resistant clonal coffee plantlets in order to mitigate the coffee wilt disease.

iii) 	Mobilise smallholder farmers into groups to work with key market traders to meet export market demands and sustainably unlock the coffee value chain. This will be done in partnership with private sector organisations such as the National Union of Coffee Agribusiness and Farm Enterprises (NUCAFE); and

iv) 	Support the establishment of a coffee processing plant at Namanve Industrial Park to initially process 26,000 metric tonnes of green coffee beans into instant and other final coffee products. (Applause) This will earn us an additional US$ 160 million annually. 

Madam Speaker, these actions will more than triple the national average coffee yields from the 600 kilogrammes per hectare today to about 2,100 kilogrammes per hectare. Coffee exports will consequently rise to about 9 to 12 million 60kg bags by 2020, more than doubling Uganda’s earnings from coffee export to at least US$ 1 billion from the US$ 400 million today. I have allocated Shs 53 billion next year for the purchase and distribution of coffee seedlings.

Tea Subsector Interventions 

Madam Speaker, in the tea subsector, Government will work with the Uganda Tea Association (UTA) and other private stakeholders to increase the productivity of tea farmers. Priority actions include mobilising smallholder farmers to access high-yielding clonal tea varieties, and increase extension services, with emphasis on increased fertilizer usage. These actions will increase the average smallholder farmer productivity from 1.5 metric tonnes per hectare today to at least the 2.5 metric tonnes per hectare obtained in tea estates. 

Ugandan tea also needs branding and marketing to increase returns from international tea auctions. Currently, a kilogramme of Ugandan tea earns US$ 0.5, less than Kenyan tea, because of the absence of Ugandan branded tea. These actions will lead to a seven-fold increase in the coverage of tea planted from the 28,000 hectares today to potentially 200,000 hectares, and consequently increase exports from 60,000 metric tonnes to more than 400,000 metric tonnes in the medium term. This increase would earn Uganda more than US$ 500 million annually in tea exports, compared to the US$ 80 million today. 

Next financial year, I have allocated Shs 6 billion for construction of three tea factories in Kisoro, Kabale and Zombo. In addition, Shs 2 billion will be provided for Kayonza Tea Factory to set up a third production line. Shs 36.8 billion has been allocated specifically for the purchase and distribution of tea seedlings.

In the fisheries subsector, productivity can be increased by employing new fish farming technology such as aquaculture or cage fish farming. A fish farmer using a cage system can realise 48 metric tonnes per annum, 12 times more than from traditional capture fishing. Enforcement of regulations to prevent overfishing to restore fish stocks in lakes and rivers is also required. Your Excellency, I would like to thank you very much. We have been monitoring quietly. The people that you have sent to protect our lakes are doing an excellent job. 

These measures would almost triple fish export earnings to US$ 360 million per annum with cage fish farming compared to US$ 135 million earned today from capture fishing. Using sector specific approaches and actions that address the challenges for each commodity enterprise as I have demonstrated for coffee, tea and fisheries, additional earnings can and should be generated from horticulture, dairy and beef, grains and pulses. 

Tourism

Madam Speaker, tourism has developed rapidly. Uganda was ranked as the fourth world’s best tourist destination and the best in Africa by Rough Guides last year. (Applause) Tourist arrivals to Uganda have more than doubled to 1.3 million people in 2015, rising from 540,000 in 2006. Tourism also employs 1.2 million people both directly and indirectly. Consequently, Uganda is targeting tourist arrivals to increase to 4 million visitors per year, and double tourism earnings from US$ 1.35 billion today to US$ 2.7 billion by 2020. This will translate into significant jobs for Ugandans.

There is, therefore, need to harness this cash cow. In addition to tourism infrastructure development, Uganda will be marketed and promoted as a world-class tourist destination. The Source of the Nile will be developed into a tourism site. This will complement the Uganda Wildlife Authority’s acquisition of three speed boats and five buses to protect our people on the lakes, and the development of tourism facilities including restaurants and shopping areas. 

In addition, the Uganda Hotel and Tourism Training Institute and Uganda Wildlife Research and Tourism Institute will be rehabilitated and equipped to build hospitality skills. International tourist standards will also be enhanced with the continued certification of hotels and restaurants. So far, 61 hotels have been star-rated. I will later pronounce specific tax incentives that have been passed by Parliament to support private initiative and investment in the tourism sector.

Oil, Gas and Minerals 

Oil and Gas

Madam Speaker, 98 per cent of land acquisition for the oil refinery has been completed. Government is in the process of selecting a lead investor to partner with in the development of the refinery. Government, in agreement with the Government of Tanzania, selected the Hoima-Tanga route as the least cost route to transport Uganda’s crude oil to the East African Coast. An inter-governmental agreement has just been signed to support the private sector in the development of the oil pipeline. In addition, a total of nine production licences have been granted and further licences will be granted as soon as assessments are completed, to make sure that we have much more oil than we know of today. The design for bulk storage of final petroleum products at Buloba has been completed.

In order to facilitate first oil production, the following related infrastructure development activities will commence next financial year:

i) 	Construction of the Kabaale International Airport in Hoima District. 
ii) 	Rehabilitation of the Tororo–Pakwach Railway Meter Gauge line to support delivery of equipment for oil production. 
iii)	Development of the Pakwach–Butiaba Ferry/barge water transport; and
iv) 	Upgrading road infrastructure, which I will detail later.

Minerals

Madam Speaker, during the year there was significant private investment in the minerals subsector; for example, a gold refinery was set up in Entebbe to refine gold to 99.9 per cent purity. A tin processing plant producing 150 tonnes of processed tin concentrate per month was established in Kikagati, Isingiro.  High quality marble tiles are being produced in Bugolobi, Kampala. The Sukulu Phosphate and Steel Project in Tororo has mineral reserves totalling 217 million tonnes, including phosphates and iron ore, among others. All that has been discovered and we are moving steadily.  

Madam Speaker, the following priority actions in the mineral subsector will be implemented starting next financial year and the medium term:
 
i)	Review the regulatory framework in the minerals sector; 
ii)	Promote mineral exploration, development, production and value addition;
iii)	Fully equip a modern minerals laboratory for testing the quality of minerals; and
iv) 	Register artisanal miners and build capacity of small scale miners.

Electricity 

Madam Speaker, in the electricity subsector, significant developments have been registered, with electricity access increasing to 20.4 per cent of households in 2016 compared to 11 per cent in 2011. I will tell you about the cost.

Construction works at the Karuma and Isimba hydropower projects are at 51 per cent and 63 per cent respectively. Construction works are also underway at 12 out of 17 projects under the Global Energy Transfer Feed-in Tariff (GETFiT) Programme. These include the 10 megawatt Soroti Solar Plant, which was commissioned in 2016, and the Muvumbe Hydropower Plant (6.5 megawatts), commissioned in March 2017. Additional works continue at Siti, Nkusi, Rwimi, Lubilia, Waki, Nyamwamba, Sindila and Kyambura. From these projects, 156 megawatts will be commissioned by 2019.

Regarding rural electrification, 113 out of 117 districts have been connected to the grid; 474.33 kilometres of medium voltage and 240 kilometres of low voltage lines have been constructed. The remaining 287 out of 1,500 subcounties will be connected in the medium term. I have allocated Shs 81.8 billion to continue implementation of several power projects. 

Madam Speaker, the person who was asking about the cost should listen to this. As part of the efforts to reduce cost of electricity, Government is engaging the financiers of the Bujagali Hydropower Project to refinance its debt. The latest information from the African Development Bank is that the refinancing arrangements should be completed by October 2017.  When this refinancing has been done, we should pull down the rate from 11 US cents per unit to about 8 US cents - (Interjections) – Yes, there is that question. That will also  help to bring it even lower.

Roads

Madam Speaker, the stock of paved roads has increased from 3,317 kilometres in 2011/2012 to 4,919 kilometres, just only 1,081 kilometres short of the 2020 National Development Plan II (NDP II)  target of 6,000 kilometres. During the year, rehabilitation and upgrading of roads was completed under Uganda Support to Municipal Infrastructure Development (USMID) in Arua, Gulu, Lira, Mbale, Entebbe, Masaka, Mbarara and Fort Portal. 

While progress has been made in upgrading roads, road safety on these roads remains a challenge due to high rates of accidents. This carnage is deplorable and we should work hard to stop it. I would like to salute the police for what they have been doing on the Masaka Highway.

Madam Speaker, next financial year, Government will continue the expansion of the paved national roads network. Additionally, roads will be constructed in support of commercial production of oil by 2020. The following 10 roads will be upgraded in this respect: Hoima–Butiaba–Wanseko; Masindi–Biiso; Masindi–Bugungu via Murchison Falls; Kaseeta–Lweera via Bugoma Forest; Hohwa–Nyairongo–Kyarusesa; Wanseko–Bugungu; Buhimba–Nyarweyo–Kakindo– Kakumiro–Mubende; Lusalira–Kaibamba-Nkonge-Sembabule; Kyotera– Rakai; and Kabale-Kiziramfumbi. The Tangi and Emmi bridges will also be built. 

I have allocated Shs 3,410 billion for the continued development of national road infrastructure, including ferries and bridges –(Interjections)- All the roads that are on the programme, as I said last financial year, are in the system and I do not have to repeat it here –(Interjections)– if the Speaker allowed me, I would tell you what is happening on the Kanungu Road. 

I am pleased to inform the House that the World Bank has lifted suspension of funding to the road sector and I thank them for that. (Applause) Madam Speaker, Government will also increase the maintenance of both the paved and unpaved roads. Japanese road equipment units worth US$ 147 million, equivalent of Shs 576 billion, have been procured for distribution to all districts, and some have already arrived in the country. The Minister of Works and Transport shall tell you when we shall distribute them to the country. 

Some of this equipment will go to the regional maintenance workshops. I have allocated Shs 10 billion specifically for the maintenance of these units. Under the Uganda Road Fund, I have allocated Shs 413 billion for road maintenance across the country.

Railway Transport

Acquisition of the right of way for the Malaba-Kampala Standard Gauge Railway Project is progressing very well. Negotiations to conclude the financing for the construction of the Standard Gauge Railway Project are also underway. Talks with the Kenyan Government to ensure the synchronisation of the construction of the Kampala–Malaba section with the Naivasha–Kisumu-Malaba one are also ongoing very well.

Madam Speaker, in view of the poor performance of the Rift Valley Railways concession, both Kenya and Uganda are terminating the agreement. The management of the Uganda railway will revert to the Uganda Railways Corporation. (Applause)

Water Transport

With respect to water transport, the Interim Master Plan for the New Kampala Port at Bukasa has been completed and initial preparatory works will begin in early 2018. The design for the remodelling of the Port Bell and Jinja piers has been completed with construction due to commence in 2018/2019. 

Commencing next financial year, Government will improve maritime transport on Lake Victoria in partnership with the governments of Kenya and Tanzania with the support of the World Bank.

Now we turn to social part of our responsibility.

Health

There has been progress in health outcomes over the last five years since 2011 –(Interjections)– Listen to the following: 
i) 	Infant mortality declined from 54 to 43 deaths per 1,000 live births. The under-five child mortality declined from 90 to 64 deaths per 1,000 live births throughout Uganda. 

ii) 	Maternal mortality has also declined from 438 to 336 deaths per 100,000 births respectively. Contributory factors for the decline in maternal mortality include the rise in deliveries in health facilities, and I salute our mothers for doing that. The deliveries have increased from 57 per cent to 73 per cent of all births. (Applause)

iii) 	The fertility rate has declined from an average of 6.2 to 5.4 children per woman. Those of you who are worried about population –(Laughter)

iv) 	Family planning has increased, with the share of married women aged 18 to 49 practising family planning rising from 30 per cent to 39 per cent.

Madam Speaker, improvements with respect to disease burden have also been registered. Hear this: mass distribution of 24 million Long Lasting Insecticide Treated Nets (LLINs) was undertaken, reducing the malaria prevalence from 42 per cent to 19 per cent. I will repeat that statement because it affects everybody, including ourselves here: mass distribution of 24 million of Long Lasting Insecticide Treated Nets (LLINs) was undertaken, reducing the malaria prevalence from 42 per cent to 19 per cent. (Applause) We look forward to when it can become zero. 

Mother to child HIV transmission has declined, with the number of new infections dropping from 22,000 in 2012 to 3,400 in 2016. (Applause) I hope we are also living responsibly. Immunisation against the five immunisable diseases among children is now at 97 per cent coverage.

In health infrastructure development, good progress has also been registered. Mulago National Referral Hospital’s extensive re-construction and equipping into a specialised facility is expected to be completed by August 2017. (Applause) This project will also include construction of a new 320-bed specialised maternal and neo-natal health care branch, which is due for completion in June 2017. (Applause) 

The construction of Kawempe and Kiruddu hospitals was completed and equipping is ongoing. The Cancer Institute has been reconstructed and re-equipped and is also expected to be fully functional in July 2017. Only a week ago, construction of a specialised international hospital was launched by His Excellency the President of the Republic of Uganda in Lubowa. You should give him a big clap. (Applause) 

Madam Speaker, despite these good milestones, the health system is still inefficient in some critical areas. Drug stock-outs and mismatch of supplies to districts faced with specific disease prevalence remain. Cases of shoddy work in health infrastructure provision at district and lower levels are still with us. There is weak supervision and monitoring as well as absenteeism of health workers at health facilities. I call upon every Member of Parliament who has got a constituency to be a watchdog on these issues. Let us not leave this to Government only. Let us share responsibility on this.

Madam Speaker, in the next financial year, priority will be placed on the following measures to improve health outcomes and remove inefficiency in health service delivery:

i) 	Elimination of drug stock-outs and increased facility inspection to eradicate negligence of duty, corruption and poor service delivery at health facilities. Once again, I call upon all Members of Parliament to participate in this vigorously;

ii) 	Emergency rehabilitation of health units and general hospitals with stronger supervision to eliminate shoddy construction work in health infrastructure, especially at the local government level; 

iii) 	Universalisation of  access to maternal health through strengthening the Community Health Extension Workers (CHEWs); and

iv) 	Increased sensitisation and awareness of the population to healthy living, including on malnutrition. 

Madam Speaker, I have allocated Shs 1.8 trillion to the health sector in the next financial year. (Applause)

Education

During the year, the universalisation of education has continued, with primary school enrolment increasing to 8.8 million pupils in 2016 compared to 8.1 million in 2011. The completion rate at primary education improved to 61.6 per cent in 2016 compared to 54 per cent in 2010. Secondary school enrolment increased to 1.4 million students in 2016 from 1.3 million in 2011. The completion rate at O’ level improved marginally to 40 per cent in 2015 from 39 per cent in 2010. 

During the year, Government fulfilled its pledge to increase primary teachers’ salaries by 50 per cent. Salaries of both teaching and non-teaching staff across all the public universities were also enhanced and arrears for non-teaching staff settled. In addition, Lira and Kabale universities were accredited and civil works at Soroti University will be completed to enable operations to commence next year. (Applause) In addition, 840 staff were recruited and posted to the 20 technical institutes under the Skilling Uganda Programme.

Despite this progress, challenges in education include declining proficiency in literacy and numeracy, and we know it, skills gaps, infrastructure deficits, teachers’ absenteeism and cases of “ghost” pupils and students that distort budgeting for and release of the capitation grants.  In order to improve education service delivery, the following interventions will be implemented:

i) 	Curriculum reform with an emphasis on science, competency and life skills;
ii) 	Improvement of existing learning facilities at tertiary institutions including re-construction of laboratories and workshops;

iii) 	Certification of non-formal training to enable acquisition of practical skills for youth without formal education;

iv) 	Establishment of 12 seed secondary schools in sub-counties which lack these schools, for which I have provided Shs 8.56 billion;

v) 	Rehabilitation of dilapidated primary schools and traditional secondary schools for which I have provided Shs 15.23 billion;

vi) 	Installation of lightning arrestors for 140 schools in the most lightning-prone districts, namely Mubende, Sembabule, Bushenyi, Lwengo, Bukomansimbi and Lyantonde; and 

vii) 	Usage of national identification to eliminate ghost students.

Madam Speaker, an additional Shs 19.6 billion has been provided for salary enhancement of teaching and non-teaching staff at all public universities. I have allocated a total of Shs 2.5 trillion for the education and sports sector.

Water, Environment and Sanitation

Madam Speaker, during the year, access to safe water nationwide marginally improved, with rural coverage improving to 68 per cent in 2016 from 67 per cent in 2015. Urban safe water access also improved to 74.5 per cent in 2016 from 73 per cent in 2015. However, these access rates are still below the NDP II target of 100 per cent by 2020. Furthermore, access to hand-washing facilities remains significantly below the national target of 50 per cent and is a major cause of preventable diseases such as diarrhoea and dysentery. 

Functionality of sanitation facilities has also declined from 92 per cent in the previous year to 90 per cent in 2016. Critical aspects that Government plans to address include improving functionality of water and sanitation facilities.

In the next financial year, Government will complete construction of Nakivubo and Kinawataka sewers, and the Kinawataka pre-treatment and pumping system. Construction of the Katosi Water Treatment Plant will also start. I have allocated Shs 632 billion to the water and environment sector.

Social Empowerment Programmes

During the year, Government disbursed Shs 75.4 billion to 10,321 projects under the Youth Livelihood Programme for the benefit of 130,306 youth, 45 per cent of whom are female. In addition, the Uganda Women Entrepreneurship Programme (UWEP) was rolled out in Kitgum, Kole, Otuke, Koboko, Nebbi, Kayunga, Nakasongola, Wakiso, Mayuge, Kaliro, Kamuli, Kalangala, Bundibugyo, Kiruhura, Kisoro, Ntungamo, Kibaale, Moroto and Katakwi as well as Kampala City. 

As a result, Shs 24 billion was disbursed to 2,340 women groups with 29,762 beneficiaries to start or expand projects, in addition to the provision of skills training to improve management of their businesses. In addition, 143,268 senior citizens in 40 districts have received the Shs 25,000 monthly grant under the Social Assistance Grant for Empowerment (SAGE) pilot programme, of whom 59.6 per cent are female. 

Madam Speaker, next financial year, I have allocated Shs 67 billion to finance 5,700 youth projects to benefit 68,400 youth under the Youth Livelihood Programme.  I have also allocated Shs 40.6 billion to target about 2,000 women groups, specifically meant to develop their business management skills, access to appropriate technology for value addition and the promotion of market access for their products and services. 

Improving Governance

Madam Speaker, in the justice system, 98 percent of infrastructure to be built under the Justice Sector Strategic Plan have been completed and will be commissioned by December 2017. In addition, access to justice for juveniles has improved, with juvenile cases being fast-tracked and 71 per cent receiving non-custodial sentences. 

In the next year, 120,000 cases are targeted for disposal, for which Shs 18 billion has been allocated. Under the case backlog reduction strategy, 28,000 backlog cases will be disposed of in the next three years, for which Shs 9 billion has been provided. An automated case management system will be designed and developed to enhance efficiency in case management. 

Four justice, law and order service points one-stop centres, covering court, the Directorate of Public Prosecutions, police and prisons services, will be constructed in Buhweju, Nakaseke, Mayuge and Butambala. Construction of the Kitalya Prison will also be fast-tracked. I have provided Shs 12 billion for this construction.

Madam Speaker, national identification has progressed successfully, with 16.9 million citizens being registered, 14.8 million of whom have been issued with national identification cards.  This is critical in facilitating efficient delivery of public and private services, including financial services, mobile banking, social safety nets and revenue collection, among others. Next financial year, registration of all citizens below 18 years and aliens legally resident in the country will be undertaken in order to support service delivery and enhance national security.

In order to improve efficiency and accountability in visa and work permit issuance, during the year Government launched the online e-visa and e-permit system to improve convenience for investors, tourists, students and other travellers. Monthly visa applications have now increased to 7,000 from 4,000 applicants. Biometric facilities are now available at six borders of Busia, Malaba, Mutukula, Elegu, Kyanika and Entebbe International Airport; in addition to 15 Ugandan missions, namely Washington D.C, Ottawa, London, Berlin, Paris, Brussels, Addis Ababa, Abuja, Pretoria, New Delhi, Beijing, Guangzhou, Ankara, Canberra and Mogadishu. 

In addition, Government amended the Leadership Code to permit confiscation of properties acquired through corruption. (Applause) In order to eliminate corruption in public offices, the Inspectorate of Government has established a directorate to specifically handle high profile corruption cases which require highly specialized knowledge, skills and tools to investigate. This will mainly focus on high profile and syndicated corruption cases in the transport and infrastructure, education, health, and agriculture sectors. Enforcement of the Leadership Code has been strengthened with the adoption of the online wealth declaration system to ease the process of declaration and analysis. 

The Financial Intelligence Authority has also been strengthened to adequately enforce the anti-money laundering law and regulations and counter terrorist financing, in collaboration with international financial intelligence authorities.

Financial Year 2017/2018 Revenue and Expenditure Framework

Domestic Revenue Mobilisation 

Madam Speaker, at only 13.8 percent of GDP, our tax revenue effort is very low and inadequate to finance our development needs.  Government will therefore boost domestic tax revenue in order to increase financing of the budget from domestic tax revenues. Accordingly, the Uganda Revenue Authority (URA) has been allocated an additional Shs 90 billion to enforce compliance. 

Non-Tax Revenue (NTR) and appropriation in aid present a very good potential source of financing our budget. In view of this, all non-tax revenue and appropriation in aid shall henceforth be collected by the Uganda Revenue Authority and be remitted directly to the Consolidated Fund in accordance with the 2015 Public Finance Management Act. This will utilize URA’s more efficient tax collection systems. The allocation of these resources to Government departments will be done through the national budget and through appropriation by this honourable House.

Revenue Performance

Madam Speaker, the revenue performance this year has been subdued as a result of slow economic growth. Tax collections for the financial year now ending are projected to amount to Shs 12,882.3 billion, against a budgeted figure of Shs 13,259.32 billion, reflecting a shortfall of Shs 377.02 billion. The shortfall has been caused by declining import volumes, which grew marginally by only 0.79 per cent against a target of 9.1 per cent. This decline is a result mainly of the depreciation of the Uganda shilling. 

Major tax collection heads reflected this trend, with direct taxes on business, employment and property incomes registering a shortfall of Shs 96.04 billion by April 2017. Despite the tax collection shortfalls I have just mentioned, this year’s revenue performance, however, represents a 13.6 per cent increase over the previous year.

Madam Speaker, in the forthcoming year and the medium term, Government’s revenue mobilisation strategy will focus on enhancing tax administration by building a compliance culture. Tax administration will be enhanced through taxpayer education, strengthening detection of non-compliant taxpayers, recovery of tax arrears and combating smuggling, undervaluation and under-declaration. The automation of online assessments and electronic tracking of transit goods from Mombasa are also ongoing. Customs data will be synchronized with domestic tax revenue. 

Income Tax

Madam Speaker, the Income Tax Act has been amended as follows:

i) 	As an incentive for businesses to invest upcountry, deductions for accelerated depreciation have been introduced. This will allow recovery of costs of acquiring plant and machinery and construction of industrial buildings much faster before the payment of corporate income tax. 

ii) 	To improve compliance in rental income, I will issue a minimum of rental charges based on location and value of properties, as a basis for rental tax for non-compliant taxpayers. I appeal to all rental income taxpayers to file their returns accurately and on time to avoid paying tax on estimated income and penalties.

iii) 	The Bujagali Energy Limited has been exempted from corporate income tax as part of the effort to reduce the cost of power.

iv) 	The income of a body established by an Act of Parliament to regulate the conduct of professionals, such as the Institute of Certified Public Accountants of Uganda and the Uganda Law Society, has been exempted. 

v) 	The interest on outstanding tax and penal tax has been limited to the principal amount to enhance tax compliance.  This measure will also apply to interest due as at 30 June 2017. 

vi) 	The income on Savings and Credit Cooperative Societies is exempted to promote savings. (Applause)

Value Added Tax (VAT)

Madam Speaker, the Value Added Tax Act has been amended as follows: 

i) 	The VAT payable on the taxable supply made to Government departments and agencies by a contractor executing an aid-funded project will be deemed to have been paid. This will avoid unwarranted delays in the execution of such projects hitherto caused by lack of counterpart funding.

ii) 	The VAT on crop extension services, animal feeds and premixes, deep cycle batteries and composite lanterns, irrigation works, sprinklers and ready-to-use drip lines has now been exempted. 

iii) 	Interest on outstanding VAT and the penal tax is also limited to the principal amount similar to the Income Tax Act.

    	Excise Duty 

Madam Speaker, the Excise Duty Act has been amended to introduce     specific rates equivalent to the current ad valorem rates on beer and soft drinks. This will ease administration and reduce time and money spent in disputes, including the determination of taxable value. 

Tax Procedures Code

Madam Speaker, persons who, upon request by the commissioner, fail to provide records in respect of transfer pricing within 30 days after the request will now be liable to a penal tax equivalent to Shs 50 million. This measure will support tax administration to enforce tax compliance on international transactions.

Madam Speaker, manufacturers and importers of goods that I will statutorily prescribe will henceforth be required to affix tax stamps. Tax stamps minimize under declaration of such goods and boost tax collections. Failure to affix tax stamps, the defacing of stamps, the possession of unstamped goods, or any attempt to acquire or sell stamps without authorization will lead to penalties as prescribed by law. 

Revenue Enhancement Measures for Local Governments

The electronic business registration and revenue collection system was piloted in Entebbe, Kira and Jinja municipalities with success. This system will be rolled out to 34 other municipalities to improve local government financing and access to information on revenue collection in real time.

Resource Envelope

Madam Speaker, the resource envelope for the financial year 2017/2018 amounts to Shs 29,008 billion detailed as follows: 

i) 	Domestic revenue amounting to Shs 15,062 billion of which Shs 14,684 billion will be collected by URA and the rest will be collected as non-tax revenue;

ii) 	Domestic borrowing will amount to Shs 954 billion; 

iii) 	The Petroleum Fund resource earmarked for oil roads development, amounting to Shs 125.28 billion;  

iv) 	Budget support, amounting to Shs 34.95 billion; 

v) 	External financing for projects, amounting to Shs 7,075.4 billion of which Shs 5,476 billion is in loans and Shs 1,599 billion is grants; 

vi) 	Appropriation in Aid collected by Government departments, amounting to Shs 757 billion; and 

vii) 	Domestic debt re-financing will amount to Shs 4,998 trillion.

Madam Speaker, total domestic sources will finance 75.5 per cent of next year’s budget. (Applause)

Expenditure Framework

Madam Speaker, the total budget approved by Parliament for financial year 2017/2018 has been allocated as follows: 

i) 	Shs 3.577 trillion has been allocated for salaries and wages;
ii) 	Shs 8.325 trillion for non-wage expenditure;  
iii) 	Shs 11.349 trillion has been allocated for development expenditure of which Shs 4.273 trillion is funded by Government and Shs 7.075 trillion from external financing; 
iv) 	Domestic debt refinancing amounts to Shs 4.99 trillion and appropriation in aid amounts to Shs 757 billion.

Conclusion

Madam Speaker, with the peace and security that has been guaranteed across the country, with the availability of reliable electricity and improved roads network and other infrastructure developments, the economy is set to grow by leaps and bounds. (Applause) 

However, to attain the middle income goal we have set ourselves, business cannot be as usual. I wish to underscore Government’s commitment to decisively deal with laxity and corruption in the public service. I apologise to the entire country and development partners, in this regard, for the bad image occasioned by the unfortunate incident in my ministry, where some officials allegedly demanded and received bribes from an investor. I do not condone this practice and will not do so at my age - (Interjection)- Resigning is not an answer, but you should urge me to work harder and get them out. Indeed, I condemn it in the strongest terms. If you resign then you are a coward.
    
This notwithstanding, I wish to commend my colleagues, the ministers in the ministry and technical staff of my ministry and associated institutions for their unwavering support in economic management and implementation of the Public Finance Management (PFM) reforms. This has made our economy resilient and saved this country from financial loss.

Madam Speaker, mind-sets and attitudes of all Ugandans must change towards hard work and not wait for handouts. (Applause) The “handshake” was an appreciation for a job well done. All able-bodied Ugandans must engage in productive economic activities. 

The budget presents opportunities for agricultural production and industrialization along the value chain, which must be exploited to increase household incomes. Implementation of Government, personal and business targets must be accomplished in a timely manner. To the business community, the budget carries a special promise, which will help you acquire more wealth. To the youth and women, the budget provides opportunities to unleash your potential to initiate and expand business enterprises for shared prosperity. 

With these many words, Madam Speaker, now I beg to submit. Thank you. For God and my country. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development for carrying out your assignment on behalf of the President. 

Your Excellency and distinguished guests, Members of the House, under Article 155 (1) of the Constitution, the obligation of presenting the national budget to Parliament lies with the President. However, as you have just seen, his delegate delivered the budget on his behalf but ultimately, the ownership of the budget is with the Minister of Finance substantively, who is the President. Therefore, since we have heard from the minister, we shall now be given an opportunity to hear from the President, whom we want to elaborate on the rationale for the proposals in the budget. 

Before I invite him, honourable members, I would like to draw your attention to the provisions of Article 98 (1) of the Constitution. It provides that the President shall be the Head of State, head of Government, Commander-in-Chief and the Fountain of Honour. (Applause)

I also wish to draw your attention to Rule 10 (4) of the Rules of Procedure which provide that while the President occupies the Chair of State in the House, he may make a presidential statement, which shall be heard in silence and not followed by any comments or questions. (Applause) 

Honourable members, we do not lose anything by listening to the head of state. In any case, we have an opportunity to disagree with his statement during the allotted time for debate on the state of the nation. Therefore, let me now invite His Excellency to make remarks on the budget. (Applause) 

5.19
THE PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF UGANDA (Gen. Yoweri Kaguta Museveni): Thank you so much. His Excellency the Vice-President, the Rt Hon. Speaker of Parliament and all the distinguished persons who are here, you heard the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development reading the budget. My comments are only to wrap up. 

I have been reading newspapers that were giving a pessimistic view of the economy. Of course, the Bible says, “they have eyes but they do not see; they have ears but they do not hear.” I am very optimistic because for the first time, we have got the base which we did not have before. The Minister of Finance talked about the first one, which is peace. Peace is there and as I told you, nobody has got the capacity to disturb it. The lawlessness which had come up will be addressed; it is not such a big challenge. So, that is a factor that is important for growth and transformation. 

Electricity; I do not think those who comment really care to study much. In 1986, we had only 60 megawatts at Jinja but now, we have more than 2,000 megawatts when all these projects are finished. The only little problem remaining is that the power of Bujagali is still expensive. However, we are working on refinancing Bujagali with cheaper money and the cost of electricity will come down, especially for manufacturing, but even for other users. Therefore, that is the second element in the new base, which we did not have before. 

Due to the decisions you made in the past, we now have many new roads. The other day I had an investor who came from the United Kingdom (UK) and he went upcountry. When they came back, they were very excited. They said in Africa they had never seen such good roads. (Applause) They said that they were asleep all the way from where they were coming from. 

The fourth element is the railway. We are preparing for the building of the Standard Gauge Railway. However, we are also going to repair the old line. You heard that we are going to repair the old line from Gulu up to Pakwach and it is that railway, which will carry equipment to Lake Albert. 

We shall also use it to transport equipment along the Albert to the oil fields. If you know the map of Uganda, once you get to Pakwach by rail, then you have got another God-made highway - Lake Albert and the Nile - which can take you all the way up to Ntoroko. You can actually go from Mombasa by rail and water, all the way to Fort Portal, almost. This is because of the railway and then the waterway. 

By Lake Victoria, you can go all the way to Nshungyezi. You cross Lake Victoria, go into the Kagera and the Kagera is navigable all the way up to Nshungyezi, which is about 30 miles short of the Rwanda border. This rail-water transport will do a lot to lower the costs of transport as far as the economy is concerned.

The other issue which the minister has talked about was the cost of money - the interest rates. I cannot guarantee lowering the interest rates for the traders; those can continue suffering, I have no problem with that. However, what I am working towards is to lower interest rates for the manufacturers and for the farmers. (Applause) I am a farmer and I am not a foreigner; I am from the Musita clan, you well know that. So, the borrowing for the farmers for agriculture and for manufacturing will go down. You heard the minister saying that he will put Shs 50 billion and the next financial year, he will put Shs 250 billion; that is another base.

Concerning agriculture, through Operation Wealth Creation (OWC) –(Interjections)- The people who are used to harvesting things they did not plant do not know that failing is part of succeeding. (Applause) I attacked Kabamba three times and I failed but succeeded on the fourth time. (Applause) If you do not know that failing is part of success, I would then advise you to go back to the school of life.

By trying, whether we succeed or not, we learn from our mistakes and we shall continue trying and we shall succeed –(Interjections)- Thirty-one years is why you are sitting here enjoying money of the - (Laughter)- and that is why you can sit here and heckle the President and you remain in your seat. (Laughter)

Operation Wealth Creation will continue. We are attacking something which you should be attacking. We are attacking what we call in Luo “pur mecham pekene” –(Interjections)- If you think that is Runyankore, you should go to Butabika. (Laughter) This is a Luo statement which means, “agriculture for only eating”. If you do not know Luo, keep quiet. If you think that the expression is in Runyankore, go and book at Butabika so that they can help you. 

We are going to struggle with subsistence farming. People must graduate from subsistence farming to food security and agriculture for money. You need to go to wealth creation schools, they will help you. For the commercial farmers, you heard the Minister saying that while the OWC are fighting with the “Pur for cham” only – agriculture for eating only – he is providing money for the commercial farmers to borrow and expand their agriculture.

Another factor that was not there before is that we have a much more educated population. You, the leaders, I would advise you to pay attention to this. The literacy rate is now 75 per cent. This was never the case before - (Applause) - These educated people, even though many of them did courses which cannot easily enable them to get jobs - social work and the like - they are educated. They can easily join the entrepreneurial class.

For us in the army and the police, we have already benefitted from them. When you recruit them, they are very easy to train and to guide. This is because of education. I would, therefore, like to use this opportunity to show you some videos of the young girls and boys – 

(A video presentation was made.)

GEN. MUSEVENI: Thank you very much. (Applause) –(Interjections)- Do you want the shoes? You just wait. 

My advice to you, since you are leaders, is that the NRM has already created a very good base for you. These literate children – I call them my grandchildren – are very easy to convert. However, you have got two problems. 

First of all, these children do not have property because normally the property belongs to the parents and the children do not have anything until the parents die. Many of the families do not know how to organise family companies where the young ones work with the parents. In addition, many of the young ones are orphans, but the NRM has educated them. 

Secondly, these children do not have jobs. Therefore, they are property-less and jobless. If we work together, we can easily convert them into property owners and job creators. (Applause) 

What these children were asking was: “After you train us, what is going to happen to us?” I said I will give you equipment to start whatever you have studied. (Applause) For this Shs 29 trillion budget we have read, quite a bit of it will go for salaries – There are people who get high salaries. (Laughter) Some of it will go for travel abroad. (Laughter) Some of it will go for all sorts of things –(Interjections)- State House is the one doing all that. That is all State House money. 

When I was talking to you the other day, I gave you the figures. In Nsambya, I used Shs 271 million. In Najjera, I used Shs 337 million. In Katwe, I used Shs 375 million. You will see the figures in my State of the Nation Address. The question is: if I can do that much with that little money, what about this huge budget of Shs 29 trillion? Why don’t we discipline ourselves and be a bit humble? –(Interjections)-           Yes, I did this in spite of the arrears. 

My strategy – for those who want to follow me – is to turn these children from property-less and jobless to property owners, wealth creators and job creators. It can be done easily because now they are educated. (Applause) If you do not want to do it, I will do it without your support.

We have abundant raw materials. These raw materials they are using are ours. We produce a lot of leather and when it is taken out, other people make shoes out of it and they come back for us to buy. We have got purchasing power, but we are misusing it; we are buying other people’s products. Our own children have no jobs and wealth, but we are sending the money out. 

I am glad the Speaker allowed me to come dressed the way I am now. (Applause) Bring my sandals - I would have come in my sandals, if my trouser was not too long that I would step on - (Interjections)- Do you want me to donate to you my sandals? That would be okulamira - inheritance. “Okulamira” means to give inheritance. You cannot give inheritance to a badly-behaved child. (Laughter)

The uniform I am putting on is Ugandan made. (Applause) The only foreign thing is the beret. I do not know why these people have not started making it. This shirt is wholly Ugandan made. (Applause) It is 33 per cent cotton, which is Ugandan, and 65 per cent polyester, which we are still getting from out. When our oil starts coming out, we shall also start making the polyester. However, the labour is ours.

This shirt is also wholly made in Uganda, although the polyester here is still coming from outside. They also put in some fibre, which they got from Indonesia, and it makes the shirt strong. This one does not have cotton, but the labour is Ugandan. (Applause) 

I would have come here in my jungle hat, which is totally Ugandan made, but because there is no sunshine I decided to use the beret. However, this jungle hat here is even better. This was actually designed by me. (Laughter) As you can see, being a bushman, I know the dangers to a bush person – the mosquitos biting your ears and neck. This jungle hat, therefore, protects me from the sunshine and mosquitos. I designed this one myself. (Applause)

These shoes –(Interjections)- Should I lay them on the Table? (Laughter) The boy who designed these shoes for me is a soldier whom I helped with a total of Shs 132 million to start this operation. (Applause) Because the people who are asking for the shoes are bad-mannered, I can look for a disciplined Member. (Laughter) [Hon Members: “Abiriga.”] – Yes, Abiriga! (Laughter) 

Today, I spoke with the boys who are making these shoes. They have some problems because the leather factory in Jinja is not producing enough leather. As a result, they are importing leather from Kenya, which costs Shs 6,000 per square foot or something like that, yet the one of Jinja is only Shs 4,700. Therefore, honourable minister, make sure that we get enough leather, working with the leather processors. These children will invade the leather industry and liberate us from imports. (Applause) We will then go to the textiles and all these things of common use – the light industry.

This human resource is very easy to convert, instead of saying that they should go abroad to work as house girls and house boys – this is wastage. (Applause) These children are educated and there is nothing they do not know. All they lack is some training and some little machinery and working capital. That is all they need. (Applause)

I have already done many experiments. There are some groups that I asked to help run maize mills and they agreed. They now have a huge operation in Wobulenzi doing maize milling. Why do we export our grains unprocessed when these children of ours can do that job for us, so that we get more money from our maize and also give jobs to our people. This includes any other thing you can think of, including fruit processing. 

Very soon, I will get them involved in manufacturing transformers and other electrical appliances. (Applause) That is why we must make sure that Kilembe processes the copper to the right level. The group that was there was not serious and we are going to throw them out. (Applause) They were selected by somebody who had a problem, but we have got other investors.

Therefore, we are squandering our purchasing power. We should use it to build ourselves up but not to enrich others. Look at the way you are dressed in suits and other attire; all that is money going to other people. That is money and jobs given to other people. Look at this carpet; our children should make this carpet. Of course, whatever we do, we must do it economically; it must be economically viable. Let us see how much of all these we can do economically. What we cannot do economically, we will let others do it. For now, there is a lot of wastage and we are making a very big mistake.

We have the regional market; our partners in the region can buy from us and we can buy from them. For a long time, we have been supporting the prosperity of Kenya - buying very many things from them. In the 1950s, I used to go –(Interjections)- Yes, that is why living long is good and I would like to advise these young people of mine. There is something called “nyeko” and it is very bad. (Laughter) “Nyeko” means jealousy. Some of these people are suffering from “nyeko”. When they see someone who has lived long, they ask, “Why has he lived for long?” When someone has served in the Government for a long time - That is “nyeko”; stop it!

In the 1950s, whenever I would go to the shops in Ntungamo and Mbarara, the only clean thing you could buy for drinking was either tea in the hotels or soda products like Fanta. However, by 1964, we started getting processed milk from Kenya. It was called Kenya Cooperative Creameries (KCC). Because of that, I was no longer buying soda. Whenever I would go to town, I would buy half a litre of KCC milk. Later on they brought milk, which could stay for long. Since that time, we have been supporting the economy of Kenya by buying Kenyan things like Bata. Now it is high time that they also bought more and more from us. (Applause) The region is there and we can produce for them.

In the minister’s speech, I think the minister needs to clarify one of his paragraphs where he was talking of the target to produce more coffee. We are targeting 12 million bags and he was making estimates about what we shall earn. The figure you were giving was based on the assumption that we will sell the coffee unprocessed, but we are ending this. The factory in Namanve, which he talked about, will process 26,000 tonnes in a year –(Interjection)- We are using Bugolobi for something else. We call this, “change of land use”. If you have not heard of that term, hear it for the first time. 

This factory will process 26,000 tonnes of our coffee and the money that coffee will earn is not the money you were talking about. This is money for raw beans but it should be money of added value. Therefore, you should revise those figures because we have that investor in Namanve and we have others who have come; one will be in Bukalasa - There are a number of them flocking in. With electricity, the investors are flocking in.

When the minister was talking about tourism, I think he forgot to bring out one factor - we are going to revive our airline. (Applause) The tourism that has been coming here will increase if we have direct flights. This business of going through all these places will have to stop.

Finally, do not think that we are going to depend on these young children whom we are converting from joblessness and wealthlessness to wealth and jobs. We are also continuing to attract Foreign Direct Investments (FDIs). We have got the 700 members of Uganda Manufacturing Association (UMA) - the Mulwanas and the rest. (Interjections) His factory is there. Some of you people do not know that Henry Ford died long ago but the Ford car is there and it is bigger now than when he was alive. (Applause) 

You need to help these people; they do not know some of these things. (Laughter) You can hear someone is saying that because Mulwana died, UMA stopped. No, he died but you may find that UMA is now bigger than when he was alive. That is what business is about. Therefore, we are going to attract more FDIs - (Interjections)- Yes, I will go and you will continue and that is very good. However, the one who decides when I will go is the Constitution and the people of Uganda, not you. (Laughter)  

THE SPEAKER: Order, Members!

GEN. MUSEVENI: I enjoy these young people. They want to see how sharp my brain is and I always handle them. You are suffering from “nyeko”. (Laughter) 

Therefore, we need to mobilise all our young people to go into manufacturing, wealth creation and jobs, attracting FDIs and expanding the Uganda Manufacturers Association group. Therefore, I am very optimistic about this economy. What the Red Pepper has been writing about – a bad economy - has only been about one aspect. It is true that we had two problems. One problem was that our businessmen who were exporting to South Sudan and Congo, because of the disturbances in those places, faced problems. That one is true. Secondly, drought caused some problems for the country. 

If you remember the story of Adam and his wife Eve, when they sinned – well, it was the serpent that mobilised the wife –(Laughter)– and the wife mobilised the husband. From that time, God in Luganda I would say “yatukolimira”. I do not know how you say “okukolimira” in English. He put a curse on us - (Interjections) – The NRM has got 80 per cent blessings and that is why it has been in power for so long. God put a curse on us and we get all these problems because of that curse. However, the job of the human being is to fight these problems. Therefore, if you would like to live in a fool’s paradise where there are no problems, then you better commit suicide so that you get out of problems. Otherwise, the job of the human being is to struggle with the problems. 

You will get somebody whose children die and he does not give up; he tries again. (Laughter) That is why you hear the name Otto in our Luo language. “Otto” means somebody who follows children who died. (Laughter) Therefore, if you follow the logic of these people, that because we had a problem - We would not be having Otto here. “Tho” in Acholi means “to die”, so I think Otto is the one who follows the children who died. Odongo must also be the same. (Laughter)

All these show you that in life, we struggle. Forget about Uganda that is emerging from so many problems. Developed countries have problems too. Look at the terrorist attacks in London; I am still looking for cameras but they have them everywhere. However, in spite of the cameras and equipment, people are still dying. (Interjections) We shall get the cameras, just wait. I will come to you at the right time; do not worry. I am always in the kitchen cooking while you are always on the dining table eating. (Laughter)

Therefore, it is a pessimistic approach to say that because we have had two or three problems, things are terrible. It is true we have had a problem here but there is potential. When I tried to attack Kabamba twice and failed –(Interjections) On Kasese, you should go to the court and give witness. Madam Speaker, these people are trying to make me break the law of Uganda by going into a matter which is sub judice. (Laughter) If you have got any information on Kasese, you know where the court is; go and give evidence.

When I tried to attack Kabamba two times and failed, on the third occasion my question was: Are the guns still there? It is because I was trying to capture the guns. (Interjections) Yes, it is true that I was a rebel but sometimes, rebellion pays. (Interjections) They are now coming to the wrong conclusions, as usual. (Laughter) In the science of war, we talk of a just war. If you fight an unjust war, you will lose. I fought a just war, and that is a subject for another day. 

However, in spite of failing, my question to the people who were helping me was whether the guns were still there. We failed twice but if the guns were still there then the situation was good. This should be the approach. Do not be influenced by these people who are panicking. Look at the potential we have and I have told you that the potential is great. We have got more potential now than ever before; there is nothing that we cannot handle. I thank you. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Your Excellency the President, our distinguished guests and Members of Parliament, you know that I have been inviting my colleagues from the region here and they are really in shock that you can heckle a head of state. The Speaker of Somalia wondered the other day when we were walking down to the reception how possible it is that we can heckle the head of state. Members, we may have to discuss this matter in the House as this cannot go on. (Applause)

Secondly, I would like to complement what the President has said, that Mzee Mulwana may be dead but his daughter is now the Chairperson of the Uganda Manufacturers Association. 

I would like to thank the President for performing his constitutional duties of delivering the Budget and his comments thereon. There are areas, which need to be handled; for instance, I would like to remind the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and the Secretary to the Treasury that in compliance with Article 164 of the Constitution and the Public Finance and Management Act, you are required to present to Parliament the names of all the accounting officers of the ministries, institutions and departments of Government for the financial year 2017/2018. Of course, when we finish here, you are invited for the reception at the Parliament Gardens where we were on Tuesday. 

Honourable members, I would also like to give notice that the Business Committee will sit on Thursday, 22 June 2017 at 11.00 a.m. to consider the programme of business for the First Meeting of the Second Session of the Tenth Parliament. The members of this committee should ensure that they are available for that meeting. 

I also wish to inform Parliament that together with the Inter-Parliamentary Union, we have organised a two-day seminar on the implementation of the Convention on Elimination of all forms of Discrimination against Women (CEDAW). This is a convention ratified by the Government of Uganda and this meeting will buttress the provisions of the Certificate of Gender and Equity Compliance, among others. Therefore, Members of Parliament, I hope you have received your invitations. You are expected, together with a number of selected ministries and development partners. The meeting will take place at Hotel Africana on Wednesday, 14 June to Thursday, 15 June 2017 starting at 9.00 a.m.

Your Excellency and honourable members, on a sad note, I received information this morning of the death of our former colleague, Ambassador Deo Rwabiita. He served in the National Resistance Council (NRC), the Constituent Assembly and the Sixth Parliament. He was a Member of Parliament for Ibanda North and he was also our deputy minister. He also served in the last session as Ambassador to Belgium and Italy. He passed away last night at his home in Gaba. Information will be given to you about arrangements for the burial.

Honourable members, Nkozi Hospital has organised a marathon to raise funds for the construction of an accident emergency unit to take place on 17 June 2017 at the Equator in Kayabwe, Mpigi District. I believe that due to accidents on that road, this unit will go a long way in helping to save lives of travellers on the Kampala-Masaka Road. Therefore, Members are invited and those who are unable to go may raise their contributions.

I would like to thank you all for coming. We shall proceed to the Parliamentary Gardens. In the meantime, the House is adjourned to Tuesday, 20 June 2017 at 2.00 p.m. Thank you very much.

The East African Community anthem

The National Anthem

(The House rose at 6.16 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 20 June 2017 at 2.00 p.m.) 
