

Thursday, 29 June 2017

Parliament met at 2.26 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this afternoon’s sitting. In the gallery, we have pupils and teachers of Gombe Junior School, Wakiso. They are represented by hon. Seninde and hon. Sseggona. You are welcome. (Applause)

We also have teachers and students from Seeta Junior School in Mukono. They are represented by hon. Kibuule and hon. Peace Kusasira. You are welcome. (Applause) 

There are also students from Uganda Martyrs University in Mpigi. They are represented by hon. Lubyayi John Bosco and hon. Temulanda. You are welcome. (Applause)

Honourable members, just to update you, this morning I was invited to officiate at the launch of the Sixth Rotary Cancer Run, 2017 at Nsambya Hospital. For the last four years, Parliament has been partnering with Rotary to enhance health. We partnered with them to construct a cancer ward at Nsambya Hospital, and we visited it this morning. 

Following the various runs to raise money, some partners in the United States have donated a linear accelerator. We talked about this yesterday. This linear accelerator is valued at US$ 4 million and it will be used to treat all organs of the body. However, in order to receive that linear accelerator, we are required to construct a bunker, which will cost US$1 million, which is approximately Shs 3.7 billion. 

Therefore, I would like to appeal to Members of Parliament to contribute Shs 1 million each, so that we can raise Shs 449 million to support this cause. It is important for us to do it this particular year, because for the second time in the history of Africa, we have a Rotary president from Uganda, Rotarian Sam Owori. We need to support him. I would like to appeal to Members to support this cause so that we can make an impact on that issue and support our people while waiting for Dr Moriku and her machine. 

Mr Sam Owori has also requested us to establish Rotary clubs in our towns. They have over 100 Rotary clubs but 50 are in Kampala. The rest of the country has a shortage. He is requesting that we do the needful and establish those clubs, and he is ready to come here to speak to us about the formation of Rotary clubs in our towns.

Honourable members, I will amend the Order Paper to permit a motion on the protection of the rights of children to be moved by Members of the Parliamentary Forum for Children in this House. Thank you very much.

2.31
MR ANTHONY AKOL (FDC, Kilak North County, Amuru): Madam Speaker, I rise on a matter on national importance and it is in line with the problem that we discussed on the Floor of Parliament last week, where our people were killed in Apaa. 

We have heard information from those who come from Acholi sub region but are working in West Nile that their lives are being threatened. They say that they will be killed if they do not leave the offices where they work. This is happening in offices run by NGOs. 

I have two of those notices that were printed; one is from Adjumani and the other is from Yumbe District. The one from Adjumani says, “Last warning. If you do not leave…” They gave names of 11 people who are Acholi and they say that “We shall start the mission of serial killings and bulks of coffins shall follow you to Acholi.” I beg to lay this on the Table.

The second was pinned in Yumbe in the office of Windle Trust International. It says, “What the Acholi people are doing to innocent children of Aringa is reminding us of the 1979 war in which the Acholi boys killed over 1,000 plus Aringa people; You know what, we shall kill all of you.” 

Madam Speaker, the Acholi people living in West Nile are living in fear to the extent that they cannot speak their own language - Acholi. Unfortunately, when you speak Acholi, Langi or Alur to a person who cannot speak or understand your language, you cannot understand each other. That is a threat to the Luo speaking people, and it is unfortunate that this kind of thing is happening in Uganda at this point. 

Madam Speaker, this is a serious warning sign that I thought was important to bring to the Floor of Parliament, so that our Government can investigate and ensure the security of those working in West Nile who have been mentioned in this threat. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, that matter is similar to the one that came up from Bunyoro. We requested the Minister for Security to examine the situation and give us a report. Similarly, I am sending that issue to the Minister for Security to investigate and come back to us. Thank you.

2.34
MS JACKLET ATUHAIRE (Independent, Woman Representative, Sheema): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on an important issue regarding the registration of learners in the various districts. 

Two weeks ago, I was in Sheema carrying out a consultative meeting. I am a guardian of two children that I am paying schools fees for and so I went to register them. However, on two occasions, the National Identification and Registration Authority (NIRA) did not turn up. I waited for them on the first day and on the second day, but they did not come. I heard parents complaining that their children are not in school and these parents do not know how their children will be registered.

Secondly, there is also a problem of single parents – those that have lost their spouses or those that have children with men or women but they do not stay together. Those also cannot be registered and it is a big problem, Madam Speaker. 

Madam Speaker, there were also complaints from some parents with children between 15 and 16 years old because these children do not fall anywhere. I talked to the district officials and they also do not have answers. Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. 

2.34
MR JAMES KAKOOZA (NRM, Kabula County, Lyantonde): Madam Speaker, you remember when we passed the law to register people, we gave authority to NIRA but they do not have the capacity. When they came in, we stopped the usual registration of deaths and births and gave them the authority to do it, but it is really terrible. Now when you go for registration, it is even worse. 

We need the Ministry of Internal Affairs to show us how these people have performed since they began, so that we can get to know what their problem is. You cannot even get death certificates from the villages so that you can get letters of administration from the Judiciary. 

We need to request the Ministry of Internal Affairs to come with a comprehensive report detailing the performance of NIRA, so that we get a long lasting solution. However, NIRA does not have the capacity; it is stretched. We either go back to Uganda Registration Services Bureau (URSB) because they were faster, or we get another solution.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, if you remember, when we were opening the sitting last Tuesday, these are the same issues I talked about. I said I would like the Government to tell us how the 30th August deadline will play out and how children between the ages of 12 and 17 years, who are not eligible for identity cards but have phones, will be registered. We had a long debate here about the school registration and we were told money was there. Now, what do you do with the village children who are not in school?

We must get a statement on this matter. Remember the scandal we had over SIM card registration was because no one comes here to tell us what is happening. Minister of Internal Affairs, you know how we harassed hon. Tumwebaze, but he is only one of the parties; the main driver is NIRA and it is under the Ministry of Internal Affairs.

2.38
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. This is to confirm to you that I communicated to the relevant minister and we expect a statement from him. 

What I did not do was to give him a timeframe but I reminded him of the dateline of 30th August. I told him about the issue you raised regarding those who lost their national identity cards and are being asked to come to Kampala. I also told him about the children aged 14 years and below. I expect a statement on the progress to be brought here.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Atuhaire said something which bothered me. She said that single parents are not allowed to register their children; is that true? Why? Supposing somebody is dead, what do you do? (Laughter)

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: That really surpasses human understanding. I am going to take it up, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Hon. Atiku, would you like to close the issue raised by hon. Akol? 

2.39
MR BENARD ATIKU (Independent, Ayivu County, Arua): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The issue my brother, hon. Akol, has just raised is very important. I would like to plead that through your office, you ask the Ministry of Internal Affairs to act swiftly because it raises tension. The two regions - West Nile and Acholi - at the moment are on tension, especially those who are innocent. 

The reason I have risen here is to give some clarification on the matter he has raised, which generalises West Nile. I have a huge community of all ethnicities, including the Acholi. Therefore, when he says “West Nile”, the Acholi people who are settled in Arua, Nebbi and the other eight districts of West Nile also get alarmed. 

Therefore, it is important that this issue focuses on Adjumani, which is the epicentre of this situation and where this conflict first happened, and also Yumbe which has now come on board. This would ensure that those investigating the matter focus on the two districts to help us find a lasting solution. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Now this is going to turn into the Acholi people versus West Nilers. We have asked the Minister of Security to investigate the matter and report to us. Each of you is going to speak from your side.

DR MORIKU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand to give information. I would like to agree to some extent with what hon. Akol raised. On 21 June, while I was in Adjumani, there was a gas cylinder that exploded. It was an accident and it injured two people who were repairing bicycles and motorcycles. Unfortunately, one of them had his leg and arm cut off and while he was being taken to St Mary’s Hospital, Lacor, he died.  

The rumour in Adjumani was that the gas cylinder was from Acholi land. (Laughter) I had to go there and get the exact information and tell the people the truth, that the gas cylinder had been there and it was just an accident. 

Madam Speaker, there is a lot of mistrust between the two communities. Probably, there is need for the Ministry of Internal Affairs to carry out investigations but there is also need for healing, reconciliation and coming together among us, the leaders, as well as other peacemakers. Otherwise, people already have a lot of mistrust in the two communities. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Anywar, it seems you are also on fire. I do not know which side you are on now. (Laughter)

2.43
MS BEATRICE ANYWAR (Independent, Kitgum Municipality, Kitgum): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am an elder and a mother of this nation, therefore I tend to tread in the middle for peace. 

Madam Speaker, we are looking towards having peace prevail in the two communities. However, there are people who have a lot of information within the public. First of all, there is tension because no suspect is being arrested and this is escalating the situation. The Ministry of Internal Affairs should arrest the suspects. 

The people with information are reaching us and some would even want us to bring them to you. First of all, they need assurance about their security as they give that information and they would like that information to reach the Government so that action is taken. However, there is no action being taken and no avenue for those people to safely give the available information. That is why they pass it on to us secretly. We have a lot of information on those making arrows, and we would like to bring these people to speak for themselves so that peace prevails. 

THE SPEAKER: Okay, honourable members, we do not want another situation like Apaa here. Therefore, I direct the ministers in charge of security and internal affairs to work expeditiously on this issue. We give you a fortnight. We do not want to give you too much time because this situation is quite bad. Government Chief Whip, please take note. 

2.45
MR WILLIAM NZOGHU (FDC, Busongora County North, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker. In 2014/2015, the Ninth Parliament passed a number of districts that would take effect from 1 July 2017. These included Bunyangabu District, which was curved out of Kabarole; Rukiga, curved out of Kabale; Kyotera, curved out of Rakai; Butebo, curved out of Pallisa; Pakwach, curved out of Nebbi; and Namisindwa, curved out of Manafwa.

Madam Speaker, the unfortunate bit of this whole scenario is that the Electoral Commission has written to one of these districts that is supposed to take effect on 1 July 2017 - I would like to read the letter, which the Electoral Commission wrote to Kabarole District Local Government’s Chief Administrative Officer (CAO). It was written on 14 June 2017 and the subject is “Creation of Bunyangabu District”. It reads as follows: 

“As you are aware, Government created the new district of Bunyangabu out of Kabarole District to take effect 1 July 2017. Section 8 (5) (c) of the Parliamentary Elections Act requires the Electoral Commission to conduct elections for district woman representative to Parliament within 60 days after the creation of the new district.

The Local Governments Act similarly provided, under the parent law, for election of district chairperson. Section 182 of the Local Governments Act, cap 243, however provides for election of interim chairperson in newly created local governments and enchains the commission to preside over the election.

The purpose of this letter, therefore, is to inform you that the commission will, on a date to be communicated in the near future, conduct elections for interim chairperson for Bunyangabu District.

The commission will, however, not be in a position to conduct the universal adult suffrage elections for district woman representative to Parliament and district chairperson due to non-availability of funds in the approved budget for the financial year 2017/2018.  This is therefore to request you to bring this information to the attention of all stakeholders. 

Sam A. Rwakoojo, 
Secretary the Electoral Commission.”

Madam Speaker, I am raising this matter because the Ninth Parliament had to phase the time in which the various districts would start. I recall for the ones that were to start on 1 July 2016, and one of them was Rubanda District, elections were conducted for both LCV chairperson and district woman representative. Given that those ones started in financial year 2016/2017, why is it that the voters, the population of these affected districts, are being disfranchised? 

Secondly, why haven’t the local governments come here to address Parliament on what is transpiring instead of having displaying double standards? How can you conduct elections for financial year 2016/2017 and then you say there is no money for financial year 2017/2018.

Finally, Madam Speaker, the people of these districts are preparing to take Government to court. I do not know whether it will be palatable for Government to be taken to court and be forced to pay costs which could even go beyond conducting elections. Therefore, the issue of contention is: why is Government engaging in double standards?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, this matter is very sensitive and it needs to be addressed. It is similar to what hon. Mutonyi moved a motion on; it has also got to do with elections in the new districts. Our Committee of Local Government is probably not constituted but we may have to suspend part of the rules to address that issue. 

However, it is important that the minister comes to tell us about this because elections are a public right. You cannot give them today and deny them tomorrow. What is the basis? Why would you give Rubanda and deny Bunyangabu?

2.50
MR GASTER MUGOYA (NRM, Bukooli County North, Bugiri): Madam Speaker, I thought I could give my legal opinion though I am not representing Government. 

Social and political rights are supposed to be enjoyed progressively, and the test is availability of resources. That is a jus cogens; it is an internationally acceptable norm. Therefore, when you allege or claim a social political right, then the burden shifts to you to prove before court. My brother, Mumbere, -(Laughter)- you will need to prove - I am not saying that you are the Mumbere —(Interruption)

MR NZOGHU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The honourable colleague is mistaking my name for that of my king and yet my name is well known. None of my names has even been Mumbere. Is the honourable member in order to mislead the House that my name is Mumbere yet I have never been named Mumbere since my childhood?

THE SPEAKER: No, he is out of order. However, on a serious note, hon. Mugoya, you people should not think of theory. Even then, people will take us to court for failure to conduct elections. You cannot say that since we do not have money, you go to court. Those are theoretical things. Why did he agree to create the districts and then allow some to have elections and disallow others?

MR MUGOYA: Madam Speaker, I concur with your findings. However, at times it is important that we get to know and distinguish between politics and the interpretation attached to politics.

THE SPEAKER: I am glad you are not the Attorney-General. The local government minister is not here. Is it true that Bunyangabu and the districts which are coming in will not elect representatives? We want to hear from the parent ministry, not from finance. Shall we have elections or we should forget about them? Is there no one to answer?

2.54
MS ROSE MUTONYI (NRM, Bubulo County West Manafwa): Thank you Madam Speaker. This issue has taken me unawares; I did not know about the letter. However, at the end 29 May 2017, the Electoral Commission wrote to those districts requesting the chairpersons, representatives of the youth and women Members of Parliament to make their choices on whether they would remain in the original districts or go to the new districts.

I would like to ask, did they not cooperate? Why is it that for one district they are saying no elections and yet another district is going ahead to make arrangements and then they turn around to say they are unable? People are already in top gear and are preparing bulls to slaughter to welcome the new district. Madam Speaker, please-

THE SPEAKER: Let me ask the Government Chief Whip to give us the way forward. 

2.55
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): I know that hon. Jennifer Namuyangu is the Minister of State for Local Government. However, the issue is multi-sectoral; it is not only a local government issue. The Electoral Commission is not under Ministry of Local Government but under the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs. That is why I am speaking because I oversee the sectors in Government.

Mr Sam Rwakoojo, as a staff of the Electoral Commission, stated in the background information given to the finance minister that the role of the Electoral Commission is to organise elections. Therefore, they would be the happiest if elections are organised, and the local governments would also be the happiest if LCI elections are held.

We have to take a decision to see where to get money and carryout these elections. The fact is that the Electoral Commission was told that there is no money-(Interruption)


THE SPEAKER: Government Chief Whip, if the Electoral Commission was told, why haven’t you informed the country and the people who are organising cows and goats for celebrations that there are no elections? Why are you letting people organise themselves and go on campaigning? I think we deserve an explanation.

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Thank you very much for your guidance, Madam Speaker. You have caught us off guard, because an ordinary letter from hon. Rwakoojo does not satisfy the country. We need to give a statement so that the concerned people get acquainted with the situation.

I will communicate to the relevant minister so that a serious statement is sent out. However, we have to look for the money because we created these administrative units after we were convinced that we needed them.

THE SPEAKER: There is no need for clarification. Let the Government come out and tell us whether the elections will be conducted or not so that people do not get ready. Can we please have this statement on Tuesday next week, because the local governments are supposed to take effect on 1st July and people are waiting.

2.58
MR ALEX RUHUNDA (NRM, Fort Portal Municipality, Kabarole): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I stand to raise a matter of national importance. 

In the Ninth Parliament, I presented a petition on behalf of state prosecutors about their salaries. In that petition, it was made very clear that the state prosecutors for a very long time have not been considered during increment of salaries especially in the Judiciary. As we speak now, they are threatening to go on strike, and this in itself is going to paralyse work in the entire nation and even cause a big problem for our security.

Madam Speaker, when you look at the conditions under which the state prosecutors operate, I think as a Parliament and Government we must take into consideration their plight, given the fact that quite a number of them have even lost their lives offering a service to this country. I do not know why, even after the petition on the increment of salaries of the state prosecutors, the Government has kept silent.

Can we get an explanation as to why up to this point, the matters of the state prosecutors are not taken into consideration yet you are busy creating districts that we are even failing to manage. You can see the crisis you are causing in the country. Every day, you are creating unviable districts yet you cannot even pay the state prosecutors who are busy doing work that keeps this country going.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable member.

3.01
THE SECOND DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND MINISTER OF EAST AFRICAN AFFAIRS (Mr Kirunda Kivejinja): Madam Speaker, fortunately yesterday Cabinet occupied itself on that issue and the minister responsible for justice briefed us on how far he has gone. 

These people are part of the general civil service system, which must be on the ground and be satisfied in order for Government to function and the country to move ahead. Therefore, it was decided that within two weeks, the responsible ministry will bring a comprehensive paper to be consented to by Cabinet, and the state prosecutors will also be part of the solution that will be reached in two weeks.

3.02
MR FRANCIS ZAAKE (Independent, Mityana Municipality, Mityana): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance, and this is about the conduct of one of our members in this august House, the hon. Byandala Abraham, who represents Katikamu North. 

Madam Speaker, on several occasions, he has been seen fighting journalists. The first time he did so was at the Anti-Corruption Court in Kololo; he boxed a young girl, Judith Nalugwa, in the lower abdomen, and you know what that means to a lady. The second incident happened on Tuesday this week at the same venue; this time, he boxed an NTV cameraman called Denis Kabugo and this was shown yesterday on NTV.

Madam Speaker, there are rules on code of conduct, which detail the way we are supposed to behave outside and inside this Parliament. Something must be done because he is continuously doing this. Whenever these people report to the police, nothing is done; they just tell the journalists that they will investigate the issue and yet it has been shown live.

Madam Speaker, I beg that something be done about this Member; maybe he can be taken to the rules committee. That is my prayer because other Members may start doing the same. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we shall examine the Rules of Procedure and see what we can do. Because the incident did not occur here, we need to establish how we can come in and we shall give you an update on that issue.

3.06
MR FRED BASEKE (Independent, Ntenjeru County South, Kayunga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on an issue of national importance concerning the works on Tirinyi-Mbale Road. 

On 2 May 2017, the President issued an executive order stopping Dott Services from working on the road. On 9 May 2017, the Executive Director of Uganda National Roads Authority (UNRA) halted the services of Dott, which was working on the Tirinyi-Mbale Road. Furthermore, on 29 May 2017, the President issued another executive order revoking the first executive order. On 22 June, the Attorney-General withdrew the executive order. 

As you travel to Mbale, you will see that the road is in a poor state. Now that they have withdrawn the executive order, we would like to know from the Government when the works will resume on this road. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. I hope that the minister is listening. We shall give you time to give us an update because that road is an important gateway to the east and people need to move. Therefore, you will give us an update.

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE SUPPLEMENTARY APPROPRIATION BILL, 2017

3.07
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE PLANNING, AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Supplementary Appropriation Bill, 2017” be read for the first time.

THE SPEAKER: Is it seconded? Yes, it is seconded. The Budget Committee will examine it and give us an update.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

3.08
 THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (PRIMARY HEALTH CARE) (Dr Joyce Moriku): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand here to give a statement to the Parliament on an update and roadmap for restoration of radiotherapy services in the country.

Madam Speaker, following the breakdown of the radiotherapy teletherapy machine at Uganda Cancer Institute at Mulago last year in March, the Ministry of Health invited the International Atomic Energy Agency to assess the old bunker’s suitability to house a new cobalt machine. This is because it was identified as the quickest way to restore the services, as opposed to the process which would require the completion of the new bunkers.     

Madam Speaker, in May 2016, the International Atomic Energy Agency sent a mission that assessed the old bunker and made recommendations to the Ministry of Health. Their recommendations were to the effect that the old bunker needed to be refurbished and new air conditioning fitted in order to be ready to receive a new cobalt machine and source for teleradiotherapy.

The Ministry of Health, following that visit, contracted Arab Contractors to refurbish the old bunker. The refurbishment of the old radiotherapy bunker was completed this year in April. Final inspection of the bunker by the Atomic Energy Council to assess its readiness to receive the radiotherapy machine as per the recommendations of the International Atomic Energy Agency was carried out this year in May. Following that inspection, the International Atomic Energy Agency was informed by the Atomic Energy Council that the bunker was ready.

Madam Speaker, the International Atomic Energy Agency authorized the manufacturer to ship the machine as well as the source. The machine was shipped and the ship set off last week. The machine is expected at Mombasa Port on 28 July 2017. However, the machine is expected in Kampala at the Uganda Cancer Institute in the first week of August 2017.

Madam Speaker, the installation will then commence and it is anticipated to take four to six weeks if all goes well. Following the successful installation, colleagues, acceptance tests will be carried out for a week by the International Atomic Energy Agency. After the acceptance tests are completed, the commissioning process will then commence. This process will involve – 

    a) The visit and assessment of the machine by four International Atomic Energy Agency missions before it is fully commissioned for clinical usage. 
    b) A team comprising of the International Atomic Energy Agency radiation therapy technicians, medical physicists and radiation oncologists will come to assess the safety of the newly installed machine.
    c) The Uganda Cancer Institute radiation team will be required to radiate a set of specific thermo luminescent dosimeters, which will then be sent for auditing purposes to the International Atomic Energy Agency in the final assessment of the safety and efficacy of the machine. 

Authorization to possess the nuclear has been requested for from the Atomic Energy Council, which we are waiting for. The commissioning and service reestablishment is expected to be completed by the first week of November 2017.

Madam Speaker, the full time clinical usage of the radiotherapy machine will therefore commence in the first week of November. 

Madam Speaker, as far as the new radiotherapy bunker is concerned, its construction is ongoing. I thank you and I beg to report. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, this is work in progress. I think what we require is that in the first week of August, you report to this House that the machine has arrived in Uganda, because it is now a Government assurance. Thereafter, we can talk. 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT 

3.16
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PUBLIC SERVICE (Mr David Karubanga): Madam Speaker, I stand here to give a statement on the delay of salary payments for public officers arising out of a question raised by hon. Margaret Rwabushaija during the Prime Minister’s Question Time on 10 May 2017. 

Section B-a(9) of the Uganda Public Service Standing Orders stipulates that salaries for public officers shall be paid monthly by the 28th of every month. Despite this statutory requirement, some Ministries, Departments and Agencies (MDAs) and local governments have, on several occasions, not paid salary and pension by that date. This statement covers challenges facing the payroll process and payment, and short and long term strategies instituted by the Ministry of Public Service to address those challenges. 

Salary processing and payment was decentralised to the respective votes way back in 2014 and that was aimed at bringing services closer, reducing processing time and proper identification of employees for elimination of ghosts. This has improved ownership and accountability of the payroll, the records and the payments made. 

Madam Speaker, we have however encountered a number of challenges and these are:

1. 	The delay in the payment of salaries beyond the statutorily provided date of 28th of every month. This has been occasioned by the late completion of payroll data capture, finalisation and calculation process, and sometimes laxity on the part of different players in the salary payment process. 

2. 	Inadequate funds for payment of salaries by the respective ministries, departments and agencies being occasioned by poor budgeting by those votes. Lack of adequate funds leads to no or delayed payments. A case in point is Kitgum, Kotido and Nakasongola District local governments in April this year and Kitgum Municipal Council and Mityana District Local Government in the month of May this year. Kitgum Municipal Council paid the May salary in June, 2017. 

	A possible cause of wage shortages is payment of salary and pension outside the Integrated Personnel and Payroll System (IPPS), which is used to process payments.

3. 	We also have inconsistent employee data in the IPPS vis-à-vis the payment information on the Integrated Financial Management System (IFMS). The IPPS system is in the Ministry of Public Service and the IFMS system is in the Ministry Of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. 

	Here, I will give an example; 57 employees of Rubanda District Local Government, it has been established, have shared supplier numbers on the IFMS, which caused some of them to miss salary in the months of April and May. The Ministry of Public Service has authorised the district to pay these salaries of course the affected employees in that Local Government. Rubanda has promised to clean up the master data on the IPPS and IFMS and correct the anomalies with the supplier numbers.

4. 	The movement of staff from a parent vote after another vote has been created also causes this problem. Such a situation requires realignment of the payroll records from the mother vote to the newly created vote. In some cases, both the new and old votes claim the same personnel; for example, Nansana Municipal Council and Wakiso District Local Government have both claimed the same employees belong to them. The Ministry of Public Service has asked the two entities to harmonise the ownership of those employees. This affects wage utilisation by either vote. 

	In Rubanda District, for example, some employees had their salary stopped by Kabale District Local Government after separation of the two districts. The employees have taken long to be accessed on the payroll by Rubanda District Local Government. It is one of the issues that Rubanda District Local Government has committed to resolve in June, which is ending, and July 2017 as elaborated. 

5. 	Over deductions for loan repayments and other recoveries from the payroll by the respective votes. Some MDAs and local governments effect deductions from employees’ pay beyond the 50 per cent statutory cap of the basic pay, and this condition is tagged to the payment system. The IPPS was configured in such a way that once deduction goes beyond 50 per cent of the salary payment, it automatically does not consider that record. This has led to some officers missing their salary payment for some months. 

Madam Speaker, we have short and long term strategies to address those challenges: 
1. To address the delays in payment of salaries, the ministry issued guidelines in March 2017 with clear timelines at each stage of the salary payment process. 

We have revised the salary payment process whereby different entities have to submit their reports or their entries by different dates: 

Madam Speaker, the processing of human resource data, entry forms, data capture and approval is a responsibility of the votes and it is supposed to be between 20th of the previous month and 6th of the pay month. 

Salary, pension payments and calculations; finalising and batching is supposed to be the responsibility of the Ministry of Public Service and it is supposed to be between the 7th and 10th of the same month.

Submission and uploading of payment files for each vote to the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development interface is supposed to be the responsibility of the Ministry of Public Service. That is supposed to be done by the 10th of the same month.

Generation of salary and pension payment invoices and uploading into IFMS is supposed to be done by the respective votes and it is supposed to be between 11th and 15th of the same month. 

The final one, which is the submission of payment instructions to Bank of Uganda for clearance and crediting bank accounts, is the responsibility of the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. It is supposed to be done by the 20th of every month so that by the 28th day of every pay month, which is the statutory date for all civil servants to get their pay, all civil servants have got their pay.

Another strategy is that the Ministry of Public Service and the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development jointly monitor wage budgeting, wage utilisation and performance to ensure that recruitment and salary payments are within the approved wage budget.

The Ministry of Public Service has also emphasised the Government policy of paying salary swiftly through the IPPS system and that is in the guidelines for the management of wage, payroll and pension, which is for Financial Year 2017/18. On that note, we issued an Establishment Notice No. 1 of 2017.

Madam Speaker, the long term strategy of the Ministry of Public Service is that our ministry is in the process of developing a Government-wide human capital management system, which will effectively and seamlessly integrate with the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development payment system - the IFMS system. This will facilitate automated export of payment information to IFMS and eradicate issues of inconsistent employee information against payment data. Implementation of that human capital management system is planned and was budgeted for in this Financial Year 2017/18. 

In conclusion, the Ministry of Public Service has, in the last one year, undertaken massive reforms in payments and payroll administration, whose outcomes point to a bright future for public service. I urge all colleagues to support our continuous initiatives. I beg to submit.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, this was a specific question relating to Rubanda. I do not know whether the Member has a supplementary question. If there is none, we note the information and we will follow up later with the minister in case there are other anomalies.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON MANDATORY VEHICLE INSPECTION BY SGS

3.29
THE MINISTER OF WORKS AND TRANSPORT (Ms Ntege Azuba): Madam Speaker, I am here to make a statement on the update of Mandatory and Periodic Motor Vehicle Inspection Services. 

The mission of my ministry is to promote adequate, safe and well-maintained transport infrastructure and services for socio-economic development of Uganda. The ministry fulfils part of this mission through implementation of the provisions of the Traffic and Road Safety Act, 1998. Mandatory inspection of motor vehicles is one of the tools being used to fulfil this mission and implement the Act. 

Madam Speaker, compulsory inspection of vehicles was previously carried out as a condition for renewal of road licenses under Statutory Instrument No. 361(7); the Traffic and Road Safety Vehicle Test Regulations of 1970. It was being conducted under delegated authority from the Ministry of Works and Transport by Uganda Police until 1998. A new Statutory Instrument No.51 of 2016; the Traffic and Road Safety Motor Vehicle Inspection Regulation, 2016 was issued and published in the Gazette on 15 July, 2016 to re-initiate the exercise.

The privatisation of motor vehicle inspection was also part of the National Road Safety Policy, which was approved by Cabinet in 2014. The contracting of an international firm was a result of an open international bidding process provided for under section 81(a) of the amended PPDA Act, 2003. This method is open to both domestic and international firms competing on equal terms in order to attract firms with the necessary experience and expertise. 

The construction of all the stations has been and is being undertaken by Ugandans and over 99 per cent of the employees are Ugandans. However, after recovery of their investment, the ministry will advertise for local providers of the same services after successful transfer of knowledge, skills and expertise.

Currently, SGS, the international firm mentioned earlier, has acquired land in Kawanda on Bombo Road, Nabbingo on Masaka Road, Namulanda on Entebbe Road, Namanve on Jinja Road, in Mbale, Gulu and Mbarara on which to construct and install equipment for motor vehicle inspection. The status of the construction of the different stations is as follows: 

    i) In Kawanda, which is on Bombo Road, the construction was completed and the station was opened on 28 November 2016. In that place, all vehicle categories are inspected.
    ii) Nabbingo, which is on Masaka Road was also completed and was opened on 3 May 2017. Inspections are only for light vehicles up to 3.5 tonnes. 
    iii) In Namulanda, the station was completed and opened on 31 May 2017 and inspections are only for light vehicles, also up to 3.5 tonnes.
    iv) In Namanve, the construction is still under progress. It stands at 45 per cent and at this station, there will be inspection of all categories of vehicles.
    v) In Mbale town, which is also under construction, the progress in 90 per cent and all categories of vehicles will be inspected.
    vi) In Mbarara, the construction is on-going; it is at 25 per cent progress and all categories of vehicles will be inspected.
    vii) In Gulu, which is also under construction, there is little progress, which is at five per cent. Inspection will be for all categories of vehicles.

In addition, three mobile units were imported and two of them have been set up at Namboole parking yard as we wait for completion of the Namanve station. 

The third mobile unit is currently stationed in Lugazi at the request of Sugar Corporation of Uganda Limited (SCOUL). The mobile stations are designed to inspect all types of vehicles and will traverse the countryside to conduct inspection in areas with sparse vehicle populations. That means that in the areas where there are no stations, the mobile stations will go there.

The inspection process is automated with no human subjectivity. The items which are very critical to road safety being inspected include the following: brakes, wheel alignment, headlamps, suspension, steering wheel alignment, exhaust smoke and signalling lights.

Madam Speaker, almost 1,500 road accidents annually are attributed to poor condition of vehicles and we believe that this inspection exercise will reverse this trend. The 1,500 road accidents annually are not acceptable to Uganda.

Madam Speaker, the provision of a motor vehicle inspection service was conceived and tendered out as a build, own and operate type of Public Private Partnership (PPP).

The fees being charge for inspection are for direct and financial costs of investment for overheads, profits, concession fees and value added tax. Out of the fees that are paid, Uganda gets concession fees of 10 per cent of gross, which goes straight into the Consolidated Fund plus 18 per cent of the gross as value added tax.

In addition to the PPDA Act, this contracting arrangement is also legally provided for under section 4 (d) of the Public Private Partnership Act, 2015, which states, “Public Private Partnership means a commercial transaction between a transacting authority and a private party where the private party performs a function of the contracting authority on behalf of the contracting authority, for a specified period and receives a benefit for performing the function through payment by the contracting authority or charges or fees collected by the private party from the users of the infrastructure or service, or both.”

Madam Speaker, the contracting authority in this case is the Ministry of Works and Transport and the private party is SGS. The Statutory Instrument (Regulation 23) and the contract for this service also stipulate that SGS will be subject to periodic audits, both internal and by the Auditor-General, just like any other Government department or project. Even as we talk, the internal audit is there in SGS; therefore, their accounts are open to any kind of audit. 

The purpose of the audits is to establish revenues collected and level of investment recovered to inform contract implementation. 

About the deadline for inspection, Madam Speaker, the requirement to have a Certificate of Fitness (CoF) by every motor vehicle is an ongoing requirement for every vehicle to be on the road. As earlier stated, this is meant to reduce the number  of  accidents  caused  by  vehicles  in  bad  mechanical condition which is estimated  at over 1,500 accidents  every year. 

It is, therefore, an offence for one to drive a vehicle without a certificate issued by my ministry through SGS.

Madam Speaker, compliance to regulations is routinely enforced by the Uganda Traffic Police. A deadline cannot be put in place for such roadside enforcement. However, enforcement can either be initiated for a new regulation and/or enhanced to both penalise and create awareness of traffic and road safety regulations amongst road users.

My ministry plans to initiate enforcement in a phased and well-coordinated manner with the Uganda Police Force. The first phase of enforcement will be to stop and caution or advise the motorists to go and get their vehicles inspected before anyone is penalised.

HON. MEMBERS: When?

MS AZUBA: With effect from 1st July. The first phase of enforcement -

THE SPEAKER: Order, Members!

MS AZUBA: Madam Speaker, the first phase is for cautioning -

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, you asked for this information. The minister is giving it to you but you do not want to listen.

MS AZUBA: It is cautioning and of course after some time, we are going to educate the population that if a vehicle is cautioned three times, definitely action will be taken; the vehicle maybe taken off the road –(Interjections)– Yes, if you are cautioned, it means that you are not willing to contribute to the safety of the road.

Madam Speaker, I would like to reiterate that the deadline does not exist because this would mislead the public to believe that after that date they should either park their vehicles or have them inspected first. It cannot be like the sim cards. 

In addition, a deadline would cause unnecessary congestion of the stations and compromise the quality of service that we intend to provide to the people of Uganda. 

It would also mean that on an annual basis, all Certificates of Fitness will expire at around the same time. Madam Speaker, this is not the intention of the exercise.

The fees charged inclusive of VAT per year are:
    a) Motorcycles – Shs 54,752
    b) Motor cars and dual purpose vehicles excluding light goods - Shs 110,000
    c) Commercial vehicles that is light omnibuses or passenger vehicles of more than seven passengers – Shs 122,000
    d) Medium omnibuses (PSV) of more than 20 passengers – Shs 59,000
    e) Heavy omnibuses, passenger vehicles of more than 60 passengers – Shs 944
    f) Light goods vehicles of less than 3.5 tonnes – Shs 110,212
    g) Medium goods vehicles – Shs 147,500
    h) Heavy goods vehicles that are more than 10 tonnes – Shs 59,000
    i) Trailers and semi-trailers – Shs 19,706 and for each extra axle on a trailer, it is Shs 944.

Subsequent payments as a percentage of initial inspection fees
Madam Speaker, when a vehicle goes for inspection and fails the test, it is allowed to go back and make corrections. If the owner comes back within 30 days after the initial failure, there is no charge. 

Re-inspection within 30 days after initial failure with use of lane is 50 per cent of what you had paid. After 30 days of initial failure, it is 100 per cent. 

Payment for duplicate certificate of fitness is 50 per cent. Payment for appeal against a result of inspection is 150 per cent. (Laughter) 

Inspection after accident/crash and repairs is 100 per cent. Inspection required by a police officer for a vehicle with a valid Certificate of Fitness is 50 per cent and inspection required by a police officer for a vehicle without a valid certificate of fitness is 100 per cent.

In conclusion, Madam Speaker, it is important that through you, this august House supports this programme to reduce the road carnage –(Interjection)– and air pollution in Uganda. The system will be implemented with due consideration to the Uganda vehicle fleet and its challenges. 

My ministry is committed to ensuring that SGS implements a quality service with the highest level of integrity. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I would like to know from you whether this is a one-off exercise. If I am inspected this year, can I drive for three years? Honourable members, the minister has said it is not an annual activity. Therefore, I would like to know whether if I am inspected in 2017 I can drive up to 2020 without another inspection.

MS AZUBA: Madam Speaker, it is every year. If you allow me –

THE SPEAKER: Order!

MS AZUBA: Madam Speaker, I made a quick calculation of the fees being paid. For example, a station inspects 150 vehicles. At the moment, there are three stations operational. At this charge of Shs 110,000 and working for six days, the company makes a gross earning of Shs 1.32 billion in a month. 

Out of that, 10 per cent is paid to the Consolidated Fund and 18 per cent is paid as Value Added Tax (VAT). They also have to pay for their investment and the charges. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, this matter was raised by hon. Muyanja. Let me see if he has a supplementary question before I can get other people.

MR NZOGHU: Madam Speaker, this House has two sides; the Government side and the Opposition side. In the circumstance that the Minister of Works and Transport has presented a statement to this effect, wouldn’t  it be procedurally right to allow the Shadow Minister of Works and Transport to also give this House the information that we have so that when Members debate, they can do so from an informed position?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the Shadow Minister of Works and Transport has not notified me that he or she has a paper. [HON. MEMBERS: “He is the one.”] No, you did not tell me. I do not know what you have. However, according to our rules, the person who asks a question has a right to a supplementary. I will call you but let us first hear from the person who raised the issue.

3.49
MR JOHNSON MUYANJA SSENYONGA (NRM, Mukono County South, Mukono): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the Minister of Works and Transport for coming up with the report. 

Madam Speaker, the motor vehicle inspection exercise is a mandatory arrangement. First, we had concerns over who owns the inspection company and where the money that is charged goes. When I checked the Uganda Revenue Authority database, there were a number of private vehicles. We did not consider Government vehicles but in their statement, they are also going to inspect Government vehicles. The lowest figure we could get annually is Shs 196 billion. 

Madam Speaker, as you have heard, I do not think the honourable minister has taken time to go to Kawanda and other centres as we have done. As you can see, Nabbingo was completed on 3 May 2017 and Namulanda was completed on 31 May 2017. As we speak, announcements and statements by the police are on-going on radios and TVs, announcing the deadline. 

Madam Speaker, I do not think the minister is fair to come here and tell us that there is no deadline when there is total connivance to make the innocent Ugandans suffer. 

I carried out a research; I went to 12 police stations, including those of Masaka where accidents have taken place. The cause of accidents is not mechanical conditions of the vehicles. All those are brand new vehicles. The cause is reckless driving, over speeding and narrow roads. 

Therefore, it is not fair for the minister to come here and deceive this august House that the cause of accidents is the poor mechanical conditions of vehicles. I have the report uploaded here, which shows that the causes are reckless driving, drunkenness, overtaking –(Interruption)

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Madam Speaker, in one of our rules, we refer to the language that we are supposed to use in our House. Instead of words such as “deceive”, we have been guided to use words such as “misinforming”. This is because you would be imputing ill motive on the minister. 

Is he, therefore, in order to use un-parliamentary language such as saying that my minister has come here to “deceive” the august House, bearing in mind that we are being broadcast live?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the word “deceive” would impute animus. I do not think the minister has that intention; so, tone down the language.

MR MUYANJA: Most obliged, Madam Speaker. The concern was to bring this information to the minister –

THE SPEAKER: Allow the honourable member to speak.

MR BUKENYA: I wanted to give him information on the police report.

THE SPEAKER: Let him speak first.

MR MUYANJA: Information on the police report allowed. (Laughter)

MR BUKENYA: Thank you, honourable member, for giving way. Madam Speaker, the information I would like to give is from the Uganda Police Annual Crime and Road Safety Report 2015; causes of accidents:

    i. Human Error – 81 per cent
    ii. Road condition – 0.8 per cent
    iii. Weather - 0.5 per cent
    iv. Vehicle condition, failure, tyre blow, steering wheel and headlights – 2.2 per cent
    v. Unknown causes – 14 per cent. That is the information that I wanted to give.

MR MUYANJA SENYONGA: As I conclude, when you look at the letter that was addressed to the press, the honourable minister mentioned only seven - I went there twice and they know me.  The last time I went there, I was treated well and sent away very fast. However, the way people are suffering there yet the only token that goes to the Government coffers is only 28 per cent. When you look at the condition of our roads - we are here supporting foreigners that are collecting our money and eventually will go away with it –

Madam Speaker, inspection in the past used to be done by Police in Naguru. We are not rejecting - (Interruption)

MR JAMES KAKOOZA: Thank you, hon. Muyanja, for giving me the way. Madam speaker, what is disturbing is that the same company, SGS, was contracted by Uganda Government in 1998 and 2000 to inspect all the goods coming into the country - re-shipment. About 80 per cent of the goods that came into the country were substandard and it was inspected by the same country.

You are contracting the same company again. In the Sixth or Seventh Parliament, Madam Speaker, if you can remember, this company was suspended by Government. The report is on the Hansard. Again, it is the same company that has been given the same contract with no time limits. What the minister has read has no time framework to build the capacity so that Ugandans can take over. It is open ended. How long are we going to continue to enrich this company? When you test a company and it does not perform, why again do you contract it?

Madam Speaker, we are here on the Floor of the House but this company will not manage inspection of vehicles. Take it or leave it, it will be substandard. As we talk, some people have complained to us that they give certificates before taking the vehicles there. If need be, we shall bring the record on the Floor of the House.

I would like to request the Ministry of Works and Transport to go back. You have an Inspectorate of Vehicles (IOV) all over the country that can inspect these vehicles; build their capacity or work together with SGS and bring comprehensive data, which can help Ugandans to have vehicles to be on the road.

Madam Speaker, this is how Rwanda managed inspection. They decided not to import all vehicles in the country before inspection. Uganda cannot manage because we cannot make it to that standard. If you want the inspection, enrich the capacity of IOV in the country and if the mechanical engineers are not here, build the capacity and they should takeover. However, to collect our money and give it to a foreign a company, they will get the money and run away and no work will be done. (Applause)

MR MUYANJA SSENYONGA: Madam Speaker, we also request that the contract be reviewed by this august House - 

THE SPEAKER: Order! Allow hon. Muyanja to speak.

MR MUYANJA SSENYONGA: The 14-passenger seat vehicles – these vehicles come without seats and belts and the seats and belts are fixed here. When these go for inspection, they are denied chance yet they entered the country.

Madam Speaker, again, when you look at the buses - it is publically known that most buses on our roads were originally lorries that were modified and assembled in Kenya. I understand they have started assembling them in Jinja. What are the technical challenges? 

You will find that the seats are not compared to their technical qualification and at the end of the day – Also, when you look at the frames, they deny them the chance and yet they are in the know that all these buses were manufactured in Kenya; now it is being done in Jinja.

Finally, there is also an element of double taxation. Previously, the Uganda Government scrapped road license as a waiver to Ugandans but they have come now up with a new tax –the minister has said after 30 days, when you go and you have not passed the inspection, you again pay for the inspection fee. They do not even wait for the 30 days. I was there physically and I gave them the money. Therefore, it is not automatic that you have to pay again after 30 days.

Madam Speaker, when you import a car, it is inspected and a sticker is put on it. Even if you imported it today and it comes this very month of June - after that inspection of US$200, again you are going to be charged here another inspection fee. Therefore, Madam Speaker – (Interruption)

MR OGUZU: Thank you, honourable member, for allowing me give you information. The information that I would like to give the honourable member is that this Parliament passed a law which determines how Government goes into business with private sector - the Public Private Partnership Act (PPP). I would like to inform you that this SGS deal did not go through the PPP Act, which would allow Parliament to approve Government’s engagement with private sector. If it was done, the minister is here she can clarify when Parliament approved SGS engagement with Government. Thank you.

4.05
MR LILLIAN NAKATE (NRM, Woman Representative, Luweero):  Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me the opportunity. I would like to thank the minister for the statement. I have a few concerns.
 
The concern I have in the minister’s statement is about the subsequent fee payment as a percentage of the initial inspection fee. I can see the payment for appeal against results of inspection is 150 per cent. I must say I am disappointed. I would like the minister to tell us when they made that decision to alter the specifications because according to the contract, we are supposed to have equipment installed from Germany. However, the equipment that is currently installed in the stations like Kawanda is from France. 

This brings me to the conclusion that when the minister was submitting about the sub-standard work, we are not likely to get the best. That is why they could have put this percentage high; the one for appealing against the results of inspection.

Madam Speaker, this contract for SGS is a five year term which is renewable. It was signed in March 2015. The contractor was supposed to construct these seven stations in the first 18 months but if you review the minister’s statement, you will find that only Kawanda was constructed in the first 18 months. The time for constructing Nabbingo and Namulanda elapsed and the rest of the stations are still on-going.

I would like to find out from the minister if he has issued any warning letters to this contractor because this would fit into your justification to renew the contract or allow our local people take on the contract. 

Madam Speaker, I would like to caution the ministry that a lot is desired in the SGS. Thank you.

4.07
MR ALEX NDEEZI (NRM, PWD Representative): Madam Speaker, I believe all of us gathered here are patriots. Patriots work in the best interest of their people. The jobs and money we have should be as much as possible reserved for our citizens. (Applause)

We have been talking about Build Uganda Buy Uganda. Since the arrival of the first vehicle in this country, all inspections have been carried out before they reach this country. Uganda has the capacity and the means. I draw your attention to page 3 of the critical areas being done by this foreign firm. The first one is checking brakes. Who does not know how to check brakes here? Wheel alignment; we have many technical personnel in the country who can do this. You can know that your vehicle has a problem. 

Madam Speaker, the point I would like to say is that we are driving in reverse gear and we are denying our own people jobs. (Applause) My request to the minister is to tell us the best way to terminate this contract with SGS. If you fear terminating the contract, tell us so that we help you. Thank you very much.

4.07
MR WILLIAM NZOGHU (FDC, Busongora County North, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker. We have received part A of this matter we are handling. I wish to seek your indulgence that you give me some reasonable time to also present part B of this matter.

THE SPEAKER: Where is part B?

MR NZOGHU: It is here and I am going to handle it, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: How long will you take? Just read the highlights of your areas of objections.

MR NZOGHU: I am going to give the highlights, Madam Speaker.

Madam Speaker - (Interruption)

DR BARYOMUNSI: I am speaking as a Member of Parliament for Kinkizi County East. I am rising on a point of procedure. I have heard Members make reference to contract information which apparently not all of us have. I do not know whether the discussion now can help us make a decision. Wouldn’t it be procedurally correct that we send this report to the appropriate committee of Parliament to engage the minister and receive additional information so that the committee as well as hon. Nzoghu, the shadow minister, can give alternative views? Then, the committee can inform this House based on detailed interface to enable Parliament make a proper decision. 

Otherwise, at the moment, some of us do not have full information to enable us take a proper decision. I would like your procedural guidance on that, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, after hon. Nzoghu had spoken, I was going to propose that there are serious divergences in the information on the amount of money and the way the inspection is managed. I was going to propose that we should send this matter to the Committee on Physical Infrastructure to examine the contract, hold public hearings and bring us a report because there are many things, which we cannot conclude here.

Therefore, the chairperson of Committee on Physical Infrastructure, can we give you one month to do the research on the areas we have disagreement and come back to us? It is urgent because our people have to drive their vehicles.

MR KASIBANTE: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am seeking this guidance as the Leader of the Opposition. (Laughter) The minister has ably stated that the exercise is on-going. As we talk now, they are at a stage she referred to as caution stage before the actual operation. Can’t we first suspend from the caution stage until Parliament resolves itself on the matter? 
Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: The minister has made a presentation and the Members also made their counter presentation. I do not know whether we are ready to take a position now. Why don’t we give ourselves time? What does the minister say? 

MR TINKASIIMIRE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. With the tempo in the House and the outcry in the public, we cannot give the committee one month and leave the minister with her companies ready to wreck Ugandans without a temporary political injunction as the House pronounces itself on the matter. 

THE SPEAKER: What does the minister say? There is a proposal that we suspend the actions of SGS.

MS NTEGE: Madam Speaker, there is a valid contract and we all know about contractual obligations - (Interruption)

MR NZOGHU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I wish to add this, followings what the Leader of the Opposition has given as we take a decision that provisionally, all motor vehicles in Uganda be inspected by the Ministry of works and Transport, Department of Mechanical Engineering and the schedule of such inspections issued in all districts of Uganda as we wait for the report of the Committee on Physical Infrastructure.

THE SPEAKER: That would be interfering with the contract. What I would like to propose is that they continue inspecting but they suspend the caution. The issues of caution this and that and stop the announcement until we have had our report in one month. No caution. That closes the second phase you wanted to start in July. Halt it until our report has come. This is urgent. (Applause)

4.17
MR ABDULATIF SEBAGGALA (Independent, Kawempe Division North, Kampala): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. This is a very serious issue, which concerns our voters and all Ugandans. As we talk now, if you happen to visit all these centres he has talked about - it is terrible!

If the announcements are going on, that the deadline is tomorrow or Saturday, 1 July 2017 and as people’s representatives, you remember the issue of SIM registration; it was this House that saved the public from what was going on and again the public is looking to us. There is no justification. You have heard of the charges of the $200 when the vehicles are being imported and now, there is another charge. You have heard about the same company, which was suspended by the same Government. This is the same Government that suspended SGS a few years ago.

Madam Speaker, I propose and request that as we carry out the due diligence as this august House as part of our responsibility, let whatever they have been trying to do be halted until we are done as Members of Parliament so that these announcements go on that there is no kind of - even the police must be involved. (Applause) Police have been warning us that on Monday they are going to arrest all vehicles.

It is this House that can save our voters and come up - Even if the Government says they have already made an agreement or a contract but if the contract is not in favour of Ugandans, then what type of contract is that? Therefore, if it means cancelling or terminating the contract, so be it. We must protect all Ugandans.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, in order to terminate the contract, we must study it. That is why I want our committee to look at it and advise us on how to move. However, we are worried that if we stop now, we will be in breach. Suppose we stopped the deadline but announcements are running. Can we suspend the deadline so that Ugandans are free?

4.20
MR ALEX RUHUNDA (NRM, Fort Portal Municipality, Kabarole): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. This is not the first time a matter of this situation comes on the Floor of Parliament. We have come to learn of a mafia group and this mafia group is very smart. They even within the contracts know very well that at a given period when Ugandans wake up and know their games and schemes, they will be able to put political pressure and terminate contracts.

However, within those clauses of the contract, the technocrats who sign these contracts sell us. Even now as we are talking, they have already a provision that protects them including the entire scheme so that we do pay heavily in case this contract is terminated.

Madam Speaker, this is a very serious matter. We have seen it when it comes to sugar. They collect money out of us. Whenever they run short of money, they hike the prices and collect the difference. Every opportunity, which they get, they have to make sure that they turn Ugandans into business.

Now, imagine such a scheme, Madam Speaker, how can we have any sane person append a signature to commit Ugandans to give wealth to foreigners? How can we do that? It is high time that Parliament pronounced herself on these matters. We are tired of selling this country.

Look at Bujagali case, we have just revised Bujagali –(Interjections)– This is not a small matter, Madam Speaker. Let us debate this matter such that we put to an end the thuggery that we are seeing happening in our country. 

4.22
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank colleagues for their submissions. I listened to you and you guided very well. As you can see from the Floor, more information is coming up, which we cannot crosscheck. More people could be having more information and Government is in agreement with your suggestion that the matter goes to the committee.

Regarding suspension of the announcements and deadline; in the minister’s statement, she said that there is no deadline. (Interjections) That means those who are announcing must be told to stop forthwith and the minister is going to do so. Announcements taking about deadlines are going to stop tonight.

The minister is going to instruct whoever has been in charge of misleading the country - because the minister in charge is saying she did not put a deadline. Why can’t we stop there, Madam Speaker, like you have guided then we go to the committee which is going to handle the matter?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, in order to support the minister, this House directs that deadline be extinguished immediately. Then the minister can now go and say, Parliament directed that there is no deadline and they stop the announcements. Then our committee handles the issue including examining the contract and report back.

Government Chief Whip and Leader of the Opposition constitute your committees quickly – Yes, we need committees by Tuesday, so that they can start work. In one month, report back and we debate and finish the matter. Okay, thank you very much. 

I understand the Minister of Internal Affairs will lay the regulations.

LAYING OF PAPERS

THE NON-GOVERNMENTAL ORGANISATIONS (FEES) REGULATIONS, 2017

4.25
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the Non-Governmental Organisations (Fees) Regulations, 2017. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the regulations are now available for your perusal.

LAYING OF PAPERS

THE NON-GOVERNMENTAL ORGANISATIONS REGULATIONS, 2017

5.25
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the Non-Governmental Organisations Regulations, 2017.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, they are now available for your scrutiny and information. 

BILL’S
SECOND READING

THE NATIONAL BIOTECHNOLOGY AND BIOSAFETY BILL, 2012


THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, yesterday we received the main report and agreed to receive the minority report today, hon. Oguzu.

5.26
MR DENIS OGUZU (FDC, Maracha County, Maracha): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am here to present a minority report arising out of a Bill that was referred to the Committee on Science and Technology. The main report was presented yesterday but because our sugar levels were so low and we could not be able to comprehend a lot of issues, you advised that I present the minority report today.

I am here to present that report pursuant to Rule 194 of our Rules of Procedure. Before I proceed, allow me lay at the Table the minority report I am going to present.

Madam Speaker, technology is evolving at a very first rate. In a number of spheres technological advancement such as biotechnology are premised on the mastery of nature, and knowledge so as to develop products that are unique in composition and usability.

However, in its immense claimed benefits and adverse effects there is need for wide public consultation, conscious consideration and regulation. Therefore, in a bid to provide a regulatory framework on biotechnology commonly known as GMO, a National Biotechnology and Biosafety Bill, 2012 was tabled in Parliament, scrutinised and reported on.

Pursuant to Rule 194 of the Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of Uganda, I am presenting a dissenting opinion from the opinion of the majority of the Committee on Science and Technology that was presented yesterday. And my grounds for dissent are as follows:

First, we are dissenting because there was inadequate public consultation on the Bill. Although the committee noted in its report under section 4.2 that there was inadequate public consultation and participation about the introduction of GMOs and biosafety, the majority of the committee members recommended that the Bill be approved with amendments in contravention of the provisions of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda and the Cartagena Protocol on Biodiversity.

Madam Speaker, the National Objectives and Directive Principles of State Policy X as enshrined in the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda stipulates that, “The state shall take all necessary steps to involve the people in the formulation and implementation of development plans and programmes which affect them.”

Article 23 (2) of the Cartagena Protocol on Biodiversity also requires that parties, which in this case is the Government, shall in accordance with their respective laws and regulations consult the public in decision making process regarding living modified organisms.

The cited provision further stipulates that the party, which in this case is Government, shall make the results of such decisions available to the public; while respecting confidential information in accordance with Article 1 of the said protocol.

Contrary to that, the Ministry of Science, Technology and Innovation failed to convince the committee that the public was adequately consulted and involved in developing the Bill whose provisions will affect them.

The committee further highlights under section 2.1 which is on page 5 regarding medical biotechnology that GMOs can lead to health risks such as food allergies, antibiotic resistance, reproductive and endocrine disorders, hormone disruptions, birth defects, short lifespans, cancer, mortality of sperms, sluggishness of sperms, digestive problems, obesity, sterility and nutritional deficiencies. 

In addition, modern biotechnology is a technology which is under corporate control; it is protected by patents and other forms of intellectual property rights. Therefore, it is contrary of farming traditions of saving seeds and exchanging seeds.

In countries like Brazil that have embraced GMO foods, legal battles with corporate GMO producers have arisen and are on-going due to limitations in multiplication, demand for royalties and the need to sign technology licence agreements before utilisation of the products. This raises a risk of affecting Ugandan farmers’ culture of -

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, are you reading the report? Why not just give the highlights of the areas of objection? Is it on the iPads?

THE OGUZU: Yes, it is. However, I thought I could highlight these things more.

THE SPEAKER: Just highlight the areas where you have a disagreement and let the Members read. 

MR OGUZU: Okay. On the basis of the inadequate consultations and engagement of the public, we feel that this Bill should be referred back to the sponsor; and the people of Uganda must adequately be involved in its development as required by the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda and the protocol on which this law is premised.

Our second ground for dissent was lack of impact assessment; Madam Speaker, majority of the committee members under section 2.1 of their report highlighted the benefits and costs of this law which is coming into force if passed. However, the committee did not indicate whether the benefits of passing this law with amendments would far outweigh the costs, which will come with it.

In practice, we know that there is what we call a regulatory impact assessment guide which the Cabinet Secretariat issued to all ministries. This guide provided that before any policy or regulation is developed, the players or sectors that originate this must be able to analyse and report that, whatever policies or regulations they are going to come up with the benefits will far outweigh the cost.

In this particular case, the committee did not indicate whether such a regulatory impact assessment was done for this particular law which they are proposing. For that purpose, we request that the Bill be referred back to the sponsor for regulatory impact assessment; such that Parliament can be informed on whether it would be very beneficial for us to pass this law. Parliament would be interested in knowing the opportunity cost which will arise from passing this law. 

Our third ground of dissent is the incomprehensiveness of this Bill, Madam Speaker. Majority of the committee members in their report in section 2.1 notes that the Bill only seeks to advance agricultural biotechnology while neglecting other forms of biotechnology such as industrial, environmental and medical biotechnology. 

The Bill places emphasis mainly on manipulation of genes to produce agricultural GMOs. In this case, the Bill is limited in scope because it does not cater for other forms of biotechnology.

Furthermore, we know that GMOs are only a subdivision of biotechnology. Unfortunately, the Bill and its proposed amendments are majorly relating to GMOs, but not biotechnology as a whole. As you can see in the report that was presented, of the 44 clauses, 23 which form about 52 percent are regarding GMOs. 

From clause 15 to 37 and even 11, about 25 per cent pertain to only structural arrangements. Therefore, for that reason, we think that the Bill has not covered a number of issues relating to biotechnology.

We even know of traditional and conventional biotechnologies; technologies for making beer among others are all not covered. Our fears are alluded to in yesterday’s report by the intent of the majority committee to present a minority report to deal with problems associated with other forms of biotechnology as indicated in section 2.1.

The Bill is not comprehensive; we think that we must refer the Bill to the sponsor such that its scope can be widened to holistically cater for biotechnology as we already know it.

Madam Speaker, our fourth ground for dissent from the views of the majority of the committee is inadequate bioethical considerations. The majority report makes no reference to bioethics, yet it is a core element of biotechnology as indicated in the National Biotechnology and Biosafety Policy of 2008. Bioethics stipulates what should and should not be done when developing biotechnology projects.

The policy notes that there is an apparent lack of code of ethics in biotechnology research in Uganda. 

Ethical considerations in biotechnology research, therefore, do not exist save for certain aspects that are addressed by the more general national guidelines on research ethics. 

The code of bioethics should enable the development and exploitation of biotechnology in accordance with acceptable societal norms. The key factors in shaping public attitude and consumer acceptance of products of biotechnology are therefore bioethics which in our case was ignored.

Madam Speaker, although the Bill under clause 44 provides for regulations on bioethical consideration, it is so crucial that the core bioethical provisions are explicitly provided for within the Bill. 

We have noted issues regarding bioethics are crucial for Parliament to delegate its responsibility to the minister. 

It is therefore, essential that these bioethical provisions are incorporated within the Bill so as to address concerns raised in the National Biotechnology and Biosafety Policy. 

For instance, Madam Speaker, the introduction of GMOs has led to a wider debate on bioethical concerns affecting social, economic and environmental spheres. These include the effects on non-target organisms, insect resistance crops, gene flow, loss of diversity as well as the issue on interfering with nature. 

Due to inadequate consideration of bioethical issues, we would think that the Bill be referred back to the sponsor such that the scope is widened to incorporate provisions on bioethics. 

Our additional point of dissent was that there was substantial modification of the Bill. The majority of the committee made 31 amendments which constitute about 70 per cent amendments to the 44 clauses of the Bill which if considered, would substantially modify the original Bill. 

The substantial amendments more so were regarding the objectives which are principle, creation of a directorate responsible for biosafety as a competent authority within the Ministry of Science, Technology and Innovation. 

Substantial amendments were also made on functions of the competent authority and this to us raised funding gaps in terms of staffing, operationalisation and enforcement.

Madam Speaker, some time back while in the Chair, the Deputy Speaker, in the First Session of the Tenth Parliament, guided that if a Bill has substantially been amended beyond 50 per cent, it loses its originality and such a Bill should be referred for reprinting. 

The Deputy Speaker further indicated that the Bill will create amendments or should be referred for reprinting if amendments are more than half of the original Bill. Therefore, the magnitudes of the amendments to this Bill necessitate that we really refer it to the sponsor for reprinting. 

In Table 1, I have shown countries that were able to refer back their Bills because of substantial amendments. It happened in the parliaments of Rwanda, South Africa and Australia and these are all Commonwealth countries. We, therefore, think this Parliament can learn from that practice and refer the Bill to address some of these gaps and we pray it is referred for reprinting.

Inadequacy of Certificate of Financial Implication 

To operationalise this, the finance ministry issued a Certificate of Financial Implication, but due to the substantial amendments to the Bill, we think the Certificate of Financial Implication which was issued is stressed so much that we may not be able to operationalise the Bill. For example, it was presumed this law would be operationalised within the Medium Term Budget Framework. 

It was also presumed that the National Council of Science and Technology would be the competent authority. However, in this proposed amendments, all these have changed, a directorate has been created in the Ministry of Science, Technology and Innovation. 

Due to that, this has stretched the financial commitments that Government made and due to that, we think that the Bill should be referred to the sponsor so that a new Certificate of Financial Implication can be obtained before this Bill is reconsidered by the Parliament of Uganda. 

We also noticed risks of external influence. The Bill and its amendments by the committee did not address the risk of external influence. This necessitates a comprehensive regulatory impact assessment to critically assess and debate the adverse risks of external influence and financial sustainability in advancing biotechnology systems. We noticed that much of the funding for biotechnology research between 2010 and 2011 were largely from foreign sources; about 38 per cent was from foreign organisations, 33 per cent was from intergovernmental organisations and 14 per cent was from development assistance from foreign governments. The Government only committed about three per cent. 

Noting that there is risk of foreign influence, we pray that this Bill be referred back to the sponsor and a comprehensive regulatory impact assessment is undertaken so as to assess the risk of foreign and external influence and sustainability going forward, before we reconsider the Bill. 

We also noticed that there were misleading amendments to the Bill, for example, the title of the Bill has been amended from “National Biotechnology and Biosafety Bill” to “National Safety Bill.” This was done without redrafting and because of that, we think this was intended to do away with the word “biotechnology”, which was considered synonymous with genetically modified organs. 

We also noticed that there was intention to depict widened scope of the biotechnology, which was not actually done and because of that, we think this Bill would better be referred to the sponsor so that the people are adequately involved in developing it in line with the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda and provisions of the Cartagena Protocol on Biodiversity. 

Finally, Madam Speaker, our ground for dissent from the majority of the committee was that the committee argued that we should expeditiously approve this Bill and yet we know that there are so many loans that have been rushed like this and are not operationalised. 

Due to the fact that we want the best law for this country, we think this Bill should be referred to the sponsor so that there is a comprehensive involvement of the public, as required by the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda and the provisions of the Cartagena Protocol. 

For that reason, we pray that the minority report would be considered such that this Bill is referred back, reprinted and redrafted before Members can pronounce themselves. 

As I conclude, I would like to ask the Members of Parliament the following questions that were sent to me by a voter: 

    1. As a country, are we ready to lose our access, control and sharing of seeds; a practice we inherited from our forefathers in this process?
    2. Do we have the capacity to deal with all bio-threats and other threats that will arise from passing this Bill?
    3.  Do we have more benefits as a country arising from this Bill than the cost before we pass it? 
    4. Are we adequately prepared to operationalise this Bill? 

I have passed the questions to you, honourable members. As you pronounce yourselves on these issues, I would ask you to kindly consider those questions. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

I beg that the majority report is not adopted and the minority report is adopted so that this Bill is referred to the sponsor for the actions we prayed for. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, we have now received the minority report and it runs together with the main report. 

As we indicated yesterday, there are a number of areas that need to be studied so we shall not go to the debate stage for now. Read through both and then we can come back to the debate at a later stage.

However, I just wanted to know whether the Cartagena Protocol is part of our law. Was it domesticated in this country because everybody is talking about it? Anyway, you will tell us about it when you come back for the debate. 

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I thank the chairperson of the committee and the honourable member for the minority report. 

I would like to seek your procedural guidance because I heard the grounds the Member was raising. In the scientific community, there are two strong opinions on biotechnology; there are those who support and those strongly against it. I am inviting myself to believe that maybe the strong opposition group is not just using this opportunity of the minority report. 

Madam Speaker, when you look at Rule 194 of our Rules of Procedure about the minority reports, it says, “A Member dissenting from the opinion of a majority of a committee may state in writing the reasons for his or their dissent, and the statements of reasons shall be appended to the report of the committee.” 

My understanding of a minority report is that you are a Member of the committee and you discussed with the members throughout and by the time of forming an opinion by the committee, you disagreed with that opinion and stated yours. 

However, when I hear the grounds, the Member is just questioning the procedures and methodological approach like the Certificate of Financial Implication. Can that be a ground for a minority report? 

This is a Government Bill. Therefore, I am seeking guidance from the Speaker, as a Member of this House, whether grounds like the Certificate of Financial Implication expiring can be a ground envisaged in the rules to be raised. 

Madam Speaker, that is why I rose to seek your guidance and the House on what kind of ground a Member can raise to justify a minority report. I just seek that clarification on my mind.  

MR NAMBESHE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. We have been attentively listening to the submission of the minority report.

I vividly remember a principle justification that was used. It was the manipulation of genes in the manufacture of genetically modified organs and it justified a dissenting view from the minority. 

With that, Madam Speaker, is it in order for the minister to rubbish this minority report, when it has a lot of justification? 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think the minority report had nine grounds and the certificate is just one of them. Therefore, I would like to advise that you go and study both the main and the minority reports. When we come to debate, you can trash them but for now let us just accept all the grounds and we shall debate them. 

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON HIV/AIDS AND OTHER RELATED MATTERS ON THE STATE OF THE HIV/AIDS RESPONSE IN UGANDA

4.54
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON HIV/AIDS AND OTHER RELATED MATTERS (Ms Judith Alyek): Madam Speaker and honourable members - 

THE SPEAKER: Please give us the highlights. I think the report is on the iPads. 

MS ALYEK: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Under rule 172 (b) of our Rules of Procedure, the Committee on HIV/AIDS and Related Matters is, among others, mandated to scrutinise the HIV policies, monitor and evaluate strategies and activities of Government and local governments and other bodies aimed at the HIV/AIDS prevention, care, treatment and psycho-social support of infected and affected persons.

The committee is further required, under Rule 172(2), to report to Parliament at least twice a year. I have the honour, on behalf of the Committee on HIV/AIDS and Related Matters, to present to you the report on the state of HIV response in the country. This report is an outcome of the ninth joint annual review meeting that was held in August 2016 and other activities that the committee undertook, namely:

    i) Meetings with stakeholders, including the Minister of Health, Uganda AIDS Commission, UNASO and Reach out Mbuya Parish HIV/AIDS Initiative.
    ii) Participation in the Eighth National Pediatric and Adolescent HIV Conference. 
    iii) A stakeholder’s consultative meeting held in western Uganda in September 2015 and another one in Kalangala on 2 December 2016. 
    iv) The field trips that had been carried out to Elizabeth Glaser Project Activities in south western Uganda

I take this honour to mention the state of HIV in the country. HIV/AIDS has been a big global health concern for the last 30 years, with far reaching undesirable socio-economic consequences. The consequences have moreover been more pronounced in developing countries, especially Sub-Saharan Africa, with Uganda inclusive.

On a positive note, new prevention, treatment and care measures over the last 16 years have resulted into a global decline in infection and impact of the HIV scourge. The situation in Uganda and other East and Southern African countries on the other hand, has moved in the opposite direction of the global trend.

As a result, Sub-Saharan Africa accounts for over 50 per cent of the new infections and global HIV burden, with Uganda inclusive. The sub-region is estimated to have between 17 million to 20.5 million people living with HIV, a number more than half of the HIV burden of between 34 million to 39 million. The number of people that are HIV positive in this country are 1.5 million, who under the new UNAIDS guidelines require care, treatment and support.

As you may be aware, Uganda was able to bring down the rate of HIV prevalence from 18 per cent in the 1980s to six per cent in the late 1990s. This was a success story built on political will and the involvement of the communities, making Uganda a blueprint for the fight against HIV, not only in Africa but beyond. Moreover, this was at a time when prevention and treatment opportunities, including ARVs, were not readily available.

There has, therefore, been a turn in the wrong direction since 2011, with Uganda having the highest HIV burden within the East African Community, with an HIV prevalence of 7.3 percent compared to Kenya, which is 5.9 percent, Tanzania, 4.7 percent, Rwanda, 2.9 per cent and Burundi, 1.1 per cent.

Uganda is one of the only two countries that registered an increase in the number of new infections between 2005 and 2013. As already noted, we have a high HIV burden that stands at 7.3 percent prevalence, coupled with high infections in specific sub-populations and sub-regions of this country. In some sub-regions of the country, the HIV prevalence has almost doubled. The high prevalence omits better prevention and treatment opportunities and knowledge about HIV calls for re-thinking on the strategies against HIV so as to move in tandem with the global strategy to eliminate HIV by 2030.

As you look at the trend of the new infections, the high prevalence has moved from married couples, as the majority new infections are now more pronounced among the adolescents and young people, accounting for 66 percent of new infections. The most at risk population – this country is registering 83,000 new infections annually. This is largely occurring among the youth between 12 and 24 years, particularly the young girls.

The national HIV prevalence stands at 7.3 percent and 8.3 percent among women, and 6.1 percent among men. The prevalence among adolescents 16-19 is three percent among girls and 1.7 among boys, while for ages 20-24 years, prevalence is 7.1 percent for women and 2.8 percent for men. In absolute terms, the number of adolescents 15-24 years that are positive is big because they form the bigger part of the population. There has been a movement in HIV prevalence by region between 2005 and 2014 as follows:

    i) Central region moved from 8.5 percent to 10.6 percent currently.
    ii) Mid-northern moved from 8.2 percent to 8.3 percent
    iii) Mid-western moved from 6.8 percent to 8.2 percent currently.
    iv) South-Western moved from 5.9 percent to 8 percent.
    v) West Nile region moved from 2.3 to 4.9 percent
    vi) North-eastern region moved from 3.5 to 5.3 percent.

The reduction has only been realised in east-central, from 6.5 percent to 5.8 percent, and mid-eastern, from 5.3 percent to 4.1 percent. Amidst these worrying statistics, some successes have been registered. The annual enrolment on anti-retroviral therapy, which is ART, is currently more than the number of the new infections, in addition to a number of care and prevention interventions. The above has resulted into a change in some of the indicators between 2011 and 2015, including the reduction in the new infection from 162,000–83,000. Reduction in mother to child transmission has moved from 31,000-3,246 currently. This has been a very great achievement. Elimination of mother to child transmission was championed by the First Lady. There has been a success of about 85 per cent to that respect.

There has also been reduction in HIV/AIDS related deaths from 63,000 to 28,000, and an increase in persons under treatment, from 588,039 to 834,931. 

Madam Speaker, further successes are expected to be registered with the adoption of the new UNAIDS guidelines to test and treat everybody that turns out to be positive that was launched by the Minister of Health in November 2016.

As we look at the drivers of the HIV incidence in the country, these include: high-risk sexual behaviours characterised by high sexual debut, which stands at 12 years for girls, with 25 per cent of the girls getting pregnant before the age of 18; multiple sexual relationships; inconsistent and incorrect condom use and; transactional sex.

There is also low utilisation of comprehensive antenatal care and delivery services. Also noted was the high numbers of HIV positive patients not on antiretroviral therapy (ART), whose risk of transmission is very high.

There is sexual and gender-based violence, resulting from gender inequalities that affect the sexual decision-making of the young girls, thus exposing them to the risk of contracting HIV.

There is also alcohol consumption closely associated with sexual activities. 

Madam Speaker, I am trying to summarize this report. I will straight away go to the challenges in the prevention on page 18 of the report.  

There is continued stock-out of HIV test kits that tends to undermine the demand for HIV counselling and testing services and their benefits to HIV prevention, including linkage to care and HIV prevention when eligible patients are started on ART.

This is partly because of the high rate of rapid testing estimated at 60 percent, which affects quantification and rationalisation of the test requirements.

There is weak data management and tracking of the mobile clients on ART and limited coordination of efforts by the various partners at district and lower levels.

Madam Speaker, the number of organisations offering services to the most-at-risk population is still low partly due to the existing legalities and community intolerance coupled with low opportunities for funding.

Other challenges being experienced include inadequate or insufficient funds in the districts to plan for HIV activities. Some areas, such as islands in Kyoga and Kalangala were facing difficulties benefiting from HIV/AIDS activities due to transport costs associated with moving HIV counselling and testing and other services from one island to another.

Emerging diseases in some parts of the country like Hepatitis B has resulted into the population shifting focus away from HIV/AIDS to the emerging diseases. Some clients dropped in most districts due to lack of logistics since donors pulled out of training of healthcare workers and introduction of the “test and treat” policy.

There has also been lack of test kits and other logistics as I had already said. It was further noted that some logistics were not present at National Medical Stores yet National Medical Stores blames districts for not placing in right and timely orders.

Madam Speaker, support to the most-at-risk population desk at Ministry of Health, for coordination is very meagre. For example, the coordination desk has no vehicle making it difficult to supervise and support upcountry facilities.

Lack of consolidated condom programme data, particularly due to distribution from the various points, has remained a challenge for condom forecasting and quantification.

There has also been a complex procurement process that delayed critical delivery, as well as complex and slow process for disbursement of funds where some funds exist.

Madam Speaker, we also noticed constraining legal, cultural, social environment with resultant stigma and discrimination. I want to mention this because we also noticed some pupils in some primary schools being stigmatized by the teachers and the fellow pupils. 

Therefore, stigma in this country remains a very big challenge on HIV/AIDS fight. Therefore, our children are suffering, sometimes they are asked why they come late to school when they are on ARVs. The teacher can even say: “You are dozing in class because you are on ARVs.” So stigma is still a very big problem.

Madam Speaker, we have some of these recommendations as regards HIV prevention. We want to bring on board local communities in designing prevention strategies for specific communities and populations to address the peculiar characteristics that may be associated with the different communities and some populations.

We would like to scale up training on ordering of medicine by the responsible health staff to avert stock-out arising from inappropriate orders. In this one, we want to remove the blame-game between National Medical Stores and the health facilities.

There has also been strengthening of the Village Health Teams (VHTs) and the roll-out of the mother-to-mother peer groups to assist in ensuring that mothers are not lost along the follow-up process. We would like to roll out the electronic medical records across the whole health care system in the country.

Madam Speaker, when you look at care and treatment, HIV treatment is critical to ending the AIDS epidemic as it reduces HIV transmission. It is partly the basis for the 90-90-90 strategy currently. The ART or the antiretroviral therapy coverage is only 58 per cent. 

The 90-90-90 strategy means 90 per cent of our population should be able to know that they are HIV positive. Out of those tested HIV positive, 90 per cent should be put on antiretroviral therapy and out of those put on antiretroviral therapy, 90 per cent should have their viral load suppressed to the extent that the rate of transmission is greatly reduced in these categories of people. That is the meaning of the 90-90-90 strategy.

The target under care and treatment is to have a 70 per cent reduction in HIV/AIDS deaths and mobility and 90 per cent viral load suppression by the year 2020. Meaning, if the 90 per cent of those who are positive are already put on antiretroviral therapy, then they should have their viral load suppressed to the extent that they no longer transmit the infection.

Increase treatment access to 80 per cent of the HIV positive persons in Uganda. But now that we are talking about the 90-90-90 strategy by 2020 by UNAIDS, we are now focusing at 90 per cent.

Therefore, this will help Uganda to avert 2,160,000 new infections between 2015 and 2025, a 77 per cent reduction from the current trend. Then there is reduction of the new infections in children, from 14,200 to 4,040 between 2014 and 2025. If this is also done, Uganda will be able to avoid 570,000 deaths by the year 2025 and the lives of 42,000 children will be saved from the AIDS-related deaths by 2025. This is in line with the key actions to start the implementation of the UN General Assembly Political Declaration to end the AIDS epidemic by 2030, within the Sustainable Development Goals.

I am also happy to announce here that the Presidential Fast-Tracking Initiative was launched on the 6th of this month, involving key action points that include addressing the prevention strategies among the young people, elimination of mother-to-child transmission as well as having sustainable financing within this country.

Gaps noted during field tours

Madam Speaker, let me look at the gaps noted during the field tours, as I try to summarise. During the field tours by the committee, the following gaps were noted:

    i) There was lack of sharing of HIV/AIDS information between the different partners to help, among others, track mobile patients who relocate from one place to another. 
    ii) The non-trained traditional birth attendants were continuing to deliver mothers and as a result interfering with the elimination of mother-to-child transmission implementation among the pregnant mothers.
    iii) There was also diversion of HIV-positive patients from the healthcare system to treatment care from witchdoctors and some church sects that convince their flock to abandon treatment and rely entirely on prayers. Such patients get back to the healthcare system when they are already in critical condition and nothing much can be done for them.
    iv) Testing centres were facing challenges in bringing blood samples to Kampala for viral load testing. We have the machine for viral load testing at Butabika only. As a result, all these other districts have to come to the central point for the viral load testing.
    v) Religious institutions and leaders were carrying out a key role in the fight against HIV but were receiving insignificant funding from the Government. 
    vi) Madam Speaker, a number of health facilities were not equipped with youth-friendly services for HIV care and prevention. 
    vii) Some development partners were not sharing information with the district political leaders.

The committee recommends that:

    1. The roll-out of the electronic medical records across the country and integrating the national identification within the healthcare system should be implemented.
    2. Sensitisation should be continuous, especially for the traditional birth attendants and the village health teams should champion this with a focus of getting mothers referred to the health facilities.
    3. Roll-out of the family support groups and the peer mothers approach as an intervention to increase uptake of HIV services should be implemented.
    4. Madam Speaker, there should be establishment of youth-friendly corners in all health facilities in this country to help our youth seek HIV prevention, care and treatment.
    5. There should also be dissemination of interventions by partners at the local government levels as well as sharing of HIV information with the district leadership.

Madam Speaker, allow me to mention something about the HIV/AIDS Trust Fund. 

    1. There is overreliance on external donors to finance the HIV/AIDS national response, including at local government level, accounting for 89 percent of the funding. The contribution from partners has flattened amidst the need to scale up integrated HIV prevention and treatment to achieve the 90-90-90 strategy by 2010. 
    2. There is a shift by most of the key partners to fund the broader health system components away from the direct implementation of HIV activities, whose funding has been through off-budget support.
    3. Country donors such as PEPFAR, Irish Aid and DANIDA have refocused their funding portfolios following a number of global issues such as competing health and development demands across Africa and an ever-increasing burden on HIV/AIDS treatment. The Global Fund, on the other hand, is refocusing its funding towards health system strengthening, not HIV/AIDS. 
    4. Ministries, departments as well as agencies budget for HIV/AIDS activities under their entities but the provision is very small and casualty to budget cuts and realignments within MDAs.
    5. Districts and sub-counties depend on the central Government releases that are largely conditional, resulting into little monitoring and supervision of HIV interventions.

The Uganda AIDS Trust Fund

About the HIV/AIDS Trust Fund, regulations were recently laid on the Floor of Parliament by the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and I am happy to announce that the regulations have finally been approved. However, the committee is still sitting to scrutinise the regulations, and its results will still be laid on the Floor of Parliament. We want an increase in domestic financing, Madam Speaker, for HIV/AIDS activities.

Success stories

Lastly, I would like to share a small success story, Madam Speaker. The committee wishes to cite two examples of responses that give us hope that it is possible to achieve the 90-90-90 strategy by 2010 with the right interventions. This is specifically in regard to the achievement of Kalangala District and the “Reach Out” Mbuya Parish HIV/AIDS Initiative in the HIV/AIDS response.

Madam Speaker, Kalangala District is dominated by the most-at-risk population, which had a 36 percent HIV prevalence among its population, 35 percent among the pregnant mothers and 28 percent of the children born to HIV-positive mothers turning out to be positive in 2014.

The district has scaled up HIV intervention with the assistance of a number of partners and has in a period of 10 years been able to:

    i) Have 88 percent of the population tested and knowing their HIV status. (Applause) This is well above the national coverage of 56 percent.
    ii) Kalangala has been able to reduce the HIV prevalence by half from 36 percent in 2004 to 18 percent in 2015.
    iii) Kalangala initiated the “test and treat” strategy, ahead of the Ministry of Health policy to start the same.
    iv) They have also reduced the infection of children born to HIV-positive mothers from 28 percent to 2.5 percent as a result of the PMTCT programme, championed by the First Lady. (Applause)
    v) They have also been able to integrate a number of services in the HIV care and treatment, including TB, sexual and gender-based violence, reproductive health, nutrition assessment, care and support.
    vi) Kalangala has retained 72 percent of the HIV/AIDS clients, 89.3 percent of whom are on ART. This means they are now moving towards the 90-90-90 strategy.
    vii) Half of the male population is circumcised. (Applause) 
    viii) They have also achieved 87 percent of staffing levels in the healthcare system.

Reach Out Mbuya Parish HIV/AIDS Initiative

The initiative is a project started by Our Lady of Africa Catholic Church, Mbuya in 2004. It provides a holistic approach to care that includes medical, psychosocial, economic and spiritual support to people infected and affected by HIV. 

Of significance, Madam Speaker, the initiative has been a success story in the PMTCT programme. In 2005, 32 percent of the children born to HIV-positive mothers – under their care by then – turned out positive. This reduced to six percent in 2006, two percent in 2009 and zero percent in 2011. (Applause)

From 2011 to 2015, the initiative has continued to register zero per cent transmission from mother to child among the HIV positive mothers under their care. That is about six years without any child turning out to be positive.

Despite the challenges we are still facing in containing and eliminating HIV/AIDS in the country, we live in a time where we are fairly well equipped to deal with the pandemic. We have the wealthiest solutions like prevention, care, treatment and/or social support. With sustained financial, political and community commitment in achieving an AIDS free generation in line with 2030 Strategy is possible.

Madam Speaker, we need among other strategies, to transit to new and sustainable financing mechanism, which are provided for in the HIV/AIDS Prevention and Control Act, 2014. I wish to end by appealing to each of the Members to play their individual and collective roles towards an HIV/AIDS free generation. I beg to report, Madam Speaker. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable Chairperson of the Standing Committee on HIV/AIDS and your members. Honourable members, this is the first time we are having an opportunity to debate this issue of HIV/AIDS and, I think it requires time. Therefore, I would like to propose that we postpone the debate to next week so that we address it fully. There are many good and bad things and challenges that need to be addressed. 

Honourable members, yesterday I informed you about the issue of sexual violence against children. Today, I had amended the Order Paper to allow the motion to be brought to deal with the issue of exploitation of children. Let us do it quickly because at 6.00 p.m., I must be in Lugogo to officiate at the finals of the African Netball Championship. If we could use just 25 minutes - five minutes to present and the rest for the debate. Hon. Monica Amoding told me that item No.10 was not ready – okay, let us give them five minutes each.

MR GILBERT OLANYA: Madam Speaker, since both of them are ready, we can give each of them five minutes. They should summarise the main issues and the debate be limited. It is very important to listen to both of them. Thank you.

MS OSEGGE: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I believe the issue of children is very important. We do not need to give it a short time as proposed. We can give it much time as it requires and also to show that we consider children very important in this country. The fact that we have allowed it to come this far, let us give it time. Therefore, I would like to propose that we postpone the debate for a better date when we have ample time. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, there are three motions. One is on sexual violence against the girl child that hon. Nakate would like to move, the second is about the general protection of children and third is to move a Bill for an Act of Parliament. Therefore, we need to give them one day - we set a date for the motions to be moved together – the one to be presented by hon. Nakate and the other by hon. Atiku. Let us give a day for the children of Uganda so that we can debate it fully.

Honourable members, we have here one of the child victims that we had invited. I met them yesterday. We shall call you back. Please, stand up. She had come to hear the debate but we shall call her back when we shall have the formal debate on all those issues – (Interjections) - yes, she is one of the victims.

I do not know what to do with hon. Rose Mutonyi - the issue of the elections but we asked the minister to come. We may not do anything about 1 July 2017 because it is statutory. However, on how to manage it, we may have to wait for the minister. What can I do, hon. Mutonyi?  

MS MUTONYI: Madam Speaker, the information that we received here cannot stop us from passing this Bill because what if it comes in September or October and they are going to carry out elections? It will mean that the chairpersons will not be able to crossover or maybe remain where they are. It is a simple Bill. It does not take long yet the districts are going to be affected.

THE SPEAKER: I do not know whether the Chairperson, Committee on Public Service is here. Have they had time to handle the Bill?

MS MUTONYI: Madam Speaker, we discussed this morning that in the absence of the committees, since they have not been constituted - you also advised that we would move a motion to suspend Rule 118 of our Rules of Procedure, in order to allow the debate and passing of the Bill; it is just a small Bill.

THE SPEAKER: What I do not know is whether Members have the Bill.

MS MUTONYI: They have in their pigeon halls and it was uploaded in iPads. Last week, when I read, it was uploaded on the iPad.

MS ALUM: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Earlier we had the Minister of State for Local Government - it is also unfortunate that we do not have the Chairperson, Committee on Local Government yet the issues of the elections at the lower local governments are very important. I do not know whether we would be procedurally correct to go with this proposed motion without the committee and the Minister of Local Government being present.

Madam Speaker, I remember in the last Parliament, I was on this committee. We extensively debated the elections of the local lower governments. Even then, what came before Parliament this afternoon, about the elections in the new districts - we sat down with the responsible ministries – Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, Ministry of Local Government and the Ministry of Public Service to iron out these issues.

Therefore, I would like to propose that the line minister should first come and inform this Parliament about it. Also the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs should come and inform the House so that we can see how to help our sister - and I propose Tuesday – to move this motion. That is the procedural matter that I am concerned about.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I do not know whether we cannot propose a postponement of the interim elections? There is the problem of where do I go and where do I remain -

MS MUTONYI: Madam Speaker, I do not know whether we can pass a law retrospectively where after 1 July 2017, the chairman can be allowed to make a choice because that is when the districts will be coming into effect. 

THE SPEAKER: That is why I was proposing that can’t we have the House propose to the Electoral Commission to postpone their election for about a fortnight, so that we can deal with this situation? Yes, 1 July 2017 is important but it is not a magic date. The Chief Administrative Officer (CAO) and others will be there but maybe the political head may not be there. Honourable Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development – you can see the partners in democracy.

5.34
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati):  Madam Speaker, we do understand the urgency of this issue but at the same time we must do it properly because even if we passed a law today, it has to be assented to by the President. I think what you have suggested is more practical that as we wait to handle this matter properly, we can have administrative arrangements to stand in the gap. 

Therefore, we are going to go back and see what administrative arrangements can be put in place as we wait for the chairperson of this committee to debate this Bill properly like any other Bill. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Do you agree that we request the Electoral Commission not to conduct this election on 1 of July? 

MR TUSIIME: Madam Speaker, they will not conduct elections on 1 of July. The issue is about the districts coming into force by that date. 

THE SPEAKER: The districts can come into force but should the leadership be elected on 3 of July?
 
HON. MEMBERS: No.

THE SPEAKER: The boundaries have been determined by law. What has not been determined is who will stand in the new district and who will remain in the old one. Can’t that wait until we have -

MR WAMAKUYU: Madam Speaker, I read the roadmap this morning and realised that the Electoral Commission is talking about Monday, 3 July.

THE SPEAKER: To do what? 

MR WAMAKUYU: To elect the interim chairpersons for the new districts.

MR NAMBESHE: Madam Speaker, I concur with your guidance to halt the roadmap designed by the Electoral Commission to avoid challenges of retrospective legislation. This is because in the event that the political leaders in the original mother districts would want to exercise the options of either transferring services to the new district or remaining in the old, in the absence of the law, there will be a big challenge. Therefore, it is better to go with the guidance you have given. Let us give some time as the law is put in place to overcome the challenge of retrospective legislation.

MR RUHUNDA: Madam Speaker, already in the budget, the releases are going to be made for the new districts. If the new districts are not having leadership, it is going to be a problem.

THE SPEAKER: No, there is an accounting officer. Really, the district chairperson is not the accounting officer because there is a Chief Administrative Officer (CAO). I do not know whether in this list from Mr Keith Muhakanizi, the CAOs of the new districts have been appointed. Have they?

MR BAHATI: Yes, they have been appointed, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Therefore, there is an accounting officer in each of the new districts.
MR NAMBESHE: Madam Speaker, I happen to be neighbouring Namisindwa, one of the newly created districts - the accounting officer has already been transferred and posted. Even the staff under him have been shared with the original local government.

THE SPEAKER: Therefore, hon. David Bahati, what we are proposing is just a temporary halt to the political arrangement. I may want to go to the new district but I am not in position because the law is not there to allow me to move. Therefore, we are asking you to halt it for a fortnight; during which time, we will expeditiously handle this Bill so that people can choose where they would like to go. There is a problem and that is why hon. Rose Mutonyi brought this motion. 

MS MUTONYI: I haven’t got the assurance yet that the chairperson, for example, who wishes to cross over to the new district, will be allowed to do so after we start. Is he going to be allowed?

THE SPEAKER: I think that is what we are trying to do. We are trying to make it possible for them to move but not on 3 of July because we will not be ready. Can we halt that arrangement until a fortnight so that we can deal with this law? The CAO and the staff will be there. Are you not comfortable? 

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, we have seen the challenge too but we request you to give us the opportunity to look at how best we can address it administratively after consulting the Attorney-General so that it is done properly. We might not know whether all the districts are affected or we are going to be handling just a few districts. Tomorrow, we shall have an inter-ministerial meeting to handle this issue administratively as we wait for Parliament. 

THE SPEAKER: Can I ask you to invite hon. Rose Mutonyi to attend that meeting because she presented the motion on behalf of the people who are not sure where to go?

MR BAHATI: Okay, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: What time will it be?

MR BAHATI: It will be at 10.00 a.m. –(Interjections)– we will hold it at the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, honourable members, I would like to thank you for the work -

MR TUSIIME: My issue is on an earlier matter, which you referred to the Committee on Physical Infrastructure. It has come to my knowledge that the current Chairperson of the Committee on Physical Infrastructure was the Chairperson of the Contracts Committee at the Ministry of Works and Transport that gave SGS the contract. Therefore, in this particular matter, I am worried there could be conflict of interest. I would request you to guide us on how to go about it.

THE SPEAKER: I have asked my legal office to check on that issue. If it is true, obviously he will not be in a position to chair the committee. There is a vice chairperson and in our Rules of Procedure, it is also clear that if one has a conflict of interest, they declare it and step aside. Let us see what happens next.

MR NAMBESHE: Madam Speaker, even the minister herself was a member of the panel that awarded that contract. She was actually the chairperson of the panel that awarded the contract to SGS.

THE SPEAKER: Then she will be a witness. Okay, honourable members - what is happening to the Busia Member? (Laughter)

MR MACHO: Madam Speaker, I wish we could have a select committee because many of the people supposed to handle this case are interested partners. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: What are you saying?

MR MACHO: As per the information from colleagues, most of the people you have directed to handle this issue seem to have smoke where there is firewood. I suggest you direct the House to just set up a select committee to handle that matter. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, we shall come back and give our ruling next week. Thank you very much, honourable members. The House is adjourned to Tuesday next week at 2.00 p.m.

(The House rose at 5.43 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 4 July 2017 at 2.00 p.m.) 
