
THE REPUBLIC OF UGANDA

IN THE PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA

Official Report of The Proceedings of Parliament

FIFTH SESSION - 3RD SITTING - FIRST MEETING

________________________

Tuesday, 14 June 2005

Parliament met at 2.40 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I wish to welcome you back from the weekend and take this opportunity to thank you for attending to two constitutional programmes last week: the State of the Nation Address by His Excellency the President on Tuesday, and the presentation of the Budget on Wednesday. These were important programmes, which you attended, more so that in the last ten or so years these functions took place here this time. I am sure you appreciated the fact that His Excellency the President himself recognised our need for financial facilitation to expand the facilities of our place of work. 

This morning I received news that one of us, hon. Ambassador Akisoferi Ogola, is indisposed. I went to see him at KADIC hospital, Bukoto. He is making some progress and we should continue to pray for him. 

Now that we are starting a new Session, which will constitute many committees, we should programme the business to be transacted during this Session. The Business Committee will sit most probably on Thursday so that we can programme the business we are to transact during this Session. The Government has 79 Bills in addition to those, which were stood over. Therefore, Members of the Business Committee who will include the chairpersons that will be elected to head sessional committees will have to meet on Thursday. Details will be given.

You recall that on 1st September 2004 terrorists held a school in Beslan, Russia hostage and three days later killed 330 people including 170 children. What happened in a small town of Beslan in the Republic of North Ossetia Alania was a graphic demonstration of how lethal terrorists can be and how schools are vulnerable to terrorism. For us in Uganda the Beslan tragedy is a graphic reminder of the Kichwamba tragedy where students were burnt alive by ADF terrorists.

In that regard, there is a copy of an address and appeal by the Parliament of Northern Ossetia Alania that have been presented at the Russian Embassy in Kampala for your possible signature and solidarity in this matter. It is befitting that Ugandans, and we here in particular, show solidarity with the people of the Russian Federation by signing the Beslan Appeal and address of the Parliament of Northern Ossetia Alania. The remaining days for us to sign run from today, Tuesday 14th to 17th 2005 from 9.00 a.m. to 12.00 noon. Please, endeavour to go to the Russian Embassy tomorrow or Wednesday and do the needful. I thank you.

2.45
MR MAURICE KAGIMU (Bukomansimbi County, Bukomansimbi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am happy that the Prime Minister is around. Hunger is killing the people of my constituency. There has been drought for a long time; all the maize, matooke and beans have dried up. It is a very serious situation. I appeal to government to come to these people’s rescue. I do not know whether the Prime Minister has anything for us. 

THE SPEAKER: You have made a report about the problem in your area. Give them time to look into it and address it. You have given notice of the state of affairs in your constituency; leave it to them.

THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. There is a sector minister who has just left, but there is a Minister of State for Agriculture. I cannot handle all the problems of sector ministers. I do feel sorry for what he has said, but there is a sector minister. I have no hesitation in directing the sector minister to handle the case.

THE MINISTER OF STATE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY (Mrs Mary Mugyenyi): I thank you, Mr Speaker. I think this is an issue that should be handled by the Ministry in charge of Disaster Preparedness, and not Agriculture. 

THE SPEAKER: Okay, I give you time to sort it out. The problem has been reported. Please, look into it and provide a solution. 

MOTION THAT PARLIAMENT DO RESOLVE ITSELF INTO A COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY FOR CONSIDERATION AND APPROVAL OF VOTE ON ACCOUNT FOR THE FISCAL YEAR 2005/2006

2.49
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING (Mr Isaac Musumba): Mr Speaker, this is a resolution of Parliament to resolve itself into a Committee of Supply for consideration and approval of Vote-on-Account for the financial year 2005/2006. 

“WHEREAS clause (4) of Article 154 of the Constitution allows the President to authorise the issue of monies from the Consolidated Fund Account for the purpose of meeting expenditure necessary to carry on the services of government until the expiry of four months from the beginning of the financial year or the coming into operation of the Appropriation Act, which ever is earlier;

AND WHEREAS the Government Financial Year will end on the 30th June 2005, and it is the belief of the President that by that date this House will not have approved the estimates of revenue and expenditure of government for the financial year 2005/2006;

AND WHEREAS it is necessary that the President authorizes the issue of monies from the Consolidated Fund Account for the purpose of meeting expenditure necessary to carry on the services of the Government;

AND WHEREAS clause 5(a) of Article 154 of the Constitution provides that the authorization of the issue of funds from the Consolidated Fund Account for the purpose of clause 4 has to be approved by a resolution of Parliament;

NOW THEREFORE be it resolved that Parliament approves Vote-on-Account allocated to the various votes attached to this resolution.” I beg to move, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Chairperson of the Committee on Budget, any comment before we proceed?

2.51
THE CHAIRPERSON, BUDGET COMMITTEE (Ms Beatrice Kiraso): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I support the motion as moved by the minister. Definitely by the 30th of June Parliament will not have passed the Budget and government needs to continue operating. 

I have looked, together with the officers of the Budget Office, at the figures that have been presented on each vote, they are about a-third of the total vote as was presented to us by the Government last week. So, it is in conformity with the Constitution, Article 154, which allows the President to seek for a Vote-on-Account, and us to approve it.  

However, I want to mention that the 30th of June is a bit way off. We hope that when the Government gets this approval of Parliament they will not immediately start spending this money, which is supposed to be for the coming financial year. This happened last year because in about August there was a lot of pressure on Parliament to pass the Budget and when we said, “But we passed the Vote-on-Account the other month”, they said, “The money is already finished”. So I want to make that observation. Otherwise, this is something, which is a formality. It is ritual. I do not think it should even attract much debate. I beg to support.

THE SPEAKER:  Thank you very much.  

2.53
MR NANDALA MAFABI (Budadiri County West, Sironko):  Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I have two concerns. We got these documents recently and I know the 30th of June is still some two weeks away. I would plead with the House that we look at these documents further before we approve the content. It is in good faith, but let us try to look at the figures, which were presented in the Budget.

Secondly, I do not know if it is not agreed upon already, as I am saying and we want to pass it now. Do we need the quorum or we do not need quorum?

THE SPEAKER: Why do you jump the gun? We have not come to the stage of deciding on that. When we do we shall consider it, but the issue is that there is a motion for Vote-on-Account, which is intended to facilitate government to provide services until the Budget is passed. If we pass the Budget in one week’s time, the Vote-on-Account effect ceases to be there; then we use the Budget. What is the problem? When it comes to voting, then that will be another matter. Of course when we transact business we do take into account the need of having a quorum, if you want an answer to that.

2.55
MR KEN LUKYAMUZI (Lubaga Division South, Kampala): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The point articulated by the Chairperson of the Budget Committee is, in my view, very important. Before we pursue the matter to the successful conclusion, I assumed the Leader of Government Business would give us an assurance that the misdeed of last year where government demanded that we pass the Budget expeditiously when the Vote-on-Account money was assumed to have been running, should be cleared. So, I seek an assurance from the Leader of Government Business that they will not repeat that absurdity.

2.56
MR WAGONDA-MUGULI (Buikwe County North, Mukono): Mr Speaker, thank you very much. Mine is an observation, which is slightly different from what the Chairperson of the Budget Committee and the Chairperson of the Committee on Economy. It is to do with the technicalities that are required in effecting the starting of a financial year. There have been instances where it has taken unnecessarily long for the Ministry of Finance to appoint accounting officers, and this affects transactions. It even affects businesses, particularly suppliers.

At one time it even affected the business of this House because the Minister of Finance had taken very long in appointing an accounting officer. I just want assurance that the minister will cause the appointment of accounting officers to be done expeditiously. Thank you.

2.57
MR EMMANUEL DOMBO (Bunyole County, Tororo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Some time back the Minister of Local Government; and the President of Uganda when he was giving the State of the Nation Address, informed this House and the country that this Parliament is going to create some new districts. I have been looking through the schedule of this Parliament, we have not yet received the motion to that effect yet right now we want to pass Vote-on-Account, which will affect the Government programmes starting 1st July this year.  

I want to seek clarification from the Minister of Finance whether adequate preparations and provisions have been made for the proposed new districts, which the President promised. Is it reflected here? I do not know. Should we stay the approval of this one until the resolutions for the new districts have come? 

THE SPEAKER: No, I do not think this requires the minister to answer. It is very clear that the districts, which are being proposed, are not districts as of now. Certainly they could not be included on the list when they are not yet districts. It could be that the President promised or proposed that he is going to create districts, but these districts will be subject to the approval of this Parliament and since Parliament has not done that, it will be shocking to see these districts on this list when you have not approved them. (Laughter)

2.59
DR FRANK NABWISO (Kagoma County, Jinja): Mr Speaker, I rise up to bring it to the attention of the Minister of Works that there was a promise in Parliament that on 26th of May this year there would be a new company, H Young, which was hired to rehabilitate the Iganga-Bugiri road – (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: With due respect, what has the promise of doing things in this current financial year to do with Vote-on-Account?

DR NABWISO: Mr Speaker –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Dr Nabwiso Wilberforce, I think we have to be relevant when contributing to the issue before us. As of now we are dealing with a Vote-on-Account to run financial year 2005/2006 starting in July. What we can advise you to do is that when you start considering these policy matters, when they come to your committee, this is when you should raise it. I beg you.  

MAJ. BRIGHT RWAMIRAMA (Isingiro County North, Mbarara): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to clarify on the matter raised by my brother hon. Emmanuel Dombo. The proposed districts are going to be created from existing districts. Therefore, they have already been budgeted for from the districts where they will be created.  

MR AGGREY AWORI (Samia Bugwe County North, Busia): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am seeking guidance from the Leader of Government Business and the Ministry of Finance regarding the relief we got from our international indebtedness. We now do not have to pay the money that we were supposed to pay as debt servicing. Will it be given back to us and we put it in this Budget and it be reflected in this Budget, which we are going to approve today? If so, what will be the change in the figures of the budget?

MR JOHN BYABAGAMBI (Ibanda County South, Mbarara): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am still on the districts and when you look at Mbarara District, which is always the largest district and has been getting more money than others, I always see about Shs 5 billion for it for total wages. Should I take it that some of the money has been reserved for the new district to be created out of it or there is something else?  

MS KIRASO: Mr Speaker, I would like to give some information to my colleagues so maybe we can move on from Vote-on-Account. This document with us has got figures, which are about a-third of the total budget for each vote. Actually what would be more interesting for honourable members is to look at the details of the monies that the Government is putting aside for each Vote. This is just a fraction and that fraction is supposed to make that ministry or that sector run for approximately four months. We are likely to pass the Budget before the four months elapse so the districts or even the other programs, their money is already determined and can start running.  

With due respect, I do think that this thing should really attract a lot of debate.

MR JOHN ERESU (Kaberamaido County, Kaberamaido): Mr Speaker, it should also be noted by members that the amount allotted for each item in the Vote-on-Account constitutes a-third, as the chairperson of the committee has already stated. However, that amount of money is also part of the overall budget. In other words, if the budget is passed for a particular department, ministry or a particular Vote, this portion, which constitutes a-third, is that amount, which will constitute a part of the total budget passed when the main budget has been passed. 

So there should not be people saying that for example the case of Mbarara as indicated by hon. Byabagambi, it is only Shs 5 billion meant for salaries and wages, that Shs 5 billion is already part of the main allotment for the financial year when the Budget is finally passed.  

MR NATHAN BYANYIMA (Bukanga County, Mbarara): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to add to what hon. Byabagambi said. If you look in all the books before us, Mbarara has always been the biggest district, getting the biggest amount of money. But when you talk of Shs 5 billion that means that it is a-third of the total of Shs 20 billion. When you look at the rest of the districts, they are getting slightly higher than Mbarara. That is why we are thinking possibly that the money was reduced, preserving it for the district that will come out of Mbarara. I want people to take note of the figure for Mbarara. It is the biggest district and this figure has never appeared like this before. Thank you.

DR NABWISO: Mr Speaker, I would like to ask a question about this mass mobilization - that Vote; what is it for? As far as I am concerned, we have now gone into the politics of transition and multi-partism. If this is meant for the Movement Secretariat, should it continue to be there?

MR MUSUMBA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I thank the members for the comments and observations made to this motion. Hon. Lukyamuzi wanted an assurance that the Vote-on-Account would not be consumed before the four months. That assurance we can give. However, that is not the critical thing. The critical thing is that Vote-on-Account, if the Budget is passed tomorrow, tomorrow being the day after the effective date of the financial year, Vote-on-Account ceases to be and becomes part of the regular budget. And hon. Lukyamuzi, for the number of years we have shared in this Parliament I thought you would recall that that is actually the position.

As for hon. Wagonda Muguli, his point is on the technicalities that are involved under the law of appointment of accounting officers, which may delay execution. We will ensure that we expedite the appointment of accounting officers so that the Budget can move smoothly.

You have helped me to clarify to hon. Dombo on the proposed new districts, Mr Speaker. Indeed it would have socked everybody to see that the people provide for something that is not legally in existence. The law would not allow us to do that. 

Hon. Awori is asking about relief money. First, the communication for relief came just over the weekend. We are waiting for the formal communication and the terms under which that debt relief is being given. As soon as we do, we will give a statement to this House about where this country stands vis-à-vis the relief that we have heard about over the air.  

The summary about new or old is that until this Parliament has complied with the law and the Constitution on the procedure or process of establishing a district, we cannot provide for it. However, we have arrangements to ensure that and when this Parliament legally creates those districts, we will provide for them. The issue about mass mobilization –(Interruption)

MR MICAH LOLEM (Upe County, Nakapiripit): Mr Speaker, I have listened carefully to the minister. What hon. Byabagambi wanted is, what was the criteria of getting this money distributed to every district? And if Mbarara is not divided into these other new districts then how do you come to Shs 5 billion? You cannot compare Mbarara to Mbale. Can you become clearer? Mbale has Shs 13 billion, and Mbarara Shs 5 billion. What are you telling us, Mr minister? Can you become clearer? You are not serious. (Laughter)

MR MUSUMBA: We are obviously serious. That is why we have been able to bring figures before you upon which the members are pronouncing themselves. We are serious. I am saying that it has been explained by hon. Kiraso, who supported this motion that Vote-on-Account is a fraction of what that district or entity is entitled to under the Budget. So before we speculate whether one district should have got more than another district, because one district is bigger than another, we have to go back to the main Budget and the figures that we have provided for each Budget. Then we will apply the formula to be able to arrive at what we are appropriating today by way of Vote-on-Account. It is a simple process.  

On the issue of mass mobilization -(Interruption)

MR BYANYIMA: I am very sorry to take you back. We all know Mbarara is the biggest district. I think it is in order for the minister to consult his technical people, we normally get - we cannot get less than Ntungamo. Forget about the new districts; if you are talking of a budget for Mbarara district, that is not the figure. So, Mr minister, consult your technical people and get the right answers or else we take this paper to the Budget Committee for a day to go through it. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, what they are saying is comparing vote 536 for Mbale district, and vote 537 for Mbarara district. They are saying that it is not reasonable for a bigger district with a bigger population - bigger than Mbale to get more than Mbarara, which they say is the biggest district in Uganda that is their concern. 

CAPT. GUMA GUMISIRIZA (Ibanda County North, Mbarara): On page 3, where these districts are indicated - they actually start on page 2 - I want to draw your attention to Apac District, whose total recurrent estimates for 2005/2006 is Shs 18.4 billion. If I am reading properly and my eyes are not betraying me, Arua has Shs 20 billion and Bushenyi Shs 22 billion. On page 3, look at Kabale, which has Shs 14 billion, Kampala has Shs 17 billion, Kasese, Shs 16 billion, and so on. 

The point that our colleagues are rising, especially hon. Byanyima and hon. Byabagambi, is it because we come from Mbarara -(Interjections)- but that is also fine by the way because that is where I come from.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, you represent a constituency in Mbarara. You came here to take care of the interests of your people in Mbarara, so you do not have to apologize.

CAPT. GUMA: That is correct. The point I am making is that even if it were any other district in the country, I would still argue the same because this Parliament is not a district council; it is the Parliament of Uganda. So if it were any other district in the country that would be an unfair position and I would raise a similar argument. But more importantly of course I come from Mbarara, so I want hon. Isaac Musumba to justify the inequalities of these figures because there is no doubt about it, Mbarara district as we stand now is the biggest district in the country. If there are some discrepancies we can iron them out in the Budget Committee. There is no hurry after all we still have two weeks to start utilizing Vote-on-Account. Let us find out so that we can know that we are passing good and correct figures.  

MR JAMES MWANDHA (PWD Eastern Uganda): I think the minister is in some kind of difficulty. I am going to explain. It is not only Mbarara, even if you looked at Tororo and compared the size of Tororo to other districts and you see the amount of money allocated for Tororo as of now, you would immediately assume that there is some anticipation by Government in terms of financing Tororo District. 

For instance, the minister cannot tell this House that Mbarara, Tororo and Kamuli are going to get new districts, and because of this they have reserved money out of this initial provision. Those districts do not exist.  Therefore, it would be better for this Parliament to pronounce itself on the districts and then make provision for all of them including the ones Parliament should have created.  Otherwise we are discussing a statement which is not correct.  

You cannot say that Mbarara District as we know it will survive on the kind of money the Minister is proposing for the three months. It is not possible. Neither can you say the same for Tororo or those districts which will have other districts created out of them. Therefore, Mr Speaker, I think we are fortunate that we still have time to pass the Vote-on-Account. Let us consider the issue of creation of districts so that the Minister can come here with a statement which is correct and truthful; note the word “truthful statement”, then we can pass the Vote-on-Account taking into consideration all those –(Interruptions)

THE SPEAKER: Why do you assume that there is reluctance?  It is true, the President said so. How can you give money for a district that does not exist? However, there could be a mistake in these figures. That would be a different matter. 

MR MWANDHA: Mr Speaker, you are suggesting therefore that there is a mistake with Tororo, Mbarara and Kamuli.  In that case, we had better subject this statement to the committee so that it can look at it and come up with a statement which all of us can believe in.  Thank you.

MR MUSUMBA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I have heard the members and I thank them for their concern.  There is no mistake. The President, both in the Budget Speech and in the State of Nation Address, told the honourable members that Government would create a number of districts and that provisions would be made when the districts are created in the new financial year. 

As of now, the districts have not been created because there is no resolution of Parliament to that effect. We cannot name districts that have not been created and provide for them expressly. However, we are aware that Government made the commitment that districts will be created. Therefore, we cannot plan as if that statement was not made. Money -(Interruptions)- Sir, if I could be protected from hon. Byabagambe whom I listened to very attentively and I am giving an answer to. 

We have put some money under the Ministry of Local Government. If you look at their budget, it is unusually big. This money is being kept there and as soon as the districts are created, it will be distributed to them.  Therefore, Sir, we have taken careful note of all these observations. We are waiting for Parliament to give us the resolution and the money for the new districts will be there. Sir, if I may be allowed to continue -(Interruptions)

MR JOHN ALINTUMA (Bukoto County East, Masaka): Mr Speaker, as you may be aware, we are having very huge problems in Masaka concerning the pensioners who have been promised constantly that their money would be paid.  I need some clarification from the honourable minister as to whether the funds that will be kept under the Local Government will also cater for this issue. It is a very big problem. We are talking about over Shs 400 million and as you might have heard, the workers are almost going on strike. Could the honourable minister explain if this issue is also catered for. Thank you.

MS KIRASO: Honourable minister, for the comfort of our colleagues from Mbarara, could you talk about this Shs 5 million vis-à-vis the four months. If in the likelihood that we do not pass the creation of new districts within these four months, what will happen to the money we have given Mbarara to run the smaller Mbarara?

MR MUSUMBA: Mr Speaker, in the unlikely event that this House does not pass any district, we will by supplementary appropriate to that district the money to be able to do the services that we think they should be doing under the law. So it is not that we do not have the money, the money is there. It has just been kept until such a time when the Parliament regularizes the decision to create districts -(Interruptions)

MR MWANDHA: Mr Speaker, I see you are consulting our rules; I do not have mine. However, I do not know whether this Parliament will be in order to pass a resolution anticipating something to happen. I am very doubtful as to whether we are in order. I seek guidance from you, Sir, whether we would be in order to pass this resolution, anticipating that we shall pass another resolution to regularize what we are passing at this particular moment.

THE SPEAKER: What do you mean by “anticipating” in this particular case?

MR MWANDHA: What is happening, Sir, is that Mbarara as we know it today is getting money which cannot run it according to the provision of the Constitution for a month, and the Minister is telling us that he has put money aside because he knows that one day we are going to sub-divide Mbarara. That is the anticipation, Sir. I am wondering whether Parliament is in order to pass a motion to anticipate an action which the Minister hopes Parliament will pass at some future date.

THE SPEAKER: Well, I have already said do not anticipate.  The explanation I heard from the Minister was that they have given a lot of money to Local Government. This does not mean that we are anticipating what we see by these figures. 

The issue about the money which you have been given for Mbarara being inadequate is a different matter. If it is inadequate, then deal with it when you consider the budget. These are issues that you will be raising. But the money you have given Mbarara is inadequate taking into account its size. That is the conclusion we can make with this figure.

MR MWANDHA: Mr Speaker, the minister would never have mentioned the Ministry of Local Government. He did so to explain why Mbarara, Tororo and other districts, which are supposed to be sub-divided, are getting so little.

THE SPEAKER: Well, honourable members, you know that in the past we queried the big sums of money given to Ministry of Finance and we were told that the ministry has what they call a contingency fund. I do not know whether in this particular case the –(Interjection)- why don’t you listen to others? You are not supposed to talk when the Speaker is talking.  

The point here is that we have been told the Ministry of Finance, the parent ministry, has a lot of money. I do not know why they have been given a lot of money, but that is the point. You cannot say that is anticipation. 

MR MWANDHA: If we are to go by what you have stated, we would be speculating, and I do not think that we are in order to speculate or anticipate according to our rules.

MRS JANAT MUKWAYA (Mukono County South, Mukono): Mr Speaker, my honourable colleague is a senior legislator and a very good disciplinarian. He reminds other people when they violate the rules. However he sought guidance from the Speaker and he was guided but he is still challenging. Stand up with 50 Members as required by the rules to challenge the guidance given by the Speaker. Short of that – thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Well, the number is three, the challenge is lost.  Please let us be serious.  

MR MUSUMBA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Finally, I was responding the point raised by the hon. Nabwiso about mass mobilization. What does the law say as of today? Until such a time as when the process that takes us through the political transition is complete and the law has changed, it is our duty to provide for these heads as they appear in the Constitution. That is why we have provided for mass mobilization.  

MR ISSA KIKUNGWE (Kyadondo County South, Wakiso): Mr Speaker, mass mobilization is an item that is challenged in the Constitutional Court as we speak. Taking into consideration your ruling that we should not debate on matters in court, I am wondering whether it is proper to have this item passed. Thank you.

MR LUKYAMUZI: Mr Speaker, when the challenge on the Mass Mobilization Vote was raised by hon. Nabwiso, I expected the Minister of Finance to come out with information that would convince legislators on this particular point. I want to inform the minister that on budget day, the President of Uganda –(Interjection)- I am not interested in your information. The President of Uganda gave us a solution. He said he was going to lead -(Interruption)

MRS MARGARET ZZIWA (Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Is hon. Ken Lukyamuzi in order to assert that when the clarification on the status of the mass mobilization was put on this Floor no information was availed? It is on record in the Hansard that the National Political Commissar stood before this House and made a clarification quoting the fact that the Movement Act is still in place.  

THE SPEAKER: These are opinions. Honourable members, why don’t we solve this issue?  This is a Vote-on-Account to allow Government to provide services; and the other provision, which you must be aware of, is that once we go to the Committee of Supply we have to pass the Vote on Account in one day; this is Rule 119(7). Why don’t we deal with this so that when it comes to considering the budget itself we consider these issues?  Any further explanation?

MR MUSUMBA: Mr Speaker, no further explanation.

THE SPEAKER: Well, honourable members, the motion is that we become a Committee of Supply to consider Vote-on-Account.  That is the motion; I want to put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

3.35
COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY

VOTE ON ACCOUNT FOR RECURRENT EXPENDITURE FOR CENTRE VOTES, REFERRAL HOSPITALS, MISSIONS AND LOCAL GOVERNMENTS

THE CHAIRMAN: I propose that the total sum of Uganda Shs. 565,962,899,000 as vote on account for recurrent expenditure for central votes, referral hospitals, missions and local governments be provided for. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, I propose the question that the total sum of Uganda Shs 226, 586,764,000 as vote on account for development expenditure for central votes, referral hospitals, missions and local governments be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (PLANNING) (Mr Isaac Musumba): Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the House resumes and the Committee of Supply report thereto.

(Question put and agreed to.)

    A. REPORT FROM THE 
    B. COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (PLANNING) (Mr. Isaac Musumba): Mr Speaker, I beg to report that the committee of supply considered the vote on account for both recurrent and development expenditure for the financial year 2005/2006 and passed them without amendment. I beg to report sir.

    C. MOTION FOR ADOPTION 
    D. OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING (Mr Isaac Musumba): Mr Speaker, I move that the House adopt the report of the Committee of Supply.  I beg to move.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much.

CONSTITUTING SESSIONAL COMMITTEES OF PARLIAMENT 
FOR THE YEAR 2005/2006

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, as requested last week, all of you registered for sessional committees on which you want to serve during this current Session. But before we proceed; I want to say that most of the committees apart from one committee, one which has an excess of 7 Members, others are within the range.  But it’s for you to really constitute these committees. The Clerk will read various names and see how we proceed. But, the only problem I see is where we have excess. We could do it by ‘aye’ or ‘nay’ but then when it comes to a committee having over 25, I do not know, I think we shall have to vote over on each of the members. Is it clear?

HON. MEMBERS: Yes.

THE SPEAKER: Maybe, should I point out the committee, which has excess?

HON. MEMBERS: Yes.

THE SPEAKER: Before the names are read, the committee on Social Services has 25 which is the maximum, committee on Public Service/Local Government has an excess of 7 - it has 32.  Committee on Finance, Planning has got 24, so it is short of one to reach the maximum. Committee on Presidential and Foreign Affairs has 20, therefore, there are about 5 vacancies. Committee on Natural Resources has 25. Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs has 21, so there are four vacancies. Committee of Agriculture has got 25 - it has a maximum. Committee on Works, Housing and Communication has got 21, so there are 4 vacancies.  Committee on Defence, Internal Affairs has got 16 so there are about 9 vacancies. Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry has got 15, so there are 10 more people. So that is the position of our committees.

DR JOHNSON NKUUHE (Isingiro County, South, Mbarara): Mr Speaker, since when you are applying it is hard, you just write a letter. It is hard to know how many people have written. It might be better to –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Should I read the names of that –(Interruption)

DR NKUUHE: No, either that or people could actually volunteer to move from those committees that are over subscribed to those committees that are under subscribed.

THE SPEAKER: So, it means, the names of that committee with 32 should be read out; will the names be helpful?

MRS ZZIWA: Mr Speaker, I propose that those other committees, which do not have excesses, can be constituted and then see where there are excess members. Whether some members would volunteer to go on, if there are no volunteers then the options of the voting would come in. 

THE SPEAKER: Yes, definitely, but should we read the names of those 32 so that they can decide where to place themselves before we vote?

MR AUGUSTINE RUZINDANA (Ruhama County, Ntungamo): Yes, Mr Speaker, I think read the names and then where someone wants to move, they can indicate that they want to move.

COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC SERVICE AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT:

1.	Hon. Awongo Ahmed
2.	Hon. Ekanya Geofrey
3.	Hon. Ignatius Besisira
4.	Hon. Iga Anthony
5.	Hon. Balemezi Lydia 
6.	Hon. Tubbo Christine
7.	Hon. Dr. Alex Okot 
8.	Hon. Capt. Charles Byaruhanga 
9.	Hon. Dora Byamukama
10.	Hon. Wacha Ben
11.	Hon. Elly Kayanja
12.	Hon. Kikungwe Issa
13.	Hon. Byenkya Beatrice
14.	Hon. Kajeke Wilfred
15.	Hon. Dr. Steven Malinga
16.	Hon. N.G.G. Wambuzi
17.	Hon. Mbalibulha Christopher 
18.	Hon. Mwondha Patrick
19.	Hon. Mukasa Antony Harris
20.	Hon. Sylvester Wanjusi Wasieba
21.	Hon. Sinabulya Sylvia
22.	Hon. Matembe Miria
23.	Hon. Kagimu Kiwanuka
24.	Hon. Prof. Ogenga Latigo
25.	Hon. Alaso Asianut
26.	Hon. Omodi Okot
27.	Hon. Orech Martin
28.	Hon. Nancha Lorika 
29.	Hon. Ndaula Ali Sekyanzi 
30	Hon. Kule Mulanga Joseph
31.	Hon. Madada Sulaiman
32.	Hon. Kigyagi Alimpa John.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, you have heard the names –(Interjection)- no, no, no, we cannot do that. We cannot say the last one because it would have been the first. 

DR STEVEN MALLINGA (Butebo County, Pallisa): Hon. Speaker, I think when we read the list, we reach 25. Anybody below that number should be deleted.

THE SPEAKER: You see, Honourable Members we have to explain. According to our rules they say a Member should in writing indicate to the Clerk where he wants to be. The question of being the last one does not mean that this list was arranged in order in which you came. You might have been the first but then those who were listing put you the last one. So, we have to actually approve each name. We may not have a problem whether the number is 25 or less, but we have a problem with this one. (Interruption) 

MRS MARGARET BABA DIRI (PWD, Northern  Uganda): Mr Speaker, this issue of sessional committees; we have been using first come, first served. Let me give an example. I put Social Service, I have been there for Social Service and  I would love to be there. But when I tendered my application, they found that people were already more than 25 and I quietly moved to Finance. Why don’t we do the same and not waste time on voting.

THE SPEAKER: No, the reason is this. The rules say in writing you just communicate to the Clerk and he gets –(Interjection) The thing is that in arranging these names, he might not have arranged them according to first come, first served. So the fairness is going to vote on these names. Because otherwise we will be changing our rules and –(Interruption)

DR. MALLINGA: Mr Speaker, those names are not in alphabetical order. It is most likely that the Clerk put down the names as he received them. So, we should go up to 25 and then the rest fall out. 

MR WAGONDA-MUGULI: Mr Speaker, can I propose that we constitute those committees, which have no problem.  We constitute those which have 25 and then –(Interjection) Those which have problems, the lists are displayed and Members can volunteer to join those committees which are under subscribed -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: No, don’t you think it is better to deal with a committee with a problem and then after we are –(Interjection) Yes, so those people who see that they are not in that committee, will be able to go to other committees where there are vacancies. I think it is better that way.

MR WAGONDA-MUGULI: No, Mr Speaker, I think the problem that may arise is that we may not be in a position to make proper judgment as to who is most suitable. But I am sure even those Members who are not here at the moment could have an opportunity to reconsider as to which committee they would best serve. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, since this is in a bundle –(Interruption)

MS MARGARET ATENG (Lira): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to propose that in considering members for the Committee of Local Government, members who were there in the previous year should be given priority. Thank you. (Laughter)

MS KIRASO: Mr Speaker, I would like to support hon. Ateng for the simple reason that the sessional committees, are remaining with a very short time to the end of the session.  Their major work now, is to look at the policy statements. It is very important for people who have had the knowledge of how their sectors are performing and who already know the policies that are going on for continuity purposes to give us quality reports when it comes to reporting on the policy statements. 

THE SPEAKER: Well, that can be one of the consideration we take into account in making the selection. But then I think let us constitute the other committees while people think about what to do. This is the Committee on Social Services.

COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL SERVICES

Hon. Rainer Kafire

(Question put and agreed to.)

Hon. Edward Wesonga

(Question put and agreed to.)

Hon. Kyatuheire Jacqueline

(Question put and agreed to.)

Hon. Kubeketerya James

(Question put and agreed to.)

MAJ. RWAMIRAMA: Would it not be easier if they read all the names at ago and a question is put?

THE SPEAKER: No –(Interjections)- Okay, since it is 25.  

MR KIBIRIGE SEBUNYA: Is the implication that I am supposed to know all the names and their faces, Mr Speaker?

THE SPEAKER: Okay. Hon. Member, let the Clerk read all the names for that committee.

5.	Hon. Wananzofu Simon
6.	Hon. Basaliza Araali Henry
7.	Hon. Hyuha Dorothy
8.	Hon. Jane Alisemera
9.	Hon. Aanimu Angupale 
10.	Hon. Santa Okot
11.	Hon. Tibarimbasa Avitus
12.	Hon. Samuel Anyolo
13.	Hon. Dr. Lwanga Herbert
14.	Hon. Wandera Martin
15.	Hon. Asupasa Isiko Mpongo
16.	Hon. G.B Kibaale Wambi
17.	Hon. Dr. Richard Bulamu
18.	Hon. Yeri Ofwono Apollo
19.	Hon. Beatrice Rwakimari
20.	Hon. Sekitoleko Juliet
21.	Hon. Hood Katuramu
22.	Hon. Bwerere Kasole
23.	Hon. Twesigye Elioda
24.	Hon. Koluo Charles 
25.	Hon. Kasule Lumumba Justine

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much; that is the committee. 

MS KIRASO: I want to be very sure that hon. Rwakimari is leaving the Committee on Finance and going to another one.

COMMITTEE ON FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT:

1.	 Hon. Nsubuga William
2.	 Hon. Kalule Ssengo
3.	 Hon. Nansubuga Sarah
4.	 Capt. Guma Gumisiriza
5.	 Prof. Mwaka Victoria
6.	 Hon. Eriyo Jessica
7.	 Hon. Ruzindana Augustine
8.	 Hon. Kakooza James
9.	 Hon. Matte Rogers 
10.	Hon. Kamuntu Ephraim
11.	Hon. Rwamirama Bright
12.	Hon. Banyenzaki Henry
13.	Hon. Kaddunabbi Ibrahim
14.	Hon. Nandala Mafabi
15.	Hon. Tubwita Grace Bagaya
16.	Hon. Basajjabalaba Nassar
17.	Hon. Mwandha James
18.	Hon. Omach Fred
19.	Hon. Kiraso Beatrice
20.	Hon. Baba Diri Margaret
21.	Hon. Akwero Odwong Jane
22.	Hon. Sabiiti Jack
23.	Hon. Amajo Mary
24.	Hon. Ssentongo Teopista

THE SPEAKER: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: That is the committee.

COMMITTEE ON PRESIDENTIAL AND FOREIGN AFFAIRS:

1.	Hon. Tuma Ruth
2.	Hon. Kawoya Anifa
3.	Hon. Bintu Jalia
4.	Hon. Zziwa Margaret
5.	Hon. Sebalu Mike
6.	Hon. Wakikona David
7.	Hon. Kazoora Bashaija John
8.	Hon. Alituma Nsambu
9.	Hon. Masiko Winfred
10.	Hon. Mutuluuza Peter
11.	Hon. Amongi Betty
12.	Hon. Kithende Kalibogha
13.	Hon. Ogwel Loote
14.	Hon. Ogwal Cecelia
15.	Hon. Byamukama Nulu
16.	Hon. Sitenda Sebalu
17.	Hon. Ochieng Patrick
18.	Hon. Awori Aggrey
19.	Hon. Opange Louis
20.	Hon. Eresu John

MR PETER MUTULUUZA (Mawokota County North, Mpigi):	Mr Speaker, I beg to request that since the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs is not full, I move from Presidential and Foreign Affairs to Legal and Parliamentary Affairs. I beg to request.

THE SPEAKER: Then it means we have 19 members. He has withdrawn his name from this committee. I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: So, the 19 constitute the committee, minus hon. Mutuluuza.

COMMITTEE ON NATURAL RESOURCES:

1.	Hon. Kagaba Harriet 
2.	Hon. Mukasa Muruli 
3.	Hon. Apuun Patrick
4.	Hon. Kavuma Ruth
5.	Hon. Munyira Rose
6.	Hon. Wopuwa George William
7.	Capt. Matovu David
8.	Hon. Kyahurwenda Abwooli
9.	Hon. Mukula Richard 
10.	Hon. Ojok B’Leo
11.	Hon. Lule Mawiya Umar
12.	Hon. Dombo Emmanuel
13.	Hon. Lukyamuzi John Ken
14.	Hon. Kulany Gertrude
15.	Hon. Kiwalabye Musoke
16.	Hon. Nantume Eron
17.	Hon. Ndawula Kaweesi
18.	Hon. D’ujanga Giw Simon
19.	Hon. Bagalana Tom
20.	Hon. Bakaluba Mukasa
21.	Hon. Nsubuga Nsambu
22.	Hon. Rukundo Serapio
23.	Hon. Onek Hillary

THE SPEAKER: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR HILARY ONEK (Lamwo County, Kitgum): Mr Speaker, the names seem not to be complete because in the final list where we are 25, my name was number 25, I did not hear it read out on that list. 

THE SPEAKER: Your name is there. Okay, that is the Committee on Natural Resources.

COMMITTEE ON LEGAL AND PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS:

1.	Hon. Ndeezi Alex
2.	Hon. Oulanyah Jacob
3.	Hon. Kayongo Tom
4.	Hon. Mehangye Idah
5.	Hon. Kizige Moses
6.	Hon. Aachilla Rex
7.	Hon. Namayanja Rose
8.	Hon. Pataki Amasi
9.	Hon. Ahabwe Pereza
10.	Hon. Kinobe William
11.	Hon. Ssempangi Kefa
12.	Hon. Okurut Mary
13.	Hon. Mayombo Noble
14.	Hon. Lt Col Katirima 
15.	Hon. Lt Gen. Tinyefuza David
16.	Hon. Chebrot Steven
17.	Hon. Kiwanda Godfrey
18.	Hon. Lyomoki Sam
19.	Hon. Tiperu Nusura
20.	Hon. Mao Nobert
21.	Hon. Kidega Daniel
22.	Hon. Mutuluuza Peter

THE SPEAKER: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES:

1.	Hon. Malinga Johnson
2.	Hon. Kasamba Mathias
3.	Hon. Kakoko Sebagereka Victoria
4.	Hon. Mukama Francis
5.	Hon. Kiyingi Sarah
6.	Hon. Wadri Kassiano
7.	Hon. Odit John
8.	Hon. Wagonda Muguli
9.	Hon. Anang-Odur Tomson
10.	Hon. Alonga Othman Haruna
11.	Hon. Seninde Rosemary
12.	Hon. Isanga Lukia
13.	Hon. Epetait Francis
14.	Hon. Kasirivu Atwooki
15.	Hon. Esele Peter
16.	Hon. Wonekha Oliver
17.	Hon. Nabwiso Frank 
18.	Hon. Kapkwomu Ndiwa Kapkom
19.	Hon. Lochiam Miligan Rose
20.	Hon. Bikwasizehi Deusdedit
21.	Hon. Bwambale Loyce
22.	Hon. Sebuliba Mutumba Richard
23.	Hon. Wadri Kassiano
24.	Hon. Nuwagaba Herbert 
25.	Hon. Nkuuhe Johnson

MR LOKERIS APARITE (Pian County, Nakapiripit): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have been on the committee on Agriculture but I came yesterday and it seems - can I be No. 26 if possible?

THE SPEAKER: No, that is the maximum number we have. But it is okay, you are there as No. 26. 

26.	Hon. Lokeris Aparite

THE SPEAKER: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

COMMITTEE ON WORKS, HOUSING AND COMMUNICATION:

1.	Hon. Byayima Nathan
2.	Hon. Yekko Arapkissa
3.	Hon. Kiwagama William Wilberforce
4.	Hon. Ael Ark Lodou
5.	Hon. Mindra Joyo
6.	Hon. Lolem Micah
7.	Hon. Mukabeera Annette
8.	Hon. Mulengani Bernard
9.	Hon. Badda Fred
10.	Hon. Arumadri John Drazu
11.	Hon. Okupa Elijah
12.	Hon. Sebaggala Latif
13.	Hon. Amuriat Oboi Patrick
14.	Hon. Twarebireho Tungwako
15.	Hon. Katongole Badru
16.	Hon. Byabagambi John
17.	Hon. Lubowa Moses
18.	Hon. Akisoferi Ogola Michael
19.	Hon. Okulo Epak
20.	Hon. Gole Nicholas David
21.	Hon. Amooti Otada  

MRS BABA DIRI: Mr Speaker, my name has been read on the Finance Committee and I have discovered that hon. Mwandha James, representing Persons with Disabilities is also on Finance. Because of that I would also like to cross to the Committee on Works. Am I allowed?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Margaret Baba Diri is applying that although you had approved her on the other committee now she wants to transfer to this committee. I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: I now put the question to the list of names.

(Question put and agreed to.)

COMMITTEE ON DEFENSE AND INTERNAL AFFAIRS:

1.	Hon. Abura Pirir
2.	Hon. Aronda Nyakairima 
3.	Hon. Col Okello Francis
4.	Lt Gen. Tumwine Elly
5.	Hon. Omara Atubo
6.	Hon. Capt. Basaliza Steven
7.	Hon. Kabareebe Muzoora
8.	Hon. Nyanzi Vincent
9.	Hon. Onzima Alex
10.	Hon. Kabakumba Masiko
11.	Hon. Udongo Pacuto Betty
12.	Hon. Saidi Okuti Nassur
13.	Hon. Kayizzi Asanasio
14.	Hon. Etonu Benedict
15.	Hon. Imumet Isaiah 

MR AWORI: Mr Speaker, I have an observation. This Committee of Defense and Internal Affairs seems to have a number of senior army officers who perennially never show up so the committee generally, whenever I attend, it is always tottering on no quorum because of – can we draft some people and push them there -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: I think there are merits in the appeal, which hon. Aggrey Awori has presented to us. This committee deals with Defence as we know it, and it also deals with Internal Affairs. These are very sensitive ministries. Yes, senior officers are entitled to be on this committee but because of the nature of their work they may be here or they may not. Can I appeal to some hon. Members on the Committee of Public Service and Local Government - I am just appealing that you really join this committee.

CAPT. STEVEN BASALIZA (Baharya County, Kabarole): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I have heard that retired Capt. Byaruhanga is on the Local Government and Public Service Committee but because of his experience in Defence, I request that he crosses over and comes to Defence. 

MR BENEDICT ETONU (Amuria, Katakwi): I thank you, Sir. I would like to make some small correction. My name has been read out as “Bernard”. I have never been baptized Bernard yet I am Benedict. In fact if you want to remember the name easily, I am now the namesake of the Pope. (Laughter) 

THE SPEAKER: But I see here as Ben, Ben is short for Benedict. Any response from people on the list on Public Service? Yes, Capt. Byaruhanga?

CAPT. CHARLES BYARUHANGA (Kibale County, Kamwenge): The Members of the Committee on Local Government still had trust in me to serve as their chairperson and I think I am doing well on that committee.

MRS SALAAMU MUSUMBA (Bugabula County South, Kamuli): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to apply to sit on the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs. 

THE SPEAKER: Good. Thank you very much. That increases the members to 17. We still need more people. Okay, let us leave it now. Can you include hon. Salaamu Musumba? I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: So they are 17 members - (Interjections)- Oh, 16 members. Let us go on to Tourism, Trade and Industry.

COMMITTEE ON TOURISM, TRADE AND INDUSTRY:

1.	Hon. Steven Bamwanga
2.	Hon. Ntocyotugira Phillip
3.	Hon. Mugambe Joseph
4.	Hon. Zachary Olum
5.	Hon. Sauda Mugerwa
6.	Hon. Ateng Atim Margaret
7.	Hon. Ssekikubo Theodore
8.	Hon. Kawanga John
9.	Hon. Nyendwoha Mutiti
10.	Hon. Angiro Gutomoi Charles
11.	Rev. Kabushenga Mbabazi Hamlet
12.	Hon. Birimumaso Mulindwa
13.	Hon. Ruhindi Fred
14.	Hon. Mutebi Kityo
15.	Hon Byatike Matovu David

MRS ATENG: Mr Speaker, I would like my name to be corrected. I have never been Atim. I am Ateng Otim. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, corrected. Now I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: Next is Public Service and here we have to vote but how do we vote? I suggest that we give out ballots papers on which you will write the 25 names. Oh! Shall we use show of hands? Okay.   

COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC SERVICE AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT:

1. 	Hon. Awongo Ahmed.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, those in support put up your hands. Okay now we go to the second name.

2. 	Hon.  Ekanya Geoffrey.

THE SPEAKER: Well, there is a point of procedure but let us finish with hon. Ekanya -(Interjection)- No, the fact that a member is not here does not mean that you cannot vote for him. Hon. Ekanya? Okay, there is a point of procedure.

DR ATWOOKI KASIRIVU (Bugangaizi County, Kibaale): Mr Speaker, I wish that each member would get a sheet of paper and picks 25 names. Otherwise, how many times are we going to vote? And is each one of us going to have a paper and you tally the number of times we have voted?

THE SPEAKER: No, what we need are 25 members. You have to vote 25 times if you can  –(Interjection)- Yes, you are entitled to that.

MR WILLIAM NSUBUGA (Buvuma County, Mukono): Mr Speaker, I would like to agree with Dr Kasirivu. It will be very difficult to establish who has voted more than 25 times and who has not. And I am actually of the view that we get ballot papers and we each tick 25 names.

THE SPEAKER: Well, the proposal was that we get a sheet of paper where you will write 25 names. 

MR BASALIZA ARAALI (Fort Portal Municipality, Kabarole): Mr Speaker, I beg that we proceed.

THE SPEAKER: Okay.  Call another name.

MR WAGONDA MUGULI: Mr Speaker, we beg your indulgence that you appreciate the problems members have. That list has more than 25 names and it is difficult for me to remember all the names that are on that paper for me to be able to prioritize them and to know which first 25 I should vote for. I could find myself giving out all my votes for the first 25 people when the ones I should have given are at the end of the list.

THE SPEAKER: Okay. Are you confessing that you are going to get confused?

HON. MEMBERS: Yes.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, if you are going to be confused, let us have –(Interruptions)

DR MALLINGA: I suggest that everybody gets a copy of the list of the names and then we each tick off our favorite 25, tomorrow. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: So what we are going to do is to have authentic ballot papers. Otherwise, we cannot just distribute things here. We shall do it tomorrow in the afternoon when we resume business here.  

MR AWONGO: Mr Speaker, I wanted to know as to how many votes I got here. (Laughter)  

THE SPEAKER: You got 97 votes but because we have now agreed on how to do it, we are going to repeat the voting.

MR OMODI OKOT (Kole County, Apac): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to seek guidance here because I have interest in the Local Government Committee. I have been a member for long but tomorrow I will not be around. Shall I be protected?

THE SPEAKER: You will be protected.

MR IBRAHIM KADUNABBI (Butambala, County, Mpigi): Hon. Ndawula Ali Ssekyanzi had expressed interest to serve on the Finance Committee and he happened to be read on that committee. I propose that we accept him to serve on the Finance Committee because he told me –(Interruptions)

THE SPEAKER: have you got powers of attorney? I think that whenever he comes he can always tell us and then we change rather than saying, “I never instructed anybody to do that”. 

Honourable members, I thank for what you have been able to do today. We have not been able to complete the exercise but we shall do so tomorrow. But because I want to have a meeting of the Business Committee on Thursday, I suggest that at least those committees, which have been constituted, can sit and elect their leadership. Do you want to do that this afternoon? 

MR ABDU KATUNTU (Bugweri County, Iganga): Mr Speaker, I had not registered my name for any of the committees but I understand there are places still on the Presidential and Foreign Affairs Committee. Can I have my name on it?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Katuntu is applying that you allow him to join the Presidential and Foreign Affairs Committee. I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: I think you can go and sit in your committee rooms and set up your leadership. It is really up to you to do it but I see there are some members who are not here. 

With that we come to the end of today’s business –(Interruptions)

DR NKUUHE: Since every member must belong to a sessional committee, what will happen for those people who are rejected from –(Interruptions)

THE SPEAKER: We shall draft them to some other committees. With this we come to the end of today’s business. The House is adjourned until tomorrow at 2.00 p.m.

(The House rose at 4.17 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 15 June 2005 at 2.00 p.m.)
 
    

