

Tuesday, 19 June 2018

Parliament met at 2.08 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

ADMINISTRATION OF OATHS

The oaths were administered to Ms Betty Muzanira Bamukwatsa

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Bamukwatsa, I welcome you to the Tenth Parliament. Congratulations upon your election. On my right-hand side are Members of the NRM and they are all friends. On my left-hand side are Members of the Opposition and the Independents. In the middle, we have the Independents and Uganda Peoples Defence Forces (UPDF) representatives. With time, you will get to know them and work with them.

I would like to give you your instruments of office - the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, which will guide you on the laws and policies of this country, and the Rules of Procedure of Parliament. I would like you to study them well because they will help you in your work, both in the plenary and committees. The Leader of the Opposition will assign you to two committees, a standing committee and a sectoral committee. In the meantime, you are welcome to sit on the left-hand side. You are welcome. (Applause)

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this afternoon’s sitting. I would like to start by amending the Order Paper to allow hon. Nandala-Mafabi to make a personal statement. 

In the meantime, the Business Committee convened this morning and approved the Parliamentary Calendar, which will run as follows: The First Meeting of the Third Session commenced on the 6th of June and will end on 4 October 2018 and there will be a recess between the 5th of October and 7th of November. The Second Meeting will start from the 6th of November to 20th of December and the Third Meeting will start from 8 January 2019 to 31 May 2019. Prorogation will be on the 31 May 2019.

As I indicated at the State of the Nation Address, the meetings will be aligned to our responsibilities. The First Meeting will be for legislation, the Second Meeting will be for oversight and representation and the Third Meeting will be for budget. We hope that with these arrangements, we shall be able to conduct our business more efficiently than we have done in the past.

Honourable members, I am also giving notice that Uganda National Farmers Federation is organising the annual agricultural show in Jinja. It will take place between 14th and 15th of July 2018. Last year, I was the guest of honour and I undertook to encourage Members to go and attend the show, particularly the Committee on Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries, which should be visible. During the tradeshow, there will be a debate on fostering value chain innovation for farmer-led food security creation.

Thirdly, honourable members, tomorrow we shall have a special sitting where the head of state will be coming to address the nation on issues of security in the country. I invite you to attend and listen attentively.

I am also giving notice that we are going to have some rehabilitation of facilities within the Chamber. Therefore, after tomorrow, we shall have a short recess of about three weeks, so that you can go and talk to your people about the budget and State of the Nation Address and then you come back and advise us on their views regarding the budget.

In the gallery, we have hon. Mugisha Muntu Gregory, former president of the Forum for Democratic Change and former Member of the East Africa Legislative Assembly. Hon. Muntu, you are welcome. (Applause) We also have a huge delegation from Rukungiri represented by hon. Mugume Roland Kaginda, hon. Fred Tumuheirwe, hon. Mary Paula Turyahikayo and now hon. Betty Muzanira. You are welcome. (Applause)

There were a few matters of national importance. Can I invite hon. Grace Kesande Bataringaya.

3.20
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Ms Winfred Kiiza): Madam Speaker, I want to take this opportunity to officially welcome hon. Muzanira to Parliament and congratulate the people of Rukungiri for having exercised their democratic right to elect their Member of Parliament. 

I pray that the House cooperates with her and that the Office of Speaker gives her the necessary guidance like it did to us when we came. Our office will give hon. Muzanira the necessary mentorship and orientation she needs to ensure that she becomes a legislator for this country and represents her people very well.

We would like to thank and congratulate you, hon. Muzanira. You are welcome to the Parliament of Uganda. All Members present here are ready to work with you. We shall ensure that we do all we can to carry the flag of the nation high. You are most welcome.

Madam Speaker, the election in Rukungiri showed that we still have a long way to go in terms of democracy -

THE SPEAKER: Please, do not go there. Just welcome the Member.

MS WINFRED KIIZA: I will not go there, Madam Speaker. However, I want to say that hon. Muzanira is ready to work with everybody and I am sure that the Parliament of Uganda, like you have received her today, is ready to give her the necessary cooperation.

Madam Speaker, even if you do not want to hear about those issues, we shall discuss them at an appropriate time.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Member, do not abuse your privilege. Let me invite the NRM.

3.23
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, on behalf of the NRM side, I take this opportunity to congratulate hon. Betty Muzanira upon her election. (Applause) Your coming today is yet a testimony that our democracy is working –(Interjection)– We invite you to join us to work together to serve the people of Rukungiri. Once again, I congratulate you.

3.24
MS GRACE KESANDE (NRM, Woman Representative, Rubirizi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Since you have assured us that tomorrow the President is coming to address us on the same matter, I beg to reconsider my submission. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Let us have hon. Opolot

3.24
MR JACOB OPOLOT (Independent, Pallisa County, Pallisa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on an important and touchy issue regarding the financing of Social Assistance Grants for the Elderly (SAGE) in our country.

Madam Speaker, I want to quickly refer this House to the supplementary budget that this House approved in May this year, in which there was provision of Shs 15.38 billion as Government’s contribution to its counterpart funding, which is actually in arrears. The Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development brought that supplementary and told us that that money would be paid to the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development to offset our commitment in the counterpart funding. Unfortunately, as we speak, the money has never been released and our development partners are becoming uncomfortable with our Government because it has not lived to its commitment. 

We tried to contact the Ministry of Finance but there have been mixed responses. In one corner, they tell you they do not have money and in another, hon. Bahati will tell you, “Let us wait and see what will be there on 20th”. It is that mixed response that makes me raise this issue. I would like to seek the commitment of the Ministry of Finance because we are just a few days away from the close of the financial year.

The most important question I would like to ask is: What kind of face do we want to present as a country and Government? When we make a commitment to development partners to fulfil a certain obligation, we should be able to live up to that commitment. Even so, when you come to Parliament asking for Shs 15.38 billion as supplementary funding to offset the counterpart funding and Parliament approves, but later you withdraw it for your ministry and do otherwise, what kind of ministry is that?

Madam Speaker, this is not a strange thing. I remember I travelled with you to the UK and we visited the Department for International Development (DFID) head office and you heard what those people said about us, even mentioning names of individuals in the ministry and how they can no longer go by their word. They now want to see the money on the table before they can promise to proceed with us in, first of all, funding the current districts but also in any proposals for the national rollout.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I would like to say that I am very disturbed by what the Government is doing. I do not think Parliament should be treated as a casual place, where you go and chat, do lwaali and then you go. (Applause). This House sat, a lot of time was spent by the Members meeting agencies and we passed the supplementary. 

Therefore, I am directing the Government as follows: The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, by the end of this financial year, that is, June 30th, make sure that you have paid the following sums:

    1. Shs 15.3 billion, SAGE counterpart funding to the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development. (Applause)
    2. Shs 7 billion, partial compensation to Dr Muhammad Kasasa Buwuule - Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development. (Applause)
    3. Shs 6.05 billion, of which Shs 4.1 billion is for Gerald Isingoma’s land and Shs 1.95 billion to Masindi Hotel Limited; that is to the Uganda Land Commission. 
    4. Under Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives, Shs 3.97 billion, of which Shs 1.97 billion is to Lango Cooperative Union, Shs 1 billion to Busoga Cooperative Union and Shs 1 billion to Management Training and Advisory Centre (MTAC) as subvention.
    5. Shs 7 billion on arrears for food, Uganda Prisons Services.

The total is Shs 39.32 billion. We must pay it, so no joking. Did we pass the money for nodding disease as well? Was it part of the supplementary?

3.29
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, on the issue of nodding disease, the resources were released to the respective districts.	

THE SPEAKER: Minister of Finance, can you assure us? We want evidence when we commence that you have paid, and stop fooling around with Parliament. There was another issue. 

MS BINTU: I seek clarification, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: On what? (Laughter)

MS BINTU: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The clarification that I am seeking from you is on rolling out the SAGE programme. I was in Masindi last weekend and my people have never received this money for the elderly persons. If you remember, we passed it here and said this money, which we borrowed as counterpart funding, should be used to roll out to all the districts within the country. (Applause)

The clarification that I would like to seek is to know whether it will be rolled out to all the districts so that we stop this imbalance. Thank you very much. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: I think the Government should answer that and the issue of nodding disease.

3.31
MR SAMUEL ODONGA OTTO (FDC, Aruu County, Pader): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank your office specifically for standing beside the children with nodding disease and the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development for releasing the money. It is good to give credit where it is due. (Applause) 

As Members of Parliament from the affected areas, we received the monies as were appropriated by Parliament and directed by your office. However, the challenge we have is that they have directed all the districts that received the money last week to spend it before the end of this month. The guidelines state that they should spend the money on allowances and repairing vehicles, which leaves the victims the same way they were before this Parliament pronounced itself over this money. 

Madam Speaker, I request for two things: One, the timeframe for spending this money should not be hurried because in one week, the money will be misused at the district headquarters. Two, the guidelines could be changed so that this money can reach the victims and the Village Health Teams (VHTs) directly at the village level. I seek your indulgence, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: As the minister cogitates - Are you going to respond to that now? They would like to know about what hon. Odonga Otto has raised - the proposed expenditure on nodding disease for vehicles and allowances. I do not think that is why we passed the money.

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, that would be irregular because this Parliament passed the supplementary budget for nodding disease for a particular structure of expenditure and for items that we were supposed to spend the money on. 

As the finance ministry, we expect that those guidelines will be respected. Any accounting officer who diverts from what Parliament approved will be in trouble. If they have not spent the money, we can work with the Ministry of Health to reach out to those districts and see what can be done in the shortest possible time. 

THE SPEAKER: Any update on the rollout of SAGE?

MR BAHATI: The Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development is here. She can update the House on the progress.

3.34
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (GENDER AND CULTURE) (Ms Peace Mutuuzo): Madam Speaker, we presented before Parliament our desire to roll out to the rest of the country and you supported us. We presented that same report to the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development but we have not gotten an affirmative feedback. Therefore, we are waiting. 

We are still discussing with the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development because they had issues on getting the counterpart funding and on how best we shall roll out to the rest of the country. I am sure the Minister of Finance will come back here to give us the answers on the rollout. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, when we come back from the recess, we shall address that issue of the rollout.

MR ELIJAH OKUPA: Madam Speaker, you have told us that you are sending us for recess to explain the budget to our voters. What are we going to explain about SAGE? It is a very hot issue. (Applause). This is the time we are going to speak to them about SAGE. It will be the first thing to be asked about if every Member called a meeting. Therefore, we needed the answers yesterday.

THE SPEAKER: Tomorrow, after the President’s statement, the minister should explain what we are going to tell the country and when he is rolling out to the whole country.

3.36
MS ROSE KABAGYENYI (NRM, Woman Representative, Kisoro): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance. 

On Tuesday, 13 June 2018, the country received news of the arrest and detention of Gen. Kale Kayihura, the former Inspector General of Police (IGP). Madam Speaker, this has not been a normal occurrence in the country. Without dwelling on the merits of the case, I would like to raise pertinent issues pertaining to the anxiety of the people of Kisoro and the country at large. 

We are disturbed by the conflicting statements surrounding the circumstances of the arrest and detention of the former IGP. We are alarmed actually by the media speculation and possibly the information that the media is spreading to the country.

Madam Speaker, the right of personal liberty is a fundamental right guaranteed under Article 23 of the Constitution –(Interruption)

MR NZOGHU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The honourable member is raising an issue about the former IGP who was the custodian of law and order. Gen. Kayihura arrested and actually criminalised very many people, including the people of Kasese whom he arrested and he superintended over their killings.

Madam Speaker, the Commander-in-Chief, in his wisdom, has arrested Gen. Kayihura in connection with his dealings as far as criminality is concerned, and for the safety and security of our country. Therefore, Madam Speaker, is the honourable member in order to actually challenge the decision that the Commander-in-Chief has taken to ensure the security of this country and to make sure he also pays for his sins?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, what is your ultimate goal in what you are raising? 

MS KABAGYENYI: Madam Speaker, given the circumstances surrounding the arrest, - we are not demanding for much as the people of Kisoro - we just would like to know why he was arrested. Also, possibly, we would like Government to tell us - the constitutional right of 48 hours after which a person has to be produced in court -

MR MUGOYA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Some of us who have ably interfaced with security agencies in this country have a lot of information that can guide security agencies and probably circumvent the trend. 

I would like to inform this august House that there is a lot more about Kayihura’s saga. Why am I saying this? When I had just entered this House, I raised the issue of over centralisation of power in the hands of one man -

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, you are now going into –

MR MUGOYA: No, let me sum up. Is it procedurally right for the Member of Parliament from Kisoro to come and require us or Government to give an explanation when there are several crimes that were purportedly committed by the officer?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I believe the matter is under investigation. We have no value to add at this stage. Let us go to hon. Amoding. Leave that matter now. (Laughter)

3.42
MS MONICAH AMODING (NRM, Woman Representative, Kumi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to raise an issue of national importance regarding the flooding in Teso sub-region.

THE SPEAKER: Order, honourable members! Members are really excited today; I do not know why.

MS AMODING: Teso is a low lying area that is vulnerable to floods from the Elgon mountain ranges and Moroto hills. As we speak today, a number of installations, particularly people’s houses, the road network and the crops in the gardens, have been destroyed by the floods in key districts. 

In Kumi, which I represent, Madam Speaker, in three parishes - Akide, Aakum and Kapolin - people have lost crops in the gardens and they have cried out to Government already for support. As you will recall, as a region we suffered from a lot of hunger in the last financial year and these are part of the reasons that cause the hunger. In Katakwi, two subcounties - Toroma and Usuk - have been submerged and people’s crops have already been destroyed. In Ngora, a few parts have been destroyed; in Bukedea, a full subcounty; and Amuria is under siege because of invasion of water. 

Our cry now is that the Ministry of Relief, Disaster Preparedness and Refugees takes immediate action. If we leave this matter to continue like this, we are going to come back to this House crying of hunger again. 

I remember last week, the ministry in charge of Teso Affairs and the ministry in charge of disaster preparedness sent a team to Teso but this was just for an assessment. We know that these assessments and the actions we would like to be taken take a long time. Therefore, Madam Speaker, our prayer is that the minister and his team get down to the ground and address the needs of the people, particularly helping people harvest their crops as large quantities have already been destroyed. 

I will take the information from hon. Abala.

THE SPEAKER: No, it is not a debate. Please, sit down. (Laughter). Can the minister say something. 

3.46
THE MINISTER OF STATE, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (KARAMOJA AFFAIRS) (Mr Moses Kizige): Madam Speaker, as hon. Amoding has rightly pointed out, the Office of the Prime Minister is fully aware of what is happening in Teso. Last week, we sent a team which made an assessment. Even yesterday, my colleague, the Minister of State for Relief, Disaster Preparedness and Refugees, was in Teso. 

We are working with the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and development partners - the International Community of the Red Cross and the World Food Programme - to find some immediate solution. We just urge the members to be patient as we find the solution. I thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, before we go to item No. 4, I want to say that on Thursday when we had the budget reading, I had said that we are going to receive from the Government names of the accounting officers on 10 July 2018. However, I have been advised that date could be the day for elections at Local Council I, which is a nationwide exercise. So, we shall receive the names and work on them on 11 July 2018. I am just adjusting it by one day. Let us go to the next item.

PRESENTATION OF PAPERS

3.46
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, for the consideration of Parliament, I beg to lay on the Table a proposal by Government to borrow up to $84.73 million from the EXIM Bank of China to finance the National Science, Technology, Engineering and Innovation Skills Enhancement Project.

THE SPEAKER: It is sent to the Committee on National Economy for perusal and report back. 

MOTION THAT THE HOUSE RESOLVES ITSELF INTO A COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY TO CONSIDER SUPPLEMENTARY SCHEDULE NO.3 FOR FINANCIAL YEAR 2017/2018

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Are you moving the motion?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: No. You had amended the Order Paper.

THE SPEAKER: You will come up; don’t worry. 
 
MOTION THAT THE HOUSE RESOLVES ITSELF INTO A COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY TO CONSIDER THE SUPPLEMENTARY SCHEDULE NO. 3 FOR FINANCIAL YEAR 2017/2018

3.47
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the House resolves itself into a Committee of Supply to consider the Supplementary Schedule No.3 for the Financial Year 2017/2018. 

THE SPEAKER: Where is the report, honourable chairperson? 

MR MUGOYA: Madam Speaker – 

THE SPEAKER: But she has not said anything; under what rule are you proceeding?

MR MUGOYA: Madam Speaker, you have ruled on this matter and I am aware that under Article 156(3), after passing a supplementary request we are supposed to receive a Supplementary Appropriation Bill upon introduction. It is on record that the payment that was effected by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development under the second schedule of the supplementary request for Financial Year 2017/2018 was done selectively, which offends Article 21 in totality.

Therefore, since we are obliged to defend the Constitution, under Article 79(3) of our Constitution, won’t it be procedurally right, as you have rightly directed and guided this august House, for the ministry to extinguish its obligation in consonance and conformity with the directive you have given before we proceed to entertain the third schedule? In so doing, we shall be able to ascertain that it was an omission under the second schedule either not to pay or to pay others. This is the procedural matter I am raising for guidance.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, thank you very much. I would like to beg that this House should do the right thing always and at the right time. When you pass a budget, it must be executed. When you execute it, you come to Parliament to tell us about its performance.

Government came for a supplementary and Parliament approved. This meant that before you could get the second supplementary, you should have accounted for the first one. Today, we are hearing of Supplementary Schedule No. 3 and a colleague raised here that there are people whose payments were approved but they have not been paid. That signifies that Government does not have money to pay.

Now you are here for another supplementary yet you do not have money to pay the earlier supplementary. The earlier supplementary was a result of an emergency, which you never foresaw during the budgeting process, that must be dealt with now.

Therefore, Madam Speaker, is the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and the Government at large assuming that this august House does not understand anything? Must you bring anything at any time for approval even if they are not asleep? 

Madam Speaker, I would like to ask, through your office, that before we deal with this supplementary - For your information, we are left with only 11 days to the end of the financial year. I do not know how you are going to spend these billions in 11 days. By the way, the law also does not allow spending supplementaries after exhausting the three per cent. Before you spend any supplementary, you must get parliamentary approval.

How will Government spend money in the 11 days left yet they have not paid the earlier people? Why can’t we ask them to first account for the earlier actions? We can put this as a first call on our next budget other than using us for purposes of passing things anyhow. I beg to move, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I do appreciate what you are saying. However, we should also follow procedure. A motion has been moved, we have not heard the report. I do not know what the committee is going to say. I do not know whether they are going to say, “Yes” or “No” and you are interjecting even before we hear the report. Let us hear what the chairperson of the Committee on Budget has to say.

3.54
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON BUDGET (Mr Wamakuyu Mudini): Madam Speaker, this is the report of the Committee on Budget on supplementary expenditure Schedule No.3 for the Financial Year 2017/2018. I beg to lay the original copy on the Table. 

On 22 May 2018, the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development laid before Parliament a supplementary expenditure estimate Schedule No.3 for Financial Year 2018/2019 amounting to -(Interruption) 

THE SPEAKER: Which rule are you addressing?

MS BETTY AOL: Rule 17 –

THE SPEAKER: Wait.

MR WAMAKUYU: It was amounting to Shs 377,247,000,000 -

THE SPEAKER: Order, honourable members. Honourable members, please respect yourselves. Rule 17 is about meetings –(Laughter)

MR WAMAKUYU: The estimates were referred to the Committee on Budget for consideration and report back to the House. The committee considered the Supplementary Schedule No.3 and wishes to report to the august House the findings as follows:

Methodology

The committee scrutinised the supplementary schedule and held meetings with the Ministry of Defence and Veteran Affairs, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development. The meetings formed the basis for the observations and recommendations therein.

Legal framework for the Scrutiny of the Supplementary Expenditure

The supplementary estimates were laid in accordance with section 25 of the Public Finance Management (Amendment) Act, 2015 which states that:

1. 	The total supplementary expenditure that requires additional resources over and above what is approved by Parliament shall not exceed three per cent of the approved budget for the financial year, without approval of Parliament.

2. 	Where funds are expended under sub section (1), the supplementary estimates showing the sums spent shall be laid before Parliament within four months after the money was spent.

The committee notes that Parliament approved the total budget of Shs 28 trillion for the Financial Year 2017/2018 further approval was given a total supplementary expenditure of Shs 1,304 billion under schedules 1 and 2 of the Financial Year 2017/ 2018.

The Supplementary Expenditure Schedule No.3 is an additional request that requires prior parliamentary approval. The schedule is composed of the following items:

Vote 004 - Ministry of Defence and Veteran Affairs

This is requesting for Shs 369,900,061,465 to cater for a shortfall in meals, fuel for land forces, medical products owed to private hospitals, classified expenditure and fuel for air force.

Vote 012 - Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development requests for Shs 7,347,253,314 as a settlement of Government subsidy to National Housing and Construction Company Limited.

The committee was informed by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development that the source of funding was from domestic borrowing.

Justifications of expenditure by vote

(i) Recurrent Expenditure

Vote 004 - Ministry of Defence and Veteran Affairs.

The ministry requested for an additional funding of Shs 369,900,061,465 comprising of classified expenditure amounting to Shs 247 bi11ion, special meals totalling to Shs 60.9 bil1ion, fuel for both land forces and air force totalling to Shs 35.4 billion, clothing and medical expenses of Shs 26.6 billion.

Vote 012 - Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development.

The ministry requested for Shs 7.3 billion, which had been submitted along with schedule 2 but was not tabled before Parliament and subsequently, it was not considered during the processing of schedule 2.

The request arose from the sale of Buganda Road Flats under the National Housing and Construction Company Limited where Government wants to settle the payment as subsidy to the company. The committee, therefore, recommends that the Supplementary request No.3, for Financial Year 2Ol7/2018 be approved.

In conclusion, the committee recommends that Shs 377, 247,314,779 as required under schedule 3 be approved as supplementary expenditure for Financial Year 2Ol7/2018.

The breakdown is as follows: 

Recurrent 

Vote 004- Ministry of Defence and Veteran Affairs Shs 369,900,061,465

Development 

Vote 012 - Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development Shs 7,347,253,314. Madam Speaker, I beg to report.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable members. I received information that hon. Kivumbi has a minority report. 

4.02
MR MUHAMMAD MUWANGA KIVUMBI (DP, Butambala County, Butambala): Madam Speaker, the minority report is a question of the law and we had discussed within the committee and agreed on how the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should proceed so that we approve in accordance with the established law. 

The agreement was that, only if the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development does not come up with the motion for borrowing, which should proceed the processing of this supplementary, then we can go ahead and move a minority report which will be an objection.

Our first call to stick with what we discussed would be to ask the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to conform to the dictates of the law and come up with a motion for borrowing and if it is done, then there will be no essence for a minority report on this matter.

4.04
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, with your consent, I beg to move a motion under Rule 16 for the House to suspend Rule 175, functions of the Committee on National Economy in its application to the motion to authorise Government to increase domestic borrowing by Shs 377.2 billion to finance a supplementary budget for the Financial Year 2017/2018 to enable the whole House to examine this request expeditiously. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: It is seconded. Please, justify.

(Motion seconded.)

MS OGWAL: Madam Speaker, the mover of the minority report has raised the issue of the law. Wouldn’t it be a procedural matter for the minister to make a formal request so that the House can depend on it?

THE SPEAKER: He has done it. Please, take your seat. 

MS OGWAL: But they brought the supplementary before bringing in the source of funding. You can never ask for a supplementary unless you prove the source of funding. You should have had the request first.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Ogwal, take your seat. I have asked the minister to justify his request. 

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, “WHEREAS under Article 159 (1) and (2) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, the Government is authorised to borrow money from any source but such borrowing has to be authorised by or under an Act of Parliament;

AND AWARE THAT on the 3rd day of May 2018, Parliament approved a total supplementary expenditure of Shs 1.3 trillion under supplementary schedule 1 and schedule 2 for the Financial Year 2017/2018;

NOTING THAT the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development received a supplementary request from the Ministry of Defence and Veteran Affairs amounting to Shs 369.9 billion to cater for classified expenditure and other critical expenditure including food for our soldiers;

AWARE ALSO THAT the Ministry of Lands and Urban Development requested for additional Shs 7.356 billion to settle for Government subsidies to National Housing and Construction Company Limited for the sale of Buganda Road Flats;

CONVINCED that there is urgent need for the additional money to finance the above requests I, therefore, move that Parliament authorises Government to increase domestic borrowing by Shs 337.2 billion to finance the Supplementary Expenditure Schedule No.3 for the Financial Year 2017/2018 Budget to enable Government finance these critical needs of the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, especially classified expenditure that is needed right now and also the resources needed to feed our own soldiers.” I beg to move.

4.08
MR MUHAMMAD KIVUMBI MUWANGA (DP, Butambala County, Butambala): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity. Being that the matter beforehand is of a security nature and presently the country is in a dire situation, it is imperative that we equip the security apparatus of this country with every means possible to combat the murders that are going on. That is so critical at this juncture because Parliament must equip the Executive with every means that it requires to defeat the enemy that the country is facing that has taken lives, including that of a Member of Parliament. 

However, be as it may, care must be taken because we are increasingly expanding our domestic borrowing debt. Domestic borrowing has adverse effects on the general function of the economy. It should not be fashionable for imprudent financial public management to go forward, as a method of work, on how to finance the economy through domestic borrowing.

This financial year alone, net domestic borrowing will equal to Shs 14 trillion of which Government’s debt redemption will be nearly Shs 500 trillion. The Government does not even have a formula on how to settle this debt. The only thing they do is when the money matures they undertake redemption by borrowing from, for instance, hon. Muwanga Kivumbi to pay hon. Bahati. Meanwhile the interest rate is increasing daily.  Much as it is so critical, from what I said earlier, we are entering a dangerous path in the financial management of this country. 

Domestic borrowing has only one problem, unlike other loans that are borrowed with securities and bonds and it is that the conditions and terms, as laid down in the Public Finance Management Act, are not laid before Parliament. Going forward, we do not know how the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development will go on financing this domestic debt that they are borrowing day by day. 

That window had been opened – you presided over the making of the Public Finance Management Act – to allow Government not to be stuck in its operations in extreme circumstances. However, when you now look at what the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is adopting as a method of work, domestic borrowing, instead of being an exception to the rule, is becoming the rule; the way of doing public business.

Madam Speaker, going forward, we will also need to revise the law on the three per cent that does not require prior approval by Parliament. This is because what is happening is that they finance dubious things that are questionable using the three per cent and then later on come with a supplementary request for domestic borrowing for serious issues. That is why I recommend the approval of this motion with a heart of stone. It is only because it concerns the security of the country that I will do so. Otherwise, I would have objected it. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Any other comment?

4.12
MR SAMUEL ODONGA OTTO (FDC, Aruu County, Pader): Thank you, Madam Speaker. It would be very awkward for this Parliament if any news run that we failed to approve money for feeding soldiers. (Laughter) 

This request will pass but we are looking at future situations. You are talking of domestic borrowing of Shs 379 billion but the financial year is ending in 11 days. My understanding of domestic borrowing is that there are going to be advertisements in the newspapers for treasury bills asking Ugandans that we want to borrow this amount of money from you and this is a process. 

Therefore, we should be told. If this money is to be spent in 11 days, how long will the borrowing take? Has the process already started or have they already borrowed? This is a precedent and we need to know. We will allow you to borrow but you have to spend the money in 11 days. You have more than enough capacity to do that but is the money already borrowed or are you actually going to borrow? This question alone disposes the whole issue and I would even move that we put the question. Honourable minister, you should help me on that particular matter.

Secondly, as the minister contemplates to respond to my question, to my colleague, hon. Muwanga Kivumbi, it is healthier for a country to borrow from within itself than to borrow from outside. We have modern scenarios - you have seen in the situation of Ghana and Malaysia where they are losing certain key assets and ports to the Government of China because their debts are so high that even in 50 years, they cannot pay. Therefore China is saying, “We are taking over these ports, we shall operate them, recover our money and give them back to your grandchildren.” 

Therefore, I think it is a healthy culture to borrow from within. However, I would like to know from the minister whether you can borrow in three days and spend the money in the remaining seven days so that we just pass this motion and you go and spend the money for those classified expenditures, which you know yourselves. The whole of this Parliament may not know what the classified expenditure is all about. Thank you.

4.15
MR SILAS AOGON (Independent, Kumi Municipality, Kumi): Madam Speaker, on the day the President gave his speech at the Serena Hotel, I remember him observing that currently our debt is at around 38 per cent and therefore, we are in a safe zone because 50 per cent is the threshold. 

However, I have an observation to make. We are talking of Buy Uganda, Build Uganda (BUBU). We are trying to feed the private sector so that we can be self-sustaining. However, where do they get the money that they use in their business from? It is the very granary that we are running to. That is the biggest challenge that we are going to face as a country. 

Once Government starts to borrow internally, you are stifling private investment. When you do that, the players in the financial markets will opt for Government because they know that is a soft spot for them. They will just take all the money to Government and those who are suffering in Kumi will not be able to borrow. Who of us can go and borrow from EXIM Bank in China? There is nobody. 

That is the effect that we are going to have. I would advise that next time, honourable minister, let Government do what they can to borrow from sources abroad and leave this pocket for us the little ones who are trying to grow Uganda’s economy. Thank you.

4.16
MR NATHAN NANDALA-MAFABI (FDC, Budadiri County West, Sironko): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Under the Public Finance and Accountability Act, Cap 36, the minister is allowed to borrow to finance a budget deficit. That is subclause (2). Section 36(4) says that the value of Government bills, bonds and so forth must specify the terms of what you are going to borrow. The only exemption is (b) - management of monetary policy - which does not apply here. However, for the rest, they must be said here - the terms, where you are going to borrow it from, for what period and interest. Now, the minister is asking for Shs 377 billion, but he has not told us where he is going to get the money from and what we are going to pay as interest. It is very serious, Madam Speaker.

Recently, in the budget, we passed a budget of Shs 32 trillion and of that, Shs 10.5 trillion is to service debt and the Government of Uganda is going to collect Shs 15 trillion. That means the balance after collection and servicing the debt is Shs 12.5 trillion. Public administration is Shs 7 trillion. Before you have touched a road, you must even borrow for public administration. Now, how are you going to develop this country if you are living on debt every day?

Madam Speaker, I think we are missing the point. We should borrow but borrow for developmental purposes. You cannot borrow for classified expenditure yet we know that we need food for defence personnel; that is the first call on the budget as the police.

Madam Speaker, so far, if you approve this, our classified expenditure is going to be over Shs 1 trillion in this financial year. If you ask them what they spent it on, you will discover that much of this money was stolen, because we are not at war with another country. 

Madam Speaker, we should be realistic in this country. Corruption is finishing our country at a fast rate and we can deal with it. If defence wants to steal our money in form of food, we should tell them that you mean you are going to buy food of Shs 5 trillion?

Madam Speaker -(Interruption)

LT COL (RTD) RWAMIRAMA: Madam Speaker, the classified expenditure was audited by a constituted committee of Parliament and they reported to the Budget Committee. Is it in order for the honourable member to say that the money for defence is for stealing- (Interjection)- Yes, but that is what it is - classified expenditure.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, unless you substantiate what has been stolen, our committee attended to that proposal.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, during CHOGM, we passed Shs 80 billion to put cameras on Kampala Road under classified expenditure; where are they? They bought helicopters, which they said were good; where are they?

Madam Speaker, they are claiming it is food, but if we compute food, let me do computation of food. Assuming every soldier eats Shs 5,000 per day, that means in a month –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: One minute

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, I just want us to do a simple calculation. We want to assume it is food, which is classified. They eat Shs 5,000 per day, that means for 30 days, that is Shs 150,000 and for a year, it is Shs 1.8 million per soldier. Assuming there are 20,000 soldiers, that would be only Shs 36 billion for all the soldiers even those who are not on the frontline. Therefore, what is this food you are talking about of Shs 60 billion for soldiers? These people want to hide behind soldiers to steal money –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Nandala-Mafabi, let us hear from their representatives. There is information from hon. Byekwaso, who represents those people.

COL BYEKWASO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Hon. Nandala-Mafabi is speculating here by assuming the soldier feeds on Shs 5,000. We have scales. He is not a soldier; if he wants information, we have scales and we know how the soldiers feed. If he wants, he can come to us. Therefore, is he in order to proceed on wrong assumptions? He has assumed something that is not correct. Is he in order? 

THE SPEAKER: Now, hon. Nandala, avail to us the scales for feeding of the soldiers and if they do not fit within this budget, we shall agree with you. Tell us the scales.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, food is food. I am sure the budget of food they need is for soldiers on the frontline, whatever the case. The others are under their budget, be it for housing, salary - it is budgeted for. Now this has come as a result –(Interruption)

MAJ. GEN. PECOS KUTEESA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I happen to be in charge of the military establishment. I know the number for soldiers we have and I do not think hon. Nandala-Mafabi has any iota of knowledge on what we have and what we do. If he wants information, he should come and ask. He should not assume. The size of any army -(Interjection)- I am sorry to lecture you; I am not supposed to be a lecturer here. The size of the army of a nation depends on so many criteria apart from geographical location, the terrain and technology advancements. When you do not have technology, you use more human beings. At our level, we use more people than machines.

When we say we are advancing and modernizing, there must be changes. Technology goes with change and the cost is different. Therefore, hon. Nandala-Mafabi, for your information, we cannot let you mislead this nation by telling us how we should guard the society. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Can I ask the Minister of Defence to answer the question about the food. Hon. Nandala says he thinks Shs 5,000 is enough. Please clarify the issue so that we can move on.

4.25
THE MINISTER OF DEFENCE AND VETERAN AFFAIRS (Mr Adolf Mwesige): Madam Speaker, certainly, hon. Mafabi is not an authority at all in determining the quantity of food a soldier should eat. Like other people, soldiers also have within them categories of soldiers who are active, less active, and elderly. There are soldiers whose duties require them to be on the desk and others on the move all the time. Now, you cannot expect somebody who is on the move, climbing Mt Rwenzori every day, to eat the same amount of food like hon. Nandala-Mafabi who is seated in Parliament. 

Therefore, the scales are available. If the committee asks for them, we will avail them and I think he says they did. They were presented to the committee. If the House needs the scales, which we use to determine what a soldier should eat, I will bring them to the Table tomorrow.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, I want us to be realistic. I took an average and I did my multiplication and that is why I was saying it is Shs 36 billion and that is not the only item I was talking about- there are more items.

Madam Speaker, we must be realistic in this; I am happy that when I talked some people rose. Let me give a simple example. Every year, we distribute 10 million seedlings of coffee. That means, in ten years that is 100 million seedlings. If you had planted 100,000 seedlings of coffee, even this building would be having coffee trees. Therefore, Madam Speaker, they will only use the army – (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think let us move on this issue. As the minister comes, join me in welcoming the students and teachers of Bombo Army Secondary School. They are up here. They are represented by the Members of Uganda Peoples Defence Forces. (Interjections) - No, hon. Nandala-Mafabi, please leave the coffee seedlings. We are not discussing coffee here. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The conclusion I would like to make is that the issues of defence we are following – hon. Adolf Mwesige, you are happy because you are healthy. We are discussing issues of defence and you cannot come - because soldiers are hungry - therefore we should pass the budget immediately. Yes, they are hungry but what about the money we appropriated before? Why didn’t you feed them?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have a committee which has examined that supplementary. Take your seat.       

4.28
MS CECILIA OGWAL (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I associate myself with the comments made by hon. Muwanga Kivumbi. As leaders in this country, we are all very concerned about the welfare of the soldiers. I think Parliament has always helped the army – (Interruption)

MR KAHONDA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I understand hon. Cecilia Ogwal, is a member of the Budget Committee. Is she in order to start debating the issue that actually passed through their committee?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, today in the business committee we discussed this issue. If you are a member of the committee, leave the House to discuss your report. This is not fair. Don’t change rules here. (Laughter)

4.30
MR HENRY KIBALYA (NRM, Bugabula County South, Kamuli): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I just wish the Executive –(Interruption)

MS OGWAL: But I am supporting the minority report.

THE SPEAKER: Where did you sign?

MR KIBALYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. There is another ring the other side. I wish the Executive could take whatever comments we make in good faith. The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development has about five ministers and many technocrats. To be sincere, the ministers in charge of finance must have studied the economics that I also studied. I know very well, my colleague hon. David Bahati, knows the greatest effects as far as domestic borrowing is concerned and when it increases the way it is increasing. 

Whenever we make a budget, estimates are brought and then supplementaries are brought and moreover they come from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development; some of these things are foreseen. A situation like feeding soldiers or paying salaries for some of these people; these are things that the finance ministry would foresee and plan for accordingly. 

We are not hitting anybody; we are not criticising anything and we are not commenting on anything in bad faith but we are saying; hon. David Bahati and the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, we are not moving in the right direction. We are not on the right track.

If every day we have an issue like this and we have to come with a supplementary, we have to come for domestic borrowing when we know very well that tomorrow something else will come, more especially at a time like this; when there are only 10 days to end the financial year. We say we are now borrowing to make sure we finance this, how shall we move in the next financial year? 

I would like to request that hon. Bahati – maybe there is something that is not right in our ministry, which we need to streamline so that we plan better for the best of this country. Otherwise, if we continue moving like this, I am worried we are taking a wrong direction. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that question be put. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY

Vote 004: Ministry of Defence and Veteran Affairs 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that a sum of Shs 369,900,061,465 be provided for Vote 004, Ministry of Defence, as recurrent expenditure.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 012: Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that a sum of Shs 7,347,253,314 be provided for as supplementary development expenditure.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

4.34 
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING)(Mr David Bahati): Madam Chairperson, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of Supply reports thereto.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that the House do resume and the Committee of Supply do report thereto.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding.)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY

4.35 
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I beg to report that Committee of Supply has considered supplementary schedule No.3 of financial year 2017/2018 and approved it without amendments.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY

4.36 
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of Supply be adopted.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that the report of the Committee of Supply be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted.)

PERSONAL STATEMENT 

4.36
MR NATHAN NANDALA-MAFABI (FDC, Budadiri County West, Sironko): Madam Speaker, I would like to make this statement under rule 54 of our Rules of Procedure. This is a follow-up on the one made by hon. Vincent Woboya, the Member of Parliament for Budadiri County East, on 17 May 2018 on this Floor. 

According to our rules, personal statements do not attract debate or response but since my name was mentioned, I think it is my duty to state the facts. 

Madam Speaker, I had actually opted to let the responsible officers of police and Inspectorate of Government to handle the investigation. This is in respect to onion seedlings allocated to the members of Parliament from Bugisu region.

From the onset, I would like to state that the onion seeds we are talking about are worth more than Shs 150 million and this is a substantial amount. It is therefore, surprising for some people to wonder why I am raising this matter.

Hon. Vicent Woboya is the Secretary for Bugisu Parliamentary Caucus and the Chairperson of the Risk Reduction Forum at Parliament. Before joining Parliament, he worked with the Office of the Prime Minister. I have been in Parliament for some time –(Interjections)– yes, I have been here for some time; you can check the records and that is not questionable. I know how the organisations and offices of Government work. It would be foolhardy of me to come out and make baseless allegations. 

I would like to state as follows: One, that the youth in Bugisu region do not have land on which they can plant coffee, which is a perennial crop. They, however, can get land on which they can grow crops like onion and cabbages on a short-term basis and this can generate money. 

As a caucus, we agreed that we should find seeds for our youths in the horticulture field and we approached NAADS to provide these seeds. 

It is against this background that when the President met the MPs from the region in 2017, the caucus, in their memo, opted for support in the horticulture sector in addition to coffee seedlings that take a longer period. I would also like to clarify that the said seeds were not a presidential donation because if it had been, I would not have taken the offer. Presidential pledges and donations are budgeted for under the State House vote and not NAADS. 

My issue of contention and the basis of my request for an investigation against my honourable colleague is that he abused his office and allocated himself more than what he should have got. (Laughter) I am going to give the figures.

He went ahead and generated a list of the caucus and who the beneficiaries would be - (Interjections) - this is not personal attack. You wanted to get the information, so listen. You have just passed your budget here wrongly, so listen and if you are not interested, get out. (Laughter)

MR WAMAKUYU: Madam Speaker, I would like to remind my brother, hon. Nandala-Mafabi, that the issue was resolved by the caucus members of whom I am the chair. Unfortunately, you were not in that meeting, hon. Nandala-Mafabi. Therefore, is it procedurally right, Madam Speaker, for the honourable member to bring up issues, which were already resolved by members of the Bugisu Parliamentary Caucus and waste Parliament’s time?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I tried hard to convince hon. Nandala-Mafabi to abandon that issue because this is a problem within the caucus of Bugisu, which is now becoming a national issue. (Applause) You have reported to the IGG, you have asked for investigations, leave that matter where it is, please.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, I would like to thank my chairman. It was never resolved because if it had been resolved, nobody would have come to the House - I am following up on a statement, which was made against me by a colleague. If it had not been made on the Floor of Parliament, I would not have come here. That is why I opted to go to other offices to deal with it, that is, the IGG and Police. Since I have been mentioned and I am here and can speak, I am requesting to conclude it so that if -

THE SPEAKER: What do you expect the House to do for you in view of the fact that you are with the IGG on this issue?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I am going to make my prayers, Madam Speaker. The other Member prayed that I withdraw the investigation and I am saying no, I am not going to withdraw the investigation.

These are my prayers as I go ahead – Madam Speaker, we need tolerance - I know why my chairman raised a procedural point; it is because he is one of those who got more seedlings than the rest. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Nandala-Mafabi, are you really discussing seeds on the Floor of this House?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I would like to show that some of those who were beneficiaries were allocated seedlings in an unfair way. The secretary of the caucus –(Interruption) 

MR KIBALYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Hon. Nandala-Mafabi is my greatest friend and we all believe in our caucuses. 

With due respect, hon. Nandala-Mafabi, the chairperson of the caucus stood and requested that much as we listen to the whole story, you withdraw and end there so that the rest of the issues related to onions are resolved and handled internally. You are a senior member of this House and the caucus. Very many people emulate you. I would implore you to listen to the chair of the caucus and the Speaker and leave this matter here. (Applause)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, I would like to thank my brother for that advice but allow me to lay on the Table, this statement; it is on your iPads. I would like to lay on the Table, a document on how the allocations were done for record purposes. I would also like to lay the statement I wrote to you. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Nandala-Mafabi, I think we have understood the issue of the onions. Thank you very much. The rest, you will sort out in the caucus of the Bamasaba, please.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, I agree with your ruling. I have conceded on that, especially after being advised by my brother, hon. Kibalya. I would however, like to leave this document to the House for Members to read –(Interjections)– it’s not the one on onions. 

I would like to lay on the Table, for the Members of Parliament who were not around, a report of the Auditor-General on the special investigations on the allegations of financial impropriety in the Office of the Prime Minister –(Interruption)

MR MACHO: Madam Speaker, I think, we as the new Members of Parliament in the Tenth Parliament, should learn a lot from our seniors. I am sorry that hon. Nandala-Mafabi run away from the Floor but he is not being a good example of a leader from Bugisu.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the House is adjourned to tomorrow at 2.00 p.m.

(The House rose at 4.47 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 20 June 2018 at 2.00 p.m.) 

