
THE REPUBLIC OF UGANDA

IN THE PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA

Official Report of The Proceedings of Parliament

FIFTH SESSION - 4TH SITTING - FIRST MEETING

________________________

Wednesday, 15 June 2005

Parliament met at 2.36 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair)

The House was called to Order

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you. In the Strangers’ Gallery is a group of 30 young women and men from Forum for Women in Democracy who are being trained in leadership. They have come to observe the proceedings of Parliament. Please join me in welcoming them to Parliament. You are most welcome. (Applause)

Honourable members, one of our colleagues namely, hon. Sekikubo, is having a big function to which all of you are invited in Lwemiyaga. You might have received a card reading 18th but it has been changed to 19th. So I appeal to all of you to go and give support and welcome a colleague who will be joining our colleague, hon. Sekikubo.

Honourable members, yesterday we dealt with a number of sessional committees and we remained with one. Those we set up have already established the leadership of these particular committees, and I want to mention and congratulate those who have been elected to the leadership.

They are as follows: Legal and Parliamentary Affairs, hon. Jacob Oulanyah, Chairperson, and deputised by hon. Godfrey Perez Ahabwe; Works, Housing and Communication, hon. Nathan Byanyima, deputised by hon. Eng. John Byabagambi; Tourism, Trade and Industry, hon. Joseph Mugambe and deputised by hon. Margaret Ateng Otim; Finance, Planning and Economic Development, hon. Maj. Bright Rwamirama and deputised by hon. William Nsubuga; Natural Resources, hon. Umar Lule Mawiya and deputised by hon. Kiwalabye Musoke; Defence and Internal Affairs, hon. Amon Muzoora and deputised by hon. Steven Basaliza Mwesigye; Social Services, hon. Dorothy Hyuha and deputised by hon. Avitus Tibarimbasa; Foreign Affairs, hon. Margaret Zziwa and deputised by hon. Sam Loote; Agriculture, hon. John Odit and deputised by hon. Dr. Atwooki Kasirivu. 

We have the Public Service and Local Governments committee.  However, there are many members, 32 in all yet we need only 25. I appeal that when you select you will be accommodative so that we have a proper committee representing us.
 
2.42 
MR OMACH MANDIR (Jonam County, Nebbi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on an issue of national importance.  As I speak, there are 104 Jonam people who are suffering from cholera.  Three of them have died, we have 59 of them admitted in Pakwach Health Centre 4, 22 of them in Pacego Health Centre 2, 15 of them in Pukwero Health Centre 3 and eight of them in Pakiya Health Centre 3. This epidemic is affecting five parishes; Pakwach Town Council with two parishes, the parish of Pubungu and the parish of Pamor, which is the most heavily affected and where we have the Health Centre 4. Then we have the sub-county of Panyango where we have Pacego parish, Pukwero parish and Pakiya parish, which have also been affected.  

Mr Speaker, I have written to the minister responsible for health to seek his intervention. The district has tried its best to contain this situation. However, it has now run short of facilities and would like to be assisted by the ministry directly. We request for assistance in terms of drugs, fluids and gloves. 

Mr Speaker, we the Jonam people are a small tribe, only 100,000 people, although we are trying to work very hard to double the number. So when you have 104 of them at the verge of dying we become extremely shaken. This is an epidemic, which is very contagious. We would like the intervention of the ministry immediately. We would also like to appeal to the ministry responsible for disaster to come to our assistance, and to all NGOs that look after such activities. Meanwhile, I would like to thank the Ministry of Health for the intervention they have so far given us.  I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: On the same issue, okay.

2.45
DR STEPHEN MALLINGA (Butebo County, Pallisa): Mr Speaker, cholera is a disease which reflects that there is need for disposal of refuse, especially faeces. This is not the first time we are hearing that there is cholera in Jonam. (Laughter) The disease is now embedded in that society and the only way to get rid of it is by preaching cleanliness. People must have access to clean water, if not they, must boil their water. They must have latrines and the only way the Central Government can intervene is to go there and preach. 

IV’s save lives but drugs have a limited value. Therefore, the honourable member must go to his constituency of 104,000 people and preach cleanliness, tell them to dig latrines and tell them to boil water. That is how they will get rid of cholera in their area. Thank you very much. 

MR OMACH: Mr Speaker, I would like to thank hon. Dr. Malinga. The people of Jonam are aware of this. I would like to thank the Minister of Health who gave us five   echo–sanitary latrines -(Interjections)- yes, let me explain. Jonam is along the River Nile and the place is very sandy. You cannot dig pit latrines because the water table is very high. When you dig them they are very shallow and they get full within a very short time. The faeces get contaminated with the water table and they move to the River Nile. That is why we had a very high prevalence of bilharzia in the area.  

That is why the Ministry of Health gave us 5 echo-sanitary latrines for demonstration and we are looking for people who can help us to ensure that we get enough latrines to cover all these areas. This will enable us to deal with the issue of cholera and bilharzia. The Ministry has also given us drugs for the next five years. The people are aware of all this and cleanliness is being emphasized. 

However what I am talking about now is an emergency. 104 people are in the hospital and they need emergency treatment. I have noted what you have said and so has the minister and the Parliament. It would only be right that we get the assistance taking into account the sandy nature of the soil and therefore inability to dig pit latrines to the depth that can be sustained for a long time. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: I do not think we need further debate on this issue in view of the fact that the honourable member has already said the Ministry of Health has intervened and given some assistance. I think the bulk of his report is to inform you about the topography of the area and the fact that is not easy to have normal pit latrines. Therefore, assistance should be given to deal with this issue. Since the Minister is here, let him handle it.
 
2.50
THE MINISTER OF HEALTH (Maj. Gen Jim Muhwezi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank honourable Fred Omach for raising this issue, which we have been trying to handle together. I would also like to thank honourable Malinga because what he said is also correct especially in other parts other than Jonam, which has a particular problem. 

I am on record that when cholera was in Katanga, in Kampala, I tried to find out what was going wrong. The technical people told me that when cholera is being transmitted, to put it very crudely, it means that people are eating faeces. 

AN. HON. MEMBER: Raw actually. 

MAJ. GEN. MUHWEZI: Raw faeces; that is true. It is a very embarrassing problem. However, in the next health sector strategic plan which is going to start this year for another five years, we are concentrating on prevention more than anything else. This is because almost 90 percent of the diseases in our country are preventable. If we observed hygienic ways of living, mobilized our people to drink clean water, to wash their hands, to use latrines and so on we could cut our budget by half regarding health.  

However as regards Jonam, hon. Omach said the water table is very high. They have a particular problem which includes other areas along Lakes Victoria, Kyoga, Albert and Edward. However, we need money to build the special latrines which he mentioned. We have tried to do that but we need more money. We also need to teach the people because when these latrines fill, the water goes back into the Nile and consequently into the drinking water and that is the problem. If water is boiled and food covered, cholera can be reduced. We are trying our best to solve this problem.  Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, what clarification is there on this issue?

MR ALONGA OTHMAN: Thank you, Mr Speaker. We are very sorry for the loss of life in Jonam. We pass through Jonam and therefore when we hear of such cases we also get scared.  Passengers travelling from Yumbe and Arua often pass through Jonam and stop over at Pakwach. Food is sold in the open there. I wanted to know whether steps have been taken to stop people from operating such eating places so that people who are going through Pakwach are not affected. I wanted to get that clarification from the minister himself. Thank you.

DR MALLINGA: Honourable Speaker, we could go on discussing this. Until we are able to confront the basic problems in these areas, we are not going to achieve anything. We are just going to have cholera every year whenever there is a rainy season. That is what happened in Asian countries until they started immunizing people just before the rainy season.

Until people were taught hygiene, they must wash their hands before they handle food or they eat. They must have latrines. Sometimes they have to have cemented latrines so that from time to time a truck goes in and transports the faeces to another area. So, what we are discussing is basically what should be handled locally and the Government can have a certain degree of intervention, but the problem is at the lower level, that is where it should be – you go to some of these areas, there are no latrines. How do you expect cholera not to recur in these areas? The problem should be put to a halt, that is the use of LC I. Tell them to dig latrines. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: No, but how long are we going to discuss this issue? It is really a simple matter, I think let us follow the technical advice we received from the doctor and see what will happen.

MR STEVEN BAMWANGA (Ndorwa County West, Kabale): Mr Speaker, I am not rising on a matter of cholera and typhoid. I just returned from Kabale last weekend and you must have read in the papers about the tragedy of the bus that collided with a trailer on Kabale/Katuna road, 12 kilometers near my house. You remember in 2003, I rose on the floor of the House when more than 60 passengers were killed in a bus that was travelling from Kigali. What happened that time, the bus driver was actually driving on the right and he collided with a trailer, which was coming from Kabale that was driving on the left. 

I remember mentioning that the problem is not about the bad roads, but because when drivers are coming from Rwanda they are used to driving on the right; and when they arrive at Katuna border, they forget that they have left Rwanda. I feel that since Rwanda has applied to join the East African Community, there is need for the governments in the region to find a way of harmonising our road safety by laws so that they can be able to drive on the left hand side since some of them drive to Kenya and Tanzania.

Another case, Mr Speaker, was that the roads that come from Kabale to Katuna are a bit meandering and have very sharp corners. To minimise over-speeding by those drivers, it would be necessary to put some road humps at the blind spots. 

Since the time I raised that matter nothing has been done. But worse, Mr Speaker, is  that we have been talking about speed governors. When somebody is driving at 160 kilometers per hour and over taking a vehicle which is even smaller, you wonder where these policemen are. I was told that recently Makerere was carrying out a research; they put students in police uniforms and on everyday checkup, because they were stopping vehicles over-speeding and in dangerous mechanical conditions. Every student would go home with about Shs.50, 000 every day. By the time they called them back for the results, these students were not even willing to go back to the campus to study. So, why are the policemen on the roads? Only to stop you and you give them a handshake, “kitu kidogo” and they leave you go while people are dying on the road! (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: No, let us not expand this kind of – he has reported the matter on the accident and the causes right and left, I think since you have made that report, the appropriate committee will take it up with the minister and provide an answer so that we do not have a fully fledged debate over this particular report.

MR BAMWANGA:  Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

MR PATRICK APUUN (Bokora County, Moroto): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I have just been in my constituency and also we had gone through the whole of Karamoja right from the south to the north. When I came back to my constituency, I was in a meeting convened at Lotome, so many people handed me reports and in those reports, I found that some people have gone hungry and are being buried. So, there is a natural disaster in Karamoja. This famine has caused a lot of damage in our homesteads. People are dying as I am talking now. I would like a team to go and verify this allegation if at all is not true because I was there myself. And I would like a team of journalists to go there and find out what is happening in Lotome.

Mr Speaker, as I speak now, 600 people are not coming out of their homesteads. It is very, very disastrous, Mr Speaker, and I am calling upon Government to intervene. 

I have just been in consultation with hon. Aporu Okol - the minister - and I am happy that she is inviting me to be with her tomorrow so that Government can intervene very quickly. I am raising that matter so that we all know that when a disaster hits our country, we need to move in very quickly so that we can arrest the situation. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: That is a cover up. (Laughter)

MR AWORI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am seeking guidance from the Chair as the highest authority of the Parliamentary Commission on a matter of the use of Parliament Buildings for commercial use. Mr Speaker, I have seen a circular to the effect that a certain –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: What guidance now? If you wanted to raise that issue, you should have seen me before the sitting started. (Applause)

MR KEN LUKYAMUZI (Lubaga Division South, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am raising a matter of public concern following the news published in the government paper, namely the New Vision of yesterday, the 14th June 2005, Vol.20 No.140. It was revealed that 246 workers were laid off from the Uganda Revenue Authority. This statement comes at a time when Parliament had just intervened about the restructuring process which was being planned in the same institution. I have in my constituency, Lubaga South, about 25 people working with the Uganda Revenue Authority, and I got worried about their fate. So, I am standing here to know from the Minister of Finance whether those workers numbering 246 and that is a very big number, have received their benefits.

THE SPEAKER: I think we can take that as a notice that you intend to ask that question –(Laughter)- because if you have to get the details, definitely the minister did not come with these details to be able to give them to you. But then, the Minister of Finance; may have to within a day or two come back here and tell us the fate of these people.

Honourable members, I think I have told you many times that should you want to benefit from this procedure, you inform me so that I know the seriousness of the matter, then I allow you to proceed.  Otherwise, if you want to put a question, put a formal question, then it shall be answered.

ELECTION OF MEMBERS OF THE 
SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC SERVICE AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT

THE SPEAKER:  Honourable members, as you –(Interruption)

MR MICHAEL NYEKO OCULA (Kilaka County, Gulu):  Mr Speaker, when members were joining these committees, I was away performing national duties in Kilak and I missed.  I would actually wish to join the Committee of Defence and Internal Affairs, if that could be granted, I would appreciate.

THE SPEAKER: So, do we close committees before we come to elections? Hon. Ocula is applying to join the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs.  (Laughter) I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER:  Okay, you have become a member of that Committee.  

Now honourable members should there be any other member who was absent and wants to join those committees lacking members, then he can indicate it, but otherwise, we proceed to set up a committee on Public Service and Local Government. Yesterday, we had a list of 32 members but we want 25.  So, what is going to happen is that we are going to – (Interruption) 

MR BEN WACHA: I put my name there, but can I know whether there is other space so that I move.  I don’t want to waste your time.

THE SPEAKER: But my appeal to you, honourable members, if you have been a member of the old committee, I would definitely encourage you to stay in that committee, if you have been a member. 

MR WACHA:  Mr. Speaker, people applied out of time, I do not want this House to waste its time; just tell me where to go, I will move. 

THE SPEAKER:  I want you to be on Public Service and Local Government.

MR WACHA:  But they are going to vote, supposing they voted me out –(Laughter)

THE SPEAKER:  Let us chase it, please.  You see, honourable members, my personal advice on these committees, is that, it would be better if you can keep the members who have been there and let us give it a chance. 

Honourable members, I am distributing these ballot papers, so that we select, but take into account my appeal. So, they are calling you, you pick up your paper and then you tick 25.  You can make –(Interruption)

MRS DORA BYAMUKAMA:  Mr Speaker, I am one of those who belonged to the Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Committee at one time and we had a similar fiasco like the one about to happen.  Now, I am on Local Government and then, there is a bombardment. The most important thing at this point in time is; if your name does not make it even to a committee, it has dire political implications.  So, allow us who feel uncomfortable about this, to move to other committees.  I mean, there is Defence, there is Natural Resources and I think it is only fair that we do not waste Parliament’s time in voting and those who can move from that committee move, so that we have 25 and business goes on.  I thank you.

THE SPEAKER:  My appeal to you honourable members is that I think it would serve the interests of Parliament if the old members of the committees remained there.  That is my honest appeal and I trust that these Members of Parliament will exercise their best judgment and instead of abandoning, because now, you are telling me you are on Legal, you think you are being followed, I think that is not there. 

Now, the best we can do –(Interjections)- We are trying to solve a problem, give me time to do it.  You see, honourable members, I had no problem dealing with the other committees yesterday, because we had required numbers having registered for those committees. But what happened with this particular committee is that, there were seven other people who joined it during the listing. 

According to the person who listed this one, there are people who came after the 25 names had been registered and these were; hon. Omodi Okot, hon. Martin Orech, hon. Lorika Nacha, hon. Ali Ndawula Sekyanzi, hon. Kule Muranga Joseph, hon. Madada Sulaiman, hon. Kigyagyi Arimpa.  Maybe, can I ask whether these people – (Interruption) 
 
MRS JANAT MUKWAYA: Mr Speaker, yesterday there was a proposal that we just count one to 25 and I remember it was rejected, because you told us that the lists were not compiled as people were received.  The Clerk just received papers and compiled. That is already in the Hansard.

THE SPEAKER: No, honourable minister let me explain. I have since then got some explanation, which I want to share with you. This morning, the list had 26 members, the last one being hon. Omodi Okot and yet others continued to join today. I want us to settle this by suggesting that those who registered late should save us the trouble of voting by going to other committees.

DR MALLINGA: Mr Speaker, we have already set a trend; we have a system of voting and we voted for the other committees. It would be unusual for us to drop people at the end; let us continue with the wheels of democracy, which have already been set by voting until we exhaust the process.

THE SPEAKER: Don’t you see that some people feel they are being hunted wherever they go, so that they are excluded? Don’t you think we need to provide a solution to this?

MR ALEX OKOT:  Thank you, Mr Speaker.  In the previous session, I was in Foreign Affairs and later in Local Government. I am afraid because I do not see my name on the list I saw being passed around, and this is the one I am supposed to use for voting.  I feel something is happening and we should be given the freedom to move away before we are voted out. Mr Speaker, I beg you.

THE SPEAKER: My appeal to you when we started this meeting was that you should try to be accommodative. This is how I started and I still appeal to you to be accommodative. That is the only way we shall run the affairs of this Parliament under the system in which we are operating.  Otherwise, you are entitled to voting. I am only trying to find – (Interruption) – yes.

MS BEATRICE KIRASO: Mr Speaker, I want to propose that we read this letter, which was written by the Clerk to Parliament to all Back Bench members.  The Clerk said, “You are hereby reminded to deposit your written notice with the office of the Clerk indicating the Sessional Committee on which you would you to serve…” and it goes on and on.  “You are requested to do so before Friday 10th June.” Mr Speaker, you have just said that there are people who registered for that committee later than Friday 10th June, in this case, yesterday. If this letter is anything to go by, why should we waste our time to vote for people who just joined the committee yesterday morning, what is the whole purpose?

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS (Mrs Hope Mwesigye): Thank you, Mr Speaker.  Mr Speaker, I rise on a point of procedure.  Our rules are very clear; Rule 153 provides as follows:
“That each Sessional Committee shall consist of not less than 15 and not more than 25 members who have deposited with the Clerk a written notice indicating the Sessional Committee on which they wish to serve. 

What hon. Beatrice Kiraso has said from the letter of the Clerk would not override this Rule. This Rule does not set a time limit, so as long as a member indicates where they wish to serve and Mr Speaker, in promoting the principles of democracy, if a committee has more than 25 members the most prudent way to sort out the members is to take a vote.

MR HENRY BANYENZAKI:  Does it mean I can submit my application now to another committee or are we already time barred?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, it is true we came here to vote on those names but we are trying to find a solution of getting harmony on these committees. That is why we have said what we have said. Otherwise, we are going to vote on these names, but it seems nobody wants to let us vote on the names yet some people think they are being hunted wherever they go which is –(Interruption)

MR AVITUS TIBARIMBASA: Mr Speaker, there was a precedence in this House when we wanted to form the committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs. It was over subscribed to. I think there were about 33 people who registered and in this House you guided us by saying those who wanted to leave can save us –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: This is what I started with, so I was giving chance to those who want to leave but not to leave with – you can see the motive of leaving which is not good.  Anyway, honourable members, let us vote. Hon. Ben Wacha, you asked me which committee I want to put you, I am putting you on Public Service and Local Government; please bear with me.

MR BEN WACHA: I thank you, Mr Speaker for putting me in that Committee, I thought you were going to continue and say for that purpose, hon. Ben Wacha has been elected to that Committee. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, no, I am answering your call, you said which committee I want to put you, I would prefer you are there. Please give the ballot papers. Read out the names.

(The voting exercise was carried out.)
 
THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I imagine that everyone has been given the ballot paper and you have all voted. It might take some time before we get to know the results. I want to, therefore, appoint the following members to supervise the counting of these votes: hon. Hyuha Dorothy, hon. Odit John and hon. Nsubuga William. Supervise the counting of the votes then you will let us know the results. It might take about an hour and we may get the results tomorrow. I had better adjourn; we shall get to know the results tomorrow. However, Members of the Business Committee are reminded of a meeting tomorrow at 10.00 a.m. in the Training Suite.  

MR KALULE SSENGO: I was wondering, Sir, whether we can meet tomorrow because we have the NEC, meeting starting tomorrow.  

THE SPEAKER: Yes?

MR KALULE SSENGO: The NEC meeting is starting tomorrow and I am wondering whether we shall meet here as well.

THE SPEAKER: The meeting of NRM! At what time is it starting?

MRS MWESIGYE: Mr Speaker, tomorrow is registration, the meeting is on Friday.

THE SPEAKER: On Friday? So we can come here tomorrow. With this we come to the end of today’s business.  The House is adjourned until tomorrow at 2.00 p.m.

(The House rose at 4.00 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 16 June 2005 at 2.00 p.m.)

