Friday, 28 June 2013

Parliament met at 11.06 a.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this sitting. The business of the day requires that we sit today in the morning, to see if we could complete the urgent and pending business before us. That is why we are here this morning and we hope to make good use of the time we are here. 

In the public gallery this morning, we have pupils and teachers from Gayaza Public Primary School, Kasangati, Wakiso District, represented by woman MP, hon. Rose Mary Sseninde and Kyadondo East County MP, hon. Ssemuju Nganda. They have come to observe the proceedings. Please, join me in welcoming them. (Applause)

We also have in the public gallery, this afternoon, Raise the Roof International Group, a charitable organisation from the United States of America, working in conjunction with Gospel Messenger’s Church, Makindye. Their visit to this House has been coordinated by the Kalungu Member of Parliament, hon. Joseph Ssewungu. They have come to observe the proceedings of the House. Please, join me in welcoming them. (Applause)

This morning, we also have students and teachers of Muyenga High School, from Makindye East, Kampala District, represented by hon. John Ssimbwa and Woman MP for Kampala District, hon. Nagayi Ssempala. They have come to observe the proceedings. Please, join me in welcoming them. You are all very welcome. (Applause)

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE ANTI-MONEY LAUNDERING BILL, 2009

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, I wish to congratulate you very much for what you have been able to achieve in this Bill. I was not in the House, but I was following the proceedings from my office. So, I would not like Members to think that because I was not in the House, I am not aware of what was going on in the House. I am very much up to-date with what was happening. 

So, we will proceed on the basis of the clauses that were stood over. I think they remain stood over for now, until we are ready to handle them. 

11.10
Clause 22

THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Robert SSEBUNYA): Thank you, Mr Chairman. I thank you for having followed the Bill in your office. Clause 22, we have a headnote that reads, “General powers of the authority”. We intend to include more powers. At the end of (j) we have (k),(l)(m),(n),(o),(p). 

So we have (k) which reads, “Request for any information from accountable persons -”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Hon. Chairman, you need to tell us what you are proposing properly. That “I would wish to insert the following new sub clauses in Clause 22.”

MR SSEBUNYA: Okay, Mr Chairman. We intend to insert the following new sub clauses on Clause 22: (k), (l), (m), (n), (o), (p), (q).
“(k) Request for any information from accountable persons, supervisory agencies and law enforcement agencies in the enforcement of its functions in accordance with this Act. 

(l) Instruct any accountable persons to take such steps as may be appropriate in relation to enforcing compliance with this Act or to facilitate investigations anticipated by this Act.
 
m) In accordance with the provisions of this Act, enter the premises of any accountable persons during ordinary business hours to inspect for compliance with provisions of this Act.

(n) Make copies of records found in possession of any accountable persons.

(o) Send a report on the activities of any accountable person to a competent authority if the unit determines that there is an element of money laundering or terrorism financing.

(p) In accordance with the provisions of this Act, halt any activity in the event that a suspicious warning has been reported to the unit. 

(q) Require any accountable person to carry out a risk based assessment of his or her customers as may be prescribed by regulations under this Act.”

The justification is to widen the scope of the FIA powers as regards requesting for any information and with regard to enforcement of accountable persons to comply with the Act and to facilitate investigations. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, those are the amendments proposed from the committee. Any proposals on these amendments?

MR EBIL: I would like to make a minor alteration in (k). Instead of starting with the word, “Request”, we say “Obtain”. Then I think (j) should be the last “Do anything that is incidental to the exercise of any of its powers”. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: In other words, you are proposing that this amendment should be inserted immediately after (i)? 

MR OMACH: Mr Chairman, we agree with the proposals. However, under (i), instead of “unit”, we agreed yesterday, that it should be “authority.” And then under the new (p), instead of “unit” you also put “authority”.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, those are clear. The proposal from the committee has now been improved and is to insert immediately after (i), thoseprovisions:(j),(k),(l),(m),(n),(o),(p) just before. So, the existing (j) will become (q). Is that correct? So, I put the question to the amendment by the committee, as improved.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I put the question that Clause 22, as amended, stands part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 22, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 23

MR SSEBUNYA: I would like to insert a new clause after Clause 22 to cater for the independence of the Financial Intelligence Authority which shall be – 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Mr Chairman, it has to be captured properly. So, you are going to say, “Clause 23 – Independence of the FIU” so that the whole text is captured. 


MR KASULE SSEBUNYA: Okay. “Clause 23 – Independence of FIA” –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: FIU or FIA? It is “A” now.

MR KASULE SSEBUNYA: We had said it stays as an authority and not a unit. “(i) The Financial Intelligence Authority shall be independent in the performance of its functions and shall not be subjected to the direction, instruction or control of any person or authority;
(ii) Not withstanding sub-section (i), the minister may give the authority policy guidelines.” I beg to move. 
The justification is for the FIA to exercise independence in performing its functions.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I think that is clear, honourable members. I put the question to that amendment, on the insertion of a new Clause 23. I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 23, agreed to.

Clause 24

MR SSEBUNYA: Mr Chairman, I intend to redraft Clause 24 on functions of the Board. Amend Clause 24 (i) to read thus: “The Board shall:- 
(a) be the policy-making organ of the authority;
(b) give direction to the director in connection with the management, performance, operational policies and implementation of the policies of the authority;
(c) on the recommendation of the director, approve such organisation structures, terms and conditions of service;
(e) prescribe such administrative measures as may be required to safeguard all revenue of the authority;
(f) subject to sections 28, 30 and 31, appoint, remove and suspend the members of staff of the authority.” 

The justification is to align the current provisions in the Bill for the functions of the Board to reflect the normal functions of the Board as required by corporate governance principles. 

I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Okay, Members. I think that is a clear proposal. Can I put the question to that? 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 24, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 25

MR SSEBUNYA: On Clause 25, we intend to recompose it to read as follows: “The composition of the Board:
(1) The following shall be the members of the Financial Intelligence Authority Board:
    (a) A Chairperson who shall be a person who has -
    (i) served as a judge of the High Court or;
    (ii) practiced as a lawyer in Uganda for at least 10 years.

    (b) Two members of high repute of whom one shall be a person with substantive experience in the legal profession, and the other shall be a person with substantial experience in the financial services industry.
    (c) A member from the Police Intelligence Office.
    (d) The director who shall be an ex-officio member.
    (e) 
(2) The minister shall appoint the chairpersons and other members of the Board.

(3) The members of the Board shall hold office on terms and conditions specified in their instruments of appointment.

(4) The appointment of members of the Board by the minister shall be vetted by Parliament.

(5) In making the appointments in this section, the minister shall ensure a standard mechanism of appointment for purposes of maintaining institutional memory.”

The justification:

    1. The current Board composition in the Bill is made of persons representing government agencies. This may have negative effects for the independence of the Board.  

    2. The Board should be composed of non-technical staff who can exercise their independence without due influence of any sponsoring agency. The agencies shall nominate representatives to another body, the UAMLC, which is also provided for in this Act.

I beg to move.

MR KWEMARA: I thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I am of the view that the committee goes back and critically looks at Clause 25 for the following reasons:

    1. When the committee was making these proposals, it had in mind a Financial Intelligence Unit. But we have approved a Financial Intelligence Authority. There is a difference between a “unit” and an “authority” and the two are not commutative. For example, if you look at Clause 138, it is proposing a committee, the Anti-Money Laundering Committee. If we have an authority, that is going to have departments and it has a board. Why do we have a committee at the same time? That is duplication. If you look at the functions of that committee, it conflicts with the functions of the board. (Interjections) I think we are not yet there but I am of the view the committee should go back and come up with something that will really work for us.

    2. Another thing that I want to share with you is that where we have a Financial Intelligence Unit, in most cases, it is within the Ministry of Finance or may be, within Bank of Uganda but the essence is to give it autonomy; they give it a committee or an advisory committee. Take the example of Tanzania. There is a Financial Intelligence Unit but there is also a committee. In South Africa, there is a reporting centre, which also has a committee. 

In Kenya, there is also an intelligence centre, which also has a committee but for us, we have diverted from all those countries and have an authority. To me, I believe the authority does not need a committee and that is why I am saying that the committee can go back and streamline that, bearing in mind that the proposals they are making are for the authority not for the committee.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I would want to persuade the chairman of the committee that we retain what is in the Bill, as to members of the board, because what the Bill is doing, they are institutionalising the appointment but what you are seemingly doing, you are individualising it. So, the format in the Bill, like the chairperson of the board, a representative from Ministry of Finance, a representative from Bank of Uganda -  so, it is those institutions who can determine which representative can best help in the Financial Institutional Authority.

But when we start picking people – the minister shall appoint others, he may appoint me, I do not know anything about those things and then we shall start having problems. But the moment we leave these institutions to select an individual to go, it is more of an institutionalised operation.

So, I would really strongly persuade the chairman that we retain what is in the Bill as it is. And secondly, I would say that if they are maintaining what is in the Bill, Mr Chairman, in (i) a representative of President’s Office or Internal Security Organisation is ambiguous. We have to be clear what we need. If it is someone from Internal Affairs, if it is someone from ISO, it should be someone from ISO. I thought it should be clear there. I would actually want to propose that we have a representative from ISO, it will be clear, because if we leave it as a representative from President’s Office, we may have the “big brother” syndrome. Some people may fear. So, let us be specific and say, “a representative from ISO”, other than making it in brackets from President’s Office. 

Thank you.

MR SSEBUNYA: Honourable members, when we read the report yesterday, we said the composition of the board, as is in the Bill, because there are going to be two institutions: there is a board of the authority and the authority and its employees. So, we have said this board is not going to be a full-time board. It is going to be a part-time job, meeting four times in a year, given that we have also said we do not want ministries to second members to this unit because we want it independent and we have already passed the independence of the committee and now, the ones you are proposing here in the board are employees of Government. So, they cannot be independent. 
So, that is why we proposed in the committee that we make these people independent and away from the ministries.

In the task force, we are going to create, in the preceding clauses, that one shall be composed of Government bureaucrats and that is to help coordinate work within Government and shall be away and shall not be the one directing the authority. The authority shall be independent with independent board members as we have described in this chapter and also are not part of Government bureaucrats. And we said on page 8, that the current composition of the board in the Bill, includes representatives of supervisory and law enforcement agencies, among others; these agencies could be considered as peers in the intelligence authority.

Therefore, it implies that the intelligence authority is being governed by peers – the committee recommends for other categories of board members that are not considered to be at the same level with the authority, such that we give them independence - they are not employees of Government - and by the way, they are dealing with money laundering. So, once you just pick somebody from the Ministry of Finance to fight money laundering, I do not think you can - (Interjections) - at least the task force you are going to create later shall be the one – (Interruption) 

MR OPOLOT: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I want to concur with the committee in terms of revising the composition of the board. In the first place, I add to what he said as the justification. There should be enhancement on the independence of this board, by minimising members by active or serving technical staff who are bound to influence, especially where they happen to be perpetrators or participants in money laundering. 

Mr Chairman, we have experienced, in the very recent past, connivance between Ministry of Finance and OPM and some of these people who were involved, were key people in some of the committees in Government. Therefore, if by accident we have such people on this board, they might influence the decisions of the board.

Having said that, I also feel that by the fact that we are proposing a chairperson of the board, then we should also have a deputy or a vice in case of the absence of the chairperson. I think it would be necessary to provide for that. 

And the other issue is that when we talk of someone who has served as judge of the High Court or practiced as a lawyer in Uganda - I am sorry I would not want to ridicule the integrity of the legal fraternity, or the Judiciary but I would not really want to think that an issue of proven integrity should be excluded here.

Of recent, we have had bickering in the legal and Judiciary circles of lack of integrity amongst the people and, therefore, being a judge of the High Court is not enough and it is not a guarantee that we should have a credible person. I would, therefore, beg the chairperson to emphasise that proven integrity as a judge of a High Court and I would really wish to emphasise a judge of a High Court without the alternative of a practising lawyer.

Thank you, Mr Chairman. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Mr chairman, just on the point raised by the Member for Pallisa, in (1) and 2 (a) - in (1), “…served as a High Court Judge”, that means the person is 65 years old and above, because he would have retired as a judge; in (2), “practiced as a lawyer for ten years”, that means that person qualifies to be appointed a judge. [Hon. Members: “Much Younger”] Much younger? So, between 35 and 38 a person has already done 10 years as a lawyer. So, are they similar or you just want to say somebody “who has qualified to be appointed –“

MR SSEBUNYA: A judge of the High Court and then somebody who has done ten years – I think we can reach a compromise and say may be – I insist on one. You cannot be both –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No, the Leader of the Opposition was already -  

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I want to thank the committee. To begin with, when you say “The chairperson shall be someone who has served as a judge or a person who has been a practising lawyer”, to begin with, I concur with you, that we do not want civil servants to be part and parcel of the board, because Ministry of Finance has the responsibility of mobilising money and if they mobilise money, they can easily launder some of it. So, on that one, I agree with you. For Bank of Uganda, their job is monetary and fiscal policy management. Ministry of Internal Affairs deals with internal issues and they are also free to investigate if they want because their offices mandate them to do that. The same applies to the IGG and the Police.

Having said that, if you look at what the committee chairperson is proposing, it means that no other profession will ever be a chairperson. And that is dangerous because there are people who are good at even doing that. I can be a former CID director or an accountant somewhere and not a lawyer. So, by bringing only this, you are creating this job for only lawyers and that is very dangerous.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Are you saying it is dangerous? (Laughter)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, I know you are a lawyer but I would also benefit because I am one but I do not want to do that.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: “Restrictive” would be a better word than “dangerous”.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: So, the chairperson should be a person of high integrity. We agree on that. For the categories, they can be any. Then, when you come to No.2, which says that these people must be members of the Police intelligence force, it means you are again bringing the other people we have refused. There are members who have retired but worked in intelligence – I will give an example of people who have done forensic investigation in auditing; they are not police intelligence officers but have knowledge in investigations. So, we can say, “The other two members should be people who have experience in investigation.” That would be good enough.

The other issue I wanted to raise and which you have put here again is that, “A member shall hold terms as determined by the minister.” You are making a mistake because the moment you say that the terms will be as specified by the instrument, you are opening gaps. The minister can say, “I have appointed you but my terms for you will be this amount of money…” This is dangerous! As Parliament, we should prescribe what a board member should be – are they full-time or part-time?

For No.4, yes, they should be vetted by Parliament. That is a very good idea so that you have a check – once you are appointed, you come to Parliament and Parliament approves you. 

And even for this one, I would suggest that at an appropriate time, when we are going to make final amendments, the disappointment of Members is that the minister should be vetted by Parliament in public. Why am I saying this? These are people who are going to scrutinise other members of the public. So, the public must be sure that those who question their transactions are members of high integrity.

MS KABAKUMBA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. My first point has been covered – I think we have to limit the term for this board and I would like to propose five years but eligible for reappointment for only one more term.

My other concern is on 1(c); we are dropping 25, which is in the Bill because we do not want to include Government officials. (c) says, “…a member from the Police intelligence office.” First of all, I have not heard of the “police intelligence office” - you will excuse my ignorance. I have heard of CIID, special investigations unit but I have not heard of this one; I do not know where it is based. But even then, if it exists, since you say they should be independent, I do not think that (c) should be left here. I would rather that we substitute it with a deputy chairperson. But when you count, these are only four members: the chairperson, two other members and the one on part (c) because (d) is ex-officio. I would propose that we make it five members since the director is an ex-officio member, just in case they need to vote.

MS KAWOOYA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. The issue I was going to raise has been raised by hon. Kabakumba. This was on the composition because as she has rightly put it, the number was not well covered to form the board when it comes to quorum. My other issue is that, I also concur with the Leader of the Opposition that the board we need is one which is composed of persons of high integrity. It is dangerous if we ring-fence them for certain categories. With due respect, you might find that some people who would be suitable may not necessarily be coming from the law profession.

Lastly, hon. Odonga Otto raised the issue of members from the Police intelligence and he wanted to suggest that if they were from the President’s Office - it is still dangerous because the President’s Office is wide and they can bring an RDC on this board – with due respect – or a mobiliser from the President’s Office. So, I think we should specify that it should not be left wide open so that people do not misuse it. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Members, from the discussion, I think we have moved away from the text in the Bill, Clause 25. We are now looking at the text that is proposed by the committee. So, the issue of the President’s Office does not arise at this stage now.

MR SSEBUNYA: Mr Chairman, I would like to thank the Members for their submissions, which have been very useful. I request the Leader of the Opposition or any other Member to propose what they want, regarding the chairperson. For us, we have said that he or she should be somebody at the level of a High Court judge.

Secondly, on (c), “a member from the Police Intelligence Office” – we have learnt here that that would be a serving officer. But you can propose somebody who has ever worked in an intelligence profession or something like that. We have acknowledged the mistake.

Lastly, on the matter of hon. Kabakumba that the number is not five but only four voting members, this House can propose any other person of high integrity who shall be a voting member. This is because the fifth one we had proposed is the director, who is an ex-officio. So, we should make the voting number five as the director remains an ex-officio. Let the Members propose and we move forward.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, as the committee chairperson has asked me to propose, I would say that “The chairperson shall be a person of proven integrity and professional experience in financial and legal matters or any other field” because even a journalist – you can get a senior journalist who did Mass Communication but has proven integrity and with experience in investigations.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: That is the proposal for the board chairperson. Is that formulation acceptable? Let us hear from Member for West Budama South.

MR OBOTH: I can understand and appreciate the reasons why the Leader of the Opposition is making it wide. It is on the basis of the multi-purpose training he has but the reasons for the proposal of a person capable of being appointed a judge - Because of all the professions, this is the bias - That I am a lawyer. It is easier to measure in the legal profession and all lawyers who can be appointed a judge are all around. They would cover all this.

I am wondering about the phraseology: why we are departing from the usual drafting? Then in this particular one - because we are dealing with money laundering; people who clean dirty money to have financial accountants and so on. Why? I would love to know the rationale of having it so wide and yet the committee had made a brief and straight forward proposal. 

I would go with what the committee has and, of course, you may think I am intending to be the person but that is not so. Mr Chairman, my view is that why do we have to divert from the normal drafting and in any case, reducing it to five or making it five? I would also like to know from those who are proposing five, why they are proposing five. We have to draft and legislate in conformity with other laws. I was thinking aloud and I want to be helped.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Maybe, the minister will help us because the initial proposal was for nine members. There is no justification you have given us for reducing the number. And also the chairperson’s competence has to be in consonance with the functions of the board. The functions of the board are in Clause 24 and we have already passed that clause with some amendments. You might find ideas on who the board chairperson will be because it is about the functions of the board. I do not see anything that requires the experience of being a judge per se to carry out the functions of that board. But that is for you Members.

DR BITEKYEREZO: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I would like to concur with the Leader of the Opposition, hon. Nandala-Mafabi, on the issue of the chairperson of the board. Mr Chairman, if you want to catch a wonderful thief, use somebody who knows how things are done. I can tell this House that if you grabbed a judge and put him here – (Interjections) - yes, you say, “Come here and get this thief who has been stealing money,” and you also brought somebody who is properly trained in financial matters, I can tell you that the person who knows how money is stolen will catch the thief even before the judge catches him.

So, I want to totally agree with hon. Nandala-Mafabi and I would urge Members to support him on this one so that we do not confine this thing to judges only but we leave this specific slot to those ones who are competent enough to catch the thief. There are some judges whom I have been reading about - I hear they are not very good. I do not want to mention names. Supposing you put them here, they will cause problems.

MR OBOTH: I would love to seek clarification just for the sake of it. Is hon. Dr Bitekyerezo suggesting in any way that when you want to catch a thief you send a thief? And if that is the case, would we take it as an admission from the Leader of the Opposition that those who are stealing money in this country are the professionals he is proposing? (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No, please.

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I have listened to the submissions from Members and I think that principally, we agree that we should not be restrictive. That does not mean that we are going to discriminate against a certain profession. You are giving the appointing authority leeway to appoint a person he or she thinks will be suitable to do that job and to me, that is simple. We are not closing doors for anybody.

The original provision was restrictive but not dangerous. And I think administratively, that is not proper. I want to call upon my colleagues to support a provision that gives leeway to somebody to choose a person who will suitably perform the function and then we move on.  (Applause)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: So, do we need to attach any listing of qualifications? Why don’t you now leave it to the – 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, I want to thank my brother from Mbarara, Dr Bitekyerezo. As a lawyer, my brother hon. Oboth knows that it has been said that a good lawyer is the one who knows where the law is. Otherwise, there would be no lawyer who would represent a murderer or a criminal who is stealing money; and the best people who represent money launderers are lawyers. So, they also know these things. 

But what we are trying to say here is that true, a man in accounts will know how a transaction has moved. Nobody should lie to you that he does not know. When you see an accountant or an auditor saying he or she did not understand a certain figure, they are lying. They saw it but deliberately closed their eye and allowed it to go. The lawyer would also know the right thing but because he is defending somebody, he will use the other way to go over it. 

So, Mr Chairman, if you look through, this is a transaction which we passed yesterday. Transactions are attaching value and when you attach value you are able to know what it is. I will give an example -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Hon. Leader of the Opposition, we are talking about the composition of the board and we are discussing the chairperson. We have already passed the functions of the board. From the functions we passed yesterday, the board is not going to do investigations. It is the policy making organ of the authority; it gives directions to the director in connection with management performance; operational policies on the recommendations of the director; approve such organisation structure terms; prescribe such administrative measures. Those are the functions of the board. 

MR NANDALA- MAFABI: Read (a)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  I have read (a) from what we have passed. (b) the policymaking organ of the unit. Functions of the board - that is why I am saying we are still dealing with the board and not the authority yet. This is the board. So, can we deal with the board? 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, I agree with you. I have read the board and the authority. For you to be able to make a decision, you should have an idea. You cannot come and say -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: But if the board is going to start tracing how transactions have moved, that is not for the board now. Let us deal with the board then we come to those details of who is going to be tracing accounts. 

MR OBOTH: Mr Chairman, on the basis of what is on-going and having listened to hon. Nankabirwa, I would propose that we would leave it open without attaching any profession. But the moment we say a lawyer - like I would have preferred- or financial –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: You would be leaving very many people out.

MR OBOTH: Yes, you are leaving very many people out. So, let us leave it to the discretion of the appointing authority. To be safe, the appointing authority should have in mind the task at hand so that when he is making the appointment, we would know who is suitable. If the appointing authority thinks that hon. Nandala-Mafabi and group would do the work, then appoint them. Let us look at integrity as one of the areas of competencies.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Okay, are we together? 

MR ODOI: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I think West Budama South has sufficiently represented West Budama North. The cardinal consideration here should be integrity. If a person is appointed to the board, such a person whose reputation is beyond reproach and who has integrity and irreproachable reputation is not a monopoly of any particular profession that I know. Mr Chairman, I support the view that we must leave this particular appointment open to every profession that is available. I thank you.

MR OPOLOT: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman, for giving me another opportunity. I am really pleased that we seem to be closing in on the common position of emphasis on integrity. However, I would also think that this integrity should also be looked at in conjunction with somebody’s age, work experience and work background, which should have a direction towards the kind and reputation of organisation, trade or business that the person has been involved in. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: So, what is the formulation now? Who is formulating it for us? West Budama South, do you want to give a formulation? (Mr Nandala-Mafabi rose_)Okay, Leader of the Opposition.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, I want to say that, “The chairperson of the board, shall be a person of proven integrity and with experience in whichever field.” This is because we are saying experience does not matter now. Whether it is a journalist, an engineer or doctor, the most important thing is proven integrity and relevant experience. I will leave it there.

Regarding the age, he has brought out a good thing. We were told recently that there was a minister who chaired a meeting and while he was chairing, he was sleeping as other members were debating. Therefore, you are right. If you bring a chairperson of advanced age, he can easily sleep while the meeting is going on. 

So, I think the person to be appointed chairperson should not be one of advanced age. Maybe, we should put a cap and say a person not above -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: That would be violating the principles of the Constitution; non-discrimination on account of age and things like that.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: But, Mr Chairman, there is a retirement age of civil servants, which is 60 years. Has that violated the Constitution? So, even the chairman of the board must be somebody - (Interruption)

GEN (RTD) MOSES ALI: Mr Chairman, I am not worried about the Leader of the Opposition who is worried about old age because I think he is moving very fast towards that. So, there is no problem. He will be there. People sleep not because of age. There might be other problems; so, if you see somebody who is aged and is sleeping, it is not because he is aged. He may have some other problems. So, I want you to find out first before you condemn people of age coupled with sleep. You should be careful not to condemn this type of people. Thank you.

DR BITEKYEREZO: Mr Chairman, I wanted to give a medical view. I want to concur with Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali because there is a condition called Narcolepsy, when somebody can sleep anywhere even in the toilet at any age, when you have got a brain dysfunction. That has nothing to do with anybody’s age. By the way, one of the causes of sleep is eating too much during lunch time and then there is a lot of digestion that is taking place. 

You can end up sleeping in a session like this when you have eaten a lot of starchy foods. For that matter, I wanted us to leave the issue of old people because we have some old men who do not sleep and we have young ones who sleep immediately. I do not want to agree with- (Interruption)

MR OPOLOT: Thank you, honourable colleague, for giving way. Mr Chairman, when I brought in the aspect of age, I wanted to seal the gap that we left by not putting the years of experience because if we are talking of a board and you leave it open, then even someone of 28 years can be appointed. I know there could be some challenges with advanced age but the appointing authority can look into that because you cannot appoint someone who is coming to sleep because if people are money laundering and the chairperson of the board is sleeping, then what value is that person adding?

The issue is, can we start with a minimum age, since we have not put the bottom bar for years of experience?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: You see, we cannot legislate the entire discretion of the minister. We should not think that the appointing person will be one that would appoint a child of 18 years to head the board. Really, give the minister that discretion.

MR RUHINDI: Mr Chairperson, I agree with you that we cannot legislate in that minute detail, thereby fettering the discretion of the appointing authority. If you look at the relevant provisions in the Constitution about statutory bodies, generally, like commissions, boards and so on, the expression used is a person of high moral character and proven integrity. That suffices.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Why don’t we just list that? Can we lift that from the Constitution? Can we put the question to that?

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Now the question of numbers from nine to five.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, first, we have the chairman. The reason the committee is restricting the number is good. One, it is costly and two, there is the aspect of efficiency because the moment the numbers are big, work cannot be transacted and we have seen this in science and technology. 

Having got the chairman, we should get three more members of the board who shall be persons of discipline with experience in legal matters, financial matters and intelligence matters for purposes of beefing up the board. My justification for that is that three are good enough and when they decide to vote, if two took a decision against one or if they concur, things would move on well.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Are you proposing three members of the board?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Yes, three more members in addition to the chairman to make the number four before we add the x-officio, who will be the director.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: If they are four, how about the voting because usually it is an odd number and things like that.

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Mr Chairman, I just want to inform my colleagues that Cabinet decided, as a principle, to reduce the number of board members on all the boards. So, the issue of reducing these to either seven or five – I talk with a authority that Cabinet already took a decision on that. I am saying this because members were asking the justification for reducing that number. So, my point of raising this was on the basis that nine is on the higher side and it is costly, just like the Leader of Opposition has said.

MS KABAKUMBA: Mr Chairman, there was a proposal that we should have a deputy chairperson. We can have four more members, one of whom shall be the deputy chairman. Those four with the chairperson, makes the number five. And the ex-officio, who is the director, will become the sixth, but of course you know that that sixth person will not be illegible to vote. So, the import of five is that if they have to do a vote on any matter, there will be no tie. So, I support the number five inclusive of the chairperson.

It should then read thus: “The minister shall appoint four other members who shall – “(Interruption)

MR SSEBUNYA: Mr Chairman, I would like to propose that on (b), we can say, “Three members of high repute, one of whom shall be a person with substantive experience in the legal profession.” And on that very (b), instead of “two”, we put “three”, which will now make the number five in total – hon. Kabakumba Matsiko is still insisting, but when we add one person of the other four, it makes the number five. You know that it is not normal and it has not been the practice to choose vice-chairperson of these boards except for the planning authority, but which has a full time executive board. You will recall that for this case, the board will sit only four times a year. I think five members is just enough.

MS KABAKUMBA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I questioned (c) on the member from the Police Intelligence Office. If that is clarified and that person is still there, then three will stand. However, if that member is not there, then they have to be four.

MR SSEBUNYA: Mr Chairman, we had agreed that the member from the Police Intelligence Office – as the Leader of Opposition has said - will not be a public servant but a member who has at least worked in the intelligence unit specifically because the vice requires a lot of investigative knowledge. That is why we need somebody with Interpol related investigations experiences. If we agree that that member to be someone out of public service, that will make five members for us.

MS KABAKUMBA: Mr Chairman, for purposes of drafting, I think we can capture the content of (c) in (b) and we can phrase it thus: “…somebody with substantial experience in the legal profession, criminal investigation...” other than making an independent (c). I beg to move.

MR OPOLOT: Mr Chairman, when you look the way (b) has been drafted – when you say, “The board shall have two members of high repute one of whom shall be a person of substantial experience in the legal profession and the other with knowledge in the financial service industry”, I would like to think that this again is, in a way, restrictive because suppose the chairperson is already someone with high experience in law – (Interruptions) – excuse me, I am saying assuming we encounter a situation where the chairperson already been appointed he is from the legal profession, must you have this other member also a lawyer?

Two, suppose the chairperson is somebody with wide knowledge in the financial industry, must you have another member with the same knowledge? My suggestion is, we should be flexible here the way we have done it for the post of the chairperson so that the members’ profession can be balanced depending on who has been appointed chairperson.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: That is part of the discretion. But what is “experience in the legal profession”? I don’t seem to understand it very well.

MR OBOTH: Mr Chairman, first, I want to give information to my colleague that the chairperson’s appointment is open. We are now only dealing with some specific areas that among those, we should have financial and legal experts. If by some coincidence or by God’s plans, it happens that the person appointed is a lawyer, like I believe it will be, that will be just an added advantage.

Mr Chairman, I have no problem with the experience that has been proposed by the committee. But that still leaves it to the discretion of the minister or the appointing authority to determine what is substantial experience in legal practice, which would be limited if we put it to only some years of practice; it would leave other people, like myself, out. That will be unfair. Substantial experience should be related to the experience someone has in that field. So, I would like to agree with the committee on that.

MR SSEBUNYA: Mr Chairman, I think we are proceeding very well. But I want to ask the Members to propose a way forward very fast for us to move on. I would suggest that we eliminate (c) and make the number of members four before we prescribe the legal, accountant and any other relevant profession.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: So, in (b), we are talking about substantial experience in investigations, legal, financial and other relevant – is that the spirit in this?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Yes, Mr Chairman, that is the right spirit, but they should be members of high repute. So, we should be talking about repute and integrity as well – (Interjections) – just listen to me. When you just talk about repute, someone might have reputation in stealing. That is why I now suggest that the members should be people of high repute and proven integrity before we add on other qualities such as substantial experience and the financial, legal or other field like investigations.

MR FUNGAROO: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I would like to support the proposal made by the Leader of the Opposition in this argument. The most important element in this Bill is to investigate, discover and deter. So, the cardinal knowledge that should be put is the ability to investigate. The rest of it to do with legislation, litigation and prosecution, there are other organs of Government that can do that. So, in this, one of the qualities that must be prominently put here is experience of intelligence nature; someone who can do investigations. 

MR OKOT OGONG: Mr Chairman, you rightly guided that we should address our minds to the functions of the board. When you look at the functions of the board, it is very clear that the functions demand leadership and administration. It states that the board shall formulate policies for the authority. And the policies of the authority are in Clause 22: “Establish the structure of staffing level; assign employees rules and procedures of career development; manage the authority’s finances and assets; obtain services or the persons by agreement -” and when you look at the services of the board, the second one is “To ensure the proper functioning of the authority in accordance with this Act; to act as a forum in which the authority –“ 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No, you are reading the wrong document now. We have dealt away with that one. 

MR OKOT OGONG: Sorry, I came late.  (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, I think we are clear on the principles we are going to incorporate in Clause 25. We have agreed on the chairperson; we have agreed on four other members whose appointments will conform to experience in those areas of law: investigation, financial and any other relevant field. For this particular aspect, I put the question. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Now, we have the issue of (2): “The minister shall appoint the chairperson and other members of the board”; that is clear. (3) “The members of the board shall hold office on terms and conditions specified in the instruments of appointment.” Now, we are looking at the rest of the proposal of the committee.

MS KABAKUMBA: We did not complete (1) because we have missed out (d): “The director who shall be an ex-officio -”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Okay, (2)(3) and (5); any proposals on those?

MS KABAKUMBA: Mr Chairman, on (3): “The members of the board shall hold office on terms and conditions specified in their instruments of appointment for a term of five years -”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No, that comes in the next clause – in Clause 26: tenure. So, are we agreeable to the new proposition in Clause 25?

MR SSEBUNYA: Members, we had proposed for a staggering mechanism because we say on the tenure that it is for only one more term – the word “staggering” here means that some of the board members can be allowed to go for a second term. Others can be dropped in the second tenure so that you allow new members to come while staying others to allow for institutional memory. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: The word “stagger” is very much associated with the state of mind than with that explanation.  (Laughter) 

MR OBOTH: Exactly and why must we provide for this? Are we going to have a puppet minister who has no substance between the two ears? Why must we provide that the minister must ensure institutional memory? Doesn’t the minister have memory? I think that is an idle one. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No, (5) is dropped. So, I put the question to the amendment as it is proposed and improved in the discussion by the members in Clause 25. I put the question to the amendments together. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 25, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 26

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Member for Bujenje proposes that in sub clause (1), instead of “three”, you put “five”.

MS KABAKUMBA: I concur with the Bill’s position. 

MR OMACH: Mr Chairman, in Clause 26(2), there is a typing error. A member of the board may resign “his or her” other than “she”.

MR OPOLOT: Mr Chairman, much as hon. Kabakumba has backtracked on her earlier position, I would still think that three years is too short a period. Someone should be given an opportunity to build an institution for at least five years with one more opportunity for renewal.
 
THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, I put the question to the amendment proposed by the Member from Pallisa that, “The board should serve for a term of five years.” I put the question.

(Question put and negatived)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that Clause 26 stands part of the Bill. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 26 agreed to.

Clause 27

MR SSEBUNYA: In “meetings and procedures of the board” – replace the phrase, “Not less than four times in a year” appearing in paragraph (a) with the phrase, “Not less than once in every quarter of the financial year of the authority”. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, I agree with him; they can call an emergency meeting. But what is important is the mandatory quarterly meetings. And to call an emergency meeting, it must be really an emergency. Otherwise, if you do not do it, they can call weekly meetings.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Chairman, I propose we leave what is in the Bill. The moment you compel the board to meet quarterly, there may be a situation when they are not able to meet – (Interjections) – if we say, “at least four times a year”, the way it is in the Bill, then they can exercise discretion. But now, when we say, “quarterly” circumstances may happen when they cannot meet in the first quarter of the year or it may not be necessary; or the meetings may be necessary from September to December. 

So, I propose we leave them to meet once every four months even if they have nothing to do in the first four months of the year.

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Mr Chairman, looking at the justification there would be no reason to differ with the proposal of the committee. And the question of four times a year or every quarter – (Interjection) - the justification here is to ensure that we are consistent with other laws. This same Parliament has been making similar laws and we provide for quarterly instead of every quarter. I believe that I would go with the proposal of the committee.

MR RUHUNDI: Mr Chairman, I would agree with the reasoning of hon. Odonga Otto because what is in the Bill is more flexible. It allows for the availability of resources to enable any activity to take place. This is a bit restrictive in the sense that it emphasises that every quarter, they must meet. 

What is in the Bill is to at least meet four times. You can meet in every quarter or as and when resources are available or there is business but for as long as it is four times. It comes to the same number – it is, actually, at least four times or in every quarter and when you count, it is four times. What is in the Bill is “four times”. It is only on the modality of how you do it and what is in the Bill is more flexible.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, the Ministry of Finance knows that there are quarterly reports from the internal audit. It is a must; the internal audit must submit quarterly reports to the board to be discussed. One of the things which must be discussed with the report is a quarterly report of the internal audit report. The moment you do not discuss it, it is very dangerous. 

So, Mr Chairman, there will always be business in every quarter and one of the mandatory businesses is the internal audit report. (Interjections) Yes, they are the ones who do it, if you are not aware. You are a chairman, so you better look through and even look at the Public Finance Accountability Act.

What we are saying is that, they can only have one item and even if they come and have tea over the internal audit report, well and good but to say that you sit four times in a year, they can decide, assuming the accounting period is 30th June, to meet four times in June when the year is ending and they say that they met four times in a year.  That is very dangerous!

So, Mr Chairman, I would propose and even request the Members that the committee has proposed a very good recommendation and I would imagine that everybody who has been a board member even in a SACCO knows that they meet quite regularly.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Who is talking on the microphone? 

MR OBOTH: It cannot be Oboth. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: The honourable minister, what is your position? 

MR SSEBUNYA: Mr Chairman, it cannot be me to take offense when the Attorney-General has advised –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Well, that is why I was asking the Attorney-General to speak on the – let us resolve this hon. Wafula Oguttu.

MR RUHINDI: It comes as the same thing really and we should not split hairs on this. Let us go with the proposal of the committee, so that every quarter they meet.


THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Okay. Honourable members, the committee has proposed that the meeting should be quarterly. I put the question to the amendment of the committee.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 27, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 28

MR SSEBUNYA: This is a simple one and I think it will be up to the House. We are saying that Clause 28: “Appointment of the Director-General.” To revise the title of the Financial Intelligence Authority from the “Director-General” to “Director.” The justification is that “Director” fits in well with the “Authority.” The “Director-General” is such a big title whose remuneration may wrongly be interpreted as a budgetary constraint.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Okay, is that clear? The Leader of the Opposition.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, I have no objection with the “Director” - But, Mr Chairman, if this “Director” is going to have powers, I would propose that we call him the “Executive Director” because that one gives it clout, so that when he walks, that is better. I do not know if you agree to that.

MR SSEBUNYA: If it is the wish of the House, we can call him “Executive Director.”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Okay, it is “Executive Director”. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: If we have agreed, then - 

MR OMACH: I have no problem with that.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: We are still on 28. Mr Chairman, before you put the question, they have said that the term of the Executive Director is five years and that is (3) (a). We have now started harmonising this. Permanent Secretaries go for three years - we have put the board at three years but for institutional memory, we can allow one year this being the beginning, then the term of the Executive Director is four years. 

My justification for this is that the longer you give this period - because we are trying to look at – recently, we passed the UNBS law and we gave four years and I think that we should try to standardise that when these directors come - like if I become a PS, I am sure of three years, if I become executive director it will be four years. That is the justification, for harmonisation. 

And the other one, which I want to raise, is that - it should be for an additional one term because we should be really sure. You can say, “Additional term.” What is a term? “Additional one term of office.” Or “Renewable once.” – “The minister may, on recommendation of the board, renew the appointment of the Executive Director for an additional one term.”

MR SSEBUNYA: Only that you have run faster but you are in the right direction. 
    a) First, we have revised the title from “Director General” to “Executive Director.”

b) Sub-clause (1) to replace the word “minister” with the phrase “President with the approval of Parliament”. The justification is that the profile of appointment requires the involvement of the President and Parliament.  

And (c) was to insert the new sub-clause (5) from (4) as follows:  “No director shall hold office for more than two terms of office.” The justification is to describe the terms and conditions upon which the Executive Director shall hold office.
  
d) Amend sub clause (2) to read as follows: “The Executive Director shall be a person with professional qualification stipulated by the regulation of this Act and must have experience in law, administration, banking, finance or economics.” 

The justification is for alignment with the principles of good corporate governance and also to quell the concerns of the public on the level of influence of the Executive, or other persons and institutions or agencies on the Uganda anti-laundering committee.

MR OBOTH: Mr Chairman, I have no problem, except – and I need the indulgence of the Chair in sub clause (2) - the proposal is good, but I was wondering whether we keep on finding this kind of – that the Executive Director shall have this and must have relevant experience in law, especially when the beginning states that “The Executive Director now shall be a person with professional qualification, stipulated by the regulations of this Act and must have relevant experience in law, administration, banking, finance, or economics.”

Mr Chairman, I would propose that experience in either “Law, administration, banking, finance, or economics” because it is just very difficult to have all these. And I have seen it in all our laws; we put these things –(Interruption)

MR SSEBUNYA: I think as a committee, we have a better drafting. 

MR WAFULA OGUTTU: Mr Chairman, thank you. I would like to add something. Somebody may have law, administration or baking, finance, or economics or investigation, because you could have somebody who has a background, having been an intelligence officer for a long time or an investigative journalist, and the others useful - (Interjections) Yes, either investigation or – Hon. Oboth had given us a good drafting, either of the many, and he has added - (Interjections) - but you cannot just have a profession in investigation, it must be –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No, the question you should be asking is, is this list exhaustive? If it is not exhaustive, then the proper drafting would be to say,  “Have experience in law, administration, banking, finance, economics, investigation, or any other relevant experience” so that it is open; we do not close because we cannot list and finish - 

MR NANDALA: Mr Chairman, someone may have relevant experience in fishing.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: It is not relevant for these purposes.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: It could become relevant –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: It would not be relevant for these purposes. You may have a Mathematician like Dr Mugenyi – 

MR SSEBUNYA: Mr Chairman, could we say “relevant professional experience?” And I understand what the Leader of the Opposition is saying; anything can happen on planet Earth. 

MR OPOLOT: Mr Chairman, I just need some clarification.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Hon. Member, the rules on the microphone are very clear. You have violated them a few times today but proceed. 

MR OPOLOT: Thank you, Mr Chairman, every day is a learning day in life. So, now that we are indulging in debating issues to do with relevant professional experience, I would also want to be guided, wouldn’t it also be reputable experience and since we put for the chairperson “substantial” wouldn’t the experience also need to be “substantial”? I am saying this because you have to match the chairperson with an E.D who is also reputable, because you can have a relevant experience but doing the wrong thing; you can have a Kazinda, who has all that experience but the output is the negative. So, wouldn’t we need the reputation in terms of that experience –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRRPESON: So, you want to insert the word “substantial”?

MR RUHINDI: I just wanted to help my brother who has just been on the microphone, and I think I agree with him, that this person too, should be a person of high moral character and proven integrity, and have qualifications - I thought that we have abandoned this being stipulated in the regulations, because now it becomes redundant after all these specifications and must have experience in either – I agree with the hon. Oboth Oboth, “Law, Administration, Banking, Finance, Economics, Investigation” and as we put it “or other relevant” –I would buy his idea, it does no harm, it clarifies that really we are talking about – this is a high level job and we are not only looking for experience, we are looking for that professional experience -

So, I think “other relevant professional experience” is better.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: So, can you now re-state it for the record?

MR RUHINDI: “The Executive Director” – you will be defining “Executive Director” to mean “Director” - I do not know - but “The Executive Director shall be a person of high moral character and proven integrity and with experience in either Law, Administration, Banking, Finance, Economics or Investigation or other relevant professional experience.”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: You left out the word “professional” at the beginning? 

MR OBOTH: It is difficult to amend what the Attorney-General has stated, but that “professional experience” before which the Chair has not –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Yes, before the “qualification” – and then it runs beyond it. Is that clear now?

HON. MEMBERS: Yes.
 
THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: “The Executive Director shall be a person of high moral character and proven integrity, with professional qualification and experience in either Law, Administration, Banking, Finance, Economics or any other relevant experience.” Is that it? Okay?

MS KABAKUMBA: I am sorry to be taking you back, but I was looking at the appointment of the Executive Director. We have just agreed with the amendment of the committee that it should be by the President with the approval of Parliament, but in Clause 28 (4), we are saying, “The minister may, on the recommendations of the board, renew the appointment of the Executive Director for an additional one –“

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Hon. Kabakumba, can I first finish with this? This one, which we are about to vote on, the qualification. I put the question to the sub-clause (2) on the qualifications of the Executive Director as amended.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MS KABAKUMBA: There is a contradiction here; if the President is to appoint the Executive Director, yet in part (4) you are saying that the minister can renew the appointment of the ED, then there is a contradiction. If you are going with the President as the appointing authority, he should be the same person either to renew or decline to renew in part (4).

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Committee chairperson, is that not consequential? This is because if you change “Minister” to “President” then wherever the “Minister” appears, it becomes “President”. 

MR OMACH: Mr Chairman, that is a consequential amendment.

MS KABAKUMBA: Thank you. But Mr Chairman, I also need another clarification. The board is being appointed by the minister while the ED reports to the board. And yet the ED is being appointed by the higher authority, who is the President. Won’t there be a conflict in terms of reporting channels? We do not want a situation like it is now in KCCA. Since the appointing authority is there, the ED could afford to ignore what the board is saying. I need some clarification; is it okay for the superior, in terms of the board, to be appointed by the minister and the subordinate, in terms of the ED, to be appointed by the President?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Yes, committee chairperson.

MR KASULE SSEBUNYA: We have seen that happen with many boards; the board of the National Water and Sewerage Corporation is appointed by the President and at the same time the President appoints the ED on the advice of the board.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No, no, no. Her point is: We have said the board will be appointed by the minister – 

MR KASULE SSEBUNYA: As we have rightly said, this is a consequential amendment – 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No, that was on the ED. Look at what we passed in clause 25(2), “The Minister shall appoint the chairperson and other members of the board.” Now, on the ED, you are proposing – because this was also your proposal – that the ED be appointed by the President with the approval of Parliament. That is the point she is raising. May I hear from the Attorney-General? 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, I think there is a contradiction; if we are saying that the board members will be appointed by the minister – now when they are appointed, they become the top organ. They are the ones who recommend the appointment of the ED. Now, if we have maintained the minister and we have put the safeguard of Parliament, I think the best we can do is to leave it for the minister to appoint the ED with Parliament’s approval. That would help harmonise the whole arrangement. The board will then remain in control of the ED, instead of us having a situation where the ED says, “You recommended me for appointment but you are not the one to –” You could have two power centres.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: The Attorney-General. 

MR RUHINDI: Mr Chairman, the concerns of hon. Kabakumba are justified; I think we need to have some parity in terms of reporting and control measures. The moment you have a disparity, then you create a problem in the institution. Therefore, my proposal is in line with hon. Nandala-Mafabi’s – that let us streamline the appointing and reporting measures for purposes of accountability. If the board is appointed by the minister and the executive director is appointed by the President, the ED owes allegiance to the President. So if the appointing authority – in fact, ideally it should be the board to appoint but if you are putting in safeguards, let the board vet and recommend to the minister for appointment.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: So then the only amendment would be retaining in sub-clause (1) “… with the approval of Parliament”; is that okay, Learned Attorney-General? Let us hear from West Budama South.

MR OBOTH: Mr Chairman, I would like to seek your good counsel and guidance on whether it has happened – I have only spent a few years here but does Parliament vet appointments of an appointee like a minister (ministerial appointments)? When a minister makes appointments, is there any other law that has been made in this country that requires such appointees to appear before Parliament for approval? If such exists, then I would be glad to benefit from it.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Learned Attorney-General?

MR RUHINDI: Mr Chairman, he is right. Then in my proposed amendment, I will not include Parliament because then we are actually going – it is the statutory bodies in the Constitution whose appointment by the President come for approval in Parliament. But for ministerial appointees, I do not know of any. So I propose that the part of coming to Parliament be dropped because it is an executive function – it is purely an executive function and in any case, those bodies, in one way or another, through their sector ministries will be reporting to Parliament – through their policy statements and other mechanisms. And they can always be queried for verifications of this and that.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you, Mr Chairman. On that one the Attorney-General is right that for the time we have been around, all the appointments have been coming through the President. But I want him to tell me if it is criminal – because what we are dealing with is financial intelligence authority. It is going to go after everybody, including you, the minister. So I want you to tell me if it is a crime for the minister to bring these people to be vetted by Parliament. What we are trying to look at here is that the public, represented by Parliament, should have people who have proven integrity and moral character. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, Rule 155(1) says, “The Committee on Appointments shall be responsible for approving, on behalf of Parliament, the appointment of persons nominated for appointment by the President under the Constitution or any other appointment required to be approved by Parliament under any law.” () The Attorney-General – this would be the first one we are doing of course. So this could be one of those “any other laws” that you are going to create appointments to be vetted by the appointments committee. I was previously worried that there might be no mandate for the appointments committee to examine any other appointee from any other institution other than the presidency. But Rule 155 seems to have handled it.

MR RUHINDI: If we are to move neatly, then let the board members also come to Parliament – are they also coming to Parliament? (Interjection) Then that is fine. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Are the board members coming to Parliament? Under what - where? Can I be reminded? Oh yes, correct. It is in 4 “The appointment of the members of the board by the minister shall be vetted by Parliament.” We have already passed that too. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, in addition to that - 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Can we finish this? 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Yes, the executive director will be an ex-officio member of the board. So, if the others are being vetted why should the other not be vetted?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Alright. We are now better advised. So, can I put the question to the amendment as proposed? I put the question to the amendment - 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, I have three on (3), the term of -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Where were we? 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: We have finished (1) and (2) and we are going to (3).

MR KASULE SSEBUNYA: We proposed an additional sub-clause that says, “No director shall hold office for more than two terms.”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: The term was three years. For the executive director it is five. What they have proposed is five - that is for the laws that we passed recently. But the laws that were passed earlier it is for five years. So there is a whole mix of terms of executive directors. But if they want what we have passed recently, which is four years, then that will be consistent. Learned Attorney- General, do you have an idea on this one? Four years, is it what we passed recently?

MR RUHINDI: Four years, Mr Chairman. Even three years, on the discretion of Parliament, to me is okay if it is justifiable. My view is that since there is a possibility of renewal, the lower the number of years the better. In fact, it is good for purposes of accountability. If you perform very well, it is extended and you can as well even serve one term if you do not perform well. If there is a check, we give you three years, if you perform well, they renew for another three. That is six years already. So, the proposal for four years is a middle ground and we can go with that.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: So, four years agreed to. I put the question that the executive director will serve for an initial term of four years and an additional four years and that is it. It can be renewed for a further term only. That means he can serve a total of only eight years maximum. I put the question to that.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: So, can we now deal with clause 28 as amended? I put the question.

Clause 28, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 29

MR KASULE SSEBUNYA: The head note on clause 29.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Not that one. Those are consequential amendments. Those are now drafting issues. I put the question that clause 29 stand part of the Bill. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 29, agreed to.

Clause 30

MR AMURIAT: Mr Chairman, thank you very much. Clause 30 talks about removal or suspension from office of a chief executive officer. My mind has been drawn to sub-clause (2) where the case of suspension is made optional. “The minister may on recommendation…” I thought that in keeping with good practice and also considering that this is a rather sensitive body, that the chief executive officer is heading, the person shall step aside in the event that he or she is being investigated. It should be made mandatory rather than optional by replacing the word “may” in sub-clause (2) with “shall”. 

Just to add on that, it happens everywhere. When an officer is being investigated, they would normally have to step aside. I do not know why in the case of this very sensitive organisation, you are making this optional rather than mandatory.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I think in usual drafting this is a phrase that is used. In basic drafting, they use this phrase “may”. You can even see the first part, “The minister may, on the recommendation of the board remove the Director General from office for misconduct, incapacity or incompetence.” Once there is misconduct, incapacity or incompetence proved, then the “may” changes to “shall”. 

MR AMURIAT:  Mr Chairman, I agree with you, but once the person is being investigated, I think the best thing would be for the person to step aside. Because I am really talking about sub-clause (2) “The minister may on recommendation of the board suspend…” this is not talking about removal; it is talking about suspending a person as investigations are carried out. If a person remains in office because the minister has the option of either asking the person to step aside or maintaining the person in office, this person could interfere with the investigations.

MR RUHINDI: Mr Chairman, your understanding is the same as mine. This is the normal way we have been doing it but I have always been told that there can always be a change - (Interjections) - Not that change - (Laughter) - this is more tied to the recommendation of the board. The “may” is to the extent that the board may or may not recommend - but I have no problem. We can use “shall” and say, “The minister shall…” Once they have recommended then the minister shall comply.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: So in sub-clause (2) we change to “shall”? 

MR RUHINDI: Yes.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: That will be convenient. I put the question to that amendment. 

MS MUTYABULE: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I want to know why we are talking about the minister. Is the minister the appointing authority or is it the President?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: The minister. We went back to the minister. 

MS KABAKUMBA MASIKO: Mr Chairman, I also need some clarification. Supposing there is information of misconduct, incapacity or incompetence by the executive director and the board does not recommend his suspension or his removal - because if we say, “The minister shall on recommendation of the board take action …” can’t the minister take action without the recommendation of the board? If there is information in regard to misconduct, incapacity or incompetence - (Interruption)

MR OBOTH: I would love to be with such a minister who would take decisions to suspend without being informed by the board. I would think that the board is the supervisory body in this case but Parliament can make any law except the other one that, Mr Chairman you have always advised us about. I would have hesitations to have that short cut instead of having the minister go direct.

MR OPOLOT: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I need to be guided on whether 1 and 2 must be read and applied together because when you say the minister may, on recommendation of the board, remove the director general from office on those grounds, it does not provide for establishment of the facts on the ground. That is why I was submitting for guidance. If the board just recommends without investigation, and if we are saying “shall”, shall the minister remove the ED?

Two, I agree with emphasising “shall” because the board works with the ED on a day-to-day basis and therefore if an investigation has been instituted and recommendations made and the board decides to recommend that the ED be removed, there should not be any other ground the minister should base on not to do so. Therefore, it should be mandatory as long as an investigation is done competently.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: We have agreed on that; “may” has been changed to “shall”.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, if you make a minister in charge of the sacking, you know a minister may want per diem or fuel and you do not give –(Interjections)- we know these things. He will then instruct that, that one be sacked because you have made the law that the minister can sack or suspend without any recourse to the board. This has happened. So for purposes of protecting this executive director, let the board be responsible because they are the ones in charge of the day-to-day activities.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, I think the issues are clear. Please let us move forward.

MR RUHINDI: I do not know whether I am reading this properly because I think we should transpose 1 and 2. Which comes first? What comes first is the suspension and then after the investigations, the board recommends for removal. So removal should be number two and the drafting should be transposed.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: The proposal from the Attorney-General is that we alter the numbering. Number two comes first and then what is in number one becomes two. Okay? And all of them must contain “shall”?

MS MUTYABULE: Mr Chairman, I am a bit uncomfortable with this word “shall” because if the executive director has to make an appeal, where does he make it? Suppose he has been treated unfairly and he wants to make an appeal? If you say “shall” that means that even the minister will not listen to this executive director.

MR RUHINDI: Mr Chairperson, it is a common legal principle that all administrative decisions are appealable in courts of law and you can make reference to Article 42 of the Constitution; so there is no bar to appeal.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Okay, that is clear. I will put the question to - Is there any other amendment? Do we need to vote on changing the numbering?

MS KABAKUMBA MASIKO: Mr Chairman, (1) is setting the grounds for removal or suspension so when you put it in (2), shall we refer to (2) when we make (1) into (2)? That is what I want clarified.

MR RUHINDI: If you start with (1), it should be, “The minister shall, on the recommendation of the board, suspend the director general from office pending the determination of any inquiry as to the existence of misconduct, incapacity or incompetence.”

(1) becoming (2) will be on the same lines. “The minister shall, on the recommendation of the board, remove the director general from office once there is a recommendation pursuant to sub-section (1).” So it is a question of drafting and those other people will tidy it up.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that clause 30, as amended, stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 30, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 31

MR KASULE SSEBUNYA: I think this is consequential; the Deputy Director General, as was proposed in the Bill. Amend clause 31 by replacing the term “Deputy Director General” with the “Deputy Executive Director” wherever it appears in the Bill.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, we are saying there shall be an executive director general but we should add “… who will deputise the executive director”. This is because the moment this is excluded, he will assume he is the boss in his own capacity. We want to remove that so that he knows, “I have been appointed the deputy executive director who is the deputy of the executive director.”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Mr Chairman, I think the way clause 31 was drafted was to create two Executive Directors. Okay, that is the amendment that “There shall be a deputy executive director who shall …” We will not talk about the appointment. The appointment of course will be in the -

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: And shall be appointed as prescribed in the -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Okay. We need to insert the phrase, “… who shall deputise the executive director”. Is that okay? I put the question to the insertion of “… deputise the executive director”.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 31, as amended, agreed to.
Clause 32

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, clause 32 (2). “Any employee …” They are saying if they second an employee say from CID, that employee will go and serve with the terms he has left. We should say that to avoid problems - if you are going to be seconded, you should decide one, to take leave without pay and two, the period you are not serving Government, you would be guided by the pension laws of the Authority.

What I am trying to say here is that after Government in sub-clause (2), this employee shall take leave without pay and adhere to pension terms applicable to Government Public Service. The justification is to avoid people going there while they are still employed in other Government departments with pension accumulating.

Mr Chairman, even in (4), this can’t be continuous employment because this person shall no longer be in the public service. That person will have left the public service for one year and taken leave without pay. That can’t be treated as continuous employment.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Is secondment a new employment?

MS MUTYABULE: Mr Chairman, as far as I know, when a person goes on secondment, that person receives only one and not two salaries. But they remain public servants. So, hon. Leader of Opposition should not get worried.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, yes I agree to the fact that the person will receive only one salary. But when you get into the details, you realise that it is stated that the pension will be continuous because the person will be earning gratuity and at the same time earning pension here yet they were not working.

What we are trying to say is: You go, serve and you are free to come back but you cannot treat that period for pension purposes; you can’t.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: But honourable member, what salary will this person be receiving? The person will still be a public servant although seconded to another department. Does such a person automatically get struck off the payroll at public service? No, the person remains on secondment because they don’t earn a salary the other side.

MR WAFULA OGUTU: Mr Chairman, I would like to ask the minister to make this clear to me. In the event that the employee being seconded is the one to be appointed executive director, will such a person automatically just work because he is already employed? Or they will be required to undergo an interview as per the qualifications spelt out in this Act. I am saying this because it is possible that they will second someone from Government to head this organisation. I want to request that the minister explains that to the – (Interjections) – yes, I can explain. Because you have said that an employee of any other component of Government may be seconded under clause 32 (2) – that person can also be seconded to be the executive director to this organisation but the executive director is a staff.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, let us get this clear in sub-clause (1) – the staff of the authority shall consist of the ED, the Deputy ED and persons appointed as employees of the authority by the board. After that, we have the category of people to go on secondment. In other words, the ED and the Deputy ED or persons already recruited and appointed by the board as staff will not subscribe to this provision.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, you have now made it easier for us. What this means is that we now don’t need (2) or (4). Why, because when you agree to go to that authority, you will be appointed. The person who drafted this law had in mind the belief that some people would want to go to this authority but also come back. What we are saying is that when you choose to go to this authority, just go and when you want to come back, you have to reapply.

In the circumstances, I would like to move that we delete (2) and (4) so that pension and gratuity for those who go is computed and when they come back, they start afresh. While in the authority, such employees shall be under the retirement terms for that authority. Every authority has retirement terms.

MR RUHINDI: Mr Chairman, the principle of secondment is a common practice in the public service. I wish the Minister of Public Service was here. When I worked in the Uganda Investment Authority, there was this problem of creating UIA as a one-stop centre. But you could not attain that without bringing in relevant expertise from other organisations. There was a time, for example, when there was need to bring in a person from the Uganda Registration Services Bureau for attachment. We also needed some experts from immigration and so forth. That is why it is still a challenge because realising a one-stop centre is not easy. Mr Chairman, when I worked in the UIA, that organisation created a new Uganda – (Interjections) – no, let me finish and go to the substance – (Interjections) – no clarifications; I won’t accept it.

Well, Mr Chairman, what I am trying to emphasise is that the principle of secondment is already with us. In fact we already seconded an officer from the Office of First Parliamentary Counsel to Ministry of Finance to work on some projects, one of which is this money laundering – (Interruption)

MR KATUNTU: Thank you very much, learned Attorney-General, for yielding the Floor. The point I am seeking clarification on is: If the principle of secondment is a practice within the public service, why do we need legislation to cover it?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Further clarification from the Attorney-General. Initially, the retirement age was 55, but when people saw a certain age was missing, it was increased to 60 years. The other reason was that there was less man power. In these circumstances, when you second an employee to a certain organisation – give the example of the Judiciary - when judges leave that place – we have the judges on the list but justice is not being dispensed. So, when you second this person, who will take over their duties? 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I think the problem is – do we all understand what secondment is about? It is a temporary placement from your mother institution to another place. It is a temporary attachment and that is very clear. But also I think the question that the Leader of Opposition is raising is legitimate. If it is a practice, why do you have to provide for it in this Bill? If that is what is normally done in the ordinary course of business, why should it be in this Bill?

MR ODOI: Mr Chairman, I agree with the Leader of Opposition and you, over this matter. These provisions are redundant and don’t serve any useful purpose. The practice - as I know it and I will point out a couple of examples - we have the Inspectorate of Government, they have police officers seconded as investigators working with the Inspectorate of Government and there is no particular law that enables this secondment to take place; it is an administrative practice within the service. Uganda Revenue Authority has the same story; they have police officers seconded to work in the investigations department. So I request the minister to concede and we drop this. 

MR OMACH: Mr Chairman, I agree to the dropping of (2), (4) and (5) and we retain the rest. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Okay, hon. Members, I put the question that those sub-clauses be deleted from the Bill. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Clause 32, as amendment, agreed to.)

Clause 33

MR KASULE SSEBUNYA: We are proposing a new clause after 32, the headnote is “Declaration of assets and liabilities and confidentiality”. It reads: “All members of the unit and any staff of the unit in a managerial position shall – 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Which clause is that?

MR KASULE: We are bringing a new clause after 32. It is entitled: “Declaration of assets and liabilities and confidentiality”:
    1. “All members of the unit and any other staff of the authority in a managerial position shall declare their assets and liabilities to the minister within one month of taking up office and substantially at periodical intervals as may be determined by the minister. 
    a) Undertake before a commissioner of oaths an oath of confidentiality in a form prescribed by the minister;
    b) Maintain during and after their relationship with the financial investigation authority the confidentiality of any matter leading to the operations of and any relevant information within the knowledge of the authority

    2. Any member of the board or staff of the authority who contravenes this section commits an offence and is liable on conviction to a fine not exceeding 500 currency points or imprisonment for a term not exceeding three years or both.” 

The justification is to empower the minster to monitor the wealth of staff of the unit and to ensure that the staff of the authority do not engage in primitive accumulation of wealth; and to protect information by oath of confidentiality given the sensitivity of the office. I beg to move. 

MR KAKOOZA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I seek clarification from the chairman why it is the minister and not the IGG like in other laws. I find it difficult that the minister should be interested in your assets. Isn’t it difficult to declare wealth to your boss; why not to the IGG? Like here, we declare assets and liabilities to the IGG.

MR AMURIAT: Mr Chairman, 1(a) would be redundant given that under other laws, these officials will be under obligation to declare their assets and liabilities to the IGG. 

I do not know what the thought was in making this proposal. 

Secondly, on (b) is it really necessary for these employees of the authority to take an oath of confidentiality. First of all, in our consideration, these people are supposed to be of high moral standing and integrity. So the kinds of people who will get employed in the organisation are considered to be those who will not go to bars and begin releasing secrets. By virtue of the fact that they go through a process and are proved to be of high moral standing, I believe even the second provision would not stand. As a result, all the other provisions proposed would fall through. I propose that we ignore this proposal and let it not be part of the law. 

MR ODOI: Mr Chairman, we have a legal regime that provides for the declaration of assets and liabilities and the implementation of the leadership code. This legal regime includes the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda and the Inspectorate of Government Act. Both pieces of legislation mandate the Inspectorate of Government as the only known legal body to whom you declare assets and liabilities. 

I understand where the committee is coming from. The committee is of the opinion that officers working for the authority should be in that category that are required to declare their assets and liabilities. But to whom is a question that is settled by law; it is to the Inspectorate of Government. So I think the only value we would add is the requirement that these persons fall in the category of such persons that should declare their assets and liabilities. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, I come with experience again. It is true, first of all, that there are two organisations where declarations are taken; the Inspector General of Government and the Speaker of Parliament for the Inspector General and the Deputy. I know the honourable member did not know that there are such places. 

Having said that, all staff must take oath of secrecy; so I agree with the committee that they must take oath of secrecy; not necessarily from the commissioner of oaths, but there should be an internal arrangement that all staff – even a cleaner should take oath of secrecy. 

Secondly, the IGG’s report – this is an institution which can be dangerous. So it should not be managerial staff only. For example, in URA, even a cleaner declares assets; so all staff of this Authority shall declare their assets and liabilities to the Inspector General of Government. 

The moment you say only managerial staff, it will be very dangerous. Those who will commit crimes will be those in lower office who will not declare assets and they will accumulate a lot of wealth. I can give you examples of clerks who have done that. 

So I plead with the minister that we agree on secrecy of oath for all staff and all staff of the Authority declare assets and liabilities to the IGG and not the minister. 

MS NANKABIRWA: Mr Chairman, I support what hon. Nandala-Mafabi is proposing. However, it sounds administrative and I want to suggest that since we are going to see regulations which will be done to enable the implementation of the Act, we put some of those details in the regulations because the law is going to be so congested. It is not the first time that we are doing this. We are not going to prescribe everything we need into the main law. We shall come with regulations and we can make it to the minister that we want amongst the regulations this regulation. It is too administrative, hon. Nandala-Mafabi, and I just want you to accept that we put those details in the regulations.  Where we need amendments, it is very easy to amend the regulations than the main law. That is my humble proposal.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: The information that I want to give you is that if you read clause 1, we said this law must commence immediately. Regulations take years to come here – (Interjections) - listen. Am I wrong, Mr Chairman? Now, the moment there is no congestion here - we have 139 clauses. What will be wrong to add a few clauses to make our law? What will remain are some administrative issues like staff things and whatever. But this one which we are talking about is to check on the integrity of the staff of the Authority and we should do it on day number one. For your information, I have been filling declaration forms from 1991.

MR KASULE SSEBUNYA: Mr Chairman – 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I had asked the member from Namutumba. Can we take all of them?

MS MUTYABULE: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I would like to agree with hon. Nandala-Mafabi’s proposal of the staff declaring their assets. But maybe where I would like to differ a bit is that not all staff but there are categories of staff because even a cleaner - you tell him to declare his wealth and a sweeper – 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: It is just a standard form.

MS MUTYABULE: Because in the public service, there are categories of people who declare their wealth.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Let me give you information, my sister. 

MS MUTYABULE: Okay.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: There is a clerk in the Office of the Prime Minister during the OPM probe, who drew Shs 3.6 billion and she was a cashier clerk. So if you say that cashiers are left out,  that is very dangerous.

DR BITEKYEREZO: The information that I wanted to give is that we have some people who are doing the simplest jobs in Government but they are richer than even Members of Parliament. So, for me, I totally agree with hon. Nandala-Mafabi. Let people declare whether you are a cleaner – whatever you are. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Hon. Minister, before you come, there are two principals combined in this proposed amendment. The first one is declaration of assets and liabilities. The second one is the oath to secrecy. Those two are combined in this and creation of penalties would go under the general punishments and things like that.

So, would you want to clearly spell out the issue of declaration of assets and liabilities separately from the issue of taking the oath of secrecy so that they are stand-alone provisions?

MR OMACH: Mr Chair, I just want to give the principal. There is likely to be a lot of temptation as regards to the staff of this authority. So we are saying that each of them must take an oath of secrecy.

Then the second one is because the temptations are high, even the messengers who are coming in must declare their assets. But I agree with my colleague that in the law, it should not go to all those many details because other details will be contained in the regulations. But it must be captured within the law that all the staff must declare their assets not withstanding other laws relating to declaration of assets.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I am therefore suggesting that there should be a clause on declaration of assets and liabilities and you explain what it is and there should be a separate clause on oath of secrecy and the oath to be taken should be in the schedule of this law so that it is clear. Is somebody going to help us with this? Yes?

MR OBOTH: I just want to support hon. Nandala-Mafabi and also state for the record that the earlier we enshrine this in our laws, the better - about everybody working in public office declaring assets. 

The experience in the OPM - actually for the record, I intend if Government does not do it, to move for an amendment that the Leadership Code Act should be able to cover every person who works in Government because some of these people are used. If we want to fight corruption, let us take it head on.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Yes, the chairperson?

MR KASULE SSEBUNYA: We do agree with the amendment given the sensitivity of this office. We imported this from a very competent country and what I am not sure of is the reporting – declare their assets and liabilities to the minister. I do not know – (Interjections) - have you dropped that one? – (Interjections) - to the IGG? Okay, on that one, we agree because where we benchmarked, it was the Executive Director for whom all this is directed but in the committee, they said Minister and so we have changed. I also do agree with the separation of the assets and labilities clause from the clause on oath of secrecy.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: So are we going to work on this now or since there is a new proposal, can we have it properly redrafted separating the two? One clause – a stand-alone clause on the Declaration of Assets and Liabilities and one stand-alone clause on Oath of Secrecy and then the oath is also drafted or lifted if you are going to cross refer then we also know which oath you are taking from the official secrecy thing - whichever oath you are taking - so that we know which oath we are referring to and then we can also either put it in the law or we cross reference.

So, we will stand over the amendment so that it is drafted properly taking those issues into account. Yes?

Clause 33

MR KASULE SSEBUNYA: On clause 33, we want to insert a new sub-clause (4) to read as follows: “The Director shall within three months after the close of each financial year submit an annual report to the minister through the board who shall as soon as possible table a copy of the report before Parliament.” The justification is to facilitate proper functionality of the Authority and instill public confidence in the Authority and its officials.  

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Don’t you think that is creating a direct relationship with the Minister? Shouldn’t it be the board? The board should be the one demanding this – they submit through the board.  

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, the person who signs the account is the board. Then I think what the Director should do is that within three months, he should prepare accounts for the board.  But the only period I am trying to look at is that its four months. I think that the law we are making is four months and not three months –(Interjections) - okay, it was initially three months but now we have changed it to four months - 

MR KASULE SSEBUNYA: We agree with “The board shall within four months at the close of each financial year submit an annual report…” it is an annual report - who shall forward it to Parliament. These words, “as soon as possible” is not – how do you know what is soon as possible? So, it is ambitious that the proposals they are making are for the Authority and not for the committee.

MR ODONGA-OTTO: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I want to persuade the chairman of the committee that we retain what is in the Bill – that is in regard to members of the board - because the Bill is institutionalising the appointments but what you are seemingly doing is to individualise it. So, the format in the Bill, for example, the chairperson of the Board, a representative from the Ministry of Finance, a representative from Bank of Uganda; it is those institutions that can determine which representative can best help in the finance institution authority, but when we start picking people, the minister may appoint me when I do not know anything about those things and then we shall start having problems but the moment we leave these institutions to select an individual, it will be more of an institutionalised operation. 

So, I really strongly persuade the chairman that we retain what is in the Bill as it is.

Secondly, I think if we maintain what is in the Bill on (1), “… a representative from the President’s Office/internal security” is ambiguous. We have to be clear on what we need, whether it is someone from ministry of Internal Affairs or someone from ISO. I think it should be someone from ISO. I thought we should be clear there. I actually want to propose that we have “… a representative from internal security.” It will be clear because if we leave it as “a representative from the President’s Office” we may have the big brother syndrome. Some people may fear. So, we should be specific and say, “… a representative from internal security” other than putting it in brackets from the President’s Office. These are the two submissions. 

MR KASULE SSEBUNYA: Honourable members, when we read the report yesterday, we saw the composition of the board as is in the Bill because they are going to be two institutions. There is a board of the Authority and the employees. We have said that this board is not going to be full-time. It is going to be a part-time job where they sit four times in a year. Given that, we have also said we do not want ministries to second members to this unit because we want it independent and we have already passed the independence of the committee. The ones we are proposing here in the board are employees of Government. So, they cannot be independent. 

We proposed in the committee that we make these people independent and away from the ministries because the task force we are going to create after the preceding clauses shall be the task force composed of Government bureaucrats and that is to help coordinate work within Government and it shall be away; it shall not be the one directing the Authority. 

The Authority shall be independent with independent board members as we have described in this chapter and not to be part of Government bureaucrats. On page 8, we said that the current composition of the board in the Bill includes representatives of supervisory and law enforcement agencies, among others. These agencies could be considered as peers in the intelligence authority. It, therefore, implies that the intelligence authority is being governed by peers which in effect could compromise the independence of the intelligence authority. The committee records for other categories of board members and who are not considered to be at the same level with the Authority such that we give them independence from the employees of Government and by the way, they are dealing with money laundering. So, I don’t think you can just pick somebody from the Ministry of Finance to fight money laundering. The task force that we are going to create later shall be the one composed of the employees of Government.

MR OPOLOT: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I want to concur with the committee chairman in terms of revising the composition of the board. In the first place, I add to what he has said as justification that there should be enhancement on the independence of this board by minimising membership by active or serving technical staff who are bound to influence especially where they happen to be perpetrators or participants in money laundering. 

Mr Chairman, we have very recent experiences of connivance between the Ministry of Finance and OPM and some of these people who were involved were key people in some of the committees in Government. Therefore, if by accident we have such people in this board, they might influence the decisions of the board.

Having said that, I also feel that by the fact that we are proposing a chairperson of the board, then we should also have a docket of vice in the absence of a chairperson. I think it is necessary to provide for that. When we talk of someone who has served as a Judge of the High Court or practising as a lawyer in Uganda, I am sorry I would not want to ridicule the integrity of the legal fraternity or the Judiciary, but I wouldn’t really want to think that the issue of integrity should be excluded here - proven integrity because of recent, we have had bickering in the legal and judicial circles for lack of integrity amongst many people and therefore, being a Judge of the High Court is not enough and it is not a guarantee that we shall have a credible person. I, therefore, beg the chairperson to emphasise “proven integrity as a Judge of the High Court” and I really need to emphasise “Judge of the High Court” without the alternative of a practising lawyer. Thank you, Mr Chairman. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Thank you and just a moment. Mr Chairman, just on the point raised by the member for Pallisa in 1(a) “… served as a High Court Judge” that means the person is 65 years and above because he would have retired as a Judge; in (2), practised as a lawyer for 10 years; that means that person qualifies to be appointed a Judge. So, between 35 to 38, a person has already done 10 years as a lawyer. Are they similar? Are these all? Would you say they are an alternative or you just want to say somebody who qualifies to be appointed? Just think about that.

MR KASULE SSEBUNYA: We are not so conversant with the learned friends and the way they judge themselves; Judge of the High Court and then somebody who has done 10 years. I think we can reach a compromise and maybe we insist on one. You can’t be both. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, thank you very much. I want to thank the committee. To begin with, when you say that the chairperson shall be a serving Judge, who has served as a Judge or a practising lawyer, I concur with you that we do not want civil servants to be part and parcel of the board because the responsibility of the Ministry of Finance is to mobilise money and if they mobilise money, they can easily launder some. So, I agree with you on that. The job of the Bank of Uganda is monetary and their - on (4), the quarterly reports, we put here. “The Executive Director shall provide quarterly reports on the performance of the Authority to the board.”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Yes.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: That one is (4). Then we put another sub-clause – if the committee chairperson does not mind – “Reports of the Board”.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: That would be a clause, not a sub-clause.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Yes, we could call it clause 34 and say, “The reports of the board will be…” – the one which hon. Katuntu brought. And the other one will be, “The reports of the board on the performance of the management.” The reason is that the board should always be able to provide performance reports on the management of the Authority because these ones do not necessarily have to come from the management for their performance – they can also be critical of the management. If there is nothing, they can say, “Nil” but if there is something, they can say, “good” and so forth.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Okay. If you lumped it up?

MR AMURIAT: Mr Chairman, instead of having reports to the Board and reports of the Board, we are talking about an Authority. Suppose we said “reports of the authority” and then it would cover whatever comes from the board going to the minister – it will integrate all these sets of reports.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: So that you do not have to separate the two; you just list them as reports of – Yes, member for Bugweri. 

MR KATUNTU: Mr Chairman, I think we need to make this law user-friendly such that if you are creating an obligation for any institution or office, it is very easy for them to figure out their functions. Other than going this way, saying I am supposed to be reporting in this section and receiving in this section and so forth. And then somebody has to flip through all these sections and so forth. If for example you are looking at the functions of the board and you say, it is to receive quarterly reports from management. Then you know what your function is; you then go to the board and ask, “What are my duties?” Prepare reports to the minister and so forth. This makes it a little bit neater and is an easy way for any consumer of this law to know what they are supposed to do under this law.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No, it is easy to execute the responsibilities. (Laughter)

MR KASULE SSEBUNYA: If it is the wish of the House, then we can recommit later as the function of the board, among others, will be to receive quarterly reports.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I think that has been captured. Hon. Members, we are on clause 33 and we have approved two amendments to that clause. And there are proposals to restructure them to be, like the Member for Bugweri says, “user-friendly” so that people understand what they are supposed to do. So I propose that we stand over clause 33 for those purposes so that we see the placement and the recommendations that come from it, unless the honourable minister has a clearer way of presenting it. 

MR OMACH: Mr Chairman, I am supposed to give you a submission on the declaration of assets and liabilities proposal.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Are you ready with that now?

MR OMACH: Yes, with your permission.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Oh, if that is ready, let him propose. Then we can stand over this particular clause for those purposes so that we can move faster. Let us go back to what was proposed by the committee – declaration of assets and oath of secrecy. 

MR OMACH: Mr Chair, the proposal reads as follows: Clause 33: All members and staff of the authority – 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: That is a new clause you are proposing. (Interjection) No, it is a whole clause after 32.

MR OMACH: “All members and staff of the authority shall declare their assets and liabilities to the Inspector-General of Government within one month of taking office and subsequently at periodical intervals as required by law.”

MR AMURIAT: It is not very clear when he imports – he talks about members; are we talking about the Board or what? Let us distinguish between members and staff – who are we referring to?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Can you read it again?

MR OMACH: “All members of the board and staff of the Authority shall declare their assets and liabilities to the Inspector-General of Government within one month of taking up office and subsequently at periodical intervals as required by law.”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: “As required by law” would mean the normal two years.

MR OMACH: That is the law for declaration of assets. (Interjection) This is declaration of assets and liabilities. (Interjection) Okay, “as required by the Leadership Code”.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: “As required by law” is sufficient. So the heading of that new clause would be “Declaration of assets and liabilities”. 

MR KATUNTU: Mr Chairman, this law is going farther than the Inspectorate Law because what the Inspectorate of Government does requires some specified officers; it does not go up to the cleaners, who we are providing for. So we need to harmonise it notwithstanding what is contained in the Leadership Code. If we say “as required by law” and the law is the Leadership Code, the Leadership Code has a limitation – it is to some specified officers but this one goes farther. I hope I am getting my law correctly, Learned Attorney-General, like I always do. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: So now, honourable minister, with the heading of “Declaration of assets and liabilities”, please read now for the record, with the notwithstanding provision so that we have one sentence.

MR OMACH: Okay. “Notwithstanding any other laws, all members of the board and staff of the authority shall declare their assets and liabilities to the Inspector-General of Government within one month of taking up office and subsequently at periodical intervals as required by the Leadership Code.” Then the second proposal is on – 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Let us first adopt that one because the other one is a separate clause altogether. Honourable members, there was this discussion on the issue of declaration of assets and liabilities. The proposal has come from the minister in text that has been formulated. I now put the question to that amendment as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR OMACH: Then the other one on the oath of secrecy, which is a new clause 34 reads as follows: “All members of board and staff of the authority shall undertake an oath of secrecy immediately upon assumption of office.”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Yes, hon. Oboth.

MR OBOTH: I wish to make some little improvement; I know the ministry is trying very hard. When you are using the word “immediately” upon assumption, it should be upon assumption – when you are assuming office, this is part of what you need to do. So when you say “immediately” it could be idle, in my own limited thinking.

MR OMACH: Mr Chairman, West Budama is becoming too much. “All members of the Board and staff of the Authority shall undertake an oath of secrecy before assumption of office.”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Is that okay? So, the oath of secrecy is the standard oath of secrecy that we know. Is that correct? 

MR OBOTH: Mr Chairman, I said my understanding in this is quite limited. But when we say “before assumption of office”, why don’t we say “on assumption of office”? Because “before” would be so - I have to have done it 10 years ago. If I have done it, it could be interpreted - but if you say “on assumption” it would mean that you are assuming this office and this is part of what you have to do to assume the office. Not before. What are you doing before? And I am not agreeing with my neighbour to the left for the first time. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I do not want to go into border disputes now. (Laughter)

MR RUHINDI: Let us take the example of the oath of a Member of Parliament or minister for that matter, Article 115 of the Constitution: “Oath of minister: The minister shall before assuming the duties of office take and subscribe the oath of allegiance and the oath of minister specified in the fourth schedule to this Constitution.”

So, it should be before you assume duties of the office. You take the -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: For now we will be consistent with the Constitution. The language is “before”. We will pass it then it will be accommodated within the flow of the text of the law. I put the question to the amendment proposed by the minister on the oath of secrecy.   

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: We had stood over clause 33. Can we now see if we can finalise clause 33, especially now that hon. Member for Kumi has a new idea on this issue?

MR AMURIAT: Not quite. I just need some bit of clarification as to whether we have abandoned the penalties related to this. The committee had proposed a penalty for people who fail to maintain the oath of secrecy -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Violations of oath have general penalties. If you violate the oath of secrecy there are penalties already.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, perhaps to help Eng. Amuriat, you remember when hon. Lukyamuzi did not declare his assets he had to vacate office. So, one of them is there.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Are we in a better position to handle clause 33 now?  

Clause 33

MR KASULE SSEBUNYA: We had proposed an addition of (4) which we read.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: The additions have already been accommodated. We have accommodated the amendment which was proposed by the committee and the amendment that came from hon. Katuntu on clause 33. All those amendments have been accommodated. The question is how do we structure them now? The proposal was that you put “reports to the board” as separate from (1) to (4) and then another “report of the board” which comes to the minister and ends up in Parliament. But there seems to be another proposal on how to handle it.                              

MR KASULE SSEBUNYA: I think hon. Amuriat had proposed that the head note should read, “Reports of the Authority”. Is that what we should go by?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Would “Reports of the Authority” accommodate all the five?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, I think Engineer has a point and to solve hon. Katuntu’s, my Attorney-General’s problem, we can say, “Reports of the Authority” then we say, (1) the Executive Director shall…” then name a, b, c, d. Then sub-clause (2) “The board shall…” a, b, and we shall have sorted it out under the same sub-clause.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Is that okay?

MR KATUNTU: I am always uncomfortable drafting on the microphone but I hope our technical staff are picking the discussions and they can sit and make it neater.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I think the principle has been adopted; it is now the technicality of structuring it in the framework of this law. So, we have adopted all the amendments in clause 33. So, can we now take a decision on clause 33 unless - yes Leader of the Opposition.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, first of all as we had said, sub-clause (1) that the Executive Director shall, (a) report so we take (1) and it becomes (a), (2) becomes (b), (3) becomes (c) then (d) we put “shall submit quarterly reports to the board on the performance of the authority.” That is to deal with that.

Then (b) sub-clause (2) hon. Katuntu will provide - 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No, hon. Katuntu’s proposal was not a report to the board; it was a report coming out of the board now to the minister. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: If that is the case then sub-clause (2) will be, “the Board shall a…” what hon. Katuntu read; (b) “Provide the minister with performance reports on the management of the Authority” and (c) any other reports. It will allow them; they can have other parallel reports to come up.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I think we have approved the broad principles of what should go into this amendment. The technical people will structure it. Hon. Nandala-Mafabi has made a good proposal on the structuring. Can I put the question? I put the question that clause 33 as amended be part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 33, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 34

MR OMACH: From clause 34 up to clause 40, Mr Chairman, there are no amendments being proposed. So, I was praying that we go up to clause 40.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: So, there are no new amendments here. Can we proceed and see where we are going to go. 

I put the question that clause 34 stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 34, agreed to.

Clause 35, agreed to.

Clause 36, agreed to.

Clause 37, agreed to.

Clause 38, agreed to.

Clause 39, agreed to.

Clause 40

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, this is on audit. I want to seek clarification from the chairman of the committee. You produced an account called Confiscated Assets Fund. Where does it fall so that we can decide on this audit?
MR SSEBUNYA: The Confiscated Assets Fund is in clause 100; we shall get there.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Is that okay?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, if that is the case, then I want to move an amendment here. That “The Auditor-General, or an auditor appointed by the Auditor-General to act on his or her behalf, shall audit and report on the accounts and financial requests of the Authority including the Confiscated Assets Fund.” The reason is that these are the accounts of only the requests - but we should also deal with the Confiscated Funds account.

MR SSEBUNYA: I do agree that the Confiscated Assets Fund should be audited.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: And put in this part to do with the reporting and the auditing. Okay, the amendment is that the Confiscated Assets Fund should also be included among the audit items in clause 40. That is the proposal, which has been agreed to by the chairperson of the committee.

MR KATUNTU: For purposes of the record, Mr Chairman, I do intend to have 37 recommitted as it has some sort of problem.

MR OMACH: Mr Chairman, 37 has a typographical error. I do not know whether that would require recommittal. It is supposed to be 37(b), which reads, “No action shall…” and remove the word “not” lie against the Authority. It is a typographical error.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: But isn’t that typographical?

MR KATUNTU: Mr Chairman, I think it would be unfortunate that this committee chaired by you is passing this sort of problem. If it is typographical, let us correct it properly so that we have a proper law.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: We are now on Clause 40 with the amendment proposed by the Leader of the Opposition to insert “Confiscated Assets Fund” among the issues - mark your issue and when we come back, we can deal with that. I put the question to the amendment proposed by the Leader of the Opposition.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 40, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 41

MR SSEBUNYA: I thought the Chairman was adjourning so I started switching off.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Would this be the right time? Okay. Because I saw that the next amendment from the committee was in clause 64, so there are others in between, which were not to the knowledge of the chairperson. Okay, I think we can adjourn here.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, I want to plead with the Members present, including the ministers, to go and read Part V very carefully as it is most interesting, so that the next time we come, you have real ideas.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Is that communication from the Chair now? (Laughter)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, from the small chair.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

2.29
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Mr Chairman and colleagues, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the Whole House reports thereto.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, the motion is for the House to resume and to enable the Committee of the Whole House report. I put the question to that motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Deputy Speaker Presiding_)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

2.29
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues, I beg to report that the Committee of the Whole House has considered the Bill entitled “The Anti-Money Laundering Bill, 2009” and has passed clauses 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28 with amendments, 29, 30 31, 32 with amendments and the proposed new clause 33, which we have stood over; clause 33 with amendments, clause 34 and there is a new clause 34. We have also passed clauses 35, 36, 37, and stood over for recommittal on part -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, we passed it. Recommittal comes at -

MR OMACH: Okay. We passed clauses 37, 38, 39, and 40. I beg to report.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Mr Speaker and hon. Members of Parliament, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of the Whole House be adopted.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion is for the adoption of the report of the Committee of the Whole House. I put the question to that.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, thank you very much. We have been able to make some progress with this Bill. It is such a spirit that will enable us transact lots of business for this country. I thank you again for being here and cooperating to make this thing move forward. This House stands adjourned to Tuesday next week.

(The House rose at 2.32 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 2 July 2013 at 2.00 p.m.) 

