Thursday, 11 June 2015

Parliament met at 2.51 p.m. in the Serena Conference Centre, Kampala.

National Anthem.

The East African Community Anthem.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the chair.)

The House was called to Order.

PROCLAMATION 

THE SPEAKER: “WHEREAS, under Article 95(2) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda a Session of Parliament shall be held at such place within Uganda and shall commence at such time as the Speaker may, by Proclamation, appoint;

AND WHEREAS the President of the Republic of Uganda is required under Article 155(1) of the Constitution to prepare and lay before Parliament in each financial year, but in any case not later than the fifteenth day before the commencement of the financial year, estimates of revenues and expenditure of Government for the next financial year;

COGNISANT OF THE FACT THAT the financial year 2014/2015 will end on the 30th day of June 2015;

AWARE THAT it is expedient that the President lays before Parliament estimates of revenues and expenditure of Government for the financial year 2015/2016 at the Kampala Serena Conference Centre;

NOW, THEREFORE, in exercise of the power conferred upon the Speaker by Article 95 Sub-clause 2 of the Constitution, I hereby proclaim that Parliament shall sit at the Kampala Serena Conference Centre on the 11th day of June 2015 at 14:00 hours to receive estimates of revenues and expenditure of Government for the financial year 2015/2016.

AND FURTHER, in exercise of the powers conferred upon the Speaker by the Constitution, The Parliament (Powers and Privileges) Act, Cap 258 and the Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of Uganda, it is hereby proclaimed and declared that the said Kampala Serena Conference Centre, including the fore court, the yard and the gardens to be the precincts of Parliament for the afore-mentioned purposes. 

GIVEN under my hand at Parliament House, Kampala, on the 2nd day of June 2015.” 

Signed by Ms Rebecca Kadaga, Speaker of Parliament.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Your Excellency, the President of Uganda, Gen. Yoweri Museveni and Hon. Mrs Museveni; Your Excellency, the Vice President, Edward Kiwanuka Ssekandi; My Lord, the Chief Justice, Bart Katureebe; Rt. Hon. Al Haji Moses Kigongo - NRM Vice Chairperson; Rt. Hon. Prime Minister and Leader of Government Business; the deputy prime ministers; the Leader of the Opposition in Parliament; the ministers and the ministers of state; the Judges of the Courts of Judicature; Members of Parliament; Members of the Diplomatic Corps; Chief of Defence Forces; the Inspector-General of Police; the Commissioner-General of Prisons; the Governor, Bank of Uganda; leaders of political parties; peligious leaders; the business community; distinguished invited guests.

Your Excellency, it is my pleasure and honour to welcome you to Parliament. Last Thursday, you performed your constitutional duty of delivering the State of the Nation Address under the provision of Article 101(1) of the Constitution. 

Today is yet another important occasion in the parliamentary calendar when you perform another important function. The constitutional duty of presenting to Parliament estimates of revenues and expenditure of Government for the financial year 2015/2016 as provided for under Article 155(1) of the Constitution.

Your Excellency, as you are aware, the enactment of the Public Finance Management Act, 2015 brought about a number of changes in the budget cycle; for example, Section 14 of the Public Finance Management Act, provides that Parliament shall by the 31st of May of this year consider and approve the annual budget and workplan of Government for the next financial year, including the Appropriation Bill and any other Bill that may be necessary to implement the annual budget.

I would like to report that Parliament in compliance with the provision mentioned above approved the budget for the financial year 2015/2016 in accordance with Section 14 of  the Public Finance Management Act.

We strongly believe that the speed with which we can move forward as a country will depend on developments in the financial and economic spheres and in line with the above. I wish to report that during the Fourth Session, Parliament considered the Second National Development Plan and approved it. Shortly after my communication, I will invite you, Your Excellency, to launch the Second National Development Plan.

Members will appreciate that for the plan to be implemented, it will require substantial funding both local and external. In that regard, His Excellency, the President, will also launch the United Nations Development Assistance Framework for Uganda 2016-2020 during this sitting.  

Your Excellency, I believe the honourable members and the Nation are waiting to hear from you. It is now my singular honour and pleasure to invite you to present the budget for this country.  I will now invite the Minister of Finance to launch the NDP.

LAUNCHING OF:

I) THE NATIONAL DEVELOPMENT PLAN II BY HIS EXCELLENCY THE PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF UGANDA

II) THE UNITED NATIONS DEVELOPMENT PLAN ASSISTANCE FRAMEWORK FOR UGANDA 2016- 2020 BY HIS EXCELLENCY THE PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF UGANDA

3.05
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Matia Kasaija): Your Excellency the President of the Republic of Uganda; Your Excellency the Vice President; The Rt Hon. Speaker of Parliament; His Lordship the Chief Justice; His Lordship the Deputy Chief Justice; The Rt Hon. Deputy Speaker of Parliament; The Rt Hon. Prime Minister; The Rt Hon. Leader of the Opposition; Honourable ministers; honourable Members of Parliament; Your Excellencies, Ambassadors and Heads of Diplomatic Missions; Leaders of our various security forces; Distinguished Guests; ladies and gentlemen 

Today as a part of NDP II, we are launching the Second National Development Plan for the period 2015/2016- 2019/2020. It is an important milestone in the actualisation of Uganda’s long term vision of transforming the country from a peasant to a modern and prosperous country as envisaged in the Uganda Vision 2040. 

I take this opportunity to thank the National Planning Authority Board, the management and staff led by Dr Kisamba Mugerwa for a job well done. (Applause)

The implementation of the NDP I is on until the end of this month. Under this plan, the country has registered enormous achievements. The following are the key achievements realised:
A drop in poverty from 24.3 per cent in 2009/2010 to 19.7 per cent in 2012/2013
Increase in income per capita from US$665 to US$788 in the past four years of NDP I

On the side of the human development indicators, we have also observed positive developments such as improvement in life expectancy at birth from 51.5 years in 2009/2010 to 54.5 years in 2011/2012.

NDP II will guide the country’s efforts in taking advantage of regional and global development opportunities. All these will contribute to attaining the Uganda Vision 2040.

The plan will also serve as the point of reference to inform all other planning processes in the country including the development partners. This is critical to ensure that we all finance and implement what we plan. 

Your Excellency, the wish of every Ugandan is to see the country grow fast. The strategic focus of the NDP II will be to attain and sustain rapid growth with value addition through industrialisation or light manufacturing and taking advantage of the potential demographic business. 

The plan has taken into account the links existing across major sectors that will generate much of the economic growth in the medium term and also create jobs.

I will give the details of the NDP II priorities to be implemented during the medium term in my budget speech, some of which are a continuation of the core projects highlighted in NDP I. The NDP II priorities are the following, Your Excellency:
Infrastructure
Agriculture
Tourism
Mineral development - oil and gas
Human capital development 

Your Excellency, implementation remains the key challenge. Institutional and policy reforms have been proposed to improve the pace of implementation like the Delivery Unit in the Office of the Prime Minister which will be tasked on following up the core projects.

The alignment and implementation of budgets to the NDP II will be taken very seriously. Strategic guidance for public investment will be provided to ensure there are effective project selection processes, ensuring alignment of projects with development policy priorities as reflected in the Uganda Vision 2040 and the NDP II. 

Through a Government process, the UN agencies in the spirit of delivering as one, developed a United Nations Development Assistance Framework that is aligned to the UNDP II. As a result of this collaboration, the process and the product that you are about to launch have become a showcase to the world on how to integrate sustainable development goals in the National Planning Framework.

Madam Speaker, at this juncture, it is my singular honour and privilege to invite Your Excellency the President to launch the Second National Development Plan 2015/2016 - 2019/2020 and thereafter the United Nations Development Assistance Framework 2015/2016- 2018/2019. (Applause)

3.10
H.E. THE PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF UGANDA (Gen. (Rtd)Yoweri Kaguta Museveni): His Excellency, the Vice President; The Rt Hon. Speaker of Parliament; His Lordship the Chief Justice; The Rt hon. Prime Minister; and all the big people –(Laughter)– sometimes we spend so much time talking about the big people and we run out of breath. All the honourable ministers, honourable Members of Parliament –(Laughter)– it is now my pleasure to launch the Second National Development Plan for 2015-2019/2020. Therefore, I launch it here. (Applause)

The Minister of Finance told you what we have achieved in the first one and what we hope to achieve in this one here. By the end of this one, you will have graduated from being - there is a certain category you have been in for a long time. This is least developed countries. By the end of this one, you are going to have graduated from the LDCs (Least Developed Country) status to lower middle-income status – (Applause) - It is not upper status. You have heard how you have moved; when the other plan started, you were at $600 -something per capita. You are now at $700 - something per capita, almost 800 inspite of having too many children. This is a question of average, if you did not have so many children, we would by now be a middle income country because the economy has been growing; even if it grows when you divide by the children and grandchildren who are too many, then you remain with a lower average. Inspite of your “reproduction”, we are now sure that by 2020, however many children you produce, we shall have surpassed the average of $1000 because that is the boundary – what is the boundary - it is $1000.

When we hit the boundary of $1000 per capita, we then would have entered the lower middle income status. When we hear of people talking of 2040, that is when we shall be in the upper middle income status where the average per capita will be $9000. So, this is the 2040 Vision you hear about, but we will have entered from the low level of the middle income.

This is, therefore, the importance of this plan. We shall talk more about it in my speech. I, therefore, launch this plan of 2015-2020. (Applause)

We have got some friends who are called United Nations. Have you heard of those people? Here, they are represented by a very beautiful African lady – (Applause) - they have been involved with us for better or for worse, like they say in the Christian marriages. They are always supporting us; when we are killing each other for no good reason, they bring us relief - Africans excel in relief - feeding people who have no homes and are running away. At one time we were in that category, do you remember? Now that we are no longer killing each other, the support goes to development and capacity building. (Applause) 

Here, they have got their own plan entitled United Nations Development Assistance Framework for Uganda 2016-2020. I also launch it. (Applause) I hope you do not say that I have not done my work. (Laughter)

PRESENTATION OF THE 2015/2016 NATIONAL BUDGET TO PARLIAMENT

THE SPEAKER: Your Excellency the President and the distinguished guests, I now invite the Minister of Finance to present the 2015/2016 National Budget.

3.15
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Matia Kasaija): Your Excellency, the President; Your Excellency, the Vice President; Rt Hon. Speaker of Parliament; His Lordship the Chief Justice; His Lordship the Deputy Chief Justice; Rt Hon. Deputy Speaker of Parliament; Rt Hon. Prime Minister; Rt Hon. Leader of the Opposition; honourable Members of the Cabinet; Honourable Members of Parliament; our leaders of the security forces; Your Excellencies, Ambassadors and Heads of Diplomatic Missions; distinguished guests; ladies and gentlemen.

Madam Speaker, in accordance with Article 155(1) of our Constitution and the recently enacted Public Finance Management Act, 2015, I have the honour to present the budget for the financial year 2015/2016 in exercise of the power delegated to me by H.E. the President of the Republic of Uganda.

I take this opportunity to thank His Excellency the President, for entrusting me with this noble duty. (Applause) I also acknowledge my predecessor, Madam Maria Kiwanuka for her stewardship and guidance during her tenure, which laid the foundation for this budget. I would also like to thank my colleagues the ministers of state and the staff led by the Permanent Secretary, Secretary to the Treasury at the Ministry, for an exemplary effort in the preparation of this budget. (Applause)

Madam Speaker, the Public Finance Management Act, 2015, inter alia, requires that the budget is approved by Parliament prior to the beginning of the financial year as “Maama” you have just said. 

The Act aims to, among others, ensure accountability; enhance reporting for public resources, and increase fiscal discipline and it also prescribes how Oil revenues will be managed and invested. 

The Act provides for Parliament to approve a Charter of Fiscal Responsibility that details a post-election Government’s fiscal policy objective, including the sufficiency of revenue, and the maintenance of prudent levels of public debt.

Madam Speaker, the financial year 2015/2016 Budget, was consequently approved by Parliament on 30 May, 2015 in accordance with Section 14 of the Public Finance Management Act, 2015. I would like to take this opportunity to thank Parliament, under your able guidance and support for passing the budget on time –(Applause)– despite the pressure of other business before the august House. 

Madam Speaker, the budget seeks to attain a better future for Uganda and is anchored on the Second National Development Plan (NDPII), which we have just launched. Allocations have been made to fund strategic choices that will drive the socio-economic transformation of our country into a middle income status. 

As His Excellency the President implored us in the State of the Nation Address last week, the budget makes strategic choices that will support business and create jobs. It also seeks to improve the skills of graduates from our education system, so that they are prepared to take advantage of employment opportunities as and when they arise, and also create new businesses. Furthermore, it seeks to rebuild the health system to improve service delivery and ultimately deal with the disease burden.

Madam Speaker, Uganda continues to register positive economic growth, driven largely by an increase in private sector activity, in agriculture, industry and services. 

Growth has also been a result of an increase in public infrastructure investment especially in energy and roads. Social services have also expanded significantly, particularly in education, health, in pursuit of Government’s policy of universal access. 

Despite significant success achieved in the past, there are still challenges that need to be addressed. The structure of our economy still consists of a sizeable informal sector that accounts for 49 per cent of the economic output. The agriculture and industrial sectors, being the main productive base of the economy require major effort to spur continued growth and competitiveness. 

Furthermore, our external sector suffers from an imbalance between growing imports compared to the poor performance of exports. Exports have been constrained largely due to political instability faced by some of our neighbouring trading partners in the region, and an economic slowdown in Europe. 

The competitiveness of our private sector remains constrained by infrastructure gaps due to unreliable electricity and inadequate rail and road networks. These gaps ultimately increase the cost of doing business. 

Unemployment, especially of the youth graduating from educational institutions, is an increasing challenge that must be tackled urgently. As I have mentioned earlier, skills building is one way to make the youth suitable for the labour market, and also enable them establish small and medium enterprises. 

We also need to build an industrial sector base that adds value to our newly discovered greatest potential, namely, minerals. 

It is also urgent that we build a solid industrial sector based principally on adding value, where Uganda enjoys a strong comparative advantage, namely, agricultural products. 

In this regard, the provision of affordable and reliable electricity is critical, in addition to dealing with other constraints to doing business.

In light of the foregoing, the budget strategy for next financial year has, therefore, been formulated to address the challenges I have just highlighted, while taking into account the prevailing macroeconomic conditions and future prospects. 

As such, the thrust of next year’s budget is continued closure of infrastructure gaps, as well as addressing socio-economic transformation. 

The theme for the budget for next year is hence “Maintaining Infrastructure Investment and Promoting Excellence in Public Service Delivery”.

Madam Speaker, in my statement today I will do the following:-
Show the economic performance and outlook going forward;
Account for the use of resources provided in the budget for the financial year now ending;
Provide the rationale for revenue measures and resource allocations in the next budget;
State policy actions underpinning both the revenue measures and expenditure allocations for the new budget.

Now I turn to financial year 2014/2015 economic performance and economic outlook. 

Economic Growth

Madam Speaker, Uganda’s economy has become more diversified, leading to new activities which were previously not captured in the national accounts. 

This diversification takes place continuously in economies that are growing, like Uganda’s. Because of this, the size and structure of our economy has to be periodically re-assessed, which economists call re-basing.

The recent re-assessment has shown that our economy is 17 per cent larger than previously estimated, and it is now valued at Shs. 75.183 Trillion, which is approximately US Dollars 25 billion.   

Our economy is projected to grow at 5.3 per cent in real terms this financial year, reflecting almost full recovery from the slowdown that happened in financial year 2012/13. 

Growth in the agriculture, forestry and fishing sectors combined is projected at 2.3 per cent; while the industrial sector is projected to grow at 5.5 per cent, and services at 5.7 per cent.

Madam Speaker, in the agricultural sector, cash crops rebounded strongly from an average negative growth of 1.5 per cent per year for the last five years to a positive growth of 6.6 per cent in this year. (Applause)

Growth in manufacturing has picked pace after a contraction in financial year 2012/2013, and is now estimated at 4.1 per cent. 

Construction has continued to be a major driver of growth in the industrial sector and is estimated to expand by 6.6 per cent, principally on account of infrastructure investment.

Information and Telecommunications has contributed significantly to services sector growth, which has continued to register high growth rates estimated at 10.2 per cent. 

This performance is driven by improved services, product innovation and other value added services such as mobile money and other modes of payments.

Inflation and Domestic Prices

It is the primary objective of Government to maintain prices of consumer goods and services stable in order to keep the value of people’s savings and maintain the economic welfare of the people we serve. When prices are increasing all the time, the standards of living decline and the value of savings is eroded. 

I am happy to report that the rate at which prices are increasing has considerably slowed to an estimated average rate of 2.7 per cent this year. (Applause)

The main factors for this are:
The abundant food supply in the country, thanks to the increased efforts of our farmers and conducive weather conditions. 
Falling global oil prices by about 47 per cent over the last 12 months ending March 2015, resulting in a slight decline in pump prices domestically. 

For instance, despite the weakening of the Uganda shilling, pump prices have fallen to an average of Shs 3,400 per litre from about 3,850 for petrol, and to an average of Shs 2,850 from Shs 3,250 for diesel. 

Monetary and External Sector Developments

Interest Rates

Madam Speaker, interest rates for borrowers remain high largely due to two factors: one, the limited supply of long term capital in the economy due to absence of a savings mechanism to mobilize.

(ii) The risk profile of borrowers, which remains high as demonstrated by high default rates and non-performing loans in the past.  

To address these constraints, Government is implementing, among others, the National Identification Project whose integration with financial systems will aid the verification of the creditworthiness of borrowers. Government is also undertaking reforms in the financial sector, including pensions, to create efficient mechanisms to mobilize long-term capital. In addition, Government will increase the capitalization of the Uganda Development Bank from the current Shs 100 billion up to Shs 500 billion over the medium term. (Applause)

Balance of Payments

Madam Speaker, as I earlier mentioned, our overall balance of payments has been negatively affected by the poor performance of exports to the region and a surge in import demand, as well as net outflow of short term capital in equity and government securities. The total export revenue for the period April 2014 to March 2015 is estimated at US$ 2,701.6 million, compared to imports of US$ 5,048.9 million over the same period. The surge in import demand has been inevitable, given an increase in infrastructure investments in oil, the road network and Karuma and Isimba hydropower projects.

Consequently, the current account deficit for this year is projected to widen to 8.5 per cent of GDP compared to 7.2 per cent in the financial year 2013/2014. During the 12-month period ending March 2015, preliminary estimates indicate that the overall balance of payments position was a deficit of US$ 450 million, compared to the surplus of US$ 287.4 million that was recorded in the previous 12-month period ending March 2014. 

The current account deficit has been partially financed by transfers in the form of external grants to Government amounting to US$ 299 million; workers’ remittances amounting to US$ 915 million; and foreign direct investments inflows of US$ 1,200 million. However, this was not enough to close the deficit - if you add up the figures - resulting into a reduction in external reserves amounting to US$ 266.5 million. Despite this reduction, our reserves remain healthy at US$ 2,972.4 million, equivalent to four months of future imports of goods and services. (Applause) I am very sure about this, sir; I am not talking hot air. 

Madam Speaker, to address this problem, in the medium term Government will enhance export performance by encouraging exports diversification through, among others, adding value to agricultural products; for example, we have now got investors to add value to our coffee. This was our long term aspiration, your Excellency, as you know. We have now got investors to add value to our coffee and cotton, for a start. This should significantly increase our export earnings.   

Exchange Rate and Foreign Reserves

Madam Speaker, the Uganda shilling has been weakening against the US dollar as a result of mainly two major factors, which I have already mentioned. Therefore, the increase in demand for foreign exchange to meet the import bill leads to a weak Uganda shilling. 

In order to reduce exchange rate volatility, the Bank of Uganda has been intervening in the foreign exchange market, although not to determine its level.  This policy of smoothening the exchange rate movements will continue in order not to cause undue instability in the business climate.

Public Finance 

Revenue Performance

Madam Speaker, the total tax collections in this year are projected at Shs 9,577 billion, up from Shs 8,031 billion in financial year 2013/2014. (Applause) You should have clapped more on that one. This increase is a result of a package of tax policy measures implemented this year, improved tax administration and increased economic activity.  

External and Domestic Financing

Madam Speaker, donor financing this year is estimated at Shs 1,765 billion, of which Shs 113 billion will be budget support, Shs 559 billion in project grants and Shs 1,093 billion will be in concessional project loans. Domestic financing through issuance of Treasury bills and bonds has dropped to Shs 1,386 from Shs 1,775 billion in financial year 2013/2014.  

During this financial year, total Government expenditure is estimated at Shs 13,988 billion, compared to Shs 11,456 billion in financial year 2013/2014. Of this, recurrent expenditure is projected at Shs 7,550 billion and development expenditure at Shs 4,881 billion. Statutory expenditure for this year is projected to increase to Shs 1,431 billion from Shs 753.9 billion the previous year. Domestically raised revenues will fund 100 per cent of the recurrent expenditure and 60 per cent of development expenditure. (Applause)

Total expenditure on externally funded development projects is expected to record a shortfall this year, unfortunately, as a result of delays in the disbursement of project loans and grants. These delays arise from weaknesses in project implementation. However, in some cases it is caused by limited understanding of disbursement procedures, late procurement and land compensation, and protracted approvals at various levels including Cabinet and Parliament. 

Fiscal Deficit

Madam Speaker, domestic revenue to GDP ratio is estimated at 13 per cent this year. Total expenditure is estimated at 18.6 per cent of GDP, which is much lower compared to about 22 per cent within the East African Community countries. Domestic resources will finance 76.4 per cent of the budget compared to 81.8 per cent last year. The decline arises from increased external financing for infrastructure development. 

The overall fiscal deficit for this year ending is estimated at 4.5 per cent of GDP, increasing from 3.9 per cent. This increase is due to higher infrastructure spending, particularly on roads and energy. The fiscal deficit is being financed by domestic borrowing through Government Treasury bills and bonds and external borrowing. This borrowing has not been inflationary, principally because the money has financed investments in the economy, which ultimately should enhance economic activity and business competitiveness.

Public Debt

The stock of outstanding public debt is projected to reach US$ 7.6 billion by end of this financial year, compared to US$ 7.2 billion last year. Sixty per cent of Uganda’s debt stock is external and 40 per cent is domestic. The increase in public debt reflects the increased borrowing to finance infrastructure investment. 

Although our public debt has increased faster compared to past trends, it is sustainable in relation to the size of our economy. Measuring public debt in relation to the size of the economy is a standard practice to know whether or not our debt is sustainable. Based on this measure, our debt to GDP ratio is estimated at 30.4 per cent, which is far below the Public Debt Management Framework, 2013 threshold and the East African Community Monetary Union convergence criteria requirement of 50 per cent. 

Public debt sustainability also signifies that Government can continue servicing its debt without default. Our public debt, therefore, remains sustainable and our economy is by no means under debt distress. This is the same conclusion reached by independent parties who undertake credit rating for Uganda, and the debt sustainability analysis conducted by the International Monetary Fund (IMF) and the World Bank. 

Uganda’s external debt portfolio consists largely of highly concessional loans, characterized by long maturities and very low fixed interest rates. This further explains why our public debt will remain sustainable over a long period in the future. However, if access to the concessional window gets more constrained, Government shall continue to diversify its sources of debt financing. Non-concessional borrowing shall only be considered for the financing of projects that will provide an economic rate of return greater than the cost of debt. Government will also continue to negotiate the most beneficial and cost-effective terms and conditions.

Economic Outlook

Madam Speaker, the economy is projected to grow at 5.8 per cent next financial year, largely on account of the recovery in private sector consumption, as well as acceleration in both public and private investment.  Over the last two years, as we are all aware, there has been significant increase in Government spending in infrastructure. This trend will continue in the next few years.

The medium term outlook for our economy is bright, with real GDP expected to continue its recovery path to an average of 6.5 per cent in the next five years. This growth will be driven by increase in public investment in infrastructure and a sustained rebound in private sector activities. Consumer prices increases are expected to remain within the five per cent policy target. I expected a handclap to that. (Applause) 

The current account deficit is projected to widen slightly on account of import demand driven by higher non-oil private and public infrastructure related imports; and projected weak exports earnings, as we have said before. Uganda’s international reserves are projected to improve gradually to achieve about 4.5 months of import of goods and services to cover in the medium term. 

The prospects for the development of Uganda’s oil sector remain positive. To date we have three active exploration licences and a production licence under a joint partnership of three international oil companies. In February this year, Government announced the first bidding licensing round for six blocks in an effort to attract new companies in the exploration phase. The bidding process is ongoing and it is expected to be concluded by December, 2015. When successful, this will lead to continued strong foreign direct investment and other financial inflows, with a positive effect on our exchange rate. 

Madam Speaker, in line with the budget theme, our strategy next financial year and the medium term will focus on accelerating infrastructure development to address the constraints to private sector growth and increase efficiency in service delivery. The budget deficit for the coming financial year is therefore, projected to increase to seven per cent of GDP, compared to 4.5 per cent for this year. Over the medium term, the deficit will average about six per cent before it drops to about 4.5 per cent in financial year 2019/2020, in line with the East African Community Monetary Union Protocol.

Development expenditure constitutes 51 per cent of next year’s budget excluding debt payments compared to 32 per cent in the financial year 2010/11. We are now putting more money in development rather than in consumption. Development expenditure will grow by 58 per cent next financial year, mainly driven by major infrastructure projects including the rehabilitation of Entebbe International Airport, new roads as I will remunerate later on, and the Karuma and Isimba hydropower projects. This represents 11.29 per cent of GDP, compared to 7.95 per cent this year. Current spending, excluding interest payments, is budgeted to increase by 10 per cent. This represents 8.4 per cent of GDP next year, compared to 8.5 per cent of GDP of this year. Public financial management reforms will continue to enhance efficiency of public expenditure. 

To avoid an increase in relatively expensive domestic borrowing and reduce the fiscal burden of debt payments over the medium term, a larger share of the fiscal deficit will be financed by external loans. We will continue to pursue concessional loans as the preferred means of meeting our external financing requirements. Non-concessional external borrowing will be considered only for the financing of highly productive fixed capital investments. 

Budget Strategy for Financial Year 2015/2016

Madam Speaker, the budget reflects the strategic choices that Government has made in the face of numerous deserving but competing priorities. This results from the inadequacy of tax revenues to meet all the deserving needs that Government is presented with even after incurring debt. 

The budget, therefore, must prioritize and make those choices that will provide the greatest sustainable economic and social benefits to society in the short, medium and long term. Therefore, while it deserves to spend more resources on social services such as education and health, it is also prudent to increase funds to key infrastructure investment, such as roads and electricity. 

Government’s continued focus on infrastructure investment will enhance regional integration and develop Uganda’s oil sector. This will unlock private sector activity, stimulate growth and generate much needed tax revenues to finance other deserving needs. However, even with the strategic choice to increase infrastructure spending, social sector spending will also continue. Next year, Government has allocated 11.1 per cent and 6.9 per cent of the total budget allocations to the education and health sectors, respectively. (Applause) 

Madam Speaker, next financial year’s budget will therefore, focus on the following seven strategic areas: 

i) 	Maintenance of national security and defence. (Applause) Yes, that is the bottom line. We are all here saying what we are saying because we are in a stable and secure environment – (Interjections) – You may like it or you may not like it, but truth must be told. 

ii) 	Facilitation of private sector enterprise development.
iii) 	Effective development and maintenance of infrastructure.  
iv) 	Commercialization of agriculture and improved productivity in primary growth sectors. 
v) 	Enhanced capacity for increased domestic revenue mobilization.
vi) 	Increased social service delivery.  
vii) 	Enhanced efficiency in government management. (Applause) 

Financial Year 2015/2016 Fiscal Framework

Madam Speaker, the total approved budget for next financial year is Shs 23,972 billion. Out of this, Shs 17,329 billion is allocated for spending by ministries, departments and agencies, which includes statutory expenditures amounting to Shs 1,148 billion.  Shs 6,643 billion is debt repayment plus interest on total debt. The total debt repayment includes Shs 4,787 billion, which is meant to pay maturing domestic debt. Also, of the total budget, Shs 200 billion will be for the recapitalization of the Bank of Uganda, and Shs 1,370.5 billion and Shs 285.7 billion will be for domestic and external debt interest payments respectively. 

Revenues

Madam Speaker, domestic revenues are expected to increase to Shs 11,333 billion up from Shs 9,799 billion, thanks to URA and please clap for them. (Applause) This will be achieved through a number of changes to the structure and coverage of taxes, and efficiency improvements in tax collection and compliance. I will spell out these measures later on when I discuss the approved tax policy measures underpinning next year’s resource framework.
	
Domestic Financing

Madam Speaker, the new domestic debt to be raised through Treasury bills and bonds next year is expected to amount to Shs 1,384 billion. These funds will help to finance Government’s contribution to infrastructure investment projects.

External Financing

Madam Speaker, next year we expect to receive external financing equivalent to Shs 5,649 billion in grants and loans, of which Shs 1,095 billion will be grants, Shs 1,326 billion concessional loans and Shs 3,228 billion non-concessional loans. I thank our development partners for this good gesture. 

Sector Performance and Interventions

Madam Speaker, I now turn to sector performance for the financial year now ending and the planned interventions for next year. I will summarize sector performance and the forthcoming interventions by thematic areas.

1. 	Defence and National Security

Madam Speaker, peace and national security are important pre-requisites, which we must not take for granted. (Applause) As we all know, they form the fundamental basis for all we seek to achieve. Government has actively enhanced the capacity of Uganda’s armed forces in order to safeguard peace and security of Ugandans and their property. Consequently, the capacity of the Uganda People’s Defence Forces (UPDF) and other security agencies has been strengthened through the following interventions: 
i. 	Recruitment and training of personnel; 
ii. 	Acquisition of advanced and modern equipment; 
iii. 	Undertaking peacekeeping, defence diplomacy and conflict resolution; and 
iv. 	Improving staff welfare through provision of accommodation, medical facilities and access to credit.

Madam Speaker, Uganda’s security forces have, with distinction, secured the country against terrorist attacks, -(Applause)- and also executed peace keeping missions in some of our neighbouring countries very successfully and proudly. (Applause) Ugandans wholeheartedly acknowledge the invaluable contribution of our men and women in defence and security services for the peace we are enjoying in Uganda today. (Applause) Those who are not happy with this, God may bless them. 

Madam Speaker, an allocation of Shs 1,632.89 billion has been approved for the security sector in the budget for the next year. These resources will be utilised to further professionalise the armed forces and other security organs. Specific emphasis will be placed on the acquisition of modern weaponry, strengthening intelligence capability, training and welfare.

Commercialisation, Production and Value Addition

Agriculture

Madam Speaker, Government recognises the pivotal role of the agricultural sector in economic growth and development. The sector employs 66 per cent of Uganda’s labour force. The role of agriculture in the livelihood of most Ugandans cannot be over-emphasized. The goal of the NRM Government is to expedite the transformation of this sector from subsistence farming to viable commercial enterprises. 

The agricultural sector has performed strongly this year, as I reported earlier. Consequently, production of various commodities has increased; for instance, fish production increased by 10.1 per cent from about 420,000 metric tonnes to about 460,000 metric tonnes, thanks to hon. Ruth Nankabirwa.

The ongoing major government interventions include: 
i) 	Providing seeds, planting, breeding and stocking materials to famers; 
ii) 	Reforming agricultural extension and advisory services; 
iii) 	Funding agricultural research and animal genetic improvement; 
iv) 	Support to commodity value chains;  
v) 	Construction of 179 valley tanks with capacity of over 500,000 cubic meters across the country; 
vi) 	Enforcing agriculture standards and regulations including the fisheries regulations; 
vii) 	Controlling of pests, vectors and diseases, especially foot and mouth disease.

Madam Speaker, since 2012, Government has implemented the Commodity Based Approach (CBA) under which support is channelled to the 12 prioritized commodities, namely: maize, beans, rice, bananas, cassava, cattle, meat, fish, coffee, tea, fruits and vegetables. Specific interventions under each commodity chain have included the provision of improved planting and breeding materials, and supporting agricultural research and development. 

For next year, I have allocated Shs 479.96 billion to the agriculture sector. The strategic interventions to be implemented under the Commodity Based Approach include the following: 
i) 	Provision of agricultural inputs to farmers; 
ii) 	Promotion of value addition for strategic commodities; 
iii) 	Funding research to increase productivity and disease resistance varieties; 
iv) 	Controlling of pests and diseases, with special emphasis on banana and coffee bacterial wilt and foot and mouth disease; 
v) 	Construction of valley tanks and dams for livestock and crop irrigation; and 
vi)	Providing affordable long term financing under the Agricultural Credit Facility (ACF) for production and agro-processing.

Value Addition and Industrial Development

Madam Speaker, this year the Uganda Industrial Research Institute has made significant innovations for Small and Medium Enterprises (SMEs) for adding value to agricultural products and building the economy’s industrial base. These innovations include the following: 
i) 	Development of solar dryer prototypes including a wooden solar dryer of 100kg capacity to dry briquettes within two days. 
ii) 	Production of several antibiotics including Bacitracin, Nisin, Subtilin, Aspergillic acid and Surfactin –(Laughter)– all of which have useful pharmaceutical applications. Excuse me for the little knowledge in pharmaceutical terms; I am not a doctor neither am I a veterinarian. 
iii) 	This will also focus on the fabrication of value addition technologies, including an energy efficient oven, ceramic bio-gas burner and a soap making machine. 
iv) 	The development of a thermo-stable vaccine against Newcastle disease, a major step in dealing with the most devastating disease in poultry farming. I do not know whether Prof. Kwesiga is here; he should stand up for a clap –(Interjection)– Yes, because he is the brain behind all this.

Madam Speaker, the Uganda Industrial Research Institute has also provided support for the development of the following industries on a business incubation basis: 
i) 	Premier Dairies producing pasteurised Mega Milk at 180,000 litres per month; 

ii) 	Kabale potatoes processing and research facility, supporting 450 farmers producing potato chips; 

iii) 	Lira peanut processing and research facility, supporting 150 farmers producing at 6.5 tonnes per month; 

iv) 	Mushroom Training and Research Centre, serving over 7,000 people in the districts of Kabale, Kisoro, Kanungu, Bushenyi, Kisoro, and Ntungamo. 

v) 	Pioneered support in the cosmetic industry with Aleosha and Amagara skin care products. Ladies, you should cheer that. 

vi) 	Under a pilot marketing arrangement, distributed six million doses of vaccine against Newcastle disease in Mbale, Kibuku, Pallisa, Bukedea, Kumi and Iganga.

Madam Speaker, industrial and business parks at Namanve, Luzira, Mukono and Mbale will continue to be operationalised to provide serviced areas for the development of manufacturing and other business enterprises. Government will complete the road networks and provide utilities such as water and electricity. In addition, provision for warehousing and logistics including cold storage and market auctioning for the wholesale of agricultural produce will be provided.

In addition to the initial focus on the Kampala Industrial and Business Park at Namanve, an allocation of Shs 4.5 billion has been approved for the compensation of persons in the Mbale Industrial and Business Park –(Applause)- to pave way for its development. People from Mbale should be very happy. (Applause)

Government will also develop Economic Processing Zones (EPZs) in line with the Free Zones Act, 2014. Economic processing zones are important tools for industrial and export promotion. Government has identified land in Kaweweta to set up an export-processing zone. Government is completing the procedures for securing ownership of the land and also concluding negotiations with prospective investors for its development. The zone will consist of, among others, a world-class modern abattoir, milk and fruit processing plants, an area for a modern farm, a textiles manufacturing plant, and refining local medicinal and aromatic herbs.
 
Tourism Development

Madam Speaker, Government has developed a 10-year tourism master plan and a five-year sector development plan to guide the implementation of critical activities to drive tourism growth in the country. Consequently, a holistic tourism promotion strategy that builds on our comparative tourism advantage is being implemented by the Uganda Tourism Board. In addition, visa costs for tourists have been reduced with the introduction of the single tourist visa to promote tourism through easing cross-border transits within East Africa. This should increase tourist numbers, generate higher foreign exchange inflows and enhance the employment potential of the tourism and hospitality industry. 

In order to diversify tourism products based on communities, regional tourism clusters were formed in Buganda, Busoga, Kigezi, Bugisu, Bunyoro, Toro, Northern Uganda and West Nile. These clusters identify, develop and market region-specific tourism products with close support from the Uganda Tourism Board. Further efforts are being made with the development of satellite wildlife education centres in Fort Portal and Mayuge and the construction of a regional museum in Soroti.  

Government’s actions to revitalise the tourism and hospitality industry in the medium term will include the following: 
i) 	Undertake skills development to meet world-class requirements for high standard of performance in the hospitality industry; 

ii)	Complete the rating and ranking of hotels and restaurants; 

iii) 	Develop strategic tourism infrastructure in partnership with the private sector; and 
iv) 	Enact and enforce sector regulation to ensure the maintenance of sector standards at internationally acceptable levels.  

An allocation of Shs 30.8 billion has been approved towards the tourism sector to implement these activities.

Business Climate 

Madam Speaker, in order to improve the business climate, Government has undertaken legal and regulatory reforms including reforms in land administration, business registration and licensing. These reforms have thus far resulted in the following: 
i) 	A comprehensive inventory and review of all business licences; 
ii) 	Establishment of a business licence e-registry as the sole repository of business licences to create a one-stop centre linking to other agencies; 
iii) 	The launch of a business regulation feedback portal at the Private Sector Foundation Uganda; and 
iv) 	Completion of computerisation of 21 land registries. 

In the medium term, Government will further rationalise business licences and procedures to eliminate red-tape in business transactions. We will also enhance the efficiency of the Judiciary to reduce commercial case backlog by introducing new technology, making procedures faster, including instituting small claims procedures.

Strategic Infrastructure Development and Maintenance 

The Transport Infrastructure

Roads and Bridges

Madam Speaker, in the roads sub-sector, emphasis has been on upgrading numerous gravel national roads to bitumen standard, and the rehabilitation and reconstruction as well as maintenance of national, district, urban and community access roads. Over the last five years, for instance, the stock of paved roads has increased by 889 kilometres and 862 kilometres of paved roads have been reconstructed. Consequently, the following outcomes in the road sector have been achieved: 

i) 	The proportion of national paved roads in fair to good condition increased from 74 per cent in financial year 2010/2011 to 80 per cent in the financial year 2013/2014. (Applause) This is projected to improve to 85 per cent in this financial year that is ending; and 

ii) 	The condition of national unpaved roads in fair to good condition has increased from 64 per cent to 67 per cent over the same period, exceeding the National Development Plan I target of 55 per cent.  

Madam Speaker, urban areas continue to suffer poor road infrastructure and increasing congestion, costing the population dearly and ultimately the economy in terms of time and money. Consequently, Government is carrying out total reconstruction of the urban road networks in Mbale, Arua, Jinja, Hoima, Masaka, Entebbe, Soroti and Kabale municipalities. In Kampala City, a total 1,270 kilometres of the city road networks have been constructed, rehabilitated or regularly maintained and more is planned for.

Madam Speaker, I am glad to report that several road projects have been completed during this financial year. These are: Tororo–Mbale-Soroti and Jinja–Kamuli in Eastern Uganda; Hoima–Kaiso Tonya, and Buteraniro-Ntungamo in western Uganda; Kampala-Masaka, and Namanve Industrial Park Access Road in central Uganda; and Vurra–Arua–Koboko–Oraba, and Gulu–Atiak in northern Uganda.

Works on the following roads is progressing well: Kawempe-Kafu, Mukono-Jinja, Kampala-Entebbe Expressway, Kampala Northern Bypass (Phase II), Mpigi-Kanoni, Luuku-Kalangala, and Mukono– Katosi/Kisoga– Nyenga in central Uganda.  We also have Ntungamo-Katuna, Ishaka-Kagamba, Mbarara Bypass, and Ntungamo-Mirama Hills Road in south western Uganda. Kamwenge-Fort Portal, Kafu-Kiryandongo, Kiryandongo–Karuma in western Uganda; There is also Moroto–Nakapiripirit in north eastern Uganda; and Atiak-Nimule, Karuma-Kamdini, Kamdini-Gulu, Acholibur–Kitgum–Musingo, Olwiyo-Gulu, Gulu–Acholibur in northern Uganda.

Madam Speaker, a total of 167 kilometres has been upgraded from gravel to tarmac out of the annual target of 250 kilometres. In addition, 129 kilometres of national roads were reconstructed and rehabilitated out of the annual target of 170 kilometres. With respect to paved roads routine mechanised maintenance, a total of 2,664 kilometres was completed out of the annual target of 3,000 kilometres. In addition, a total of 11,408 kilometres of unpaved roads have undergone routine mechanised maintenance out of an annual target of 12,500 kilometres.

Madam Speaker, an allocation of Shs 3,328.79 billion to the transport sector has been approved for the next financial year, in order to improve the condition of transport infrastructure nationwide. (Applause) I know why I am emphasising “nationwide”. This represents 18.2 per cent of the total resource allocation for next financial year. 

Government shall accelerate the construction and completion of the on-going road projects and maintenance of the national, district, urban, community access road networks and numerous bridges across the country.

Madam Speaker, the road sector is targeting the following outputs in the forthcoming financial year: 

i) 	Upgrading 400 kilometres of roads from gravel to tarmac roads; 
ii) 	Reconstructing and rehabilitating 250 kilometres of old paved roads; 
iii) 	Undertaking routine mechanised maintenance on 3,000 kilometres of paved roads; 
iv) 	Routine mechanised maintenance of 12,500 kilometres of unpaved roads; and 
v) 	Periodic maintenance on 2,000 kilometres of unpaved roads.

Madam Speaker, next year, the following roads projects will be completed: 
i) 	Atiak–Nimule, 35 kilometres; Maracha and Koboko town roads, 9.9 kilometres; and Mvara–Ediofe Cathedral Road in Arua Municipality, 10 kilometres in northern Uganda; 
ii) 	Kamwenge - Fort Portal Road, 65 kilometres; Kafu–Kiryandongo, 46 kilometres; Bundibugyo town roads, 6 kilometres in western Uganda; 
iii) 	Rwentobo–Kabale-Katuna Road, 65 kilometres; Ishaka–Kagamba Road, 35 kilometres; and Kabale Town road, 2.3 kilometres in south western Uganda. 
iv) 	Moroto-Nakapiripirit Road, 92 kilometres in north eastern Uganda; and 
v) 	Masaka–Nyendo Road, 8 kilometres; Seeta–Namugongo Road, 7.2 kilometres; Kyaliwajala–Kira Road, 3.5 kilometres; Naalya–Kyaliwajala Road, 2.5 kilometres; Namugongo Ring Road, 1.8 kilometres and Shrine Access Road, 1.8 kilometres; Nakasongola Road, 2 kilometres in central Uganda.

In addition, construction works will continue on the following roads: 
i) 	Kampala-Entebbe Expressway with a spur to Munyonyo, 51 kilometres; Mpigi–Kanoni Road, 65 kilometres; Kampala Northern Bypass, 17 kilometres; Kanoni–Sembabule-Villa Maria Road, 110 kilometres; Mukono–Kisoga–Nyenga Road, 74 kilometres; and Mukono–Kayunga–Njeru, 94 kilometres in the central part of our country.

ii) Pakwach–Nebbi Road, 54 kilometres; Karuma-Kamdini, Kamdini-Gulu, 65 kilometres; Olwiyo(Anaka)-Gulu, 70 kilometres; Gulu–Acholibur, 74 kilometres; Acholibur–Kitgum-Musingo border, 86 kilometres; and Lira-Akia and Lira Railway and Army Barracks Access roads, 12 kilometres in the northern part of our country; 

iii) 	Kiryandongo-Karuma in western Uganda; 

iv) 	Mbarara Bypass, 40 kilometres; and Ntungamo-Mirama Hills, 37 kilometres in the south western part of Uganda; and 

v) Musita–Mayuge–Lumino–Busia/Majanji, 104 kilometres; Namunsi–Sironko–Muyembe, 32 kilometres; Iganga–Kaliro, 32 kilometres in the eastern part of Uganda.

Madam Speaker, new road construction and maintenance projects to commence next year include the following: 
i) 	Tirinyi-Pallisa-Kumi/Pallisa–Kamonkoli, 111 kilometres; Mbale–Bubulo-Lwakhakha Road, 45 kilometres; Nakalama–Tirinyi–Mbale Road, 101 kilometres; Mbale-Nkokonjeru Road, 21 kilometres; Soroti-Arapai Railway Station, 10 kilometres; Soroti State Lodge Road, 2 kilometres; Kamuli and Jinja town roads, 22.2 kilometres; and Ngora Town Road, 2 kilometres in the eastern part of our country.

ii) 	Mityana–Mubende, 89 kilometres; Kibuye-Entebbe Airport, 37 kilometres; Kampala–Mukono, 21 kilometres;  Nansana–Busunju Road, 47 kilometres; Masaka–Bukakata, 41 kilometres; and Luuka–Kalangala, 60 kilometres phase two in central Uganda.

iii) Fort Portal–Kyenjojo, 50 kilometres; Fort Portal–Hima, 55 kilometres; Hima–Katunguru, 58 kilometres; Hoima–Butiaba-Wanseko, 111 kilometres; Bulima–Kabwoya,  65 kilometres; Kabwoya–Kyenjojo, 105 kilometres; Mubende–Kibaale-Kagadi, - that one - (Laughter) - 104 kilometres; Kigumba–Masindi–Bulima, 69 kilometres in western Uganda. 

iv) 	Rukingiri–Kihihi–Ishasha/Kanungu, 78 kilometres; Ishaka–Rugazi–Katunguru, 55 kilometres; and Kabale-Bunyonyi Lake Road, 8 kilometres in south western Uganda. 

v) 	Karenga-South Sudan border, 44 kilometres in northern Uganda. 

vi) 	Soroti–Katakwi–Moroto–Lokitanyala, 208 kilometres; Muyembe–Nakapiripirit, 92 kilometres; and Mbale–Nkokonjeru, 21 kilometres in eastern Uganda.

Procurement for the contractors to undertake the following road projects will commence next year: 
Tororo–Mbale-Soroti, maintenance and Lira-Kamdini, construction and maintenance, altogether 341 kilometres with support from the World Bank.
Two Kampala Flyovers and road upgrading project with assistance from the Japanese Government (JICA). 
Muyembe–Nakapiripirit 92 kilometres, funded by the Islamic Development Bank and I recently signed the papers. 
Kabwoya-Buhuka 43 kilometres and Karugutu–Ntoroko (55 kilometres) with assistance from the UK Government. 
Rwenkunye–Masindi-Port–Apac–Lira–Acholibur (250 kilometres) under the IDB funding.
Kapchorwa– Suam funded by the African Development Bank. (Applause) – Chebrot Oyee. 

Madam Speaker, I apologise I have been taken up by excitement. I forgot that we are in Parliament. I beg your pardon. 
Kampala–Jinja Expressway (77 kilometres) under the Public Private Partnership (PPP) arrangement.

Madam Speaker, feasibility studies and designs will also be carried out on the following roads: 
Luweero-Butalangu-Ngoma (83 kilometres); Lusalira- Kasambya-Nkonge-Sembabule (97kilometres); Kanoni-Misingi-Mityana (61 kilometres); Bombo-Ndejje-Kalasa (19 kilometres); Kampala–Bombo Expressway (35 kilometres); Kampala–Mpigi Expressway (21 kilometres); Nakasero-Northern Bypass Express Route; Seeta-Kyaliwajjala-Matugga-Wakiso–Buloba-Nsangi Road; Najjanankumbi-Busabala Road and Namboole–Namilyango Road in Central Uganda. 
Karugutu-Ntoroko (55 kilometres); Muhororo-Ndaiga (31 kilometres); Kyenjojo-Kahunge-Nyarukoma-Kigarale-Rwamwanja (34 kilometres) in Western Uganda. 
Kabwohe–Bwizibwera-Nsika-Ibanda-Kabujogera-Masyoro-Rwenjaza/Kyambura (85 kilometres); Rwamwanja-Kiruhura (34 kilometres); Hamurwa-Kerere-Kanungu/ Buleme- Buhoma-Butogota-Hamayanja-Ifasha-Ikumba (149 kilometres); Ishaka -Katunguru (88 kilometres); Kisoro-Mgahinga Gate (14 kilometres); Kisoro-Rubuguli-Muko (48 kilometres) Muhanga-Kisiizi-Rwashamaire (50 kilometres) in South Western Uganda. 
Nabumali-Butaleja-Namutumba (90 kilometres); Magale-Bumbo-Lwakhakha Road (14 kilometres); Kumi-Ngora–Serere-Kagwara/Soroti (75 kilometres); Soroti-Katakwi-Moroto, Mayuge-Mbaale-Nakivumbi-Bugiri–Namayingo-Lugala (90 kilometres); Busia-Tororo (24 kilometres); Simu-Kamu-Bulago-Masisa with a loop to Bumasobo in Buyaga and Bubulo-Bududa circular Road (28 kilometres) in Eastern Uganda.  
Atiak-Adjumani-Afoji, Goli-Paidha-Zombo- Warr-Arua (59 kilometres) and Kitgum–Kapedo Road in Northern Uganda. 

Construction of the following strategic bridges across the country will continue: 
Second Nile Bridge at Jinja;  
Pakwala, Nyacyara, Goli, Nyagak III; 
Enyau and Alla; 
Apak Bridge on Lira-Moroto Road;
Ntungwe Bridge on  Ishasha-Katunguru Road; 
Mitano  Bridge on Rukunguri-Kanungu  Road; 
Kabaale (linking Kyankwanzi to Ngoma in Nakaseke); 
Kasozi-Lugogo Bridge (linking Ngoma to Buruli); 
Nalakasi Bridge on Ariamoi-Kotido-Kaabong-Kapedo Road; 
Lopei Bridge on Moroto–Ariamoi-Kotido Road; 
Nyamugasani Bridge on Kinyamaseke-Kisinga-Kyarumba-Kibirizi Road; 
Maliba-Nkenda Bridge on Bugoye-Nyakalingijo Road in Kasese; 
Ruboni Bridge which provides access to Mt Magherita Tourist Site in Kasese; 
Cido Bridge on Nebbi-Goli Road; 
Leresi Bridge on Butaleja-Leresi-Budaka Road; 
Seretiyo and Nyaliti Bridge on Kapchorwa-Suam Road; 
Ora Bridge on Okokko–Anyiribu Road; 
Aji Bridge on Ullepi Offaka–Nyiribu Road 
Kangole Bridge on Katakwi–Moroto Road 
Kaabong Bridge and Kabuhuuna Bridge on Nguse River in Kibaale District. 
The design of Kiakia, Ora, Mutukula, Semlik and Murungo bridges will also be undertaken.

Madam Speaker, procurement for the construction of an additional 20 strategic bridges will be completed. These include: 
Awa, Olemika, Ora I and II  bridges on Pakwach-Inde-Ocoko Road; 
Nyakambu Bridge on Kabwohe-Bwizibwera Road; 
Koch Bridge on Keri-Midigo-Kerwa Road; 
Osu Bridge on Arua-Biliafe-Otrevu Road; 
Odrua Bridge on Arua-Vurra Custom-Paidha Goli Road; 
Nariamabune Bridge on Ariamoi-Kotido-Kabong-Kapedo Road; 
Malaba  II and III Bridges, Okane and Halukada Bridges on Tororo - Busia Road; 
Maziba-Omukabaare Bridge on Old Kabale Road i.e. Kigtagata-Kabunyonyi-Nyakigugwe Road;
Kagandi-Kaku Bridge on Natete-Busanza-Mpaka Road; 
Kiruruma Bridge on Katojo-Kihihi Road; 
Dungulwa Bridge, Rwembyo and Kajwenge Bridges on Kinyamaseke-Kisinga-Kyarumba-Kibirizi Road; 
Kamira Bridge on Kabwohe–Bwizibwera road.

Since 2009, road maintenance equipment units were provided to local governments to enable them to carry out regular maintenance of district roads and also allow opening new community access roads - that is the truth of the matter! However, this equipment has not been properly maintained and commencing next financial year, Government will detail and enforce operational procedures for equipment management. 

Madam Speaker, in order to protect road reserves, Government will also establish a road reserve protection unit comprising of the Uganda Police and UNRA officials to patrol and demolish structures set up in the road reserves. Those who are doing it better hear this. We shall gazette these road reserves, freeze any future development on these reserves and install mark posts to determine them.

Government will enforce zero tolerance for corruption at weighbridges by dismissing and prosecuting corrupt officials manning weighbridges. They better hear this. Hon. Byabagambi has assured me that this is going to happen. This is because weighbridges continue to be abused and have not deterred axle overloading which is seriously damaging our newly constructed roads. 

In addition, the law will be amended to make it more punitive to transporters who overload. The Minister of Works and Transport will issue a statutory instrument banning the transportation of wet sand on our roads. He has released it.  

Railway Transport
Madam Speaker, Government is committed to revitalise the railway network in order to lower the cost of freight, especially for bulky commodities. 

Government will fast track the construction of the Standard Gauge Railway. To date, we have made modest progress in a number of areas. The preliminary studies for the Kampala-igali and upgrade of Tororo-Pakwach/Gulu-Nimule railway line to standard gauge railway line are underway. (Applause)

Water Transport

Inland water transport has great potential for development of an inexpensive, energy-efficient and environmentally friendly transportation system. Government initiatives under the water transport sub-sector have mainly focused on construction and rehabilitation of the inland water landing sites, procurement of ferry services, improving the safety through surveys and mapping of inland transport routes.

In the forthcoming year and over the medium term, Government will focus on improvement of existing marine infrastructure so as to reduce the cost of transportation and increase connectivity. Specifically, Government will focus on increasing the volume of passenger and cargo traffic by marine transport. In addition, a number of legislative interventions will be initiated as measures to provide safe, secure and environmentally friendly inland water transport. 

In the next year, new ferries will be commissioned for Wanseko–Panyamur, Namasale–Lwampanga and Sigulu Islands in Bugiri District while rehabilitation of Kiyindi ferry will be completed. Procurement for a ferry on Lake Bunyonyi will also commence.

Air Transport

Madam Speaker, over the next five year period, Entebbe International Airport, as Uganda’s principal international gateway, will be upgraded to improve the quality of operation and maintenance. The scope of works upgrade includes, among others, construction of a new cargo centre, a new passenger terminal, strengthening runways and the replacement of navigation aids. The cost of the airport rehabilitation amounts to US$ 325 million and this money has already been secured. (Applause) 

In addition, several regional aerodromes, including the one in Jinja and an airport at Kabaale in Hoima to ease the development of the oil refinery will be fast-tracked. (Applause)

Energy Infrastructure 

Madam Speaker, over the medium term, Government will address the high energy costs and unreliable power supply faced by the consumer, especially those engaged in production.

Electricity generation capacity in Uganda has increased from 595 megawatts in 2011 to 851.53 megawatts in 2014, including 100 megawatts of thermal power on stand-by basis. This generation capacity includes: Nalubaale, Kiira, Bujagali, Electro-maxi, Jacobsen, Kakira and Kilembe Cobalt. Other small stations include Kinyara, Mubuku, Ishasha, Mpanga, Bugoye, Kabalega, Nyagak I, Kisizi, Kuluva, Kagando and off grid thermal plants among others.

Arising out of the above interventions, the national electricity access has increased from 11 per cent in 2011 to 14 per cent in 2014. During the same period, rural electricity has increased from four per cent to seven per cent - small but progressive. Power losses in the distribution network now stand at 20 per cent from 27 per cent in 2011. 

The total grid electricity supply increased by 5.4 per cent from 3,039 Megawatt hours in 2013 to 3,203 Megawatt hours in 2014. 

Under the Rural Electrification Programme, a total of 1,568 kilometres of medium voltage lines and 166 kilometres of large voltage lines have been completed and commissioned in this financial year.  On-going projects total to 1,938 of medium voltage lines and 1,633 kilometres of large voltage distribution lines. These will be completed in the coming financial year. 

In terms of connections, new customer connections made under the Rural Electrification Programme during this year include 46,000 new connections on the grid and 1,968 new solar Photo Voltaic (PV) connections.

In the forthcoming year, Government will fast-track the construction of the Karuma and Isimba Hydropower projects - 600 megawatts and 183 megawatts respectively. Other mini-hydro power projects such as Muzizi HPP, construction of at least five small Hydropower plants: Nyamwamba, Siti, Waki, Rwimi, Kikagati and at Nengo Bridge, as well as construction of transmission lines under the Rural Electrification Programme. Feasibility studies for other hydropower projects are on on-going. 

Madam Speaker, commencing next financial year, Government will also construct a total of 2,002 kilometres of transmission lines across the country. These include: Bujagali-Tororo-Lessos, Mbarara–Mirama Hill–Birembo, Mbarara–Nkenda, Tororo– Opuyo–Lira, Kawanda–Masaka, Nkenda–Fort Portal–Hoima, Isimba Interconnection Project, Karuma–Kawanda, Karuma-Lira (220kV); Mutundwe–Entebbe and new sub-stations at Gulu and Agago with line bays at Lira.

Government is resolute in investing in the necessary infrastructure to facilitate the exploitation of the abundant renewable energy sources, including hydropower, geothermal, and nuclear so as to increase power generation capacity to 2,500 megawatts in 2020.

However, our long term vision is to achieve the required 41,738 Megawatts by year 2040. In addition, Government is targeting to increase per capita electricity consumption to 588kilowatt hours by 2020 and 3,668 kilowatt hours by 2040. This will address the energy constraints in order to lower production costs and ultimately improve on the country’s competitiveness.

Oil, Gas and Mineral Development

As we are all aware, the legal framework for the management of oil and gas resources has been finalised. These include the enactment of the Petroleum Refining, Gas Conversion, Transmission and Midstream Storage Act 2013, the Petroleum Exploration, Development and Production Act, 2013 and the Public Finance Management Act, 2015. 

The relevant institutions, including the establishment of the National Oil Company and the Petroleum Authority of Uganda are also being finalised to ensure prudent management of the oil and gas resources.

Madam Speaker, as part of the refinery development programme, land acquisition for the proposed oil refinery at Kabaale in Hoima is almost complete. The environmental baseline study for the oil refinery project has also been concluded.

The major priority next financial year will be commencement of a detailed engineering study for the oil refinery, following the selection of a lead investor on a Private/Public Partnership basis. Government shall also fast-track infrastructure development for the commercialisation of oil, including the development of an airport, as already alluded to earlier, near the Oil Refinery Project site at Kabaale in Hoima District.

Madam Speaker, Government will also continue the exploration and production of oil and other valuable minerals such as iron ore and phosphates and also concretise the development of the Crude Oil Pipeline to the Indian Ocean and petroleum products pipelines.

Information and Communication Technology (ICT)

Improving access to efficient and affordable ICT services is key to promoting private sector investment, by significantly reducing the cost of internet services, which also stimulates the growth of other related sectors of the economy. 

The ICT sector currently employs about 1.3 million people and generated up to Shs 416.7 billion in 2014 up from Shs 332 billion in 2013. It contributes almost two per cent to the national output. 

The number of mobile telephone subscribers now stands at 19.5 million, while internet subscriptions increased from 3.4 million in 2013 to 4.3 million in 2014. (Applause)

The volume of various value added services such as Mobile Money transfers and other data related services are becoming more popular. All these are attributed to the improved ICT infrastructure.

Madam Speaker, the operationalization of the national backbone has started yielding positive results. By January 2015, 30 public offices were connected to the National Backbone Infrastructure and received high speed internet bandwidth. This intervention has led to a reduction in Government expenditure to the tune of Shs 5.287 billion per annum. In the coming year, an additional 60 offices will be connected to further reduce public expenditure on connectivity by Shs 9.347 billion.

The National Information Technology Authority is currently consolidating the hardware and software licenses with the objective of accelerating delivery of Government services. Other developments include the connection of public universities to the National Backbone Infrastructure to enable access to high speed internet connectivity and facilitate e-learning and technological research. 

In addition, a ‘One Network Area’ for telecom services for partner states under the Northern Corridor Integration Project was established. As a result, calls originating and terminating in Uganda, Kenya, Rwanda and South Sudan are charged at the local call rates –(Applause)– hence reducing the cost of cross-border business transactions from US$ 18 cents to US$ 10 cents per minute. 

Digital Broadcasting Migration that increases the efficiency of the use of the broadcasting spectrum has commenced with a pilot phase covering Kampala. Digital Migration in broadcasting will be rolled out nationwide, under a Public/Private Partnership arrangement. 

Next year interventions in information and communications technology will include the following:
Complete the third phase of the National Backbone Infrastructure 
Extend to include Short Messaging Services and Data Services by December 2015
Connect more MDAs to the National Backbone Infrastructure to reduce the cost of internet connectivity and promote e-Government 
Strengthen the legal and institutional framework for ICT use and IT information security
Establish a fully integrated one stop centre for investment linking the National Identity Card System, the Integrated Financial Management System, Government Payroll System and Computerized Education Management System among other interventions 
Operationalize the second phase of the National Backbone Infrastructure and 
Commence the construction of the National ICT Park and Innovation Centre at Namanve.

For human capital development, enhancing the skills and the welfare of Uganda’s human resource enables sustainable supply of skilled, healthy and capable Ugandans to support private sector and social development.  

As I mentioned earlier, Government is committed to enhance service delivery in the education, health and water sectors by addressing challenges in human resources management, enhancing performance and strengthening supervision, monitoring and inspection.

Education and Skills Development

Government has continued to improve access to education by implementing the Universal Primary Education (UPE), Universal Secondary Education (USE) and Universal Post Ordinary Level Education and Training (UPOLET) programmes. In the financial year now ending, UPE enrolment amounted to 6.4 million pupils and the USE/UPOLET programme enrolled 873,476 students of whom 46.2 per cent were female. (Applause)

Madam Speaker, financing for higher education under the Students Loan Scheme commenced with 1,201 students for 26 programmes in 13 chartered universities under nine major disciplines receiving loans against 2,125 applicants. 

Under Skilling Uganda, the sector disbursed funds towards completion of construction works of workshops and classrooms at Kihanda and Namasale Technical Schools, civil works of classrooms and workshops at Namisindwa Technical School in Manafwa and St Joseph’s Kyalubingo in Kamwenge were undertaken.

Construction of eight primary teachers colleges is on-going in Paidha, Arua, Canon Lawrence, Bukedea, Kapchorwa, Bundibugyo, Buhungiro and Ibanda. 

In fulfilment of the pledge by His Excellency, the President, teachers’ salaries were increased by a further 15 per cent (Applause) and Shs 206 billion was disbursed towards this purpose. Yes, 25 per cent plus 15 per cent has been given to the teachers; I am sure and I know it.

Government is committed to enhance access and quality of education and skills development. In the next financial year, an allocation of Shs 2,029 Billion has been approved. The key priorities to be financed in the financial year 2015/16 include the following:
Increase in the capitalisation and school facilitation grants by an additional Shs.39.78 billion to ensure better effectiveness of the UPE, USE/UPOLET programmes.
Construct 293 primary schools in the country.
Train 4,000 head teachers and orient 10,000 School Management Committees (SMCs) in Leadership and Management Skills. In addition, 12,000 teachers and head teachers will be trained in delivering literacy and numeracy in primary one to primary three in 27 worst performing districts. (Applause)
Provide instructional materials and teaching aids for UPE, USE and UPOLET.
Enhance vocational and skills development by implementing the Skilling Uganda Project with additional funding of Shs 5.9 billion.
Increase access to tertiary education by expanding the Student Loan Scheme with an additional allocation of Shs 6 billion for loans to 1,000 new degree students and 200 diploma students. 
Support to the teachers’ SACCO with an additional Shs 5 billion in order to increase access to affordable financial and credit facilities. Akatono kazira mu liiso. 
Kick-start construction of the National High Altitude Centre in Kapchwora and embark on preliminary design works for the Akii-Bua Olympic Stadium in Lira with an additional allocation of Shs 5 billion. 
Increase of salaries for lecturers in all public universities with an additional funding of Shs 50 billion.  This enhancement will raise the professor’s pay from the current Shs 4.1 million to Shs 6.3 million per month. 

Madam Speaker, this year, Government launched the Youth Livelihood Programme in order to create jobs for our youth. By December 2014, a total of 36,144 youth had received technical and financial support to enable them establish projects. As a consequence, a total of 2,788 youth projects worth Shs 15.6 billion has been supported under the programme.

Health Service Delivery

Madam Speaker, over the years, health service delivery has improved as a result of Government interventions with the support of our development partners. From 2006 to 2014, infant mortality rate reduced from 76 per 1,000 to 54 per 1,000 live births. Under five mortality reduced from 137 per 1000 live births to 90 per 1,000 live births. Child stunting has decreased from 38 per cent to 33 per cent; we could have done better. 

Vaccination against Diphtheria has increased from 76 per cent in the year 2011 to 93 per cent; vaccination against Measles has improved from 56 per cent to 91 per cent; Antiretroviral therapy coverage increased from 53 per cent to 77 per cent and; the Contraceptive Use Prevalence Rate has increased from 24 per cent to 30 per cent.

This year, Government, with support from the World Bank, is reconstructing and rehabilitating nine major hospitals. These are: Moroto, Mityana, Nakaseke, Kiryandongo, Nebbi, Anaka, Moyo, Entebbe and Iganga. 

Over the last five years, Government has rehabilitated and expanded facilities at Jinja, Masaka, Hoima, Gulu, Lira, Mbale, Fort Portal, Soroti, Arua, Kabale, Moroto and Mbarara hospitals. 

The construction of Kawempe and Kiruddu hospitals is also progressing and expected to be completed by mid-2016. Once completed, these facilities will go a long away in decongesting Mulago Hospital. The construction, expansion, rehabilitation and equipping of Mulago Hospital is also underway and will be completed by December 2016. 

Construction of the Out Patient Department theatre, accident and emergency departments in Hoima and Kabale hospitals with support from JICA, is also underway and shall also be completed by 2016. 

In order to minimise the challenges arising out of staff absenteeism, the construction of additional staff houses is on-going at various lower level health facilities. Government’s target is to increase the percentage of staff housed from 17 per cent today to 30 per cent by 2018. Consequently, staff houses have been constructed in Kabale, Masaka, Hoima, Arua regional Referral Hospitals. Construction of staff houses is on-going in Mulago, Soroti, Hoima, Fort Portal hospitals.

Madam Speaker, Government has also undertaken skills development for health workers. Under a bursary scheme, training and bonding has taken place for 500 midwives, 200 health workers in medicines logistics management, 107 in data management and 296 in integrated diseases surveillance.

Despite the progress being registered, Uganda’s high population growth rate, driven by the high fertility rate which His Excellency referred to, poses challenges for health care delivery. Women and children remain the most vulnerable groups to diseases. In order to reduce the disease burden faced by Ugandans, Government has undertaken the following actions: 
Developed a rapid response mechanism outbreak of epidemics such as Ebola, Marburg, Yellow fever and Cholera, in addition to establishing a laboratory for diagnosis of Viral Haemorrhagic Fever and an Emergency Operation Centre. 
Implemented an aggressive Malaria Reduction Strategic Plan with a target to eliminate malaria deaths and reduce incidences of malaria to 30 cases per 1,000 population, by 2020. 
Reduced HIV/AIDS new infections from 147,000 in 2011 to 137,000 in 2013. HIV prevalence is now estimated at 7.3 per cent. We could have done better.
Increased the number of health centres offering Prevention of Mother to Child Transmission from 2,138 in 2013 to 2,248 facilities in 2014. 
Increased the proportion of pregnant women living with HIV accessing Anti-Retro Viral treatment from 33 per cent in 2007 to 87 per cent in 2014 as a result of increased testing for HIV in pregnant women from 30 per cent in 2008 to 95 per cent in 2014.
Significantly reduced the number of HIV infection in new born children from 28,000 in the year 2009 to a projected 8,000 as at the end 2014. (Applause)
Increased the number of accredited health facilities that provide ARVs from 475 in 2011 to 1,603 by December 2014; this includes 100 per cent of public hospitals, 91 per cent Health Centre IVs and 87 per cent of Health Centre IIIs are also providing paediatric ART. 
Reduced by half the number of people dying from Tuberculosis from 9,900 in 1990 to 4,700, thereby achieving the Millennium Development Goal Six target.

Madam Speaker, Government is also strengthening the capacity of specialized health facilities such as the Uganda Heart Institute and the Uganda Cancer Institute with a clearance commissioned just a few weeks ago, to tackle the increasing cases of medical conditions that require specialised care and reduce on the cost of referrals for medical treatment abroad.

In the next year, an allocation of Shs 1,270.8 billion has been approved to the health sector. Interventions in the health sector will include the following:
Construction of specialized Maternal and Neonatal unit in Mulago Hospital with funding from the Islamic Development Bank. 
The construction, expansion, rehabilitation and equipping of Mulago Hospital will continue and is expected to be completed by December 2016. 
Procurement of 10 ambulances for the planned Ambulance System for Kampala Metropolitan Area.
Rehabilitate and upgrade Rukunyu, Maracha, Kansunganyanja and Rwashamaire health centres.
Procure assorted essential medical equipment and furniture for 10 general hospitals, 10 Health Centres IV, 30 Health Centres III and 20 Health Centres II countrywide.
With support from the Italian Government, we shall construct 69 housing units at Health Centres III in the districts of Kaabong, Abim, Kotido, Moroto, Amudat, Napak and Nakapiripirit in the Karamoja region.
Continue rehabilitation of the following hospitals: Adjumani, Kitgum, Kabarole, Kiboga. Kapchorwa, Kamwenge Pallisa, Itojo, Kitagata Bugiri, Atutur, Apac, Abim, Bundibugyo, Kaberamaido and Masindi. (Applause)
Reconstruct Kawolo and Busolwe hospitals with the aid of a Spanish Debt Swap Grant. This will include extensions of Out Patient/Casualty units, building obstetric theatres, expansion of the delivery suites, and improvement of maternity wards.
Rehabilitate, expand and equip Yumbe and Kayunga hospitals with support from the Saudi/Opec Funds for International Development (OFID) and Arab Bank for Economic Development in Africa (BADEA). This will include construction of staff houses and provision of ambulances.
Enhance treatment against Hepatitis B with an allocation of Shs 10 billion.  (Applause) 

Madam Speaker, that was a fight, put strongly by Members of Parliament and I congratulate them. 

Government will directly seek to address the health of mothers and children. Providing comprehensive antenatal care and malaria prevention for pregnant women, in addition to HIV voluntary counselling and testing services and nutritional supplements will go a long way in this quest. 

With the enhanced provision of Emergency Obstetric Care medical supplies, in addition to improving referral and support supervision, maternal mortality rates are projected to fall from 438 per 100,000 live births to 220 per 100,000 live births with these interventions. Government also aims to reduce infant mortality rates from 54 per 1,000 live births to 44 per 1,000 live births.

Water and Sanitation

Madam Speaker, in the Water and Sanitation sector, Government has since 2011 undertaken several projects in both urban and rural areas. Urban water supply has been enhanced with the completion of construction of Kiganda, Kakumiro, Nkoni, Kinogozi and Najjembe piped water systems. Construction works on Kyamulibwa, Kinoni/Rugando, Purongo, Patongo, Ibuje, Opit, Dokolo, Ovujo, Ocero, Suam, Matany, Kachumbala, Mbulamuti, Namutumba and Buwuni are also on-going. The rehabilitation of the Kampala City Water Network at Ggaba has also increased daily water production to at least 240,000 litres per day.  

Rainwater harvesting systems has also been completed in Namayingo, Kaliro, Mukono and Sheema districts, with the participation of Non-Governmental Organisations. In addition, 20 production wells have been drilled for mini-piped schemes and 45 local government staff trained in operation and maintenance. In addition, 177 boreholes have been drilled during the financial year.

An allocation of Shs 547.3 billion has been approved for the water and sanitation sector. Key interventions will be on increasing access to safe water in rural and urban areas; increasing sanitation and hygiene in rural and urban areas; and increasing functionality of water supply systems. Government will continue to provide safe water and hygienic sanitation countrywide. Specific actions will include the following:
Construction of gravity flow and piped water schemes in several areas such as Buboko-Bukoli, Bududa- Nabweya, Lirima, Kahama, Kanyampanga, Nyarwodho and Bukwo among others.
Rehabilitation of broken down (de-commissioned-minor and major repairs) hand pumps, valley tanks and drilling of new boreholes countrywide.
Construction and rehabilitation of piped-water systems as well as sewerage and sanitation facilities countrywide.
Construction of windmill-powered watering systems in Karamoja.
Upgrade water supply systems in rural growth centres like Nyamaranda in Kibale District into small piped systems to replace hand pump boreholes.

Madam Speaker, in an effort to provide improved urban hygiene, sanitation and protection of Kampala’s natural environment there will be an expansion of sewer network coverage within the metropolitan Kampala. The construction of Kinawataka sanitation infrastructure will also commence. 

Government’s objective in the water and sanitation sector is to increase rural and urban access to safe water supply to 65 and 100 per cent respectively in financial year 2019/20; as well as increase sewerage coverage to 30 per cent in towns with population greater than 15,000 people. 

Effective service delivery

Efficiency improvement is in the implementation of Government programmes to ensure effective delivery. Despite the achievements we have recorded in the infrastructure, agriculture and social service sectors, service delivery is faced by numerous management challenges. 

In social services, education and health sectors suffer from staff absenteeism, ghost staff, mismanagement of facilities and supplies. 

In infrastructure, the transport, energy and water sectors suffer poor project formulation, design, implementation, monitoring and evaluation as well as corruption in the award and management of contracts such as what has happened to the Mubende-Kagadi Road. There are also still challenges related to coordination and monitoring of Government programmes at various levels of Government.

To address the persistent delays and eliminate ghosts in payment of retirement benefits, Government decided to decentralise the budgeting and payment of pension and gratuity starting with staff who have retired this year. I wish to inform you that we have fully decentralised all the funds for pension and gratuity hitherto budgeted for under the Ministry of Public Service, to the respective MDAs where the staff retired from. The Ministry of Public Service will continue to play the role of providing policy guidance and oversight only.

We have noted delays in payments to vendors arising from capacity challenges at some MDAs. This has now been sorted out and we expect smooth payments to vendors, as we do for wages and salaries and we do not expect arrears.

Government will undertake reforms in project management to avoid unnecessary costs and delays in implementing public investments and ensure Government projects are executed efficiently. Among others, these reforms will include providing new guidelines for project preparation and contract management. 

Madam Speaker, in order to enhance the effectiveness of public service delivery, the following key policy interventions will be implemented:  
Enforce a Performance Management Framework that clearly links defining budget allocations to sector outcomes, and outputs and in order to improve effectiveness and efficiency of public service delivery.
Strictly monitor and enforce performance contracts and administer strong sanctions to accounting officers who fail to adhere to set guidelines. Specifically going forward renewal of appointments for permanent secretaries, chief administrative officers, heads of government departments and all accounting officers will take into account a proven track record of sound implementation of Government programmes/projects and after a stringent vetting process. (Applause) It is no more, business as usual; I wish my permanent secretary was here to tell you. 
To address the problem of ghost workers, Government has compiled a biometric database of all its employees which is linked with the national identification system. Accordingly, effective next financial year, all public servants will be required to have the National Identity Card before accessing the Government payroll.
Government shall vigorously enforce implementation of the sanctions against officials who fail to provide timely accountability and those who continue to burden Government with arrears.
Prioritise clearance of all domestic arrears including salary, pension and gratuity arrears - because have already incurred some, so we have to pay. 
Installation of pre-paid meters for utilities for MDAs who have not already done so will be enforced so as not to undermine the development of the private sector.

Strengthen procurement and contract management with emphasis on infrastructure projects through outsourcing project management and scrutiny of contract variations.

Enhance Public Investment Management by improving project selection, appraisal and analysis and make it mandatory for preparation of feasibility studies for all projects and PPPs before the project is approved and sanctioned for funding.

Ensure expeditious submission of loan requests to both Cabinet and Parliament and urge expeditious approval to enable project effectiveness.

Parliament, I must thank you, particularly the committees where we send these Bills. I say “Asanteni sana” and let us do a better job. (Applause)

Taxation and Revenue Mobilisation

Madam Speaker, as you are aware, the main thrust of tax policy is to progressively enhance revenue mobilisation to fully finance the Budget. This is to be accomplished while ensuring that taxation is not a hindrance to private sector investment, savings, production and social welfare. 

In pursuit of this goal, our efforts are geared towards increasing the tax to GDP ratio by at least 0.5 percentage points of GDP every financial year and to attain a target of 16 per cent by 2018. Some of the challenges that inhibit the pace of revenue growth include, among others, a large informal sector that constitutes 49 per cent of GDP, a poor taxpaying culture among many Ugandans and lack of collaboration among government ministries, departments, agencies and local governments.

Madam Speaker, to address the challenges affecting revenue mobilisation, Government will continue to make policies and enact laws that will facilitate investment and revenue growth. Successful completion of the National Identification Project is fundamental in supporting tax administration. This must be complemented by ensuring that all Government ministries, departments, agencies and local governments share information with Uganda Revenue Authority. 

Government will also continue to invest in Uganda Revenue Authority to enhance its capacity to effectively deliver on its mandate by improving systems, providing sufficient office space to accommodate all URA offices and train its staff.

Madam Speaker, this is the thrust that has formed the tax measures approved by Parliament for the next financial year, the details of which are given in various tax laws. However, I want to highlight the following key areas because they are the most prominent measures to generate revenue for next financial year:  

Adjustments in the excise duty rates 

Madam Speaker, modest adjustments were approved in excise duty rates on some items such as fuel, beer, cigarettes, wine and ready to drink spirits.

Excise duty of 10 per cent was introduced on confectioneries and furniture and five per cent on motor vehicle lubricants. 

Formalisation of business  

Madam Speaker, Uganda’s informal sector is relatively large as I have already said yet it contributes minimally to revenue. The informality cuts across agriculture, wholesale and retail trade, construction, transport, etcetera. 

Madam Speaker, commencing next financial year, we are going to use the Withholding Tax system, through designated agencies, to collect taxes from these businesses. For the transport sector specifically, there will be a mandatory payment of tax for all Public Service Vehicles and Goods Motor Vehicles at time of renewal of annual licenses. This will only be on renewal and not at first registration.   

Taxation of the Petroleum and Mining Sector

In order to unlock investment in the petroleum and mining sector, we have made changes to the Value Added Tax Act to allow licensees to register for VAT during the exploration and development stages of their operations. This will enable them to obtain relief from VAT payable on goods and services supplied to them. Previously, licensees were not allowed to register because they do not make taxable supplies during the exploration and development stages, which is a requirement for a refund of VAT on inputs. 

Madam Speaker, the Income Tax Act now provides for a comprehensive regime for the petroleum and mining sectors so that the sectors are taxed in accordance with the commercial rules under which they operate. In addition, the Act now provides for the tax rate applicable to non-residents providing goods and services to the licensee. 
 
VAT Threshold 

The VAT threshold has been maintained at Shs 50 million since the inception of VAT in 1997. This threshold has been overtaken by events such as growth in the economy, exchange rate depreciation and inflation. The VAT threshold has now been revised to Shs 150 million to take into account these new changes. 

Cash basis accounting for VAT purposes

Madam Speaker, the threshold for persons that use a cash basis accounting system was increased from Shs 200 million to Shs 500 million in recognition that businesses with a turnover of less than Shs 500 million transact mostly in cash.      

Presumptive regime

The presumptive tax regime has been simplified by categorising businesses and fixing the taxes payable. We have also increased the threshold for the presumptive regime from a gross turnover of Shs 50 million to Shs 150 million. This will reduce the cost of compliance among small businesses and increase certainty of tax.  

Thin Capitalisation Rules 

To encourage firms to access financing from foreign sources so as to expand business, the thin capitalisation rules have been amended to allow firms to deduct interest on loans if the loans do not exceed their share capital by 150 per cent. 

Removal of excise duty on international calls - One Area Network for the EAC region

Madam Speaker, to implement the One Area Network for the EAC region effective 1 January 2015, as I have said before, the excise duty of US Cents 9 on international calls from the Northern Corridor countries has been removed, which means that calls should be relatively cheaper from within the Northern Corridor countries. This is aimed at enhancing communication and improving the business environment. 

Environmental levy 

Madam Speaker, for environmental concerns, a temporary action has been taken to increase the environmental levy on used motor vehicles from 20 per cent to 35 per cent for motor vehicles of 5-10 years old and to 50 per cent for those above 10 years. However, this excludes Goods Vehicles.

Non-Tax Revenue 

Madam Speaker, Non Tax Revenue items and rates administered by Government ministries departments and agencies have been reviewed to generate additional revenue. 

Madam Speaker, passport fees have been increased by Shs 30,000 to Shs 150,000 and a special passport fees at Shs 300,000 has been introduced for any person who wishes to get a passport expressly within 24 hours. 

EAC Pre-Budget Consultations 

Madam Speaker, under the East African Community framework, the Ministers of Finance held pre-budget consultation meetings to discuss issues of common interest in the spirit of furthering regional integration. 

The ministers agreed on a number of measures with regard to the EAC Common External Tariff, details of which will be contained in the Gazette to be issued by the EAC Secretariat. Some of the significant decisions for Uganda include: 
Authority to import road tractors for semi-trailers at a duty rate of 0 per cent instead of 10 per cent. 
Motor vehicles for the transportation of goods with gross vehicle weight exceeding five tonnes but not exceeding 20 tonnes at a rate of 10 per cent instead of 25 per cent. 
Motor vehicles for transport of goods with gross weight exceeding 20 tonnes at 0 per cent instead of 25 per cent. 
Buses for the transportation of more than 25 persons at a rate of 10 per cent instead 25 per cent. 

The benefits are valid for a period of one year only. Therefore, the private sector is encouraged to take advantage of these benefits before the expiry of this period.     

Tax Incentive Regime for Investment

Madam Speaker, some existing and potential manufacturers and investors have petitioned Government seeking improvements to the current tax incentives regime for investment. I intend to holistically address this issue without distorting the overall taxation regime. I will be meeting with investors regularly to discuss options to improve the tax incentive regime for investment and the appropriate changes to be implemented. 

Tax Administration

Madam Speaker, as part of the strategy to enhance compliance and revenue collections, Uganda Revenue Authority will undertake the following measures:
Implement the joint compliance campaign for the fast-growing priority sectors with high revenue contribution such as wholesale, retail, real estate and manufacturing. 
Undertake taxpayer sensitisation and education on tax policy changes.
Strengthen the international taxation function with respect to audit capacity of international transactions and exchange of information with other tax jurisdictions.
Expand Tax Registration and Expansion Programme outside greater Kampala, Mbarara, Wakiso, Mukono, Arua and Lira. 
Automate the exchange of information and enforcement collaboration between MDAs within the greater Kampala. 
Expand the implementation of the Single Customs Clearance process. 
Enhance information management systems to facilitate faster clearance of goods by rolling out the Electronic Cargo Tracking System to Mombasa, implementing centralised document processing and implementing a centralised automated valuation database.

International Agreements 

Madam Speaker, dynamics of taxation have globally evolved to the extent that companies plan and consequently evade taxes –(Interjections)- I beg your pardon, I can see why some of you were insisting that I drink some water.

To curb such practices, Government has ratified the following agreements:
The East African Community Agreement for the Avoidance of Double Taxation and Prevention of Fiscal Evasion in respect to taxes.
The Agreement for the Establishment of the African Tax Administration Forum on Mutual Assistance in Tax Matters.
The Organisation of Economic Cooperation and Development Convention on Mutual Administrative Assistance. 

I wish to lay before this august House the said agreements in accordance with Section 4 of the Ratification of Treaties Act, Cap 204.

In conclusion, I wish to commend this Budget to all Ugandans in our quest at creating a better Uganda both now and in the future. The strategic choices we have made in the Budget for next year concretise the foundation for the prosperity of future generations. 

Uganda’s Vision 2040 aspires for a transformed Ugandan society from a peasant to modern and prosperous country by 2040. We need to harness the natural endowments we are blessed with. 

Madam Speaker, for Ugandan households, the Budget has provided funds for education, health, water, agriculture, among many others. These areas have the highest impact on the livelihoods of most Ugandans. 

For both rural farmers and the business community, addressing infrastructure gaps reduces the cost of doing business. For the general population, it seeks to improve social welfare for women by providing better healthcare and enhancing skills development to improve human capital. 

For the unemployed youth, the Budget presents an opportunity to equip you with appropriate skills for employment and the creation of both jobs and entrepreneurship. 

For women entrepreneurs, the Budget funds an initiative to support your business ventures. (Applause) Opportunities abound in key growth sectors like agriculture, industry, trade and tourism, which you, the youth and women, must seize now. 

For the Ugandan worker, pension reforms will secure incomes in your retirement. 

For the private sector, this Budget is aimed at reducing the cost of doing business and be competitive in an expanded East African Community market. 

I, therefore, implore you to take advantage of this to make profits, expand your enterprises, create jobs and ultimately contribute significantly to the growth of this economy and support the NRM. All this is meant to lead to a modern and prosperous country and improve the overall quality of life.

Madam Speaker and honourable members of Parliament, I thank you. I thank you, Your Excellency the President. For God and my country. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Your Excellency, the President, our distinguished guests and Members of Parliament, on behalf of Parliament, I would like to congratulate the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development for the very passionate delivery of the 2015/2016 Budget. (Applause) 

I would also like to thank the Members of Parliament and the committees particularly for facilitating the process under the Public Finance Management Act. (Applause) I would like to report that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development has already complied with the requirement to furnish the names of the accounting officers for the financial year 2015/2016. 

As you are all aware, the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development was carrying out a delegated function. Ultimately, under Article 155 of the Constitution, His Excellency the President has the final accountability for the National Budget. It is now my pleasure to invite him to make his remarks on the Budget and other things.

5.30
THE PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF UGANDA (Gen. (Rtd) Yoweri Museveni): Thank you. “Abagulusi mubalozire?” What I am saying is in Runyoro and it is translated as, “Have you seen how the old men can perform?” (Laughter)

His Excellency the Vice President, the Rt. Hon. Speaker, His Lordship the Chief Justice, the Rt. Hon. Prime Minister, the hon. Al Haji Kigongo, honourable ministers and Members of Parliament, ladies and gentlemen.

You have all heard the speech of the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. The NRM, over the last 29 years, has laid the basis for the metamorphosis of the economy and society of Uganda from a third world one to a first world one in the coming years, the various obstacles notwithstanding.

Some of the obstacles are conceptual; failure to prioritise for instance. That is a big weakness. Other obstacles are moral; corruption of actors such as public servants or political leaders failing to supervise and discipline the civil servants.
Other obstacles were historical; for example, low levels of education, underdeveloped infrastructure, a narrow internal market occasioned by the colonial fragmentation of Africa and other bottlenecks. 

The NRM has patiently worked on all these bottlenecks. Working with our brothers in East Africa and in the rest of Africa, we have revived the East African Community and created the Common Market of Eastern and Southern Africa (COMESA). These expanded markets solve the problem of the market for our goods and services to some extent and enable us to negotiate more credibly for access to the foreign markets.

Apart from the security challenges in the region that keep popping up in Eastern Congo, South Sudan, Somalia, Central African Republic and others, the producers in Uganda and the region are now assured of the markets both regional and international. This is very crucial for everybody to know that if I produce, I will sell. That would not be the case if these markets were not organised.

The NRM has addressed the issue of human resource development such as education and health. You have seen what I call five-star hotels; these new multi-storey secondary schools. I went to a remote village; I do not think it is even on the map. It is called Asinge on the Kenya border and found there a huge school just like Sheraton Hotel here. There are 569 five-star hotel schools. I went to Mbale S.S; you would think you are visiting Serena Hotel. It has huge buildings. The other day I was in Mubende, Mbarara High School and the girls’ school in Fort Portal town, I think it is Kyebambe. That is all human resource development, education and health.

The literacy rate was 43 per cent in 1986. It has now gone up to 75 per cent today. You heard the minister telling you about the mortality rate for infants. In 1986, it was 156 per 1,000 babies born alive. It is now 54 per 1,000 babies born alive and you heard what he said; the target is 44.

The average life expectancy was 43 years in 1986 but it is now 58 years. The percentage of people living below the poverty line was 56 per cent in 1992-1993. This reduced to 19.7 per cent in 2013. These are statistics from the Uganda Bureau of Statistics. 

We could have achieved more if we were to fight corruption and if all of you were to support our efforts in prioritising expenditure so that we do not scatter our resources in the non-crucial areas.

I would like to salute the NRM caucus and other positive leaders for supporting some of my prioritisation measures since the 2006 conference we had at Statistics House. 

As I pointed out in my State of the Nation Address, we have spent and we are planning to spend quite a bit of our money on electricity generation and transmission, as you heard the minister giving the details, on roads and scientific innovations in addition to all the other expenditures on the other sectors. This has a marked impact on these sectors: 

Electricity and the roads that form the basis of the economy

When Ugandans are able to travel on a tarmac road from Oraba–Karuma–Kampala, Mbarara-Kabale to Kyanika and Bunagana, a distance of 1,057 kilometres on tarmac road continuously and then from Oraba-Karuma-Kampala-Mbale to Murongo Bridge on the Tanzanian border, a distance of 906 kilometres respectively and from Malaba-Kampala-Fort Portal-Lamia River, a distance of 630 kilometres and Malaba–Kampala-Fort Portal to Mpondwe a distance of 517 kilometers respectively, I feel very pleased. (Applause)

That means Uganda is linked from North to South, East to West by all-weather roads and tarmac roads. Soon Ugandans will be able to drive on a tarmac road from Nimule up to Kampala and from Moroto up to Kampala.

Concerning electricity, as I pointed out in my State of the Nation Address the other day, with the completion of Karuma and Isimba dams as well as dozens of mini-hydros, geo-thermal, planned thermo and co-generation efforts, our generation capacity will go from the present 840 megawatts, which the minister showed you here on the screen to 1,974 megawatts by 2020.

In the medium term, with addition of Ayago, Kiba, Uhuru and other power stations as I told you the other day, our generation will stand at 4,356 megawatts by 2035, although I think that is a bit slow. I do not know why we cannot make it faster. That is still not enough for a modern economy but we will have moved a long way from our starting point of 60 megawatts in 1986. 

You all know our plans with the railway. We have signed appropriate memoranda of understanding (MOUs) with the Chinese company (CHEC) to design and build a Standard Gauge Railway from Malaba to Kampala from Tororo–Nimule–Pakwach and from Kampala to Mpondwe and Mirama Hills on the Congo and Rwanda borders.

Some of the roads are done with external support for example Arua–Oraba and Gulu–Atiak–Nimule. I salute the partners who thus assist us and these include the World Bank, the European Union, the African Development Bank (ADB), the British TradeMark, the Islamic Development Bank and so many others. 

The economy of Uganda has, in the past 27 years, grown at the rate of 6.6 per cent per annum in spite of the electricity, road, rail and ICT backbone bottlenecks. When you hear these rates of growth, which the minister is reading and the ones we achieved in the past, these were achieved in spite of poor roads, inadequate electricity and high transport costs. 

After these bottlenecks are solved, the way we are solving them now, the economy will grow at the rate of 7 to 10 per cent per annum. That is where we are heading. (Applause) This higher rate of growth will start in the year 2020. This takes into account efficiency improvements in infrastructure spending and coming on stream of oil production. 

However, even at the present rate of growth, Uganda will become a lower middle income country by 2020. What we have showed you here is that even with these bottlenecks, which we have not fully solved, Uganda will achieve a lower middle income status by 2020, that is, in the next four years. That is when Uganda will attain a GDP of $1,039 per capita. At the present, we are at $788 per capita up from $665 in 2009/2010. This is an increase of 18.5 per cent. This is, by the way, inspite of the population increase. Still we are moving up. 

We could have achieved more if, for instance, we had spent less on wages and spent more on infrastructure. Out of our total budget of Shs 23 trillion, almost Shs 3 trillion; 12 per cent is spent on the Government Wage Bill. 

From our own domestic revenue of Shs 11 trillion, wages would account for 26 per cent. By even saving a quarter of this, we would be able to build one and a half tarmac roads of the Kampala–Masaka type per annum where we spent Shs 440 billion in addition to whatever we are doing now.

Anyway, our Baganda people say, “Ekitatta muyima tekimumala ko nte” which means, “As long as a Muhima has got life, he will always have cattle even if some of those cattle die in big numbers.” This is on account of his dedication. 

Therefore, some disorientation notwithstanding, the NRM is set to achieve its strategic goal of modernising Uganda. (Applause) 

One area we are going to address, as I pointed out in my State of the Nation Address recently, is the area of value addition and manufacturing. This is in order for us to earn more Forex. As you heard the Minister of Finance, Plnaning and Economic Development say, our GDP is now Shs 75 trillion. If the exchange rate was at Shs 2,000, our GDP size in dollars would be $38 billion. However due to the fact that the shilling is depreciating, you heard that the GDP size in dollars is now $25 billion. If the exchange rate was lower, it would be higher. 

By adding value to our raw materials, our GDP in dollars will rapidly grow. If we use the other method of calculating GDP; the Purchasing Power Parity (PPP) method, the GDP of Uganda today is $54 billion.

Industrialisation and value addition are therefore a must. Some people misunderstand the chain of production. When we say that we are spending about Shs 500 billion on agriculture, some people think that this is not enough. I heard people murmuring when the minister was reading the figure. The Opposition always miss things. 

However, when we spend Shs 3 trillion on roads, that money assists agriculture first and foremost. If you are talking of agriculture without roads then I am sorry you do not know what you are talking about.    

How about defence and security? The figure we are spending on defence and security is Shs 1,500 billion. Is that money connected with agriculture or not? If you say it is not connected then I would invite you to go to Somalia and try to run a coffee farm there. Can you have agriculture without peace? Therefore, please take a holistic view of the Budget and not a fragmented one. I thank the minister and I thank you all. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Your Excellency the President, distinguished guests and Members of Parliament, as you might be aware, the implementation of the Public Finance Management Act required an involuntary adjustment to the parliamentary calendar. Since February, the Members have been continuously working and diligently without the usual recess, as agreed by the parliamentary calendar. In order to facilitate and give the honourable members an opportunity to go and inform the electorate about the State of the Nation Address and the Budget, they have to recess from today until 23 June 2015 at 14:00 hours. 

However, I give notice to the Chairperson and members of the Business Committee that the Business Committee will convene on Monday, 22 June 2015 at 10.00 a.m. 

In the meantime, you are all invited to the parliamentary gardens at Serena Hotel where the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development will continue to elaborate on his Budget. (Laughter) So, we are still in session. Thank you very much. The House is adjourned.

(East African Community Anthem.)

(National Anthem.)

(The House rose at 6.01 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 23 June 2015 at 2 p.m.)


                                                                             



