Thursday, 12 June 2014

Parliament met at 3.12 p.m. at the Serena Conference Centre, Kampala. 

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

National Anthem

East African Community Anthem

PRAYERS

PROCLAMATION 

THE SPEAKER: This is the proclamation by the Speaker of Parliament of the Republic of Uganda:

“WHEREAS under Article 95(2) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, a Session of Parliament shall be held at such place within Uganda and shall commence at such time as the Speaker may by proclamation appoint; 

AND WHEREAS the President of the Republic of Uganda is required under Article 155(1) of the Constitution to prepare and lay before Parliament in each financial year, but in any case not later than the 15th day before the commencement of the financial year, estimates of revenue and expenditure of Government for the next financial year;

COGNISANT of the fact that the Financial Year 2013/2014 will end on the 30th day of June 2014;

AWARE THAT it is expedient that the President lays before Parliament the estimates of revenue and expenditure of Government for the Financial Year 2014/2015 at the Kampala Serena Conference Centre;

NOW, THEREFORE, in exercise of the powers conferred upon the Speaker by Article 95(2) of the Constitution, I hereby proclaim that Parliament shall sit at the Kampala Serena Conference Centre on 12 June 2014 at 1400 hours to receive estimates of revenue and expenditure of Government for the Financial Year 2014/2015; 

AND FURTHER, in exercise of the powers conferred upon the Speaker by the Constitution, the Parliament Powers and Privileges Act, cap 258, and the Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of Uganda, it is hereby proclaimed and declared that the said Kampala Serena Conference Centre including its forecourt, the yard and the gardens be the precincts of Parliament for the aforementioned purposes.

Given under my hand at Parliament House, Kampala this 12th day of June 2014.
Rebecca Kadaga, Speaker.”

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Your Excellency the President of the Republic of Uganda, Gen. Yoweri Kaguta Museveni; Your Excellency the Vice-President, Mr Edward Ssekandi; Rt Hon. Margaret Zziwa, Speaker of the East African Legislative Assembly; Rt Hon. Deputy Speaker, hon. Jacob Oulanyah; Rt Hon. Prime Minister and Leader of Government Business; the honourable Deputy Prime Ministers; the Leader of the Opposition in Parliament; honourable ministers; Judges of the Courts of Judicature; Members of Parliament; members of the diplomatic corps; the Chief of Defence Forces; the Inspector-General of Police; the Commissioner-General of Prisons; the Governor of the Bank of Uganda; leaders of the various political parties; religious leaders present; the business community; distinguished invited guests; ladies and gentlemen. 

Your Excellency, last Thursday we witnessed the opening of the Fourth Session of the Ninth Parliament and the delivery to Parliament of an address on the state of the nation by Your Excellency the President. Today is yet another important occasion in the parliamentary calendar as provided for by the Constitution. Your Excellency, I welcome you and all the other dignitaries in all your capacities. Today, distinguished guests, we expect the President to cause to be presented to Parliament estimates of revenue and expenditure for the Financial Year 2014/2015 as provided for under Article 155(1) of the Constitution.

You will recall that during the State of the Nation Address, His Excellency outlined the achievements Government has registered this year, the plans and programmes Government intends to undertake in the Financial Year 2014/2015 as well as the legislative business Parliament is expected to receive from the Executive for consideration. This noble intention announced last week is translated into action by the provisions of the Budget, which is to be shortly presented. Parliament’s task will be to evaluate whether the pronouncements made in the State of the Nation Address match the financial provisions in the Budget and will advise accordingly.

Your Excellency, I believe honourable members and the nation are anxiously waiting to hear what Your Excellency intends to present through the Minister for Finance. However, before I invite the Minister for Finance, it would be remiss of me not to commend the achievements we registered last night and to thank you personally, to thank the African Union and the United Nations for honouring the people of Uganda and East Africa when one of our own was elevated to the Presidency of the UN General Assembly. (Applause) On behalf of Parliament, I congratulate the MP for Mawogola County and also Minister for Foreign Affairs, hon. Sam Kahamba Kutesa, on this appointment and wish him well. I thank you very much. (Applause)

MOTION THAT PARLIAMENT DO RESOLVE ITSELF INTO A COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY FOR CONSIDERATION AND APPROVAL OF:

    I. THE REVISED REVENUE AND EXPENDITURE ESTIMATES FOR THE FISCAL YEAR 2013/2014

II. THE BUDGETARY PROPOSALS FOR THE ESTIMATES OF REVENUE AND EXPENDITURE FOR THE FISCAL YEAR 2014/2015

3.25
THE MINISTER FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mrs Maria Kiwanuka): Your Excellency the President; Your Excellency the Vice-President; Rt Hon. Speaker of Parliament; His Lordship the Chief Justice; Rt Hon. Deputy Speaker of Parliament; Rt Hon. Prime Minister; Rt Hon. Leader of the Opposition; Rt Hon. Deputy Prime Ministers; honourable Ministers; honourable Members of Parliament; development partners and members of the diplomatic corps; distinguished guests; ladies and gentlemen.

In accordance with Article 155(1) of our Constitution and in exercise of the powers delegated to me by His Excellency the President, I have the honour to present the Government revenue and expenditure proposals for the Financial Year 2014/2015.

I beg to move that Parliament resolves itself into a Committee of Supply to consider:
i) 	The revised revenue and expenditure estimates for the Financial Year 2013/2014; and
ii) 	Proposals for the estimates of revenue and expenditure for the Financial Year 2014/2015.

THE SPEAKER: Is the motion seconded? The motion is seconded.

MRS KIWANUKA: Thank you. Madam Speaker, the budget for the Financial Year 2014/15 is quite special in a number of ways. This is the fifth and last year of the implementation of the first phase of our National Development Plan, Financial Year 2010/11 to 2014/15. This, therefore, gives us the opportunity to review progress, identify emerging challenges and draw strategies for the next National Development Plan.

It is also the fourth year of implementation of the NRM Election Manifesto 2011-2016. Also, within two months, we shall embark on conducting a nationwide population and housing census to collect and update our demographic and socio-economic statistics critical for national planning. The coming budget year also falls within the target year 2015 for achievement of the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) and builds the foundations for the general elections scheduled for the year 2016 to enable Ugandans exercise their fundamental freedom of the right to vote their leaders. It is also, Madam Speaker as you have said, the year that Uganda has ascended to the presidency of the United Nations General Assembly. We congratulate the President, hon. Sam Kutesa, and all Ugandans on this achievement. 

Madam Speaker, amid challenges including the aftermath of the global economic crisis, the Government has achieved significant milestones in the socio-economic transformation journey over recent years. These include the following:

    • Uganda’s fast expansion over the last two decades has simultaneously translated into a significant reduction in poverty. The proportion of people living below the poverty line has declined from 56.4 per cent in 1992/1993 to 24 per cent in 2009, and now further to 19.7 per cent in 2012/13. (Applause)

	This indicates that our country has already surpassed the Millennium Development Goal (MDG) of halving the proportion of its population living in extreme poverty by 2015. This is the first and most significant MDG because if we do not alleviate poverty, you cannot tackle ignorance and disease on a sustainable basis.

    • There is also an improvement in the quality and stock of physical infrastructure with 830 kilometres of new roads constructed; 1,630 kilometres of transmission lines laid; and over 42,000 new rural users were connected to the national grid, predominantly in the rural areas. (Applause)

    • As further interrogation of our MDGs shows, we have increased quality and access to social services like education, health and water.

    • It is also a year, Madam Speaker, in which Uganda has been the pre-eminent destination of foreign direct investment in East Africa. It is also the year in which Uganda was one of the five signatories to the Protocol of the East African Monetary Union Roadmap.

However, we must not rest on our past successes. The challenge going forward is to ensure that we sustain this inclusive growth trajectory towards true socio-economic transformation. This year’s budget is a continuation of our long journey towards creating a better Uganda for people today and for future generations. 

The theme for the Financial Year 2014/2015 Budget is, therefore, “Maintaining the Momentum: Infrastructure Investment for Growth and Socio-Economic Transformation.” It will focus on implementing key development priorities over the next year within existing resource constraints, and continue to narrow the infrastructure gap while promoting economic productivity and diversification for better job creation to satisfy Ugandans.

Madam Speaker, this is the fourth budget that I am reading but it never gets easier. I wish to extend my thanks to His Excellency the President who entrusted this responsibility to me and for his continued guidance throughout the budget process. (Applause) I thank my Cabinet colleagues, Members of Parliament, our development partners, civil society and the Ugandan people for the time dedicated to scrutinise the budget proposals and the valuable input towards finalising the forthcoming year’s budget. This was truly a consultative budget process and my phone number is known to 33 million Ugandans. (Laughter)

Economic Performance and Outlook for the Financial Year 2014/2015

Madam Speaker, Uganda’s economy continued to grow throughout the financial year but more modestly than the 6.2 per cent that was projected a year ago. This was a result of a slow-down in performance by the manufacturing, construction and financial services. At the same time, telecommunications and electricity went through a consolidation phase. The continuing unrest in the region reduced our export and remittance proceeds, and the last stages of the global crisis effects were played out on the world stage towards a new equilibrium.

Although the estimated growth has been less than expected, it is still a very credible performance by our economy. Throughout all this, Uganda has retained her macroeconomic stability and was a top destination for foreign direct investment in East Africa.

During next fiscal year, real GDP growth is projected at 6.1 per cent. Agribusiness, that is, agricultural activity and agro-processing, exports, manufacturing, mining and quarrying are projected to be the major drivers of growth. Government’s medium-term objective is to restore real GDP growth to 7 per cent per annum. This will require continued implementation of sound macroeconomic policies, implementation of financial sector reforms and continued acceleration of the intervention required in removing bottlenecks to private sector development and competitiveness.
 
Madam Speaker, inflation has remained low this year and it dropped to 5.4 per cent by May 2014. Annual core inflation declined to 3.3 per cent as at the end of May 2014. The slowdown in price increases followed a reduction in food prices resulting from drought in the first half of this financial year. The price increases were contained by coordinated prudent fiscal and monetary policy management. Maintaining low inflation continues to be a key objective of Government’s macroeconomic policy in order to ensure a stable investment climate and preserve the welfare of Ugandans.

Madam Speaker, as far as private investment is concerned, Government’s long-term objective is to boost domestic savings to provide long-term development finance. This will help match domestic project finance requirements to project implementation profiles, as well as lower lending interest rates to long term borrowers. Government will continue prioritising infrastructure development, facilitate regional trade and offer affordable financing for viable bankable projects and completing the business licensing reforms that are on-going.
 
Over the year, our exchange rate has remained relatively stable, with marginal appreciation of the shilling by about two per cent against the US dollar. The strengthening of the shilling has largely been on account of strong foreign inflows from investment portfolio holders and foreign direct investment. This is due to the attractive investment climate in Uganda. 

Balance of Payments

Madam Speaker, during the year now ending, our balance of payments continued to be affected by the persistent current account deficit, which has been largely financed by surpluses on the capital and financial account. The current account has remained weak due to a large trade deficit which is projected to widen from US$ 2 billion last year to US$ 2.46 billion by the close of the year. This is mainly due to the continued strong demand for imports, especially investment imports, and weaker-than-expected global and regional demand for our exports. At the same time, we are calibrating our regional exports strategy to include and focus on destinations other than South Sudan.
 
Madam Speaker, I am glad to inform you that even then, our total exports were improved over this year now ending. Uganda’s value of exports of goods and services are projected to be US$ 5.4 billion. However, our demand for imports of goods and services remained robust with imports expected to increase to US$ 7.9 billion during this fiscal year.

Our export strategy will maximize demand for our products and services above and beyond local effective demand, thereby spurring demand for jobs here in Uganda. This will be achieved by making sure we make enough products for that market beyond our borders, which has infinite effective demands. In the medium term, our competitive advantage lies in agro-processing using locally sourced inputs and lower skilled labour, even as we train for higher value-added industries. 

This budget will focus on enhancing the business environment for already existing firms and SMEs in rural and urban areas and encourage productivity for existing key crops. Government’s contribution to this medium-term strategy includes maintaining stable and competitive exchange rates, ensuring political stability and undertaking investments in infrastructure to facilitate trade while promoting manufacturing, especially agro-processing.

Foreign Exchange Reserves

The level of our foreign exchange reserves has slightly improved from US$ 2.9 billion in June 2013 to US$ 3.1 billion expected at the end of June 2014. This is equivalent to 4.2 months of future import cover for goods and services. Government’s medium term objective is to maintain a level of foreign exchange reserves of at least five months import cover, which adequately provides a buffer against external shocks.
 
Fiscal Sector Performance for Financial Year 2013/2014

Madam Speaker, net URA revenues for financial year 2013/2014 were projected at Shs 8,578 billion but collections are estimated at Shs 8,104 billion or 94 per cent of the projected revenue, which represents a shortfall of Shs 475 billion for this year. The underperformance of revenue collections was mainly due to the lower-than-projected growth in the economy, which affected particularly Value Added Tax and Corporate Income Tax. I will also point out, Madam Speaker, that as more people turn to investment rather than consumption, the tax regime on investment activity is much more favourable than on consumption activities. However, in comparison to last financial year, URA revenue collections in absolute terms have increased by 13.4 per cent.
 
Madam Speaker, during next year, Government will take corrective measures to improve revenue performance. This will include strengthening tax revenue administration, vigorous identification and collection of taxes already due from various entities, and some new tax revenue enhancement measures. I will spell out these measures later when I come to the tax proposals.
 
Madam Speaker, financing from the domestic financial markets for the Financial Year 2013/2014 budget amounted to Shs 1,747.8 billion on a net basis to supplement domestic revenues for the infrastructure investment projects, especially roads. In the coming financial year, net domestic financing will amount to Shs 2,539.1 billion, which includes a drawdown of the Energy Fund to finance the Karuma and Isimba hydropower projects and reflects an additional Shs 791.3 billion over and above the approved levels in Financial Year 2013/2014.

Madam Speaker, we found that this cost is more bearable than the cost of cutting budget allocations to various ministries, departments and agencies that are already implementing investment projects, which results in arrears and legal costs.
 
Madam Speaker, we acknowledge the vital assistance role played by development partners in speeding up our rate of development and freeing up Government resources for other priority activities. We also thank the development partners for directing their external financing towards areas that we have prioritized in the implementation of our national development objectives. We have been able to accelerate progress especially in infrastructure and social sectors. 

However, we do also acknowledge that although our development needs remain substantial, Overseas Development Assistance (ODA) is decreasing worldwide. Together with our development partners, we will make sure that we work to ensure true value for money from ODA that comes.

Madam Speaker, during the year, external assistance to finance the budget was projected at US$ 1,028 million. It is projected by the end of this financial year, Government will realise just about half of this assistance. The slow disbursement is largely attributed to low absorption by sector ministries arising from slow implementation of projects. My Ministry will work vigorously with the ministries, departments and agencies to improve execution, financial and operational management of these development projects. Government agencies will be required to implement projects as programmes in order for the country to fully accrue the benefits from external assistance. We will make sure of this, Madam Speaker.

Next financial year, US$ 1,017 million in external support is expected. Project support will be US$ 991 million. In addition, general budget support amounting to US$ 25.7 million, excluding debt relief, has been committed by our bilateral development partners.

Madam Speaker, total expenditure during the year is projected to amount to 19.7 per cent of GDP, compared to 18.8 per cent in the previous financial year. Government expenditure, excluding Karuma and Isimba, is projected to be Shs 11.93 trillion, which is 99.7 per cent of planned expenditure.

The stock of public debt is projected to rise to US$ 7 billion by the end of FY 2013/14, from US$6.4 billion in FY 2012/13; US$ 4.2 billion of the debt is external and US$ 2.8 billion is domestic. Notwithstanding the increase, our public debt remains sustainable and Uganda is not under debt distress. Over the medium-term, the debt-to-GDP ratio is projected to peak at about 39.8 per cent of GDP, which is a comfortable projection. 

Madam Speaker, as Government diversifies its sources of debt financing, we will ensure our borrowing strategy remains sustainable in line with our public debt management framework, 2013. The underlying principle will be to confine any commercial or near commercial financing to only infrastructure projects with an income stream to ensure guaranteed repayments. Meanwhile, grants and concessional financing will continue to finance social projects with long term indirect benefits.

Financial Sector Developments

Madam Speaker, during the year now ending, the banking sector remained stable and registered rapid asset growth, arising from increased deposits and lending activity by bank customers. However, interest rates have remained high, primarily because of high levels of borrower risk. The good news is that the Central Bank reference interest rate was reduced to 11 per cent in June 2014 and average commercial bank lending rates have also declined from 24.2 per cent to 20 per cent during the year.

In the coming year, completion of the Uganda national identification project will help increase what the banks call Know Your Customer (KYC) and will reduce the perceived risk of borrowing default. We are happy to note that Stanbic Bank has agreed to benchmark its lending rates to the CBR already, which is now at 17.9 per cent. 

The emergence of new mobile telephone technology and agency banking has been a key driver of improving financial inclusion over the year. A study of 2013 has found that people with access to banking services rose from 70 per cent to 85 per cent. This was primarily due to penetration of mobile money banking into the rural areas and with its low cost of implementation.  

In the next financial year, Government will deepen the financial sector by accommodating alternative banking approaches including regulations to govern mobile banking, moving to put other financial services on the mobile platform other than just depositing and withdrawing money. We will also introduce legislations for agency banking, which will regulate the agents who handle the mobile money transactions; bank assurance, which is insurance for agricultural projects. This means that agriculture lending will reduce in cost. We also hope to introduce banking according to Islamic principles –(Applause)– which means that instead of the bank or the financing house charging interest, they take an equity stake in the project or the business and work hand in hand with the borrower to ensure a successful conclusion. To this end, Government will present to Parliament amendments to the Financial Institutions Act 2004 and Bank of Uganda Act 2001, in line with international best practice.

Non-bank Financial Institutions

Madam Speaker, access to non-bank financial services increased from 49 per cent in 2009 to 65 per cent in 2013. The effect of this was a significant reduction in the financially excluded population from 4.3 million (30 per cent of adults) to 2.6 million (15 per cent of adults) in 2013. 

In order to promote savings and enhance consumer financial protection for majority Ugandans, Cabinet approved the policy principles for the tier 4 microfinance law to regulate and supervise the microfinance institutions including SACCOs and money lenders. The Bill is with the First Parliamentary Council and will be presented to Parliament in the coming financial year.

Deepening Financial Markets

In the retirement benefits sector, Madam Speaker, Government is making progress in reforming the sector to improve savings in the economy, protect savings of individuals and restore trust in the retirement benefits system. The framework for regulating and providing oversight of the sector is now fully operational. The aim is to ensure that the pensions sector allows workers to have a choice in the pension schemes they contribute to, the form of benefits payments that they request and whether it is in terms of annuity or lump-sum while ensuring maximum safety of their savings.

In the capital markets, the stock market registered a record turnover of Shs 198 billion up from Shs 31 billion recorded in 2012. Capital assets under professional management grew to over Shs 800 billion by the end of 2013. This was mainly driven by the recent reforms in the pensions sector.  

Madam Speaker, capital markets development is critical to attaining long-term sustainable economic growth, because it plays a major role in the mobilization of domestic resources for long-term investment. There are currently only 40,000 registered shareholders in Uganda. Public awareness will be stepped up in order to draw many more Ugandans into the formal savings sector and to interest more Uganda entrepreneurs in equity capital to finance their businesses rather than just bank loans. This will lead to an increased level of domestic savings, which is currently estimated at only 10 per cent of GDP. 

During the next financial year, we intend to reach an additional 20,000 potential investors in the securities market, through a focused capital markets development campaign. Government will amend the Capital Markets Authority (CMA) Act in order to provide for a greater diversity of financing opportunities, and to facilitate movement of capital across the East African region in line with the EAC Common Market protocol.

Madam Speaker, in the insurance sector, gross insurance premiums rose to Shs 457 billion, representing a 30 per cent annual growth. Agricultural insurance products were offered for the first time and currently, eight insurance providers are already underwriting agricultural related loans. This will reduce the perceived risk of agricultural loans and thereby reduce interest rates to this sector. In addition, the first ever reinsurance company, Uganda Reinsurance Company Ltd, was licensed to underwrite risks locally and reduce on the amount of premiums issued outside Uganda.

During the year 2013/2014, the Anti-Money Laundering Act was passed and we highly commend Parliament. It demonstrates our clear commitment to fight money laundering and the financing of terrorism. During this coming financial year, the Financial Intelligence Authority will be operationalised and begin to conduct financial sector surveillance in order to secure all international financial transactions and ensure that they occur in compliance with the Anti-money laundering Act.

Madam Speaker, Government will use Public Private Partnerships (PPPs) as an important option for delivering public infrastructure projects and services. The Public Private Partnership Bill, 2012 that supports PPP regulation is before Parliament and we appeal for its enactment. It will provide the regulatory framework for the institutional arrangements and monitoring the implementation of PPP projects throughout the country.

Madam Speaker, PPPs must be well regulated to make sure they do not increase contingent liabilities on the Treasury and fiscal obligations on the Ugandan public. Contingent liabilities create a possibility that Government may be required at some future date to make unexpected and substantial payments. 

The cardinal PPP principles are three: First of all, economic benefit to the country must outweigh the financial costs or the revenue foregone by Government on their behalf. The PPP partners must demonstrate their operational and financial capacity of having operated at schemes of that complexity and that financial magnitude in the past. We will also make sure that any SOE’s operating commercial ventures on behalf of Government will not expose the Treasury to contingent risk.

The Budget Strategy for Financial Year 2014/2015

Madam Speaker, Government’s budget strategy for the coming financial year is built on four key interlinked interventions. These interventions are: 

1. 	Improving the business climate by undertaking key economic infrastructure investments while maintaining peace, security and macroeconomic stability. Only Government can do this.

2. 	Leveraging Government’s limited resources to facilitate productivity in agriculture, agribusiness, agro-processing, tourism, industry and support services such as ICT. 

3. 	Improving the productivity of Uganda’s human resource by enhancing provision of quality education, health and water services with appropriate performance indicators and monitoring systems; and

4. 	Strengthening institutional governance, accountability and transparency in government operations or government related operations.

Madam Speaker, this budget strategy will be another link in the chain to faster economic growth and higher employment levels, acceleration in growth of per capita incomes and sustained poverty reduction. It also ensures that Government facilitates the private sector by implementing measures to improve efficiency and lower the cost of doing business.

Improving Uganda’s Business Climate

Madam Speaker, the budget strategy to improve Uganda’s business climate will focus on interlinked actions that reduce the cost of doing business. I will later elaborate on each of the sectoral actions to improve the business environment as part of next year’s sector priorities.

Uganda ranks among the top 10 recipients of foreign direct investment in sub-Saharan Africa. Investment opportunities in infrastructure development, oil and gas, agriculture, mining of non-oil minerals and telecommunications are supported by sustained political stability and the macroeconomic environment, which many of us do not miss until it is gone.

In the next financial year, 37 licences will be abolished and amendments will be affected to 307 licences to merge them. I wish to also appeal to Parliament to expedite consideration and enactment of the Investment Code (Amendment) Bill, the Counterfeit Bill and the Public Private Partnerships Bill to further facilitate the business climate and encourage investment.

The Uganda Investment Authority and the Uganda Registration Services Bureau are transforming into one-stop centres to efficiently facilitate investors and quicken business registration. Company registration online will also be launched to speed up registration. Government will reduce the burden of multiple data entries for business start-ups by use of information collected at business registration for taxation and licensing. Already, the Uganda Revenue Authority is working together with KCCA and the municipal councils to streamline their databases.

Madam Speaker, in the next year, Government will roll out the National Land Information System from six zones to 21 land offices, thereby significantly reducing the time and cost of undertaking land transactions and enhancing the security of land registration. This will reduce fraud and corruption related to transfer and titling of land and allow land to be used as a financing mechanism for rural development.

Madam Speaker, Uganda is fully committed to regional integration. Key interventions that have been implemented under the East African Community include the signing, by our five presidents, of the East African Monetary Union Protocol to join the implementation of the customs union and the common market. The EAC partner states are now undertaking common infrastructure projects and working to reduce non-tariff barriers. As I stand here, Madam Speaker, my colleagues in Kenya, Rwanda and Tanzania are also delivering their budget speeches. We do it on the same day and at the same time. (Applause)

Madam Speaker, I am also happy to report that by the direct intervention of the Presidents of Uganda, Kenya and Rwanda, freight movement on the northern corridor is now much improved. By removing roadblocks, weigh bridges and multiple bonds, the number of days it takes a container from Mombasa to Kampala has been reduced from 18 to a maximum of four days –(Applause)– and to Kigali, reduced from 22 days to a maximum of seven days. (Applause) This was implemented without a single procurement activity - no bricks, no nails, no steel were bought. It was purely a presidential initiative to remove non-tariff barriers. (Applause) 

My colleagues, the ministers responsible for finance and economic affairs in East Africa, are carrying on this directive. We will make sure that this year, working together with the ministers for East Africa and the ministers responsible for trade, we will remove all non-tariff barriers.

Madam Speaker, a single entry East African tourist visa has also been introduced for visitors to Uganda, Rwanda and Kenya. (Applause) A common payment system has also been introduced. I will add that the Monetary Union Protocol, which was signed in November 2013, is undergoing ratification in all Partner States. Uganda is particularly interested in East Africa. We are land-linked. We have borders with Kenya, Rwanda, Tanzania, South Sudan and Eastern DRC. They are all net importers of our foodstuff and we intend to have them as major pillars in our export diversification drive.

For science innovation and industrialization, Government has continued to build infrastructure to ensure serviced industrial and business parks. Specific focus this coming financial year will be to operationalize the Kampala Industrial Business Park at Namanve as our flagship industrial estate to attract investors of all types. In the next year, Government will also enhance support to industrial research institutions to develop and commercialize technology innovations. We are already signing contracts with development partners to introduce business incubation units this coming financial year.

For financial inclusion, Madam Speaker, the budget strategy will deepen the financial sector to facilitate the availability of affordable credit for bankable projects in the private sector, including agriculture and SMEs. Government has prioritized the promotion of financial literacy to sensitize potential beneficiaries about new products such as crop insurance and to stimulate domestic capital mobilization through investment clubs. 

However, there are complementary factors, Madam Speaker, when it comes to accessing financial affordable credit. We must also address the knowledge transfer gap, whereby entrepreneurs must get business skills and operational skills for their particular areas of operation. We also must have behavioural training and savings mentality encouragement so that people do not expect to get all their money back and make profits within six months. Bankable projects are what is lacking. We will work together with all the ministries and departments to ensure that these services are availed to the Ugandan entrepreneurs. 

On the wider question of employment - enhancing productive employment; as Uganda celebrates progress in our Millennium Development Goals, our work force is growing due to better life expectancy and social service delivery. Their pathway to stable value-added employment is our economy’s opportunity and also our challenge. 

SMEs are critical in creating jobs and mobilizing the informal and rural economic activity. It is important to note that SMEs span the whole economy including artisans, small industrialists, health services, schools, entertainment, tourism, ICT agriculture input, to name but a few. The two main constraints to job creation are the lack of knowledge skills transfer and inadequate availability of affordable credit for viable and bankable projects on a sustainable basis. I am repeating some of these phrases, Madam Speaker, because they are all interlinked. 

Stable value added employment will be achieved in the medium term, within the following framework:
    i. Enhanced life expectancy, as depicted by progress on the MDG’s;
    ii. Significant opportunities presented by a competitive advantage in agriculture, agribusiness and distribution networks; and
    iii. Emphasis on a holistic approach encompassing increased formal employment as a long-term goal but via higher worker productivity, contract farming and support to SMEs, both formal and informal.

The experiences of countries like Mauritius that have an unemployment rate of less than 2 percent suggest that productivity and competitiveness of the local private sector are critical in generating decent and adequate jobs. This does not happen only through good infrastructure or pragmatic macro-economic agenda, much as these are invaluable and provided by government. A productive domestic private sector is where the citizens make the most of their macroeconomic environment and take the lead in translating the dividends of good infrastructure into personal financial gains.  

To achieve this, government’s role is catalytically; it is facilitative. The other actors in this quest are civil society, development partners, religious agencies, politicians, households and the unemployed youth and other workers themselves. We must all pull together on this task. 

Government’s task remains how to facilitate productivity and encourage the private sector to create jobs. Government agencies will carry out an implemented and integrated strategy focusing on the commodity chain, to continue undertaking the following interventions:
    i. Curriculum reform to enhance market orientation and private sector entrepreneurship;
    ii. Implementation of the Skilling Uganda Initiative in the business, technical and vocational training with an emphasis on provision of hands-on technical skills training and business development in line with the market demands. 
    iii. We are re-orienting the mind-set of potential entrepreneurs to a savings and long-term culture, enhancing financial literacy and inclusion, and implementing the PPDA Amendment Act provision, which ensures local content to be satisfied in government contracts. 

THE REVENUE AND EXPENDITURE FRAMEWORK FOR FINANCIAL YEAR 2014/2015

Madam Speaker, the revenue and expenditure framework for the financial year 2014/2015 budget has been developed in line with the recent trends in the domestic, regional and international economy. Next financial year, total resource inflows are projected to amount to Shs 15,054 billion. Domestic sources will contribute Shs 12,321 billion representing 81.8 percent of the total budget resource for the year. (Applause)

The Uganda Revenue Authority will collect taxes amounting to Shs 9,577 billion; and non-tax revenues of Shs 206 billion will be collected. The budget will also be financed by issuing government securities worth Shs 1,437 billion on domestic markets and net government drawdown from our savings of Shs 1,102 billion.

Total external financing of the budget will amount to Shs 2,733 billion, equivalent to 18.2 percent of the total budget resources. Budget support comprises Shs 69 billion while project aid amounts to Shs 2,664 billion, an increase of Shs 116.3 billion over the financial year now ending.

The resources available to finance discretionary government expenditure next year, therefore amount to Shs 11,088 billion, excluding project aid, public debt and other statutory obligations, which amount to Shs 3,966 billion. The total resources available for discretionary government expenditure represent an additional Shs 1,546 billion above the approved level for the year now ending.

SECTOR PERFORMANCE FOR FINANCIAL YEAR 2013/2014 AND PRIORITIES FOR FINANCIAL YEAR 2014/2015

Madam Speaker, in order for a detailed report on sector performance over the past year, the background to the budget for financial year 2014/15 has endeavoured to cover the performance of all sectors comprehensively. I will therefore only highlight the key achievements of some of the major sectors while emphasizing the priorities for the forthcoming year and the medium term.

The financial year 2014/2015 budget strategy is based on the following objectives:
    a) Achieve real economic growth rate of at-least 7 percent in the medium term;
    b) Keep annual consumer price inflation within single digit;
    c) Position Uganda in the context of EAC integration to ensure competitiveness;
    d) Maintain a prudent level of foreign exchange reserves of at least five months import cover, and;
    e)   Maintain a competitive real exchange rate market determined which can support export growth.

In order to achieve these objectives, the following priorities underline allocations of resources in the financial year 2014/2015 Budget: 
    a) Maintenance of national security and defence;
    b) Infrastructure development in transport and energy;
    c) Enhancement of scientific research, technology and innovation for industrialization, competitiveness and employment creation;
    d) Enhance production and productivity in agriculture, agribusiness, tourism, trade and industrial development;
    e)   Continue human capital and skills development; and
    f) Continue to strengthen institutional governance and public service delivery.

Madam Speaker, peace and stability remain the cornerstone for socio-economic transformation of our country. Under the strong leadership of H.E. the President, we have built a strong, professional, well-equipped Army and other security forces. (Applause) This has provided a peaceful, secure and politically stable environment that gives confidence and assurance to both foreign and local investors to consider Uganda a viable investment destination. We salute the members of our armed forces. 

Over the financial year now ending, Government continued to strengthen the capabilities of our armed forces and other security agencies by the acquisition of modern security and defence equipment and other logistical facilities, as well as the improvement of staff welfare and training. In order to facilitate the government programme of professionalization and equipping the security agencies, Shs 1,005.5 billion has been allocated to the security sector in the financial year 2014/15 representing 7.1 percent of the total budget. The key priorities will be in professional development of our forces, consolidation of peace, promotion of defence diplomacy, resolution of conflicts, internally, regionally and internationally and support the country’s foreign policy of peaceful co-existence and good neighbourliness.

Under infrastructure development, Madam Speaker, in the financial year 2013/2014, the transport and works sector was allocated Shs 2,510.66 billion. These resources have been used to upgrade to gravel 264 kilometres, rehabilitate 178 kilometres, complete construction of six new bridges and undertake the routine maintenance of 10,500 kilometres of unpaved roads. A further 1,720 kilometres of paved roads underwent routine maintenance. 

The rehabilitation of the existing Nalubale Bridge and construction of the New Nile Bridge at Jinja are highlights that have commenced.

Madam Speaker, during the year, 830 kilometres of the following new roads was completed: Nyakahita-Kazo; Kazo-Kamwenge; Fort Portal-Bundibugyo; Mbarara-Kikagati; Malaba-Bugiri; Tororo-Mbale; Jinja–Kamuli; Kawempe- Kafu; Mbale-Soroti; and Kampala- Masaka. 

With support from the World Bank, the rehabilitation and reconstruction of the road networks in the following municipalities commenced during the year: Mbale, Jinja, Masaka, Gulu, Lira, Arua, Mbarara, Entebbe, Soroti, Masaka, Fort Portal, Kabale, Moroto, Tororo and Hoima. 

In addition, routine and periodic maintenance for approximately 17,650 kilometres of national, district, urban and community access roads, including an estimated 265 kilometres under Kampala Capital City Authority were carried out. 

Government has commenced the rehabilitation and construction of numerous smaller bridges across the country mainly in Northern, Karamoja, Rwenzori and other areas of North Eastern Uganda.

Madam Speaker, with these interventions, the proportion of the national unpaved road network in fair to good condition is currently at 66 percent while that of National Paved Road network is at 77 percent. Our target is to improve the condition of these roads further to 75 percent and 85 percent respectively over the medium term. 

In the forthcoming financial year, I am increasing the allocation to the Works and Transport sector to Shs 2,575.5 billion. Government has targeted the upgrading from gravel to bitumen of 200 kilometres, the reconstruction of 178 kilometres, construction of 10 new bridges, and the rehabilitation of seven bridges. In addition, 12,875 kilometres of unpaved roads are scheduled for re-grading.

Madam Speaker, during the forthcoming year, Government will continue construction of at least 1,700 kilomeres of the following on going road projects: Vura-Arua-Oraba upgrade; Buteraniro-Ntungamo–Rwentobo; Ntungamo-Kabale–Katuna; Hoima–Kaiso–Tonya; Kampala-Mukono–Jinja; Gulu-Atiak-Nimule upgrade; Ishaka-Kagamba; Kampala-Entebbe Expressway; Moroto–Nakapiripirit; Kafu–Kiryandongo; Luuku–Kalangala upgrade; Fort Portal-Kamwenge; Mbarara Bypass; Mukono-Kyetume-Katosi/Kisoga to Nyenga; Mpigi-Maddu-Ssembabule; Kiryandongo to Kamdini; Kamdini to Gulu; Pakwach to Nebbi; Ntungamo to Mirama Hills; Kampala Northern Bypass upgrade; Masaka to Bukakata; Kigumba to Bulima-Kabwoya; Olwiyo-Gulu-Kitgum–Musingo Road; Villa Maria–Sembabule; Musita-Lumino-Busia/Majanji; Mubende-Kakumiro–Kagadi; and Mukono-Kayunga–Njeru.

Madam Speaker, construction of 650 kilometres on the following new roads: Projects will also commence in the coming financial year: Kabwoya–Kyenjojo; Tirinyi-Pallisa-Kumi/Kamonkoli; Kapchorwa-Suam; Mbale-Bubulo-Lwakhakha; Kyenjojo-Fort Portal; Ishaka-Rugazi–Katunguru; Sironko-Namunsi–Muyembe; Nansana–Busunju; and Mbale–Nkokonjeru; Atiak-Adjumani and Rukungiri-Ishasha-Kihihi and to Kanungu.

Madam Speaker, I have allocated an additional Shs 75 billion to the Road Fund to facilitate maintenance and rehabilitation of approximately 10,000 kilometres of national, district, urban and community access roads across the country. Government will also continue construction of several strategic bridges including the Mitaano Bridge in Kanungu District as well as the bridges destroyed by the recent floods in Kasese and other parts of the country.

Madam Speaker, accountability is key. A lot of resources are being devoted to the roads and we will ensure that accountability is forthcoming. This also applies to road maintenance as well as road construction.

Madam Speaker, in the railway sub-sector, Government, in collaboration with other partner states within the East Africa, is scaling up efforts to revitalise the railway transport system as a viable means of long distance transport. The upgrade to Standard Gauge Rail of the Tororo-Kasese and Mirama Hills to link with Kigali in Rwanda is a continuation of the link from Mombasa to Nairobi, to Malaba to Kampala. 

During financial year 2014/2015, the construction of an inland container depot at Mukono and the redevelopment and upgrading of facilities at Port Bell and Jinja piers will commence.

Madam Speaker, also under the Northern Corridor Initiative, we have developed outstanding gauge railways proposal for holistic approach going from Mombasa in Kenya to Nairobi, Malaba, Kampala, down to Mirama Hills to Kigali, running through the three countries to be developed as one whole project by all three countries. This will help us to bring down the costs of doing business by lowering the cost of transport. It is not a transport project, Madam Speaker, it is a development project as is the spur from Tororo to Nimule and which will continue to Juba as South Sudan has indicated interest.

In Energy infrastructure, Madam Speaker, during the financial year, the total national power generation capacity increased to 852 MW. Feasibility studies have been completed for several small hydropower sites, totalling to 130 MW at Kikagati, Mitano, Lubilia, Siti, Waki, Rwimi, Ndugutu, Nkusi, Nyamwamba, Nengo Hill, Esia, Muzizi and Nyagak III. Construction for these projects will begin in this financial year with support from development partners including the World Bank, Norway, United Kingdom, the European Union and Germany; together with the private sector.

Madam Speaker, 1,630 kilometres of transmission lines were added to the national grid during the year now ended. Sixteen sub-stations were constructed to improve transmission and distribution efficiency and reduce transmission losses. There are on-going procurements for 6,250 kilometres of transmission and distribution lines for which construction will begin during financial year 2014/2015. 

The terms of the distribution concession will also be further enforced to reduce systems losses from 23 percent to 20 percent. This will include further rolling out of the prepaid system to all government offices.

Madam Speaker, during the year now ending, Government has extended electricity to under-served areas of the country as part of its Rural Electrification Programme which continues to be on going. An additional 15 districts have now been connected to the national grid. These include Katakwi, Amuria, Kiruhura, Lamwo, Nakapiripirit, Amudat, Kaberamaido, Dokolo, Amolatar, Ntoroko, Alebtong, Moroto, Buhweju and Napak. This brings the total number of districts with electricity connections to 98 out of 112 districts. (Applause) I also include Kyegegwa District.

Work has commenced to also connect 11 districts. These are Buliisa, Adjumani, Moyo, Amuru, Otuke, Zombo, Koboko, Maracha, Yumbe, Nwoya and Namayingo. The remaining three districts of Kotido, Kaabong and Kalangala will be supplied by the end of 2016, thus completing the long but steady journey of supplying electricity to all districts of Uganda. (Applause)

In the forthcoming year, special attention will be placed on accelerating implementation of the major hydropower plants at Karuma and Isimba.

In the oil, gas and petroleum development, Madam Speaker, during the year now ending, Government has made significant progress in oil, gas and petroleum development. A total of 116 wells have been drilled, with successful results from 101 wells where oil has been found; that is 101 wells of 116. Of the wells with positive exploration results, 29 wells have been flow tested.

With respect to the development of an oil refinery, land acquisition has progressed with the compensation for 50 percent of project-affected people. In addition, the Environmental Baseline Study for the oil refinery has been concluded. The process for selection of the lead investor for the oil refinery has also reached advanced stages following submissions of proposal by four of the six shortlisted international firms.

The oil refinery will be developed as a Public-Private Partnership with the selected lead investor holding a 60 percent shareholding and Government and participating East African Community partners states holding up to 40 percent of the shares. 

Over the next year, the engineering design of the oil refinery will be completed to pave way for construction to begin. The oil refinery is a major achievement for Uganda in our quest for value addition within the country and we thank the President for his guidance in this matter. The reason as to why an inland refinery can work in Uganda is because Uganda is 1,000 kilometres from Mombasa and even a more distance from the mega refineries of the Middle East. 

In addition, the refinery area has 30 million people living within the market area who are already using refined products. So, the market is there and the production costs are favourable and that is why that is such a big achievement for us. We will also ensure that the by-product of the refinery goes into a fertiliser plant that is to be set up alongside the refinery to produce ammonia fertiliser. This will be the first ammonia fertiliser plant in Eastern Africa to supply our market and the regional demand.

In the area of non-petroleum minerals, iron ore discoveries at Buhara, Nangara, Kisoro, Rugando, and Butogota estimate total reserves at 116 million tonnes, with a gross value of $15.6 billion. In addition, reserves of 7.8 million ounces of gold have been found in Tiira in Busia, Kamalenge in Mubende, Mashonga in Bushenyi, Kampano in Ibanda and Alupe in Busia.

These gold reserves have a total gross value of $10.9 billion. Vermiculite, which is an industrial metal in Manafwa has been valued at $11.5 billion while limestone and marble reserves in Hima, Dura and Tororo have increased to over $300 million.

Government will support the development of these strategic mineral reserves to ensure the benefits accrue to Uganda, and the localities where the reserves have been discovered. These minerals belong to the people of Uganda and are held in trust by the Government. (Applause)

Madam Speaker, I have allocated Shs 1,675 billion to the energy and minerals sector to undertake development of the non-petroleum minerals.

Information and Communication Technology 

This sector is achieving increasing importance as a support to the other sectors. It is no longer a sector on its own but it is an input to health, education, business and trade, agriculture and weather forecasting. During the year just ending, we have completed construction of two phases of the National Transmission Backbone Infrastructure which has improved internet connectivity at an affordable cost. This has reduced the cost of bandwidth to $ 300 per megabit per second per month, down from $600 prevailing on the market. Bulk internet bandwidth agreements have been signed with Government institutions with 18 ministries so far being supplied with cheaper bandwidth. 

I encourage the private sector to utilise the infrastructure in order to reduce their ICT costs of doing business and enhance their efficiency and profitability.

Madam Speaker, in order to increase the economic benefits the country receives from connectivity improvements, a business process outsourcing incubation centre at the Statistics House has been officially launched. It employs 250 directly and an additional 4,000 employees are currently employed by other BPO operators in the sub-sector. (Applause) This represents an opportunity for Uganda to become a business process outsourcing hub on the global market.

Madam Speaker, I bring to your attention that a report by Microsoft for Eastern and Southern Africa ranks Uganda second behind only South Africa for ICT potential –(Applause)– with Madagascar in third place. 

In the financial year 2014/15, Government will accelerate the commercialisation of the second phase of the National Backbone Infrastructure project and commence construction of the National ICT Park and Innovation Centre at Namanve. 

In the key growth sector, productivity and production is key. The agricultural sector is key for employment, productivity and exports. It employs 70 percent of the Uganda’s labour force and contributes about 21 percent to the GDP and less than 1 percent in taxes. 

But during the next year, Government will support interventions in the agriculture sector on the following key actions:-
i) 	Focus on provision of inputs, while minimising expenditure on administrative costs, seminars and workshops;

ii) 	Place resources available for inputs provision under a single umbrella and leverage them to focus on the need of the agriculture business people. Currently, almost Shs 400 billion is available in various silos for import provision. We will put them all under one umbrella where accountability will be enforced;

iii) 	Government will also encourage small holders to produce surplus for market, however small, focusing on those enterprises that provide high returns to smallholder farmers. These crops are all well known to us;
For medium and commercial scale farmers, encourage commercial ranching, large scale crop production and value addition and to live in peace and harmony with the small holders who can be contract farmers or landlords if they lease their land. The Government role will be to leverage and facilitate agriculture using the value chain approach to provide agribusiness with solutions for job creation, export diversification and increase in household incomes.

The above strategy will be implemented holistically by government agencies working in concert including the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, Ministry of Agriculture, Animals Industry and Fisheries, Ministry of Works and Transport, Ministry for Energy and Mineral Development, Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives, Ministry of Local Government; the Ministry for Water and Environment and the Ministry for Lands.

We call upon aid agencies to come together to make sure that agriculture productivity and agribusiness becomes the cornerstone of our employment creation module. 

Madam Speaker, turning to tourism, sustainability and enhancement of our tourism sector is dependent on environmental protection and conservation of our unique and diverse wildlife and flora. And at this time, I pay tribute to the gallant rangers of Uganda Wildlife Authority who risk their lives to discourage poaching. (Applause)

The tourism sector will significantly contribute to national output if its full potential is utilised. Government’s contribution will be to support the private sector operations by:
    (a) Developing, financing and implementing a sustainable conservation strategy including appropriate penalties with the oil companies and local communities involved.
    (b) To finance and implement a holistic tourism promotion strategy.
    (c) Leveraging on our comparative tourist advantages to reduce the cost of visiting Uganda by promoting the single tourist visa and in easing cross-border transit in East Africa.
    (d) Making sure our diversity of bio-attractions, geographical, historical, and religious are all taken care of in the promotional strategy.

And we will leverage on a cross-sectoral approach to ensure tourism roads and power availability to the private sector installations in the tourist sites.

I have accordingly allocated an additional Shs 5 billion to the Uganda Tourism Board for tourism promotion, for the formulation of the promotion and conservation strategy. (Interjections)

Human Capital and Skills Development

Madam Speaker, Government strategy for skills development entails, among others, increasing access to quality education with emphasis on skilled development, quality healthcare as well as safe water and sanitation facilities.  (Interjections)

THE SPEAKER: Order, hon. Members; you will be able to debate the Minister’s address when we return to our House.

MRS KIWANUKA: Government spending on the three sectors of health, education and clean water will amount to over Shs 3,550 billon, which is approximately 25 percent of the total budget.
 
For education, Government has continued to increase the availability of school facilities, infrastructure to enhance access, improve the quality of learning to provision of teaching materials, recruitment of additional teachers and enhanced monitoring and supervision. (Interjections)
 
As UPE and USE continue, enrolment in Business and Vocation Education and Training (BTVET) has also increased to about 24,000 while enrolment in higher education institutions is now close to 200,000 students. (Applause) Two million and four hundred copies of core textbooks and teachers’ guides have been procured and distributed to improve the quality and relevance of primary education. Four hundred eighty six secondary schools have been rehabilitated and constructed, with development partner support. Construction works are on-going at an additional 639 schools.
 
I have allocated Shs 1,699 billion to the education sector in the next financial year to enhance the quality of education. (Applause) Priorities include enhancement of teachers’ salaries, with emphasis on primary school teachers. (Applause) I have also provided Shs 5 billion towards supporting teachers’ SACCOs, in addition to the Shs 2.5 billion provided during this year.
 
Madam Speaker, I have also specifically allocated Shs 68.7 billion for the implementation of the Skilling Uganda Programme. (Applause) Workshops will be constructed at technical schools in Kihanda in Kanungu; Namasale in Amolator; Namisindwa in Manafwa, Bukholi in Bugiri, and St Joseph Kyalubingo in Kamwenge.

Government will also operationalise and expand the student loan scheme with emphasis on science and vocational training. The loan scheme will be rolled out starting with undergraduate students in both public and chartered private universities.

Madam Speaker, in addition to the primary and secondary schools construction programme already underway, Government will commence the construction of eight primary teachers colleges at, Paidha, Bundibugyo, Bukedea, Kapchorwa, Arua, Ibanda and Canon Lawrence and Buhungiro. Construction of the National High Altitude Training Centre will also commence in Kapchorwa, in addition to the rehabilitation of six regional stadia. (Applause)
 
Government will also provide instructional materials to support the roll out of the new curriculum for 45 primary teacher colleges and also for special needs education.
 
Under health, Government procured and distributed medicines and drugs worth Shs 124 billion. These include essential medicines including Anti-retrovirals, tuberculosis medicines and reproductive health supplies. Enrolment for anti-retroviral treatment increased from 376,000 in 2012 to 570,000 in 2013. In order to reduce the incidence and impact of malaria, long-lasting insecticide treated nets were also distributed in all districts and indoor residual spraying has also been on-going in the high prevalence districts of Northern Uganda, Kumi and Ngora. Vaccines for the nine vaccine-preventable diseases were also procured and distributed in order to eliminate stock-outs.
 
In order to decongest Mulago National Referral Hospital, the construction of new hospitals in Kawempe and Kirundi in Kampala is on-going. (Applause) In addition, regional referral hospitals of Moroto, Mityana, Nakaseke, Kiryandongo, Nebbi, Anaka, Moyo, Entebbe and Iganga general hospitals, are being rehabilitated. (Applause)
 
In the next financial year, Government will enhance health workers remuneration and improve their skills through capacity building. (Applause) Health facility infrastructure at both local government and referral levels will also be expanded, in addition to the construction of additional staff houses to minimise absenteeism.
 
Government will also implement the malaria strategy for effective prevention and control through the mass distribution of long-lasting insecticide-treated nets and mass indoor residual spraying, commencing in the high malaria-prone areas of Northern Uganda and Lake Kyoga. This is a six-year programme, split into two phases of three years each and was developed and will be implemented by Government, the development partners, the private sector and the local communities all working together. Malaria is not only a health hazard; it is also an economic hazard. It is responsible for child mortality, maternal complications and loss of work productivity more than all other diseases put together in Uganda. This is why we have singled it out for special attention.

Madam Speaker, in the health sector, I have allocated Shs 1,197.8 billion to enable implementation of the Government priority programmes.
 
In water and sanitation, Government has made considerable progress in access to clean safe water and sanitation. Sixty five percent of Ugandans now have access to safe water within a distance of half a kilometre. (Interjections) The expansion of the Ggaba Water Works and construction of Namasuba Hill Reservoir commenced during the year. Piped water systems and gravity flows schemes in Kahama in Ntungamo District, Wadelai and Singila in Alwi dry corridor, the expansion of the Tororo-Manafwa water supply were completed. The cumulative storage for water for production is estimated at 28.3 million cubic metres. The functionality of water sources at rural water supply points ranges between 83 to 85 percent.
 
The construction of the Lubigi waste water treatment plant and rehabilitation of Bugolobi sewerage treatment plant were completed. The construction of the Nakivubo and Kinawataka waste water management plants was also started. 

Sanitation cover is now estimated at 71 percent for rural areas and 83 percent for urban households. (Applause) Our target is to improve this percentage to 100 per cent for all Ugandans by the year 2018. 

Madam Speaker, in the next financial year, Ggaba Water Works will be expanded to increase water production in Kampala from 180,000 cubic metres per day to 230,000 cubic metres per day. 

Government will also implement the Kampala Sanitation Master Plan to increase sewerage coverage in Kampala, construct works on the Nakivubo treatment plant facility, rehabilitate and expand water supply systems in the towns of Arua, Gulu, Mbale and Bushenyi. 

Madam Speaker, I have allocated an additional Shs 30 billion for the purpose of enhancing safe water provision and sanitation. I will also take a minute to inform you that the completion of three big irrigation schemes was completed in the year just ending. This has meant that rice farmers have now experienced increasing productivity of rice from 20 bags per acre to 25 bags an acre. This is in Mubuku and Ndoho.

Madam Speaker, during the year now ending, Government has vigorously instituted accountability measures to effectively and efficiently utilise public resources. As you know, Madam Speaker, this started two years ago; it was continued in the budget of last year and it continuing even now. 

Under cash management, the Treasury Single Account was implemented to strengthen day to day cash and debt management. All redundant bank accounts for government departments at the Bank of Uganda have been closed and the numbers of bank accounts operated by any Government Agency have now been restricted. We have enforced limits on cash withdrawals to a maximum of Shs 20 million per day to reduce the amount of public funds exposed to potential abuse. This also means that at the end of every quarter, any unused funds will return to the Treasury for scrutiny and to be distributed again. 

Madam Speaker, we have fully decentralised payroll management in the public sector from the Ministry of Public Service and the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, to the accounting officers who hold votes, responsibilities for those respective votes. This has addressed the perennial problem of delayed salary payments and existence of “ghost” staff on the Government payroll. With this arrangement, Accounting Officers are personally and financially responsible for all salary transactions. Madam Speaker, we appreciate the support we have received from yours and Parliament while carrying out this exercise.   

In order to improve payroll management, the biometric information of all public servants across the country is being taken and a comprehensive audit of the payroll by the Auditor General will be completed by the end of August. The Integrated Personnel and Payroll System (IPPS) is being rolled out and will interface with the Integrated Financial Management System (IFMS) under my ministry to ensure payment of all staff salaries through the IFMS, as Government payment system.

In order to improve the management of government pension and gratuity, with effect from 1st July 2014, the budgeting and payment of gratuity will be decentralised from the Ministry of Public Service to the individual institutions where the retiring public officers reside. (Applause) This decentralisation will also be extended to the payment of monthly pensions in the medium term.

Budget Transparency and Accountability

Madam Speaker, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development continues to publish the quarterly releases to all government departments and agencies in the print media. I call upon the honourable Members of Parliament and the general public to take keen interest in this information and use it to monitor the implementation of government programmes and utilisation of tax payers’ money within their respective domains. 

During this year, my ministry launched the Budget Information Website which provides all budget-related data and instructions for whose use are on our ministerial websites. The budget information on the website provides the performance of government programmes by locality and serves as a platform for the public to provide feedback and report any information related to implementation of the national budget.

Madam Speaker, in the next year, budget transparency will be enhanced by working closely with the civil society. I call upon the civil society to work together with my ministry to enhance budget transparency. The CSO are literate, numerate and present in the field. We call upon them to use those strengths to help us monitor, evaluate and ensure maximum value for money for government monies used in the field, not in workshops.

The Ministry of Finance is also establishing an SMS system and hotline for the public to air their views, seek responses from government agencies on implementation of public programmes and whistle-blow irregularities in public financial management. (Applause)

Madam Speaker, in the next year, other key priorities for improving institutional governance, accountability and efficiency measures will include the following:

    1. Conduct the National Population and Housing Census to gather demography and economic data critical for proper planning. I have allocated an additional of Shs 40 billion to the Uganda Bureau of Statistics for the census.

    2. To ensure timely preparation for the 2016 general elections, an additional Shs 105.6 billion has been allocated to the Electoral Commission to carry out preparatory activities. I have also allocated an additional Shs 80 billion to the Uganda Police Force, to cater for recruitment of required personnel and other activities in preparation for the elections. (Laughter) An additional Shs 74 billion has been allocated to the implementation of the National Security Information Systems Project, commonly known as the National ID Project.

    3. I have allocated Shs 450 billion to enhance the salary of all public servants. (Applause) This includes provisions for the teachers’ pay increase in line with Government’s agreement with the Uganda National Teachers’ Union (UNATU). The salary of the lowest paid teacher will therefore increase by between 15 percent and 25 percent. (Applause) Other public servants’ salaries will also be adjusted within the available resources.

Along with this, Madam Speaker, we will work together with the sector ministries to implement performance indicator benchmarks to make sure that the quality of health and education services to the public is assured. 

Government will also institute tax inclusive budgeting for all goods and services procured by Government, including those of development partners supporting public programmes, with effect from financial year 2014/15. This measure will remove distortions and loopholes that arise by not treating government transactions in the same way as those of the private sector and also eliminate the accumulation of government tax arrears.

In accordance with the PPDA Amendment Act, Section 59(a), it is now mandatory for all Government agencies, when using the open bidding to grant a 15 per cent margin of preference to goods, which are domestically manufactured, mined, extracted or grown in Uganda. (Applause) And a seven per cent margin of preference for works by Ugandan contractors or services provided by Ugandan consultants. This is meant to promote local content. 

Government will also work with the security companies to roll-out prepaid systems for electricity and water starting with government institutions to address the problem of accumulation of utility bills and eliminate domestic arrears. 

Madam Speaker, a final word on the question of ghosts. The ghosts reside amongst us all; they are our parents, our children, our relatives, our friends; they are in government and the private sector alike. So, we must combine our joint forces; kick out the ghosts, bring the money back by way of improved service delivery. It is not a blame game; it is a game of redress. Let us make sure that the money formerly going to ghosts comes back to support real activities, real health and real education. (Applause) Thank you, Madam Speaker.

Self-accounting bodies

Under the constitution of self-accounting bodies, the budgetary proposals for the following self-accounting bodies have been submitted in compliance with Article 155(2) of the Constitution:
i)	Courts of Judicature;
ii) 	Electoral Commission;
Iii) 	Inspectorate of Government;
iv)	Parliamentary Commission;
v) 	Uganda Law Reform Commission;
vi)	Uganda Human Rights Commission;
vii) 	Uganda AIDS Commission;
viii) 	National Planning Authority; and
ix) 	Office of the Auditor-General.

In accordance with Article 155(3) of the Constitution, Government has made recommendations on these proposals. I hereby lay both the budgetary proposals and the recommendations of Government before this august House, as required by the Constitution. (Applause)

In order for me to submit a fully financed national budget for your consideration in accordance with Article 155(1) of the Constitution, the budget provisions of these self-accounting bodies are in accordance with the resource envelope conveyed to them in the course of budget preparation, including the presentation of the National Budget Framework Paper to Parliament, in accordance with the Budget Act, 2001.

Financial Year 2014/2015 Tax and Revenue Measures

Madam Speaker, the objectives of the various tax measures are to raise revenues, enhance transparency in collection and enforcement, improve compliance and encourage investment while promoting value addition.

I have proposed tax amendments to the tax laws to achieve the above objectives and introduced amendments to simplify the laws, clarify ambiguous provisions and enhance compliance in the various tax laws. I will also highlight the decisions reached at the East African Community pre-budget consultative meeting of May 2014.

Under the income tax, elimination of initial allowances on eligible property; a person who places an item of eligible property into service for the first time during a year of income is allowed a double tax deduction for that year of income of accelerated depreciation and ordinary depreciation. I, therefore, propose to terminate initial allowance on eligible property in order to widen the tax base. This measure is expected to generate Shs 53.2 billion.

Increase the Presumptive Tax Threshold from 1 to 3 percent: A lot of businesses in Uganda are operating informally making it difficult to apply the normal income tax regime on them. A presumptive tax system was developed for them but the rates of tax on their income have not been revised since 1997. I propose to increase the presumptive tax threshold from 1 to 3 percent to raise revenue of Shs 8 billion.

Imposition of 15 percent tax on Sports and Pool Betting winnings and Designation of Gambling Houses to withhold the tax - Madam Speaker, I propose to introduce a 15 percent tax on winnings on sports and pool betting and designate gambling houses as withholding agents to withhold the tax. This measure is expected to generate Shs 8 billion.

Termination of exemption on Interest Income on Agricultural Loans; I propose to terminate the exemption on interest income on agricultural loans to raise revenue. This measure is expected to generate Shs 25 billion when the banks will now be paying this interest to Government.

Capital Gains Tax on sale of Commercial Property

Madam Speaker, I propose to introduce capital gains tax on the sale of commercial property to raise revenue of Shs 52 billion.

Income Tax Act Thin Capitalisation Rules

Madam Speaker, I propose to limit deductions for interest paid to non-associated persons not to exceed 50 percent of earnings before interest and depreciation. This will ensure that it is effective in limiting the avoidance of tax abuse through low tax interest payments.

Termination of exemption on Income derived from Educational Institutions: I propose to terminate the exemption on income derived by a person from managing or running an education institution for commercial gain. This is consistent with the principle of equity and transparency in tax regimes and broadening the tax base by bringing more taxpayers into the tax net. (Interjections) This measure is expected to generate Shs 15 billion.

THE SPEAKER: Order, Members!

MRS KIWANUKA: Madam Speaker, you will note that income tax means tax on all income after all costs have been met.

Definition of Start-up Costs

Madam Speaker, currently, there is no definition of start-up of costs in the Income Tax Act and this causes a risk of mixing start-up costs with capital expenditure, thus getting a double benefit. I propose to restrict start-up costs to only non-recurring preliminary costs, which are associated with starting up a business.

Other Technical Amendments

I propose to other technical amendments, the details of the above proposals are contained in the Income Tax (Amendment) Bill, 2014. 

Value Added Tax: Value Added Tax (VAT) is a well-designed tax and follows best international practice. It is designed to generate revenue and is borne by the final consumer. However, since its introduction, changes have been introduced to address perceived problems that have created complexity both in the underlying tax structure and its administration. These include VAT exemptions for intermediate inputs of various sectors. 

To restore its credibility and enhance revenue mobilisation, I propose to restructure the VAT Act to remove these distortions, with the objective of promoting transparency, formalisation of business and compliance in the management of VAT, making sure the VAT burden is on the consumer.

Termination of exemptions under the Second Schedule of the VAT Act: Madam Speaker, I propose to terminate the exemptions on the following supply with effect from 1 July 2014:
i) 	Supply of new computers, desktop printers, computer parts and accessories and computer software licenses. 
ii) 	Supply of hotel accommodation in tourist lodges and hotels outside Kampala District.
iii) 	Supply of liquefied petroleum gas – cooking gas.
iv) 	Supply of feeds for poultry and livestock.
v) 	Supply of agriculture and dairy machinery.
vi) 	Supply of packaging materials to the dairy and milling industries.
vii) 	Supply of salt.
viii. 	Supply of insurance services except medical and life.
ix. 	Supply of specialised government vehicles, plant and machinery services and civil works related to roads and bridges construction, agriculture, water, education and health.

Madam Speaker, the above measures are projected to generate Shs 215 billion and the details are contained in the VAT (Amendment) Bill, 2014.

Termination of zero-rated supplies under the Third Schedule of VAT Act: I propose that the following VAT zero-rated supplies be terminated with effect from 1st July 2014:
i) 	Supply of printing services for educational materials.
ii) 	Supply of cereals grown, milled or produced in Uganda.
iii) 	Supply of processed milk and milk products.
iv)	Supply of machinery and tools for agriculture; and
v) 	Supply of seeds, fertilisers, pesticides and hoes.

The above measures are projected to yield Shs 30 billion and the details are contained in the VAT (Amendment) Bill, 2014. 

Excise Duty

I propose to increase excise duty on petroleum and diesel by Shs 50 to increase revenue collection. (Interjections) This measure is expected to raise about Shs 60 billion much needed for road maintenance and other infrastructure needs.

Reinstate excise duty of 200 shillings on Kerosene per litre to raise revenue, the removal of the duty in 2011 did not lead to reduction of the price as expected and the oil dealers were the beneficiaries not the final consumer.

Findings from the industry suggest that the reason the price of paraffin did not reduce was because unscrupulous dealers use it to adulterate diesel, which causes damage to car engines and industrial mortars. This is very hazardous to all users in industry, transport and households. This measure is expected to generate about Shs 15 billion and will go towards provision of solar energy in the rural areas.

Increase Excise Duty on Sugar from 25 shillings to 50 shillings: This measure is expected to generate about Shs 7 billion. Madam Speaker, as we speak, the price of sugar is at least 20 percent below the prices that were prevailing in the year 2011 –(Interjections)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, please allow the minister to make her statement. 

MRS KIWANUKA: Introduction of 10 percent excise duty on mobile money withdrawal fees: Madam Speaker, in financial year 2013/14, I introduced a 10 percent excise duty on mobile money transfer services, but the revenues were not realized as the charges were transferred to withdrawals and the revenues remained within the mobile industry. To correct this anomaly, I am proposing a 10 percent excise duty on fees charged at withdrawal. This measure is expected to generate about Shs 16 billion.

Excise duty on bank charges and money transfer fees:  Madam Speaker, I propose to introduce excise duty of 10 percent on bank charges and money transfer fees to generate revenue of Shs 22 billion. Details of the above measures are contained in the Excise Duty (Amendment) Bill, 2014.

Treatment of Government Taxes

The ministry has embarked on the process of integrating Government in the tax system and removing any distortions and loopholes that arise by not treating government transactions in the same way as those of the private sector.

 Madam Speaker, I am proposing that commencing next financial year, all goods and services procured by Government, directly or with development partner support will be tax inclusive. Funds have been allocated in the budget to the relevant sectors for this purpose. Accordingly, the gross tax payment system managed under my ministry will cease.

In this respect and to provide for a smooth transition for the new policy framework, I have decided to write off all outstanding taxes owed to Uganda Revenue Authority by both the Central Government and Local Governments. However, this excludes PAYE, Withholding Tax and any other taxes withheld at source which must accounted for by the responsible persons in accordance with the law.

Non-Tax Revenue, New Tax Laws and other Reforms

Implementation of the Revised Non Tax Revenue rates by Government:
Madam Speaker, last financial year I revised some non-tax revenue rates through the Finance Bill 2014 to raise revenue. The exercise will continue in Financial Year 2014/15 raising further revenue of about Shs 40 billion. Details will be contained in the Finance Bill, 2014.

New Tax Laws and other Reforms

Last financial year, my ministry proposed new Excise Duty, Stamp Duty, Lotteries and Gaming laws as well as the Tax Procedures Code. I am happy to report that these Bills are now before Parliament and I am hopeful that they will be considered, enacted and implemented as part of the tax reforms and budget for the financial year 2014/15. It is of necessity to expedite the enactment of these laws as they are critical for enhancing compliance and the overall objective of increasing revenue collection.

Tax Administration

Madam Speaker, modernisation of the tax administration remains a priority to enhance revenue collection. The e-tax system and other information management systems to augment the capacity of URA tax administration will be stepped up to improve taxpayer compliance. The e-tax is to be linked with the IFMS system, and accessibility of electronic services for small taxpayers will be enhanced to make it easier for them to comply with their tax requirements. 

In order to improve administration of tax collection, a list of key performance indicators has been developed between my ministry and URA to monitor efficiency gains from tax administration and ensure that URA can deliver the set targets.

East African Community and Regional Initiatives

Under EAC Northern Corridor, initiatives have been implemented to improve efficiency in the clearance of goods at Mombasa port and along the corridor. The focus has been on addressing the perennial bottlenecks that increase the cost of doing business in the region. As I said before Madam Speaker, I wish to report that transit time from Mombasa to Kampala has been reduced from 18 to 4 days, while the time taken to load and transport fuel from Kisumu and Eldoret to Uganda has been reduced from 3 days to less than one day. In fact some business people are now complaining that they have nowhere to store their cargo, it is arriving so fast.

Transit bonds which have been a major complaint by the business community have been eliminated and multiple customs documentation substantially reduced. These improvements are resulting into reduction in costs of transport for Uganda’s import and export cargo and also deepening the EAC integration process. We will continue to do so, Madam Speaker.

The EAC pre-Budget Consultations

The East African Community ministers responsible for finance and economic affairs agreed on a number of decisions during the Pre-Budget Meeting in Nairobi on 3rd May. These included introduction of a 1.5 percent infrastructure levy on selected imports into EAC to finance railway infrastructure development in the respective countries. So, Uganda’s levy would go for the railway infrastructure within Uganda. Details of the decisions will be contained in the East African Community (EAC) Gazette.

Report of Tax Expenditure for FY 2013/2014

Madam Speaker, Article 152 (2) of the Constitution requires me to periodically report to Parliament on the exercise of powers conferred upon me by any law to waive or vary a tax imposed by that law. This is to report that this financial year, I waived Stamp duty of Shs 200 million payable by Pride Micro Finance Limited and Shs 2 billion payable by Uganda Development Bank Limited on increase in share capital. 

I also waived PAYE liability of Shs 332,252,158 for Gulu Independent Hospital for the period July 2002 to October 2005. This is in line with the tax waiver granted to the Northern Uganda business community in 2006 due to hardship in the aftermath of the war.

Government has, as of 26 May 2014, also paid Shs 11,503,215,750 in respect of hotels, textile manufacturers, hospitals and tertiary institutions, and non-government organisations with tax exemption clauses in their agreement. I lay on Table. 

Schedule of Indebtedness

Madam Speaker, in accordance with the provision of Article 159(4), Section 13 (1) and (2) of the Budget Act, 2001, I hereby lay before the House a report on Government’s total indebtedness as at 31 March 2014 and all the loans contracted, the grants that Government received during financial year 2013/2014. I wish to call upon colleagues to spare time, read and discuss the report and provide your viable insights, comments and guidance. I beg to lay on Table. 

Conclusion

Madam Speaker, this Budget has been prepared to create a better Uganda. It is all about coordination, cooperation and accountability from all of us. Having a shared vision requires working for the common good as a team. With this common understanding, we shall transform Uganda. We shall build modern and lasting infrastructure, deliver services, create jobs, reduce poverty, increase incomes and ultimately improve the overall quality of life of all people in Uganda on a sustainable basis.

The Budget has prioritised implementation of actions that have impact on the livelihoods of a majority of Ugandans such as education, health, water and agriculture, among others. 

For rural farmers and the business community, the Budget aims to enhance availability of electricity and transport infrastructure to reduce the cost of business. Again for the farmers, the Budget aims to help you transform from being just a farmer to agricultural business people. 

For potential entrepreneurs and job seekers, especially the youth, the Budget provides opportunity for appropriate skills development for the market, for openings into the huge market of agricultural productivity and agro-processing and affordable access to investment finance for bankable projects. 

For the Ugandan worker, pension sector reforms will be aimed at securing incomes on retirement and to ensure efficient mobilisation of domestic savings for sustainable and long term development needs without compromising social security protection.

Therefore, Madam Speaker, the Budget proposals I have presented today are not as a contract among a selected few. The Budget proposals reflect a shared vision and common agenda for all citizens of Uganda.

We could use again the motto of the Uganda Cranes; “we go, we go: No matter what, we go.” We wish them to increase productivity. We congratulate the Cranes on their win against Madagascar and we wish them good luck in Equatorial Guinea on their inevitable path to Africa Cup of Nations this time. 

As I draw to a close, I know it will soon be kick off time for the World Cup across in Brazil. It is Africa’s time to win the World Cup.

As I commend this Budget to the people of Uganda, I wish to urge my colleagues, Members of Parliament, government technocrats, private sector actors and the civil society to play their respective roles and implement the proposals for a better Uganda. Madam Speaker, I beg to move. (Applause)


THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Minister of Finance. Your Excellency, Mr President, distinguished guests, the obligation to present the National Budget to Parliament lies with the President. The Minister of Finance has just completed a delegated function but the ultimate responsibility rests with the President.

But before I invite him to make his remarks, I wish to draw the attention of the hon. Members and the distinguished audience to the provisions of Article 98(1) of the Constitution which provides as follows, “There shall be a President who shall be the Head of State, Head of Government and Commander in Chief and the Fountain of Honour.” (Applause)

I further wish to draw your attention to our Rules of Procedure, in particular to Rule 10 sub rule 4 of the Rules of Procedure which provides as follows: “The President, while occupying the Chair of State may make a presidential statement, which shall be heard in silence and not followed by any comment or question.” (Laughter)

Hon. Members, last week, you appeared to have forgotten those provisions so let me now invite His Excellency, the President to make his remarks and obviously, you will have an opportunity to get the full text of the minister’s statement and the President’s speech for your debate. 

5.20
THE PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF UGANDA (Mr Yoweri Kaguta Museveni): Thank you. His Excellency, the Vice President, Rt hon. Speaker, somebody representing the Judiciary, (Laughter) Rt hon. Prime Minister, Rt hon. Leader of the Opposition and hon. Ministers, hon. Members of Parliament, Members of the diplomatic corp, ladies and gentlemen. 

The Banyankore have a proverb, which says that it is better to feed somebody who thanks you even if he is suffering from stomach ache than to feed somebody who never thanks. So, when I was hearing the minister reading her speech, especially paragraph 60 where she said - Madam Speaker  - that is what she said and I am quoting, “During the year - this year, that is - 830 kilometers of the following roads have been completed; tarmacked -(Interjections)- in one year – (Interjections) You hear them. You listen and go and measure them. Nyakahita-Kazo; Kazo-Kamwenge; Fort Portal-Bundibugyo; Mbarara-Kikagate; Malaba-Bugiri; Tororo-Mbale; Jinja-Kamuli; Kawempe-Kafu; Mbale-Soroti and Kampala-Masaka. (Interjections) Oh, I can see that with the gentlemen and ladies in front of me, the problem they have is English. The issue was not how long the road has taken. The issue was that these roads were completed this year. (Applause)

And then paragraph 68, she said “1,630 kilometres of new transmission lines” and then, she went on to say how many new districts have electricity now that did not have electricity before. She read them; Kyegegwa, Katakwi – although she was reading them in her English style. (Laughter) Amuria, Kiruhura, Lamwo, Nakapiripirit, Amudat, Kaberamaido, Dokolo, Amolatar, Ntoroko, Alebtong, Moroto, Buhweju and Napak. (Applause) If a Ugandan is not happy about this, then you know there is some problem.

In the other paragraph, on new roads being worked on , not yet completed but being worked on – 1,700 kilometres. (Applause) Of course, here I am not only talking to you the MPs because this radio is being heard outside and so, I am also talking to the Ugandans –(Interjections)– well, campaigning is not a bad idea. (Laughter)- (Applause) Campaigning for the NRM – once the roads we are working on or about to work on – actually, the ones that we are working on are ready for tarmacking – 1,700 kilometre and these are Vurra – those ones that she read - Buteraniro-Ntungamo–Rwentobo – all those; 1,700 kilometres. 

So, I am really very proud to associate myself with these achievements. (Applause) The budget presented by hon. Maria Kiwanuka today highlights a continuation of the shift in resources from consumption to investment in the critical area of roads, energy, agricultural productivity, security and supporting the private sector through reforms that reduce the cost of doing business. 

Funding to the Ministry of Works and Transport has more than doubled to Shs 2.5 trillion and to the Ministry of Energy to Shs 1.6 trillion. A significant amount will be allocated to agriculture including supporting agro-processing –(Interjections)– she will give you the details when you debate in Parliament.

As a result of this shift in resources, Uganda has achieved connectivity across the country on tarmac roads from Malaba to Katuna and Kisoro, from Mutukula to Karamoja; the road to Nakapiripirit is under construction; from Kampala to Oraba; from Kampala to Bundibugyo; from Kampala to Bwera on the Kasese side of the Congo border; from Kampala to Gulu to Atiak to Nimule. Uganda is now connected from corner to corner. (Applause) You can now drive on tarmac roads to almost all the corners of Uganda and we are about to fill the other small few gaps like Kapchorwa-Suam, Mbale-Magale Bumbu-Lwakhakha, Rukungiri-Kihihi-Ishasha. We are about to fill those remaining secondary directions.

Government, led by the Ministry of Finance, is implementing important reforms in Public Finance Management to eliminate wastage of public resources and I fully support this initiative. (Applause) This cleaning up of Government financial and accountability systems will continue to address the problem of diverting funds meant to implement Government programmes and projects. 

I will not tolerate any further mismanagement leading to wastage of public resources and the issue of ghosts on the payroll and for pensioners must stop immediately. (Applause)

As you all know, Government has started implementation of two major power projects, Karuma and Isimba. In the coming financial year, implementation activities will continue and funding for these key projects is available.

Public servants must facilitate and not constrain public and private investment. Those ministries that are directly involved in facilitating private sector development must be more responsive and efficient in dealing with demands of private sector business development. 

The private sector needs a conducive investment climate for growth and expansion and this is the only way jobs can be created. But this cannot happen if public servants obstruct and hinder private sector innovation by creating unnecessary bureaucracy as avenue for corruption. 

One of the major constraints for our socio-economic transformation is the low level of domestic revenue mobilisation. Our revenue to GDP ratio of only 13 per cent means that many of those who must pay taxes are not paying them and yet there is no way we can continue to depend on donor financing, which in many cases, comes with conditions and long delays. 

I am, therefore, directing the Minister for Finance together with the Commissioner-General of URA to improve enforcement of revenue collections and to broaden our tax base. I also urge Parliament to support the new tax measures that the Minister for Finance has proposed in her Budget Speech. 

A key element of Uganda’s socio-economic transformation has been peace and security of person and property as well as political stability. Uganda is now peaceful in all parts of the country and our borders are secured. (Applause)

It is my duty and responsibility to continue to protect all Ugandan citizens from acts of terrorism and I will do whatever is necessary to promote peace and stability in the region. (Applause) This is why I made a decision to provide military support to the Government of South Sudan. The benefits of our intervention in South Sudan, including trade and other businesses, justify our actions. This is one of the reasons that Uganda has also been at the forefront of regional integration to promote larger markets, economic growth, peace and stability. 

In the past one year, we have agreed with our regional partners to expedite key infrastructure projects such as the standard gauge railway and reduce trade barriers to create a large and single economic market. This is important for lowering the cost of private sector development, promoting tourism and eventually boosting domestic incomes. All these initiatives will take priority in the next financial year. 

We normally talk a lot about the economy because that is what is primary and the successes are there for everybody to see. But also on the social side – for instance, if you look at the problem of HIV/AIDS, according to the figures that I have here, the number of new infections of HIV/AIDS has declined from 160,000 in 2011 to 137,000. So, when we have got new infections going down, that means you are reducing the problem. Of course, it is a pity to find that somebody can get infected with HIV/AIDS now, given all the information that is available; but that is how human beings are. I was happy to notice that while in 2011 160,000 new people got infected – people who were healthy just went out and looked for HIV/AIDS and got it. (Laughter)

The figures show that the ones who went out to look for HIV/AIDS and got it – in the last report – were 137,000 lower than the other figure of 160,000. (Interjections) No, this does not involve children; these are new adult people like the ones who are here who just go shopping for HIV/AIDS. (Laughter)

The number of new babies born with HIV/AIDS also dropped to less than 8,000 last year compared to 25,000 in 2011. (Applause) That is also some good news.

The number of people currently on ARVs has increased to 577,000 – that is more than half a million, which is good, because apparently, when people are on ARVs, they do not infect others as much as when they are not. So, the more people that go on these ARVs, the better. Therefore, the number of people which we have now placed on ARVs – the new ones, which were 194,000 as you can see, is bigger than the new cases that got infected, the 137,000. According to the epidemiologists, this is called a “tipping point” – that by doing this, we are gaining the upper hand on this human-made problem of AIDS.

The death rate has also begun to fall; people who died of AIDS in 2011 were 66,000 but last year, they were 56,000. That means there is also some decline.

Now, finally, you must have read – if you remember what I said in the State of the Nation Address the other day- about the decision to go massive in terms of commercialisation of agriculture, which we have been talking about for a long time but which some of the people who are supposed to implement it do not do. I told you we are going to use the personnel of the Army to help in this. We have already done that in a limited way and immediately we did it, production went up especially maize. (Interjections) You ask hon. Kataike, she will show you the address. She is there, if you have not seen her.

But this massive production can also have a problem if there is no value-addition, which links us with the export markets and the regional markets because the internal market may not be enough to absorb. For coffee, there is no problem because, however much you produce, it will always go out. For tea, we are beginning to have a problem because of the crisis in Egypt; apparently, Egyptians drink a lot of our tea and when they got problems, we started getting a problem of tea exports at Mombasa. But fortunately, now the situation is stabilising and I think demand will go up again. Therefore, for coffee and tea, there is no problem; whatever we produce will go out. All we need is minimum processing, storage and those other support services.

But for other products like maize, we must have enhanced processing and storage capacity. Fortunately, we have got a number of private investors who are processors; hon. Amelia Kyambadde has the list of people engaged in value-addition. We are going to use all this money we have been saving from all this wastage to support them. So, that list we compiled in Kumi during the Women’s Day; in Rubaare during Labour Day; on Youth Day. The first step we shall take is to have the Ministry of Industry help them to get the Uganda National Bureau of Standards certification because we do not want them to sell to the public something, which is not good. And then we shall see how to help them. 

This is good for the youth because some of them can go into agriculture - those who have got general degrees, which are not easy to access jobs in the labour market and the scientists are already organised in groups to go into value addition. We shall be able to support both; those who want to go into agriculture and those who what to go into value addition. 

With these few words, Madam Speaker, I thank the Minister for Finance and I hope the MPs will enthusiastically support this budget so that we modernise our country. I thank you. (Applause)
 
THE SPEAKER: Your Excellency, the President, on behalf of Parliament, I would like to thank you for fulfilling your obligation under Article 155(1) of the Constitution and presenting the budget to the country. 

When we adjourn, all the guests are invited to the Serena International Conference Centre. As you have heard, the minister made some tax proposals but there cannot be taxation without entertainment. (Laughter) So, we shall go and put you in the mood to discuss her proposals. 

Your Excellency and distinguished guests, certain processes and formalities have to be complied with during the beginning of the financial year. On that note, I would like to remind the Minister of Finance and specifically the Permanent Secretary and Secretary to the Treasury, that in compliance with Article 154 of the Constitution and the provisions of the Public Finance and Accountability Act, you should present to Parliament the names of all the accounting officers of the ministries, the institutions and departments of Government for the financial year 2014/2015. 

I also wish to remind the permanent secretaries that the ministerial policy statements should be submitted to Parliament by the 30 June, 2014. However, I want to make one clarification for purposes of the Hansard, that it will not be possible to expedite the Investment Code (Amendment) Bill nor the Counterfeits Goods Bill because they are not before Parliament and were, therefore, not saved at the prorogation. So, it is incumbent upon the government to hasten the first reading of those two Bills. 

Hon. members, in view of the magnitude of the work pending, in particular, as you recall a lot of work was saved, business will resume on Tuesday, 17 June, at 14.00 hours. House adjourned to Tuesday, 17 June, 14.00 hours. In the meantime, you are invited to the Parliamentary Gardens. Thank you very much. 

East African Community Anthem.

National Anthem.

(The House rose at 5.43 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 17 June at 2.00 p.m.) 





