

Friday, 1 June 2018

Parliament met at 10.07 a.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this meeting. The purpose for which this meeting is called is clear and that is what we will focus on. Thank you. 

10.09
MR DAVID LUKYAMUZI (Independent, Busujju County, Mityana): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for the opportunity to bring up this matter of national importance. 

We have a challenge in my constituency where three people have been kidnapped so far and they are targeting children. Last week, the kidnappers brought in documents indicating the names of those people that are to be kidnapped in a local council. They listed the people and stated the days on which they would be kidnapped. 

I am requesting this House to help me and take action. If possible, let the ministry responsible take up the matter because we are not ready to watch our people dying. Thank you.

10.10
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. This is a matter that requires the police to come in like it has been doing concerning all the kidnaps that have been taking place in the country. It has been discovered that some people have started kidnapping themselves and putting their relatives at ransom to get money. We have been reading about cases where police has successfully pursued these kidnappers. 

I would like to inform hon. Lukyamuzi that whenever cases of kidnap are reported, police have come up to hunt for the kidnappers. I would like to assure you and the people of Busujju that police will definitely hunt down the kidnappers. I beg to submit. 

Mr Speaker, I would like to request the Members of Parliament who have not signed in to do so because according to the record, you have begun the sitting with zero attendance whereas there are people inside. I request that they sign in as they come - the Chamber screen is now indicating that we have two Members of Parliament but obviously we have more than that.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It is a system error.

10.12
MS LUCY ACHIRO (Independent, Aruu County North, Pader): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for the opportunity. I rise on an issue of national importance about an organisation known as Laquinta Schools who claim to be giving scholarships to people all over the country. They sent out an advertisement all over the country calling upon parents, caretakers, people with HIV/AIDS, elderly people and orphans. Their office is in Zana along Entebbe road. 

This organisation requested people to pay Shs 280,000. About 1,800 Ugandans paid this money and when the people were called on 3rd March, the organisation members were nowhere to be seen. This organisation is again sending the same messages and we have about 12 people from Pader District who paid this money and have been stranded in Kampala since Sunday. I do not know if the Government Chief Whip or the Ministry of Education and Sports are aware of this because they have got a lot of money from people. 

I think Ugandan citizens have been given so much freedom to do anything they want. My request is that the organisation should be investigated and if possible, the license they are using should be withdrawn.
 
10.14   
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Mr Speaker, I will liaise with the honourable member to give me more detailed information so that I can request the Minister of Education and Sports to take it up. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. 

10.14
MS ANNET ANITA AMONG (Independent, Woman Representative, Bukedea): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance. Bukedea, where I come from and represent, has a problem of floods. There are two sub-counties: Kolir and Malera that have been cut off because of too much water. People are displaced from their homes and are staying around schools. They do not have any provision of either tents or food. Cholera is breaking out yet we have not had any response from the Ministry of Disaster Preparedness. Can we get a response from this ministry? 

10.15
THE MINISTER FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Matia Kasaija): Thank you, Mr Speaker and my colleague who has raised this issue. We are fully aware of this matter and the Minister of Disaster Preparedness was with me a few days ago. We are trying to organise some money to enable him to deliver necessaries such as tents, blankets and even a little food. I can promise the House that by Wednesday, there should be something that is being worked on. 

10.16
MR BARNABAS TINKASIIMIRE (NRM, Buyaga County West, Kibaale): Thank you, Mr Speaker. On Monday, in my constituency, a child of called Abdul Aziz aged about 13 years old, a pupil at St John’s Kindergarten and Primary School in Muhorro Town Council was kidnapped. The matter has been reported to police but up to now, there is no information gathered from police or anywhere about where this child could be. 

I was asked to raise this matter on the Floor of the House such that the Ministry of Internal Affairs and possibly Defence or Government could explain where this Ugandan is.

The second issue, which I was also asked to raise-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: On the same matter?

MR TINKASIIMIRE: No. Since you have given me the opportunity, let me raise it. The ministry of agriculture advertised for the best farmer who is a youth. One of my constituents called Kisembo Christopher Goodyear won the championship. He was supposed to win a prize and equipment from the ministry. Unfortunately, this money has never been delivered to him and he only received Shs 3 million from FAO. 

I am told when he was being given the certificate, one of the ministers of finance was present and I know my senior colleague from Bunyoro knows that issue. Therefore, we are interested in knowing when this money is going to be delivered. If he won genuinely and beat all the other young Ugandan farmers, why can’t he be given the money that was advertised in the newspapers?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you.

10.19
THE MINISTER FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Matia Kasaija): Thank you, Mr Speaker, and my young colleague hon. Barnabas. I am aware of that young man’s win but I am not aware of him being given money by Government. Now that I have been made aware, I will inquire from the minister of agriculture and then we shall do whatever is necessary.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you.

10.20
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Mr Speaker, I heard hon. Tinkasiimire say that the case of kidnap was reported to Police on Monday. He also said that the problem now is that Police have not told the family or anybody the whereabouts of the kidnapped boy but Police is still investigating. They cannot tell you where the boy is when they have not concluded their investigations.

I know that they are tracing the phone calls because this is what they normally do. When they get to a conclusion, then they will inform the family about the kidnapped person; whether he has been found alive or dead. 

However, I would like to thank you for your vigilance and I would like to request you to instil hope in the people that Police will definitely come out when they are ready. However, before they are ready, they cannot deceive the parents –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Procedure? 

MR OKUPA: Mr Speaker, I think the country needs to be informed because there have been a number of kidnaps. I think this Parliament deserves a statement from the Minister of Security or Internal Affairs because there have been a number of kidnaps of different nature.

Just a week ago, a young man was also kidnapped from Kasilo. His body was found cut but fortunately he did not die and I have a very horrible picture of him. Nevertheless, we were able to work with one of the officers you gave us to trace and get this person that had kidnapped him and he happened to be his own in-law. We got him in Malaba crossing to Kenya. We do not know what his motive was because the wave of kidnaps and why at this time of the year and why it is in the whole country -

Therefore, I think the country and Parliament needs a statement from the Minister of Security or Internal Affairs to brief people of what is happening and possibly, what the cause is- they have been handling this matter. What could be the cause of these rampant kidnaps across the country?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think there was a statement that was promised by the Minister of Internal Affairs on this issue. It is pending and we had said we would do it today but let us wait and see if there is a chance to have that statement.

MS NANKABIRWA: Mr Speaker, all the security agencies are meeting again on Tuesday and I am sure that we will be able to get a comprehensive statement on the matter.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Okay, let us go to the Order Paper.

MOTION THAT THE HOUSE RESOLVES ITSELF INTO A COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY TO CONSIDER THE HARMONISED FIGURES FOR THE SUPPLY TO VOTES FOR FINANCIAL YEAR 2018/2019

MR OKUPA: Further procedure, Mr Speaker. I think you need to use your Chair and possibly ask the Government Chief Whip to source for Members; we need quorum for this session. I have seen some Members boarding buses and going for committee work. The issue of the budget is very important; can’t they be stopped so that we conclude this matter? The issue of committee trips should be suspended. There are two buses outside there yet this is a very serious matter. You can direct the Police to stop any exit of such buses out of the precinct of Parliament and we conclude this matter.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, a vote for an important matter is being called and I need all the Members present so that we can proceed. All Members that are due to travel can postpone their travel to afternoon when we are finished with this business.

Clerk, can you direct all those people who are supposed to be leaving - no driver should drive any bus out of this place and committees that are in meetings please adjourn your meetings and come here we finish with this business. Clerk, direct drivers not to take any vehicle of Parliament out of this place with Members. (Applause)

MR MAWANDA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on procedure in respect to resolutions that we make in Parliament. In the Ninth Parliament, we found out that Government owes people money to a tune of more than Shs 600 billion. Some people have lost their property, some have died and we agreed that Government phases out a payment plan within three years so that these people can be paid.

Mr Speaker, as we are processing the budget, I have not seen a deliberate move from Government to have the people whom Government owes money mostly compensations through court which are under the Ministry of Justice to have them paid. 

Is it procedurally right, Mr Speaker, that the resolutions we make in Parliament should be left without being implemented? Now that the minister of finance is here, can he give an undertaking again that something is going to be done to ensure that these people are paid? These cases continue accumulating; something has to be done to ensure that they start reducing on the backlog. That is the procedure I am raising, I think the honourable minister can be able to advise us on how he intends to handle the matter.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: If you are requesting the honourable minister to advise you then it is not a procedural matter. Honourable minister.

10.27
THE MINISTER FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Matia Kasaija): Mr Speaker, you are putting me in a very difficult situation because I cannot make a ruling in this House. Can I seek guidance from you? How do I proceed to answer here?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You then don’t proceed.

MR KASAIJA: My hands are tied.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  They will remain tied.

MR KASAIJA: On a serious note, hon. Michael Mawanda, I would like you - because I am not privy to that resolution. If you have a copy, please let me have it and then I can be able to come back to this House and give a satisfactory answer. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, I suspend proceeding for 10 minutes to allow Members to come and we take this vote. House suspended for 10 minutes.

(The House was suspended at 10.28 a.m.)

(On resumption at 10.49 a.m. the Deputy Speaker presiding_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, in the public gallery this morning, we have staff from the Parliament of Kenya and Parliament of Ghana. I introduced them the last time; let me introduce them again today.

    1. Mr Martin Masindi, Senior Deputy Director
    2. Mr Joash Kosiba, Fiscal Analyst
    3. Mr Abdirahman Gorod , Fiscal Analyst
    4. Ms Amran Yunis, Fiscal Analyst
    5. Mr Adan Ahmed Abdi, Fiscal Analyst

From Ghana, we have Dr Abraham Ibin Zackaria, Deputy Director, Research Department. Please join me in welcoming them. (Applause) You are very welcome.

Honourable members, you recall there was an issue happening in Gulu raised by the Member for Gulu District, the honourable chief whip would like to say something about it.

10.51
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Mr Speaker, yesterday I committed myself to contact the minister in charge of forests, to contact National Forestry Authority (NFA), to stop the eviction of the people from Gulu Municipality Forest Reserve which was supposed to be effected today. I communicated to the minister and he called the NFA people to stop the eviction. The eviction has been stopped.

COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY

Central Government 
Recurrent Expenditure 
THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 6,560,907,142,000 be provided for as recurrent expenditure for Central Government Vote for Financial Year 2018/2019. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Central Government 
Development Expenditure 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 12,595,863,285,000 be provided for as development expenditure for Central Government Vote for Financial Year 2018/2019.
 
(Question put and agreed to.)

Regional Referral Hospitals
Recurrent Expenditure 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 95,313,106,000 be provided for as recurrent expenditure for Regional Referral Hospitals for Financial Year 2018/2019. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Regional Referral Hospitals
Development Expenditure 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 21,775,420,000 be provided for as development expenditure for Regional Referral Hospitals for Financial Year 2018/2019.
 
(Question put and agreed to.)

Missions Abroad 
Recurrent Expenditure 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 146,893,890,000 be provided for as recurrent expenditure for Votes of Missions Abroad for Financial Year 2018/2019. 
(Question put and agreed to.)

Missions Abroad 
Development Expenditure 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 21,796,748,000 be provided for as development expenditure for Votes of Missions Abroad for Financial Year 2018/2019. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Local Government 
Recurrent Expenditure 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 2,631,313,163,000 be provided for as recurrent expenditure for Local Government Votes for Financial Year 2018/2019. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Local Government 
Development Expenditure 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 461,439,290,000 be provided for as development expenditure for Local Government Votes for Financial Year 2018/2019. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Total Recurrent Expenditure for Financial Year 2018/2019

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 9,434,426,500,000 be provided for as total recurrent expenditure for financial year 2018/2019.

 (Question put and agreed to.)

Total development expenditure for financial year 2018/2019

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 12,595,863,285,000, be provided for as total development expenditure for financial year 2018/2019.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, there has been an error. The total that I have just dealt with on development expenditure was for Central Government only. I thought I had recognised the figure but it did not include referral hospitals, foreign missions and local governments. When you put all those totals together, the figure is different. I need to correct the record.

Total development expenditure for financial year 2018/2019

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I now put this question to correct the error earlier made on the final figures for the total development expenditure. I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 13,100,874,742,000, be provided for as total development expenditure for financial year 2018/2019.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Total Statutory expenditure

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 10,167,513,811,000, be provided for as total statutory expenditure for financial year 2018/2019.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

11.05
THE MINISTER FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Matia Kasaija): Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of Supply reports thereto.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the motion is for resumption of the House to enable the Committee of Supply report. I put the question to that motion.


(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Deputy Speaker presiding_)
 
REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY

11.06
THE MINISTER FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Matia Kasaija): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of Supply be adopted –(Interjection)- I beg your pardon. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You are reporting, honourable minister.

MR KASAIJA: I beg to report that the House has considered –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, it is the Committee of Supply. (Laughter) Honourable members, please, understand the honourable minister. For the last two days, he went to “hell” and came back. (Laughter)

MR KASAIJA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I beg - (Laughter) – okay, I would like to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Committee of Supply, honourable minister. (Laughter)

MR KASAIJA: Yes, the Committee of Supply has considered the budget estimates for financial year 2018/2019 and passed these figures with no amendments.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, say, “…and supplied...” - (Laughter) – okay, say this: “Honourable members, I beg to report that the Committee of Supply has considered the budget estimates – all the figures – and supplied without amendments.” (Laughter)

MR KASAIJA: Mr Speaker, I would like to report that the Committee of Supply has considered and supplied the budget proposals for financial year 2018/2019 without amendments and passed - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, we use the phrase “has supplied,” please.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY

11.08
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Matia Kasaija): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of Supply be adopted.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion is for adoption of the report of the Committee of Supply. I put the question to that motion. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE APPROPRIATION BILL, 2018

11.09
THE MINISTER FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Matia Kasaija): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Appropriation Bill, 2018,” be read the second time.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the motion seconded? 

(Motion seconded.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, it is seconded by the members for Ndorwa, Bukedea, Kasilo, Agule and Buliisa District. Would you like to speak to your motion, honourable minister, if there is need. 

MR KASAIJA: Mr Speaker, the budget is a total sum of Shs 22,535,301,243,000. I would like to request this House to appropriate it and this is both for recurrent and development expenditure. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, your justification is only the memorandum. You are not going to deal with the figures because you are sticking to what you presented in the Bill; you cannot amend it. Amendment would be for the House. You are only justifying the Bill, not the figures.

MR KASAIJA: Okay. The object of the Bill is to provide for the authorisation of public expenditure from the Consolidated Fund to meet expenditure for the financial year ending 20 June 2019.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion I now propose for your debate is that the Appropriation Bill, 2018 be read the second time. As you are aware, this is the Appropriation Bill. You have just supplied figures that now need to be contained in the Bill so that we can conclude the budget process. I do not think there is any need for debate, so I will put the question.

Honourable members, I put the question that the Appropriation Bill, 2018 be read the second time.

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE APPROPRIATION BILL, 2018

 Clause 1

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 1 stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 1, agreed to.

Clause 2

MR LUGOLOOBI: Mr Speaker, I wish to propose an amendment to clause 2. Place the following words after the words, “June 2019”: “the sum of Twenty-Two Trillion, Five Hundred Thirty-Five Billion, Three Hundred One Million, Two Hundred Forty-Three Thousand Shillings”. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, you have heard the amendment that is based on the figures you have just supplied. I put the question to that amendment. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 2, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 3, agreed to.

Clause 4

MR LUGOLOOBI: Mr Chairperson, I beg to be corrected. I do not know if the schedule is coming under clause 4 because that is what I want to amend. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: The schedule comes under the schedule. 

MR LUGOLOOBI: Okay, Mr Chairman.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 4, stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 4, agreed to.

The Schedule

MR LUGOLOOBI: Mr Chairperson, this schedule has been amended substantially and the amendments are all contained in what we have called “Schedule 3A”, which is the Appropriation Bill, 2018 for recurrent expenditure. I beg to lay on the Table this schedule, which has been thoroughly checked and verified.

For development expenditure -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: What schedule is that?

MR LUGOLOOBI: This is the schedule for the Appropriation Bill, 2018 for recurrent expenditure; it is Schedule No.3A.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Let the records capture Schedule No.3A.

MR LUGOLOOBI: Mr Chairman, for development expenditure, we present new figures. We present a new Appropriation Bill for development expenditure under Schedule No.3B, entitled “Appropriation Bill, 2018, Development Expenditure.”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Let the records capture that.

MR LUGOLOOBI: Those are the amendments on the schedule, Mr Chairperson.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, these amendments are a series and they are the actual figures we have supplied. The details are contained in the schedule that has just been provided. Can I put the question to this amendment?

MR TINKASIIMRE: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I want to move an amendment in regard to vote 003, Office of the Prime Minister. 

The Committee on Presidential Affairs recommended to the Committee on Budget that Shs 10 billion be provided for Teso Affairs and Bunyoro Affairs. However, the Committee on Budget only provided Shs 5 billion for Teso Affairs and instead of providing Shs 5 billion for Bunyoro Affairs, they added it onto the Luweero Affairs vote. That is why the budget for Luweero Affairs rose from Shs 33 billion to Shs 41 billion. We are only remaining with Shs 8 billion. That is the area which I want to cause an amendment by requesting that we move Shs 5 billion from the Luweero vote –(Interruption)

MRS OGWAL: Mr Chairperson the Committee on Budget is constituted by Members approved by this Parliament and all the chairpersons of sessional committees are members of the Committee on Budget. Therefore, any issue concerning any sector ought to have been tabled before the committee because they are members –(Interjections)– I am raising a procedural matter. 

Mr Chairperson, we are very concerned about Bunyoro. I come from and live in Bunyoro. However, I think it would be better for us to reconsider that issue after we have approved this, under a supplementary budget if it is extremely necessary. For now, Mr Speaker, we did not conclude this business yesterday in accordance with the law; you had to use your authority to amend the deadline. Now that we have reached this stage, it becomes very difficult to ask the committee to sit down again. (Applause) 

Honourable members, let me tell you that as a member of the committee, we had to close our eyes and we gave a lot of money for the oil roads. Many people from the north even rebuked me, but we thought it was important - 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable member, you rose on a point of procedure. 

MS CECILIA OGWAL: Are we proceeding correctly by suggesting that a new amendment be moved without committing it to the committee? 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the procedure is clear; where we have reached, we cannot again start discussing figures and opening up the debate. However, I think the honourable member wanted to be on record and he has achieved that. (Laughter) For the worth of it being on record, he has succeeded, but for having the figures altered now, he cannot manage. That would be managed now through a different procedure.

Honourable members, I put the question to the amendment - procedure?

MR TINKASIIMIRE: Mr Chairperson, whereas I agree with your ruling and guidance –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Why are you then coming up?

MR TINKASIIMIRE: I would wish to be given further guidance on this matter. I am a Member of Parliament representing the people of Buyaga West County in the great Bunyoro Kingdom. A matter that concerns the kingdom has come to the Floor of the House and it is declared a done deal when I am inside here. You are now telling me that as a member who is participating in taking that decision, I am only doing it for ceremonial purposes. (Laughter)

HON. MEMBERS: Order. 

MR TINKASIIMIRE: Which point of order are you bringing? Which point of order are you giving against me? 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, in all the traditional dances that we have, they follow some procedures. In Acholi particularly, if they tie the jingles around your leg and the process is going on and you dance out of tune, yours will sound loudest for reason that it is out of tune. 

Right now, we are in a process of appropriation and you have raised a concern that has been noted and you are present. However, you should have been present at the right place at the right time to raise those issues. If you had raised it with the Committee on Presidential Affairs or with the Committee on Budget, that issue could have probably been considered there. 

However, where we are, they will manage it in the process of managing the budget. Now that you have raised the matter, this issue will come. If it requires readjusting the budget by a supplementary, they will have to come back and do that. They do not have to come back now, but we would still be within the limits where they can adjust figures and implement that particular provision for Bunyoro Affairs. It can be accommodated; the ministers are here and they can do that. You have done well. (Laughter) 

Honourable members, can I now put the question to the amendment to the schedule as proposed by the chairperson of the committee? I put the question to the amendment as proposed by the chairperson of the committee.  

(Question put and agreed to.)

The Schedule, as amended, agreed to.

The Title

MR LUGOLOOBI: Mr Speaker, I beg to amend the long title to read as follows: “An Act to apply a sum of Twenty-Two Trillion, Five Hundred Thirty-Five Billion, Three Hundred One Million, Two Hundred Forty-Three Thousand Shillings out of the Consolidated Fund to the service of the year ending on 30 June 2019 and to appropriate the supplies granted.”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the proposal from the chairperson of the committee is to adjust the figure which appears in the long title to correspond to what we have just passed. It would have been a consequential amendment but let us put the question to it.

(Question put and agreed to.)

The Title, agreed to.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

11.27
THE MINISTER FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Matia Kasaija): Mr Chairperson, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House do report thereto.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the motion is for resumption of the House to enable the Committee of the whole House report. I put the question to that motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Deputy Speaker presiding_)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

11.28
THE MINISTER FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Matia Kasaija): Mr Speaker and colleagues, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled, “The Appropriation Bill, 2018” and passed it with some amendments. I beg to move.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

11.28
THE MINISTER FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Matia Kasaija): Mr Speaker and colleagues, I beg to move that the report of the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion is for adoption of the report of the Committee of the whole House. I put the question to that motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

BILLS 
THIRD READING

THE APPROPRIATION BILL, 2018

11.29
THE MINISTER FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Matia Kasaija): Mr Speaker and colleagues, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Appropriation Bill, 2018” be read the third time and do pass.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion is that the Bill entitled, “The Appropriation Bill, 2018” be read for the third time and do pass. I put the question to the motion. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

A BILL FOR AN ACT ENTITLED, “THE APPROPRIATION ACT, 2018”

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you and congratulations. I am wondering whether I should congratulate the minister. (Laughter) In fact, let me congratulate the chairperson of the budget committee. This time, I am going to be very economical with my congratulations. They will only go to the very deserving, and on this occasion, honourable minister, you have not deserved it. I would like to congratulate you for surviving. (Laughter)

However, honourable minister, as I said yesterday, I think we need some changes. You need to help this Parliament perform its duty. I already communicated this yesterday and I do not want to repeat myself, but there is need to do things in a proper way to avoid these kinds of scenarios.

Honourable chairperson, thank you very much. If we all knew what the chairperson and members of the Committee on Budget went through these last four days, then you would know why I am singling them out. I would like to thank them very much because they went beyond the schedule of duty to bring this matter today. (Applause)

I also would like to thank you, honourable members, for what we have been able to achieve because it was not an easy one. Therefore, honourable members, - Okay, the Leader of the Opposition, but you keep changing the Leader of the Opposition. Is it still hon. Katusabe? (Laughter)

MR KATUSABE: Mr Speaker, today it is my senior, hon. Elijah Okupa, who is our Leader of the Opposition. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is there a statement from the Opposition side so that we can have a statement from the Government and we close? 

11.32
MR SAMUEL ODONGA OTTO (FDC, Aruu County, Pader): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. Before the Leader of the Opposition comes up, I would like to thank you so much for the time and resilience you have offered - sitting up to 10.00 p.m. This is where the national cake is shared and many people were charged, but you really chaired the House so well. I would like to put this on record. (Applause)

Mr Speaker, I would like to thank the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, specifically hon. David Bahati, who has been very relevant and available to this House. (Applause) I know he is a little younger and so, the issue of age also comes in –(Laughter)– but I would really like to thank him. 

I also would like to appreciate the spirit both sides of the House have shown. The architects of the 1995 Constitution may have to start thinking whether multi-partyism in Uganda is working because both sides of the House can easily generate consensus on difficult matters. (Applause) There have also been situations where there is cross-pollination –(Laughter)- People crossing the Floor from the Opposition to Government side during private time. Therefore, Mr Speaker, I really would like to thank the House and in this spirit, we should help our voters to utilise the money effectively.

Lastly, finance minister-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Odonga Otto, when you talk of cross-pollination of Members, what do you mean? You need to speak directly and not in tongues. (Laughter)

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Speaker, that is a difficult one. Probably, yesterday’s Leader of the Opposition, hon. Atkins Katusabe, would be an authority in that area but that is for another day.

Lastly, as the Minister of Finance promised yesterday, I request that when Parliament resumes, he should inform this country about the accounting officers who have not completed their accountability and have been blacklisted as per the letter of the Secretary to Treasury. Please inform this country that the accounting officers who have been blacklisted shall not be the ones to handle this budget we have spent a lot of time on. Otherwise, thank you so much. 

11.35
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (NRM, Kasilo County, Serere): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also thank you, honourable colleagues and the Ministry of Finance that has also had a very hectic time, especially hon. David Bahati. I appreciate his temperament; sometimes we get so hard on him but he keeps his cool. We would like to thank him for keeping his cool.

We would like to thank the Members for their contributions, although there are issues which are still pending. I think the Minister of Finance should take the comments that were made in good faith and the issues that are pending, like what hon. Tinkasiimire has raised, and go and think about them and help us. The Members were shouting about the Social Assistance Grants for Empowerment (SAGE) and I am sure you know what they mean.

We also would like to thank hon. Cecilia Ogwal and her team for the minority report because there were issues which came up there, although some of them have not been solved. I hope the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and his team are going to take them seriously. 

Members are also concerned about the supplementary budget that we passed on 3 May 2018. Now that we have finished this budget, go and act very fast on those issues; I do not want to emphasise this any further.

The Speaker has also raised a number of issues. We must follow the law and have things done within the law. 

Mr Speaker, on a final note, I am sure most people have seen what happened in Kenya during their prayer breakfast. We saw President Uhuru Kenya and his Deputy, Raila Odinga, and Kalonzo - I know we were represented by the Speaker of this Parliament – do something that Uganda should emulate. Seeing President Uhuru Kenyatta saying, “I would like to apologise for whatever comments I made or actions I did against my brother, Raila Odinga, and I ask for forgiveness” and then Raila Odinga responding, with William Ruto and Kalonzo on the other side also doing the same, is something that this country must emulate.   

Yesterday, we had a very hectic election in Rukungiri. So many words were thrown left and right during the campaigns. We would love to see President Yoweri Museveni and Dr Kiiza Besigye doing the same thing for this country. This country belongs to all of us and we know we have erred on both sides. We are tired and we shall tear this country if we continue that way. A contest must be a contest. Now that the Forum for Democratic Change (FDC) has taken over, let us all join hands to work and help the people of Rukungiri and the people of this country to come together for the betterment of this country. 

Therefore, as we take this budget to the people, let us make sure that the money that we appropriated is used appropriately and for the right use. As we conclude this session today, may the Good Lord who has brought us this far take us to the next financial year safely and with blessings for prosperity for this country. May God bless all of you. (Applause)

11.39
MR JOSHUA ANYWARACH (Independent, Padyere County Nebbi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am representing the Dean of the Independents. On behalf of the independents, I would like to thank you for your steadfast leadership of the House especially at this very difficult time. When it comes to figures, every sense is awake to make sure that we do not make mistakes.

I would like to thank the committee for the good job done. Honourable Minister Bahati, you are always outstanding and hon. Kasaija as well. However, for the last two days, there has been some sluggishness but we understand because this is a very massive sector.

Mr Speaker, I would like to particularly thank Members for the level of tolerance that they showed especially yesterday. You would suspend proceedings and then we would come back and you suspend again; we said we were not going back until the Speaker declares, as our commander, that we should go back. You then declared yesterday that we should go back and come here today, and I thank Members for coming back again at the same time that you told us to come back.

Mr Speaker, I am disappointed that we are leaving today without any vote created for Uganda Air Cargo Corporation. In the last financial years - 2016/2017 and 2017/2018 - the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development had promised that they would create a vote for Uganda Air Cargo Corporation. For our strategic defence interests, we need to ensure that such a corporation exists under an Act of Parliament and is fully supported. We cannot transport some of the machinery and the people that we want to help in Somalia or South Sudan by hiring foreign airways. 

Therefore, it would be in the best interest of this country and particularly now that we had even booked a place at Jordan Aeronautical Systems Company (JAC), where we were supposed to repair our only C-130 airplane, which has the capacity to carry over 23 tonnes. A new one is US$ 70 million and repair is only Shs 36 billion, which is US$ 10 million. We are also incurring overhead costs of almost up to Shs 3 billion in parking, insurance and payment to the employees. 

My prayer is that we consider them next year. However, I would like to thank the Ministry of Defence for revamping the Uganda Air Cargo Corporation. They spent Shs 2 billion in repairing what we had and they are now ready to give us Shs 10 billion. 

Finally, I would like to allude to the thoughts of a gentleman called John F. Kennedy - “History has made us one. Geography has made us neighbours. Economics has made us friends. Necessity must make us allies. Whatever God has put together, no man should put asunder.” For that reason, wherever we have pulled strings, we are still one and nothing will put us asunder. (Applause) God bless you. For God and my country. Happy Martyrs Day. 

11.43
THE MINISTER FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Matia Kasaija): Mr Speaker and colleagues, I thank you. Like the previous speakers, I really thank you for the resilience you have shown when conducting business in this House and your truthfulness; when we agree on something, you execute it as agreed.

I thank the House. Last night, we left at about 10.00p.m. and I was pleasantly happy to see that you have come back in big numbers and we have been able to finish our job today. I thank the chairperson of the committee; we kept him very busy yesterday. I plead guilty because I made him late this morning because we had to agree on figures and he was very flexible.

Lastly, we have appropriated and funds will go to various sectors. My prayer to you is that we all be accountable to this country. I will be pleased when we come back here next year to hear that a certain project in your area is moving on nicely. I do not have eyes to see and ears to listen in each part of this country. 

I, therefore, appeal that in your various constituencies, keep an eye on what the districts are doing. I can give an example from my own district. What are the districts doing with the money? The good thing is that when we send the money to the various districts and sectors, it is public information. I am sure we send this information either in your emails or hard copies. If we are not doing it, I want to be informed.

We should come back here next year when Uganda has moved a step forward. The theme of this budget is “Uganda’s industrialization”, and that is the task I am given by the appointing authority. Therefore, if there is anything that will distract us from industrialising this country, we should rise in full force and say “no”. 

I am saying this because we have agreed on the issue of employment of our youth. Colleagues, I know that many of you are from villages like me. There are a number of youth that are coming out of institutions of higher learning. We are trying to help them to get skilled but the biggest problem is going to be employment. I pray that for everything we debate in this House and anything that we do in this House, we think about how it is going to create new jobs for our youth. If we fail to do that, I am afraid these youth will become a curse. We passed the supplementary, I will soon deliver. I wish you all the best and happy Martyrs Day. 

Mr Speaker, thank you very much for this opportunity. Let us continue keeping together so that we can move this country. You will hear the rest of it on 14 June when I deliver the Budget Speech. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Can I have hon. Kamuntu and then the Government Chief Whip, briefly. 

11.48
THE MINISTER FOR TOURISM, WILDLIFE AND ANTIQUITIES (Mr Ephraim Kamuntu): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I listened to you yesterday when you were guiding the House particularly during the debate on Apaa. I also listened to you give counsel during the debate on the budget.

Honourable members, we must give credit where it is due. Mr Speaker, you are a Speaker and at the same time a Member of Parliament. I wish this could change so that you are a Speaker without the weight of a constituency on your mind.

Secondly, you guided us - (Interjection) - I know why I am saying so. You showed a sense of nationalism and patriotism on a matter, which even touched your region as a Member of Parliament. You were very outstanding because I saw emotions almost bordering on what I saw during the debate on the constitutional amendment or “age limit Bill”. We thank you.

Colleagues, if you listened to the Speaker giving counsel, he criticised us as a Government for knowing all these deadlines in advance, but the way he did it was in an encouraging manner. He showed that Uganda is one and it must remain united, come rain or sunshine. Thank you very much.

11.50
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would also like to appreciate you for having guided us. You have taught us to keep time; if it is the Deputy Speaker presiding over a sitting, he comes in promptly at 2.00 p.m. (Applause) 

I would like to call upon colleagues who have not taken this chance to learn from the Deputy Speaker to do so when the opportunity is still on table. He is strict with the Order Paper and prepared. Sometimes you are tough even when you are smiling, and your eyes speak volumes. (Laughter)

As a Government Chief Whip, it has not been easy. I shared this with my colleague, hon. Ssemujju, when we met Madam Speaker. Whipping Members of Parliament is not easy. The numerical strength that we have has not always been portrayed in the attendance of the House, but we promise to do better.

I would like to thank the people whom I designated to take up leadership positions in the committees on budget and finance. This means I made a very good choice because they have been appreciated by all of you. I know that the session is ending and therefore, we are likely to see changes in the third session as far as designation of membership to the committees or reconstitution of committees is concerned. 

Mr Speaker, we do not want to again abuse your tolerance and patience by keeping you and the Members here as this is a Friday. I know that when it comes to submission of ministerial policy statements, we have not performed well as a Government.

I hope my ministers who are here and those who are not here are taking this very seriously. Late submission of ministerial policy statements ends up affecting the whole process of budgeting. We promise to work better to make sure that we submit quality documents in time.

As far as attendance of Parliament by ministers is concerned, a lot is happening. When a minister is not around, they must notify the Speaker, the Leader of Government Business and the Government Chief Whip, indicating who is going to hold their portfolio while they are away. We are improving to make sure that we do not deny this House quorum to enable us perform the noble duty for which we were elected. 

I would like to thank all of you for being a wonderful team. We promise to continue working together, fighting while smiling, and sharing after Parliament. Thank you very much. May God bless you all.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, as you are aware, Sunday is Martyrs’ Day and all roads will lead to Namugongo. There will be transport from this Parliament at 6.30 a.m. You are strongly advised not to take your private cars. Please, use the buses. If you take your car, you might have difficulties with where to leave it. You might attend the ceremonies in your car. You are better off leaving it behind and using the general transport provided by Parliament, or you walk like the other pilgrims. People walk from the far end of the country. You see them coming as you drive on the roads. They have been walking for the last two weeks as pilgrims to Namugongo. Please, join them. It is a big celebration and part of the story of this country. Let us go and be witness to what will be going on Sunday.

Honourable members, you have made statements and some of them were addressed to me. Many of them that sounded very kind were meant to kind of help rebuild a relationship with me that some of your conduct had destroyed. (Laughter) It was like trying to make an entry, but it is okay. We serve a public office and whatever we do is for the betterment of the people of this country. 

We have a great country and we are great people. If you knew how many people in the world wished to be Ugandans -(Applause)-  you would then start counting your blessings as a citizen of this country. Honourable members, there is nothing wrong with Uganda that cannot be corrected by what is right with Uganda. There is nothing wrong with us as a people that cannot be corrected by us as a people. 

If you went to Uganda House in New York, you would find a flag that is displayed in a frame. That flag is torn and beaten with cuts all over. It was retrieved from the World Trade Centre when it was bombed on September 11, 2001. When the debris was removed, everything was taken away but that flag was picked. The resilience shown by that flag, surviving that bombing, is the resilience of the people of this country. (Applause) This country has gone through a lot but we have this unique way of rediscovering ourselves. 

One time I spoke here about how I saw President Museveni standing on a vehicle with Taban Amin during the by-elections in Masindi, and that is what I am saying. (Applause) It is significant for us to recognise these facts and celebrate them because they tell something about our country. It is fine to quarrel, but we have a way of coming back as a people and finding our direction. How I wish that could inspire the way we do business in this House. How I wish all those other tendencies that sometimes lead to tensions that are not necessary – How I wish we could go back to the resilience of this country and the spirit of the people of this country to rebuild. 

Honourable members, we need to be focussed. If you see how by-elections are happening these days, there is a lot of tension. The amount of tension in the Jinja by-election, the amount of tension in the by-election that was concluded yesterday - was it really necessary? Aren’t we, as leaders, capable of diffusing all these tensions and coming back as a people to work for the betterment of everybody in this country? Don’t we have that capacity? If we do, why don’t we do that? 

The parties divide us and we come from different regions, but those parties, those divisions the rivers and boundaries create, are not deeper than the blood that connects us as one people under God. Why don’t we celebrate that and try to work together? Find solutions where there are problems, move together where there is weakness so that we are stronger, and together we shall always be stronger. 

Therefore, my appeal to you Members, as we wind up this session of Parliament and we go to the next, is that let us try and focus on how we can do our best. Honourable Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, this House is very good at discussing politics because it is the only agenda that is brought to this House; can you bring for us debates that help us to shape the structure of this economy?  (Applause)  Can we pick a day or a full week to debate “Uganda 2025: what do we need to do today?” and we just have a general debate without votes? (Applause) We need proposals coming from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. Yes, the loan requests come all the time, but it is not the basis of our debate. 

Can you come and tell us to debate the issue of infrastructure financing outside debts? Can you tell us about those guarantees? The country has been stable, what have we gained from our stability as a country? People are issuing infrastructural bonds and trading in the markets; money is coming in and they are building roads without borrowing money from anybody.  Kenya is doing it, why can’t we do it? Why don’t we deal in long term bonds? (Applause) Can you bring those debates to this House so that we take matters away from this FDC, DP, UPC, NRM and we focus on the country? (Applause) 

You leave us with no option but to discuss politics, which is the easiest thing to discuss by the way. (Laughter) I do not have to prepare but I just show up and I am ready to go. Help us, please, to generate business that will help us discuss issues that bring food to people’s tables, send people’s children to school and help with the healthcare. Bring those issues and we debate them. 

Honourable members, I do not know where that came from but it has come. (Laughter)

Proclamation by Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah, Deputy Speaker of the Parliament of the Republic of Uganda: 

“WHEREAS clause (3) of Article 95 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda provides that the Speaker may, after consultation with the President, prorogue Parliament by proclamation;

AND WHEREAS the necessary consultation with His Excellency the President has been carried out and it has been agreed that Parliament be prorogued;
 
AWARE that the Second Session of the Tenth Parliament commenced on the 6th day of June 2017;

NOW, THEREFORE, in the exercise of the powers conferred on the Speaker by clause (3) of Article 95 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, it is proclaimed that Parliament shall stand prorogued with effect from the 1st day of June 2018. 

The pending business before the House and its committees is hereby saved.

Given under my hand and seal at Parliament House, Kampala this 1st day of June 2018.”

Our next meeting will be on Wednesday, 6 June 2018 when we receive the State of the Nation Address from His Excellency the President. This particular sitting is adjourned and this House is prorogued.
 
(The House rose at 12.05 p.m. and adjourned sine die.) 

