
THE REPUBLIC OF UGANDA

IN THE PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA

Official Report of The Proceedings of Parliament

FIFTH SESSION - 2ND SITTING - FIRST MEETING

________________________

Wednesday, 8 June 2005

Parliament met at 2.35 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Your Excellency, Yoweri Kaguta Museveni, the President of Uganda, Your Excellency, the Vice-President of Uganda, Your Lordship the Chief Justice of Uganda, the Rt hon. Deputy Speaker, Your Lordship the Deputy Chief Justice, traditional leaders, the Vice-President of the Movement, the former President of Uganda, Rt hon. Prime Minister, the National Political Commissar, honourable ministers, heads of diplomatic missions, hon. Members of Parliament, heads of commissions, all distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen. It is my pleasure to welcome you today to the permanent home of Parliament, a fact that –(Applause)- has saved me from making a proclamation of other places to be Parliament and precincts of Parliament. (Applause) I welcome you, Your Excellency.

Before I proceed I want to mention that today marks seven years since the massacre of our youths at Kichwamba Technical School. Because of this I request you to stand up and we observe a moment of silence.

(The Members stood and observed a minute of silence.)

THE SPEAKER: Your Excellency the President, honourable members, distinguished guests, clause (1) of Article 155 of the Constitution states that the President shall cause to be prepared and laid before Parliament in each financial year, but in any case not later than the 15th day, before the commencement of the financial year, estimates of revenue and expenditure of government for the next financial year. 

The Speaker has been formally informed that His Excellency the President is ready to perform this constitutional duty today through the hon. Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. I now call upon the said honourable minister to move his motion for presentation of the estimates of revenue and expenditure of Government for the year 2005/2006 financial year, to Parliament. Honourable minister.

MOTION THAT PARLIAMENT RESOLVES ITSELF INTO A COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY FOR THE CONSIDERATION AND APPROVAL OF:

THE REVISED REVENUE AND EXPENDITURE ESTIMATES FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2004/2005; AND THE BUDGETARY PROPOSALS FOR THE ESTIMATES OF REVENUE AND EXPENDITURE FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2005/2006

2.45
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Dr Ezra Suruma): Your Excellency, the President, Mr Speaker, hon. Members of Parliament, I beg to move that Parliament resolves itself into a Committee of Supply for the consideration and approval of: 

The Revised Revenue and Expenditure estimates for the financial year 2004/2005; and
The Budgetary proposals for the Estimates of Revenue and Expenditure for the financial year 2005/2006.

Under Article 155(1) of the Constitution, the President shall cause to be prepared and laid before Parliament estimates of revenue and expenditure for each financial year. I am accordingly performing this duty on behalf of the President.

Mr Speaker, permit me to start by observing that this Budget day falls between Martyrs Day, which was last Friday and Heroes Day, which is tomorrow. These are occasions on which we are reminded of fellow Ugandans who made the supreme sacrifice of giving up their lives for the rest of us. I pray that the good that comes out of this budget will honour their memory. (Applause)

Mr Speaker Sir, I beg to remind honourable members and fellow Ugandans that the Budget of Government is a statement of the revenues the Government expects to collect over the next 12 months, and how it plans to spend those revenues. It is noteworthy that the Government expects to collect 13.4 percent of Uganda’s Total Income. The remaining 86.6 percent of Uganda’s Income will remain in the hands of the private sector and will be utilized by the Ugandan people. However, the Government will spend additional money that it will acquire from external sources equivalent to approximately 9.5 percent of the Gross Domestic Product (GDP). Therefore Government’s Total Spending will be approximately 23 percent of GDP.

The Main Purpose of this budget is threefold:

 The first purpose of the Budget is to help in increasing the production of goods and services so that the average standard of living improves rapidly and poverty is correspondingly reduced. This is Economic Growth.

The second major purpose of the budget is to promote economic order and stability by encouraging competitive efficiency and controlling inflation. This is Macroeconomic Management.

The third purpose is to provide services which are vital to our country and which only government can do best namely Security, Law and Order, Infrastructure such as roads, and Disease Control such as epidemics etc. This is the provision of Public Goods.

Therefore, Mr Speaker, the overall objectives of this budget are to promote economic growth while maintaining a stable economic environment and providing funds for essential public services.

However, these objectives must be seen in the long-term perspective of transforming Uganda into a peaceful and prosperous country. The long term vision or plan in which this budget falls is the continued improvement in household incomes, increased productivity in agriculture and food security, industrial development; the maintenance of security, law and order and democratic governance; the continuous rise in average educational attainment; increased prevention of disease, improvement in health access and increased life expectancy of Ugandans; universal access to clean water; improvement in human shelters; employment and universal social security.

These objectives are already contained in the National Poverty Eradication Action Plan (PEAP).  The PEAP recognises that although major progress has been achieved in the reduction of poverty on a long-term basis, from 56 percent in 1992/93 to 35 percent in 1999/2000, the proportion of people living below the poverty line has recently increased to 38 percent.   The PEAP 2004 has therefore focused on addressing this core challenge. The strategies I am going to describe are fully consistent with the Poverty Eradication Action Plan (PEAP) 2004. The National Planning Authority will develop a revised national perspective plan for long-term development with performance targets which will help to guide future allocations of resources. Government will also refine indicators to measure and monitor progress towards these social goals. 

Mr Speaker Sir, before I spell out the details of the Budget for the financial year 2005/06, please allow me to highlight key issues underpinning the budget strategy for the same period.

Economic Growth Strategy 

 Mr Speaker Sir, in line with the above objectives, the Budget for financial year 2005/06 will provide strategies and financing for Promoting Economic Growth and Household Incomes through increased Savings, Investment, Employment, and Productivity. This Budget aims to re-orient public expenditures towards increased investment in agriculture, value addition through industrial processing, and innovation. These are the areas we believe to be most likely to yield high rates of return and household incomes. Mr Speaker Sir, in order to accelerate the rate of growth we must increase Savings, Investment, Productivity, and Employment. We now turn to these important policies.

Mobilising Savings

The people of Uganda have known from time immemorial the importance of dividing their resources so as to provide not only for today but also for tomorrow. We do know that it is important to put aside seed for planting, to increase our herds of sheep, goats and cattle, and to maintain cassava, sweet potato and banana gardens to sustain us through the days ahead. Mr Speaker, what we seem to have lacked and still lack is how to shift traditional savings into monetary savings, maintain the social security that traditional savings serve, and pool these savings into institutions that can intermediate them as credit. 

In order to address this problem, the Government has embarked on a program to mobilize the rural population to participate in microfinance institutions as shareholders, depositors and borrowers. This programme to transform subsistence wealth into monetary wealth will substantially increase the volume of trade, monetary savings as well as credit particularly in rural areas where banking facilities are few. 

Mr Speaker Sir, I applaud those who have already mobilised the people into savings and credit institutions. I have visited some of these institutions and the results are truly impressive. Government will build on these efforts to ensure that there is a microfinance institution in every sub-county within 3 years and eventually we hope to reach every parish. 

Enhancing Investment 
Mr Speaker Sir, Investment is the addition to our productive capital. In the agricultural sector the investment required is more and better seed, hoes, oxen and oxen ploughs, tractors, harvesters, fertiliser, insecticides, herbicides and vehicles for commodity transportation. These investments must be made in increasing amounts if agriculture is to grow. In industry, examples of investment include machinery, factories, research, development and innovation of new technologies and procurement of raw materials. 

Both investment in agriculture and industry requires investment in infrastructure in the form of electricity generating plants, navigable roads and railways, properly equipped airports, harbours, as well as law and order, financing and security infrastructure. Investment must be made in all these sectors. The greater the investment, the higher the likely rate of growth of productivity and the total production capacity of the Ugandan economy.  Therefore this budget aims to re-orient public expenditure towards increased investment in agriculture, industrial processing, innovation, standardization, microfinance, long term finance, roads, energy, tourism and trade.

Raising Productivity

Mr Speaker Sir, we seek higher productivity in all spheres of our economy for two important reasons. First because we seek to derive more income from our productive efforts and second, because we must compete with the rest of the world for markets. More agricultural productivity for instance on maize or cotton farms, means that we increase our harvest from 1 ton per hectare to 4 tons per hectare for maize and from 300 kg. to 1,000 kg. for cotton. Such increases in productivity expand our food and raw material stocks as well as our surplus for additional income. 

 As Ugandans we must constantly strive to increase efficiency, lower production costs and improve quality in order to compete favourably with the products of others. We must consistently increase investment in better equipment and therefore better technology so that we can increase productivity in terms of quantity, quality and cost. Our heavy investment in education and health will also certainly lead to higher productivity. The priority for increasing productivity will be achieved through mobilisation of the population for increased saving, credit, production, provision of appropriate technologies and linking agriculture to agro-processing industries.  

 Mr Speaker Sir, for the purpose of raising agricultural productivity I am allocating an additional Shs. 33 billion to the Agricultural sector.

Increasing Employment
 
According to the Household survey of 2003, Uganda had a labour force of approximately 9.3 million, of whom 87 percent was in rural areas.
The majority of the labour force was employed in agriculture, with 67.8 percent in hunting and forestry, 11.6 percent in sales, maintenance, repair of motor vehicles and household personal goods and 6.1 percent in manufacturing. 

 Recent Uganda Bureau of Statistics surveys indicated the status of employment, for example among the youth, women and in urban areas. The highest relative unemployment rates were observed in the younger age groups with a peak in the 20-29 age bracket at 5.5 percent. Unemployment was also higher in urban areas at 12.0 percent as compared to 1.7 percent in rural areas. 

 To respond to the challenges of reducing poverty and improving the welfare of the people, Government has made the issue of investment and employment creation an urgent priority. In order to increase employment opportunities, the Government will implement the following programs:

A Rural Development Strategy will be implemented to reduce under-employment in the agricultural sector. 

The increase in microfinance activity will contribute to employment creation both directly and indirectly.

Government will start a program to lease Government land in parcels of economic size to Ugandans, especially the youth, who wish to make a start in organized agriculture with provisions for mechanization, irrigation, extension and marketing services.

Government will extend assistance to farmers on land adjacent to out-grower schemes so that they too can participate in production for companies engaged in processing rice, sugarcane, oilseeds, sorghum, cassava, bananas etc.

Investing in public goods and services, such as roads, utilities, industry and infrastructure not only creates jobs but also facilitates private investment which provides further employment opportunities.

Construction of shelters for artisans with equipment for hire will also increase employment and improve working conditions in urban areas. 

 Mr Speaker, as part of the additional resources for agriculture, and in order to stimulate employment for the youth and women, I propose to allocate Shs. 1 billion.

Rural Development

Mr Speaker Sir, in February 2005, Government announced a far-reaching rural development strategy. The key elements of that strategy are as follows:
• Provision of support to Farmers’ Groups, Associations and Organizations in order to improve management, record keeping, production planning, savings and credit mobilisation, produce handling, storage and quality control, as well as marketing; 
• Enhancing Rural Micro-Finance Services Provision through building the institutional capacity for savings and credit mobilisation, planning and assessment in collaboration with extension workers;
• Establishment of a Community Information System to report regularly on conditions in rural areas. These statistics will include land holdings, land utilization rates, outputs of various crops, livestock, fisheries, pests and diseases, and other vital social statistics.
• Enhancement of access to domestic, regional and international markets.  This will be done through the organization and linkage of farmers groups and organizations to consumers, processors and produce buyers.
• Facilitate the delivery of agricultural inputs. 
• Enhancement of agricultural productivity through agricultural extension.
• Agro-Industrial development through enhanced support to research and development. 
• Support to the Uganda National Bureau of Standards for quality control and assurance.

Industrial Development

Mr Speaker Sir, the pace of Industrialization must be increased. In order to support Industrialization, research and development must be encouraged, more and cheaper long-term financing must be available, foreign direct investment must be attracted, and a bigger and growing market for industrial products must be found. Government will put in place a mechanism to support research and development. The Innovation and Industrialisation Fund to support research and development will be operationalised. Emphasis will be placed on development and commercialisation of suitable proto-types for small and medium scale enterprises. Support will be given especially to research and development in processing agricultural products and other strategic industries. 

 As part of our Industrial Development Strategy, Government recognises that Energy supply is critical to the development of modern manufacturing and services. It also plays an important role in rural development. With the national demand expected to peak at 650 megawatts by 2010, Uganda’s current level of energy supply of about 317 megawatts is inadequate. Every effort will be made to ensure that Government commences the construction of a major hydropower dam on the River Nile in financial year 2005/06.

With regard to increasing sources of long-term capital, the Uganda Development Bank is to be re-opened in financial year 2005/06 to serve new and existing businesses especially in industry and agriculture. I will return to this matter later when I discuss financial sector developments.

Macro Economic Management

The People of Uganda are fully aware of the long and hard struggles we went through to stabilize our economy so that people no longer have to line up for commodities, or hide their foreign currencies at airports and border crossings, or line up at petrol stations that do not have fuel. We all thank God that those days are behind us. However, it is these sad  memories, Mr Speaker, that underlie our cautious approach to Government expenditure and our commitment and determination to ensure an economy free of excessive inflation, free of excessive exchange rate fluctuations and upheavals in interest rates. It is a fact of historical significance that the NRM Government has demonstrated that it has the will, the discipline and the know-how to maintain a stable macroeconomic system. This commitment to maintain macro-economic stability will remain.

 Consequently, the Government will continue to execute its budget within the overall limit approved by Parliament, and in a manner that is conducive to meeting our inflation target of 5 percent per annum.  At the same time, the Bank of Uganda will receive our support in the conduct of a prudent monetary policy. 

Mr Speaker Sir, before I come to Government’s actions to provide public services in financial year 2005/06, allow me to briefly review performance in the financial year which we are now ending.

FY 2004/05 Economic Performance & FY 2005/06 Outlook
Economic Performance 

Growth

Real GDP at market prices is projected to grow by 5.8 percent in financial year 2004/05.   In nominal terms, GDP is estimated to amount to Shs.15,134 billion up from Shs.13,200 billion.  Taking into account our population of 26.7m, this amounts to almost Shs. 570,000 GDP per capita compared to about Shs. 510,000 in 2003/04. This is a nominal increase of about 11 percent.  

The Service sector is projected to account for 43.3 percent of national output, while Agriculture accounts for 36.3 percent and Industry 20.4 percent. The rate of growth in Agricultural output is expected to rise from 1.6 percent in financial year 2003/04 to 2.1 percent in financial year 2004/05.  Although agriculture still has the lowest growth rate of the three major sectors by a considerable margin, the slight rebound in growth in financial year 2004/05 represents a welcome reversal in the declining trend since 1998/99. The improvement is due to a recovery in cash crops and livestock, even though food crop growth remained low.  The poor performance of food crops is attributed to the poor and erratic rains during the first season of 2004 that affected crop plantings in some districts during the second season.  At the beginning of 2005, the districts in the Northern region experienced prolonged drought.   Delayed rains, poor soils, pests and crop and livestock disease, aggravated the situation.  The continued vulnerability of the agricultural sector to exogenous factors emphasises the need for a sustained Rural Development Strategy.

Industrial Production

Mr Speaker Sir, Industrial output is projected to grow by 9.1 percent in financial year 2004/05, its highest growth rate since 1998/99. This is a result of sustained strong growth in construction and a rise in the growth of formal manufacturing, mining & quarrying.   In addition, Services are expected to grow by 7.2 percent in financial year 2004/05, with growth in wholesale and retail trade, and transport & communication driving the performance of the sector.

Investment

Investment is projected to increase to 22.3 percent of GDP, of which Private investment is projected to increase by almost half a percentage point of GDP to 17.3 percent in financial year 2004/05. Our rate of domestic savings, although still low, is expected to rise by a percentage point to 9.8 percent of GDP.  This is welcome progress towards greater sustainability in our domestic economy.

Exports

Total exports of goods and services are expected to grow by 10 percent in financial year 2004/05 and to exceed US $ 1 billion for the first time.  Growth in exports in dollar terms has been driven by strong performance of non-traditional exports such as fish and flowers, and a rebound in international coffee prices. 

Inflation

Mr Speaker Sir, we have once again been successful in financial year 2004/05 in meeting our objective of controlling annual inflation at an average of 5 percent or less.   Although the erratic rains experienced over the past year have driven food crop annual inflation to an average of 23 percent in 2004/05, annual inflation excluding food crops is expected to be 4.5 percent.

Economic Forecast

Real GDP at market prices is projected to grow by 6.8 percent in financial year 2005/06.  Agricultural output is expected to grow by at least 3.7 percent next Financial Year, as food crop production recovers from the poor rains experienced in financial year 2004/05, and cash crop production is boosted by a rebound in coffee volumes, and as we start to benefit from the replanting programme.  Industrial output is expected to grow by 10.2 percent. Growth in formal manufacturing, mining and quarrying is expected to remain strong, while electricity production is expected to increase as a result of the introduction of thermal generation and the planned commissioning of two new units at Kiira power station.  Services output growth is expected to remain at 6.8 percent.

Monetary Developments   

Mr Speaker Sir, performance under the monetary program was good. The March 2005 targets for base money growth were met. Both the broad money growth and credit to the private sector slowed down, particularly from the large commercial banks. In general, the banking sector remained healthy with a very low level of non-performing loans. 

The implementation of the regulations under the Financial Institutions Act, 2004 should bring down credit exposure concentration. In financial year 2005/06, the Bank of Uganda will continue to pursue monetary, financial and exchange rate policies aimed at ensuring continued monetary and financial stability. 

Mr Speaker Sir, in order to increase competition in the commercial banking sector and therefore help to reduce interest rates, the moratorium on opening new banks will be lifted in financial year 2005/06. The Bank of Uganda will now be prepared to license new banks consistent with the requirement of the Financial Institutions Act 2004.

Exchange Rate

The appreciation pressures experienced last year continued into financial year 2004/05, driven largely by strong inflows of foreign exchange for investment, high levels of donor aid, particularly project support and transfers to Non-Governmental Organisations as well as increased export earnings. In addition, the appreciation of the shilling was also partly caused by the persistent weakness of the US dollar on the world market. Our exchange rate has appreciated by 10 percent this financial year, causing the imports to grow faster than exports by a significant margin.  Imports are projected to grow by 20 percent in dollar terms in financial year 2004/05, as compared to export growth of 10 percent.  

These developments which have had a negative impact on our trade deficit, point to the fact that prudent macroeconomic management cannot be limited to inflation control.  We need to create conditions for export growth, by mitigating the impact of dependence on donor funding on our exchange rate and increasing the proportion of our budget which is financed by domestic revenues. Government will continue to pursue a flexible exchange rate regime and other measures aimed at ensuring external competitiveness and overall macroeconomic stability. The Bank of Uganda will expand the capacity of its research department to provide timely information on the domestic resource costs of exports in order to assess the competitiveness of the exchange rate.

Interest Rates and Long-Term Government Securities

Continued upward pressures on the exchange rate limited Bank of Uganda’s use of sales of foreign exchange for liquidity sterilization purposes. The burden was shifted to the issuance of domestic securities to control the inflation. However, Government will continue to pursue policies which are compatible with low and stable inflation and which will encourage savings mobilisation, lower lending rates and more private sector borrowing. Already, securities issued by Bank of Uganda have resulted in interest rates reducing from over 20 percent in financial year 2003/04 to below 15 percent in financial year 2004/05.

In the capital market, the public continued to respond positively to government securities, including bonds.  There was a manifestation of strong investor confidence in Uganda’s economic and macro-economic management and the first ever sovereign rating of Uganda was done by Fitch Corporation which accorded Uganda’s economy a heartening ‘B’ rating. 

The Financial Sector

In financial year 2005/06 more efforts will focus on deepening capital markets and mobilising long-term finance. As I stated earlier, the Uganda Development Bank (UDB) will be re-opened to provide long-term financing, equity and guarantee schemes in addition to wholesaling lines of credit. The Export Guarantee Facility hitherto managed by Bank of Uganda will be moved to UDB and will be extended to cover all exports.  I am providing an initial capitalisation of Shs.5.0 billion for the UDB. Furthermore, measures aimed at liberalizing the pension schemes will be put in place to provide more avenues for mobilizing long-term finance. 

In addition, in financial year 2005/06, the Bank of Uganda will continue its efforts to supervise and regulate micro finance institutions engaged in deposit mobilisation, with a view to supporting Government’s efforts aimed at savings mobilisation and credit to small households.

Regional Monetary Policy Coordination

The Bank of Uganda continued to work closely with the Central Bank of Kenya, and Bank of Tanzania to facilitate the formation of a Monetary Union in East Africa. In this respect, officials of the three Central Banks commenced work on mapping out the necessary convergence criteria. These efforts will be continued in financial year 2005/06.

Fiscal Performance
Revenue Performance

Mr Speaker Sir, I am pleased to say that our domestic revenue has performed above target.  Total domestic revenue is expected to amount to Shs.1,933 billion this Financial Year, which exceeds the budgeted level of Shs.1,867 billion. This performance is due to increased revenue collections by the Uganda Revenue Authority, which are expected to exceed their annual target by about Shs. 80 billion, even though other domestic sources did not perform on target.  This is attributed to improved administrative efficiency and strong direct tax performance. I congratulate the Uganda Revenue Authority over this achievement.

Expenditure Performance

In financial year 2004/05, Shs. 2,432 billion was released, excluding donor financed projects.  Releases to the Poverty Action Fund amounted to Shs.813 billion, resulting in a pro-rata performance of 97.6 percent. The overall performance demonstrated prudent and effective budget management for the financial year 2004/05.

The Resource Envelope 
for FY 2005/06

Mr Speaker Sir, the total amount of resources available in financial year 2005/06 are estimated at Shs 3,799 billion, representing an increase of 9.7 percent, on financial year 2004/05.  Sixty percent of the budget in financial year 2005/06 is projected to be financed by domestic revenues, amounting to Shs. 2,280 billion, whilst the balance will be provided through the support of our donor partners.  This represents a significant increase as compared to financial year 2004/05, when 54 percent of the budget was financed by domestic resources, and reflects our objective of gradually increasing the share of the budget that is financed by domestic resources. It is also consistent with a decline in our fiscal deficit from 9.9 percent of GDP in financial year 2004/05 to 9.2 percent in financial year 2005/06. Interest payments and domestic arrears repayments are expected to amount to Shs. 376 billion in financial year 2005/06. This means that Shs. 3,423 billion will be available to support economic and social development.  

Sector Performance 
and Outlook

Mr Speaker Sir, I will now reflect on sectoral performance in the financial year 2004/05 and set-out planned outputs for financial year 2005/06 in each sector.

Agriculture and Rural Development

In the Agricultural Sector in financial year 2004/05, the major activity was the extension of the National Agricultural Advisory Services (NAADS) to an additional eight districts bringing the total number of districts under NAADS coverage to twenty-nine. A total of 5,600 farmer groups were registered in financial year 2004/05.

For financial year 2005/06, I have provided Shs.148.9 billion to the Agriculture Sector from Shs. 115.6 billion this year, representing a 29 percent increase.  The priority interventions in financial year 2005/06 will focus on: 

• Integrated Support to Farmer Groups; 
• Micro Finance; 
• Water for Production; 
• Extension Services; 
• Land Registration; 
• Environment & Natural Resources; and 
• Community & Information Services.  

Integrated Support to Farmer Groups

The rural development strategy hinges on the provision of integrated support to farmers groups to increase productivity through better agricultural practices, improvement in input supply channels and producer – buyer linkages. This support will be initially targeted at selected crops, in order to raise their production significantly and to impact the livelihood of the greatest number of poor households. Activities include the sensitisation and mobilization of farmers into farmer groups, including the formation of at least 8,980 farmer groups and organizations.  

Mr Speaker Sir, Government will intensify provision of appropriate technologies and input kits including fertilizer, improved seed, pesticides and herbicides and co-operative storage facilities. This action will encompass provision of integrated support to 4,000 farmers groups.  Input kits comprising improved seed, a fertilizer pack and pesticide spray will be provided to maize, rice, sim sim and soya bean farmers. I am allocating an additional Shs 7 billion to the Agriculture Sector for this integrated support to farmers. 

Extension Services

The National Agricultural Advisory Service (NAADS) is central to the provision of integrated support to farmers groups. In addition to extension services provided by National Agricultural Advisory Service (NAADS), we will rely on the respective commodity market chains and the private sector players for the delivery of inputs and the marketing of farmers’ output. I am therefore providing an additional Shs 5.5 billion to enable them roll out their services to cover a total of 37 districts,  up from the current 29, and to 330 sub-counties, up from the current 280 sub-counties. I am also proposing to review the operations of NAADS to ensure their effectiveness and efficiency.

Mr Speaker Sir, in addition to the above, I am allocating Shs. 5 billion to enhance productivity in the Cotton sub-Sector and raise production to 300,000 bales annually. I am allocating a further Shs.4.5 billion to clear all outstanding arrears on cotton seed to farmers.

Supporting Micro-Finance Capacity Development

This action will entail Government facilitation of capacity building for Micro Finance Institutions (MFI) in order to enhance savings and credit in the rural areas. Government will assist in the provision of microfinance infrastructure including training in management, record keeping, supervision of savings and credit associations and other rural organizations.

I have provided Shs 2 billion in financial year 2005/6 to assist in the initial mobilization, organization, training and supervision of new institutions. Additional loanable resources are already available within the Ministry and measures to strengthen implementation, regulation and protection of these microfinance institutions and their depositors will be unveiled in the near future.

Community Information Service

Current and future levels of agricultural output need to be established, recorded and communicated. This will enable us to know the current levels of productivity, the results of introducing new inputs and technologies (seeds, fertilizer, pesticides and new methods of cultivation). To measure food stocks, cultivated areas and outputs, we propose to establish a rural reporting system or community information system at Parish level, whereby the Parish Chief reports regularly on the welfare parameters of households, land holding, land utilization rates and outputs of various crops, pests/diseases occurrences, food stocks and other community statistics. The Uganda Bureau of Statistics, in collaboration with the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries and Local Government, will design the reporting formats and ensure system implementation. I am allocating Shs 2 billion to the Uganda Bureau of Statistics for this exercise.

Water for Production 

In financial year 2004/05 a total of 43 parish level valley tanks were constructed.  In the Karamoja region 11 strategic reservoirs were commissioned and 9 windmills for powering high yielding boreholes were also procured. Water for production is a key priority for financial year 2005/06.  Shs. 2.96 billion has been allocated for water intended for production and further enhancement of the productivity of the agricultural sector.  Objectives include: completing 9 parish level valley tanks in Sembabule district, the reconstruction of the Kailong dam in Kotido district, the construction of two windmill-powered boreholes in Moroto district, and extensive training courses to raise capacity. 

In view of the need to address ‘Water for Production’ constraints, I propose to complete the rehabilitation of Irrigation Schemes at Mubuku, Doho and Olweny to prepare them for the necessary hand over to user farmer groups in their respective areas. This too will increase employment and production opportunities in those areas.

Government will also provide relief for the most water stressed areas through implementation of low-cost rain-water harvesting technology and provision of bulk water supply from large water masses.  Initially the program will cover Bukanga, Isingiro, Kooki, Kabula, Mayuge, Nakasongola and the Teso and Lango regions. Additionally, opportunities for the utilization of solar-powered pumps for irrigation will continue to be explored and plans will be designed for their implementation. 

Land Registration

A modern land registry is central to national development as it enhances security of land rights and therefore creates an environment conducive for investment. Records in the existing registry, which covers only about 15 percent of Uganda’s area, are in fragile and often illegible condition, out of date, and accessible only at very high cost. This generates insecurity of property rights, increases the cost of land transactions, and makes it more difficult to use land as collateral for formal credit. 

Rehabilitation work on the land registry has started with reorganization and indexing of land records in the Kampala Mailo Registry covering records of 3 districts. Funds have been secured to enhance the rehabilitation of registries nationwide. Beginning financial year 2005/06, Government will invest funds to ensure: Rehabilitation of land records and establishment of a Land Information System (LIS), and Strengthening of capacity in the management of land records. 

Environment and Natural Resources

Mr Speaker Sir, Uganda’s future economic growth and its sustainability will depend on how well we manage and use the environment. During financial year 2004/05, a total of 950 km of forest boundaries were reopened, about 79,000 hectares out of 105,000 hectares were recovered from encroachers and 1,000 hectares of forest were planted.  The National Environment Management Authority (NEMA) continued to enhance the capacity of districts and communities in environment planning and management. During financial year 2005/06 and in the medium term, Government will aim to strengthen meteorological services, reduce wetland encroachment and preserve the environment and natural resources.

Financial year 2005/06 will see the institutional set up of the District Forest Services, an initiative that is envisaged to increase forestry conservation, promote commercial tree planting, and promote the productive capacities of forests to benefit the poor.

Concerning Meteorological services and following the outcry that basic meteorological information has not reached agricultural households, Government intends to strengthen the observational network and early warning system to provide timely information for harvests and thus increase yields.  I am providing an additional Shs. 0.5 billion for this activity.

Economic Functions and Services

Mr Speaker Sir, the focus of our industrial development strategy is the stimulation of agro-based industries.  Government’s plan during financial year 2005/06 and the medium term is to support value addition through the Innovation and Industrial Fund.  This Fund, which I mentioned earlier, will be co-ordinated by the Uganda Industrial Research Institute (UIRI) and will be responsible for the incubation and commercialisation of innovations and prototypes. The Uganda National Council for Science and Technology and the Uganda Industrial Research Institute will be restructured to streamline research and development.   

In financial year 2005/06 support will largely be targeted value-addition in coffee, banana, gum Arabic and cotton.  I have allocated Shs7.25 billion for the targeted interventions, including those channelled through the capitalisation of the Uganda Development Bank (UDB); and Shs 2.75 billion for industrial research and development. A further Shs. 2 billion has been provided for Jua Kalis (Artisans) to develop appropriate industrial sites, with utilities and facilities to promote their activities in terms of size, quality, and marketing.

In addition, support will be provided to the Uganda National Bureau of Standards to which Shs.2.3 billion has been allocated to enhance quality assurance, product certification, laboratory testing and consistency with regional and international standards of agricultural produce.

Energy Development 

Mr Speaker Sir, as I had mentioned earlier energy supply is critical to the development of a modern economy, and plays an important role in rural development. In financial year 2005/06 I have allocated Shs. 20 billion to start an Energy Equity Fund for the construction of a large-scale Hydro-Power Station along the river Nile.  I have also allocated Shs. 22 billion for 50MW of thermal power generation. In addition I have allocated Shs. 20 billion for extension of electricity to 16 district headquarters and the completion of rural power projects.

Tourism Development 

Mr Speaker Sir, the number of tourists has grown from about 300,000 visitors in the financial year 2003/04 to over 500,000 in the financial year 2004/05. This rapid growth demonstrates that Uganda is a growing attraction and we should invest in improvements in tourist circuits that are already proven. It is for this reason that I have allocated Shs. 2 billion for Tourism Infrastructure Development.

Industrial and Business Parks

Government has secured Shs. 22 billion to develop a modern, well-planned and serviced industrial park at Namanve. The first phase of this development will make over 100 plots available for industrial and business enterprises geared towards export production. Government, in partnership with the private sector, will also develop facilities that can be used by small and medium enterprises with job creation potential, such as garment production, shoe making, and Information and Communication Technology (ICT) services. 

Infrastructure Development 

Roads and Waterways

Mr Speaker Sir, Roads and Waterways are critical in boosting production, marketing, incomes and competitiveness, and are therefore central to the Government’s Budget Strategy.  In financial year 2004/05, 7,795 km of the national road network received routine mechanised maintenance. The Nsambya - Ggaba, Pakwach - Nebbi, and Sironko -Kapchorwa roads were completed. The Kyegegwa – Kyenjojo road is expected to be completed this month. This road has been fully financed from the Government of Uganda’s own resources.

In financial year 2005/06, the following roads will also be completed: Karuma - Olwiyo, Olwiyo – Pakwach, Fort Portal - Hima, Kagamba – Rukungiri, Busunju – Kiboga – Hoima, and Jinja - Bugiri. The work on Jinja – Bugiri road, which is central to the Northern Transport Corridor and had been unduly interrupted by the contractor’s abandonment of works, will resume by end of this month. The new projects planned whose procurement is now ongoing include upgrading of the following roads: Soroti – Dokolo – Lira, Kampala – Gayaza – Zirobwe – Wobulenzi, Matugga – Semuto – Kapeka, and Kabale – Kisoro – Bunagana/Kyanika. The Busega – Mityana road will also be worked on. In addition 87 national road bridges will be repaired and maintained. 

The Government is purchasing a multi-purpose ship for Kalangala Islands at a cost of Euro 5.4 million, with the objective of providing an efficient, safe and affordable transport between the Sesse Islands and the mainland. This ship which will be operational by August 2005, will boost investment, tourism and trade. 

Railways

In order to reverse the deterioration and improve on the efficiency of rail transport, Government has entered into agreement with the Government of Kenya to concession the national railways to a joint operator. The reform and divestiture of the Uganda Railways Corporation will lead to the creation of a holding company to manage infrastructure assets which remain owned by Government, and a concessionaire to manage operations. Full operations are expected to begin by December 2005. 

Social Services 

Mr Speaker Sir, with respect to social sectors, the combined share of the health and education sectors, as a percentage of the total budget, has more than doubled over the past fifteen years. It has totalled about Shs 1,000 billion in financial year 2004/05, with education having the largest share of any sector in the budget. In recent years, an increasing share of total expenditure has also been transferred to districts for numerous local government development programmes such as district road maintenance, agricultural extension and advisory services, education, Primary Health Care and water. Expenditure on Local Government programmes in financial year 2004/05 amounted to almost Shs. 800 billion, or 25.1 percent of total expenditure.

Education

Mr Speaker Sir, Government’s heavy investment in Universal Primary Education (UPE) has more than tripled the number of children enrolled in primary school from 3 million in 1997 to over 7.6 million currently and the gender gap in most levels of primary education has been eliminated. To meet growing demand, the number of primary teachers on Government payroll has increased by over 50 percent in the space of four years, from 82,148 in 2000 to 124,137 in 2004. Enrolment of children with special needs also rose from 20,000 in 1997 to 218,286 in 2002, of which 46 percent were female and 54 percent male. The proportion of enrolled children from the lowest income quintile increased from 50 percent in 1992 to 83.7 percent by 1999. Adult literacy has also improved due to Functional Adult Literacy programmes.

Government remains committed to its twin objective of delivering Universal Primary Education (UPE) and strengthening post primary absorptive capacity.  This is aimed at increasing the transition rate from primary to Senior One from 50 percent to 80 percent, and that from Senior Four to Business, Technical and Vocational Educational Training (BTVET) institutions from the current 10 percent to 50 percent.

For financial year 2005/06 we will continue to improve the quality of education in primary schools and enhance efficiency and effectiveness in teaching and learning.  Mr Speaker Sir, in this regard Shs 13 billion has been provided for primary teacher’s salary enhancement. This will increase the salary of a primary teacher from Shs. 130,000 this year to shs.140,000 per month next year.

Mr Speaker Sir, with respect to Secondary education sub-sector, there are currently 697,507 students. In line with Government’s policy of equitable public service provision, Government sponsored a total of 39,220 and 3,840 scholarships for secondary schools students from IDP camps and poor households respectively during financial year 2004/05. 

Overall the education sector has been allocated Shs. 634.5 billion for next financial year, representing 17.2 percent of the national budget.  In financial year 2005/06, primary education enrolment in Government schools is projected at 6.5 million pupils, while the number of teachers will increase to 129,000, thus improving, the Pupil: Teacher ratio in Government Schools from 53 to 1 to 50 to 1. An additional Shs. 4 billion has been provided for enhancing the salaries of University lecturers.

Health

Mr Speaker Sir, there is now clear evidence that Government’s universal primary health care policy and the recent reforms within the health sector have brought about a significant expansion in the use of the health system. Out Patient Department (OPD) attendance has increased dramatically in most health facilities across the country, from 9.3 million new cases in 1999/00 to 17.7 million in 2002/03. The OPD utilisation rate has therefore improved from a baseline rate of 0.40 visits per person per year in 1999/2000 to 0.72 visits per person per year in 2002/03.

Mr Speaker Sir, immunisation coverage has also increased dramatically. For instance, 83 percent of the targeted population received a 3rd dose of DPT (DPT3) vaccine. The proportion of people in the poorest 20 percent of the population who seek care when ill has risen from 46 percent to 73 percent between 1999 and 2003. The Government has built 400 new Level II Health Centres and upgraded 180 Health Centres Level II to Health Centre Level III status (including maternity services). 

For the financial year 2005/6 the sector is targeting OPD utilization of 82 percent and DPT 3 coverage of 86 percent. Supervised deliveries at Health facilities are expected to increase to 38 percent while the approved posts filled by qualified staff are forecast at over 70 percent.  

I have allocated U Shs. 509.6 billion to the health sector.  Emphasis will be placed on filling the vacant posts at Primary Health Care and referral facilities, provision of supplies, drugs, health supplies, vaccines, and purchase of equipment. An additional 2,000 health workers will be recruited in financial year 2005/06.   

HIV/AIDS

Mr Speaker Sir, sustained political commitment and leadership, early intervention, a strong focus on prevention, and a multi-sectoral approach have led to the reduction in prevalence rates in HIV/AIDS. The prevalence of HIV/AIDS has fallen from 30 percent in 1993/94 to 7 percent in 2005. In the financial year 2004/05 funds from the Global Funds for HIV/AIDS Tuberculosis and Malaria and the US Presidential Emergency Fund for AIDS (PEPFER) were received. This should enable us to substantially increase our efforts to fight the pandemic and other killer diseases that plague our country.

Water and Sanitation

Over the last decade, Government has made substantial progress in terms of increasing access to safe water. Rural safe water coverage rose from 57.9 percent in June 2004 to 60 percent in June 2005 while 2,792 new water points were established. In the urban areas water coverage increased from 65 percent to 67 percent in the same period. A total of 300 new water stand-points to cater for poor communities were installed. In the small towns sub-sector, a total of 13 water schemes were completed.   The National Water and Sewerage Corporation also continued system expansion and rehabilitation in order to increase water distribution in all the towns of its operation.

In financial year 2005/06 I have allocated Shs. 110.1 billion for the sector to increase coverage nationwide. In the rural water sub-sector, 2880 new water points to serve almost 700,000 people will be constructed. In the urban sub-sector, 36 water schemes covering towns including Iganga, Mityana, Mpigi, Pakwach and Nebbi will be constructed over the next three years. 

Gender and Social Development

Mr Speaker Sir, the social development sector is mandated to deliver community-level actions to reduce poverty through promotion of employment, equity, and adult literacy. The sector received a budget allocation of Shs.3.84 billion in financial year 2004/05 and has renovated and equipped 73 community development centres, established 3 new community libraries, enrolled 477,017 functional adult learners, and reintegrated 500 formally abducted children in various trauma centres. 

I have allocated U Shs. 18.27 billion for financial year 2005/06 to the Ministry of Gender Labour and Social Welfare to strengthen the community development function, recruit more Community Development Workers and expand the outreach of the functional adult literacy programme.

Security and Governance

Mr Speaker Sir, with regard to Security and Governance, it has always been and still is Government’s commitment to ensure that peace prevails in all parts of Uganda. Government has in particular made efforts to restore peace in all parts of Northern Uganda and to curtail cattle rustling in the Karamoja region. Years of insurgency in Northern Uganda have diverted national resources, and prevented progress in poverty reduction in the war torn areas. Now that most parts of the North are peaceful efforts are being made to secure the villages so that the internally displaced persons can return home. 

In Karamoja, despite the many challenges, the disarmament programme is progressing well.  So far over 10,000 guns having been recovered through the voluntary approach. Government will in the next financial year complement the voluntary approach with other measures aimed at accelerating the disarmament process.

 In financial year 2005/06 further steps will be taken to streamline procurement in the Uganda Peoples Defence Forces. A logistics/ infrastructure system that is consistent with the Public Procurement and Disposal of Public Assets Act will be established. A policy and planning department and the newly established Defence Sector Working Group will also continue to assist in improving the efficiency and effectiveness of public expenditure. 

Participation in International Peace support initiatives is anticipated in this financial year in the Great Lakes region, notably Somalia and Sudan.  Our promised contribution to the African Union Peace Keeping Force will also be honoured.   

Mr Speaker Sir, with the return of peace in the North, Government recognises that the region’s post-conflict rehabilitation and development is critical. In light of this, sectors are urged to earmark resources to the North when implementing their sector programmes.

Justice, Law and Order

Last financial year the Police Force recruited and trained 100 cadets and 800 Police Constables, raising total personnel to just under 15,000.  Some barracks have been renovated to improve infrastructure.  The Prisons service in the same period reduced congestion in the prisons and the length of stay on remand has been reduced significantly.

Mr Speaker Sir, over the medium term, Government will focus on two strategic areas for reform in this area. These are criminal justice and commercial justice reforms.  Under the criminal justice reform interventions have focused on four areas; legal services reform; improved administration of justice, improved civic and legal education and law reform. In the commercial justice sector focus is on commercial court reform, companies and land registries reform, reform of key commercial laws and strengthening commercial lawyers.

Public Administration

Mr Speaker Sir, in order to improve on the efficiency and effectiveness of public expenditure and administration, Government will review, and rationalize public expenditure. This measure will contribute to achieving cost efficiency and effectiveness in public service delivery. Government will also ensure that the Sector Wide Approach is strengthened across all sectors. 

A major area of concern in Public Administration is the accommodation for Government Offices.  It has been observed that Government institutions have entered into agreements with significant budgetary implications, which are proving difficult to accommodate within the available resources. This has severely constrained the discretionary budgets of Ministries and impacted negatively on the operations. Government will review the policy on accommodation as well as the existing obligations to ensure that accommodation costs are affordable.

Mr Speaker Sir, in order to improve efficiency, Government has also embarked on rationalising the development budget in order to attain the following: 

• realign the development budget portfolio to the PEAP priorities;

• streamline significant administrative costs;

• enhance monitoring and evaluation; and
 
• ensure that counterpart funding is fully incorporated in the medium term   expenditure framework. 

This should enable us to mobilise resources for an affordable and efficient development portfolio.

Accountability

Mr Speaker Sir, Government introduced the Integrated Financial Management System (IFMS), computerised budgeting, accounting and reporting applications. Pilot implementation of IFMS was launched in February 2004 in six Ministries and four Local Government sites.  It will be extended to all Central and Local Government votes over the medium term.

While it is recognized that public accountability requires the active participation of all sectors of society, the State must take prime responsibility.  The key public policy areas that Government is concerned with over the medium term include tackling and eliminating corruption; ensuring the transparent, effective and efficient collection and use of public resources and building systems of ethics and integrity in public life in Uganda.

The launch of the National Anti-Corruption Strategy is a clear demonstration of the commitment of Government to fight corruption.  As part of the process of strengthening our work in this process, Government has put in place the Accountability Sector as a key element in the implementation of the National Anti-Corruption Strategy. 

To ensure effective performance monitoring of all our programmes, a National Integrated Monitoring and Evaluation Strategy (NIMES) has been established.  This strategy provides a mechanism for systematic flow of information relevant for tracking progress in programme implementation at different levels of government. Key components of the strategy include the statistical development under UBOS; the Local Government Information and Communication System (LOGICS); and the Community Based Information Systems.

Domestic Arrears

Government has developed a strategy to accelerate the reduction and clearance of arrears, while consolidating the gains achieved in the various initiatives such as the Commitment Control System, Integrated Financial Management System and the Pre-Payment system especially for utilities. For telephone services, I want to reiterate that all ministries must utilize the pre-payments mode to avoid any accumulation of arrears. 

Local Government and Fiscal Decentralisation Strategy (FDS) 

Mr Speaker Sir, the Fiscal Decentralisation Strategy streamlines and harmonizes the transfer of resources to Local Governments allowing them to exercise autonomy in decision-making and at the same time enhancing public expenditure management.  In financial year 2005/06, Graduated Poll Tax will be removed. A provision of Shs. 30 billion has been made to compensate for the suspension. This amount includes provision of Shs.2.7 billion to cater for new districts.  A further Shs.4 billion has also been provided to cater for the regional tier. Additionally, in every district, Government will pay the wages of the LC Five Chairman, the Speaker to Council and the LC Three Chairpersons. This will help to further cushion the local administration against the loss of graduated tax collections.

Pay and Pension Reform

Mr Speaker Sir, pay reform has been a central focus of Government in the effort to improve public service performance. Government is committed to the implementation of the Pay Reform Strategy in order to attract, recruit and retain a competent and motivated workforce in the Public Service. Government will discourage selective pay awards which jeopardize the implementation of the comprehensive Pay Reform Strategy. Government will expedite the finalization and approval of the comprehensive Pay Policy to rationalize pay across public service institutions and agencies. 

Furthermore, Government will limit any expansions in the size of the Public Service in the context of agreed sector targets and the pay reform strategy. In financial year 2005/06, institutions that have been divested have not been provided with any wage resources. Affected ministries are therefore expected to remove these structures from their payrolls. In addition, the budgeting for salaries should be done according to the staff establishment ceilings provided by the Ministry of Public Service. 

Over the medium term, Government will undertake the review of current establishment structures including those for semi-autonomous and autonomous institutions, with a view to merging them where duplication will be identified.   For local governments, employees will be recruited in a phased manner, in line with the newly approved local government structures. Local Governments that recruit employees outside approved structures will henceforth be liable for the costs associated with this recruitment.

Mr Speaker Sir, during budget execution for financial year 2004/05, government experienced salary shortfalls in various votes at the centre and in local governments. In view of the difficulties caused by supplementary wages, accounting officers will henceforth be required to verify their payrolls every month before wages are paid.

Pensions have continued to exert fiscal stress on the budget year after year.  There is widespread consensus on the need to reform the pensions system to prevent arrears accumulating.  Government is finalising a contributory pension scheme for all public servants, for members of parliament, ministers, the military and civil servants. This reform will be implemented in conjunction with reforms in the National Social Security Fund (NSSF). 

Constitutional Self-accounting bodies Bodies

Mr Speaker Sir, the budgetary proposals of Self Accounting Bodies have been submitted in compliance with Article 155 (2) of the Constitution. In accordance with Article 155 (3) of the Constitution, Government has made recommendations on them. I hereby lay both the budgetary proposals and the recommendations of Government before this august House, as required by the Constitution.

In order for me to submit a fully financed National Budget for your consideration in accordance with Article 155 (1) of the Constitution, the budget provisions of these Self Accounting bodies are in accordance with the resource envelope conveyed to them in the course of budget preparation, including the presentation of the National Budget Framework Paper to Parliament, in accordance of the Budget Act 2001.

Schedule of Indebtedness

Mr Speaker Sir, in accordance with the provision of Section 13 (1) and (2) of the Budget Act 2001, I hereby lay before the House the Statement on: 

Government’s total external indebtedness as at 31st March, 2005; and the grants that              Government received during financial year 2004/05. 

With respect to Section 13 (3) of the same Act, Government guaranteed one loan of US$ 5.2 million to the Islamic University in Uganda during financial year 2004/05. Details of the utilisation and the performance of each loan and grant, including the extent of the achievement of the objectives and targets, will be provided in the policy statements of the ministries and departments which received the loans and grants as well as in our poverty monitoring and assessment reports.

Revenue and Tax Measures
 for FY 2005/06

Mr Speaker Sir, it has been said that there are two certainties in life - death and taxes! While this may paint a rather depressing picture, taxes produce another certainty, which is, that without tax revenues, no Government can make a budget. Taxation is the only practical means of raising the revenue to finance government spending on the goods and services most of us demand.

Mr Speaker Sir, there are daunting challenges facing our country that need home-tailored solutions. We face a problem of an excessive fiscal deficit which is unsustainable. We have resolved to bring it down and our target this year is to lower it from 9.9 percent to 9.2 percent. We also need to invest in poverty-reducing programs that will lift our people out of absolute poverty.  There must be investments in basic infrastructure like railways, roads and electricity to facilitate the attraction of private investments and industrial growth. The lack of adequate and functioning infrastructure is a serious obstacle to Uganda’s medium-term growth prospects. The private sector cannot wait forever for these basic facilities and we must act now to provide them. My taxation measures, are therefore, premised on the need to generate adequate resources to finance programs that are essential to our economic goals.

Mr Speaker Sir, by regional standards, our revenue effort is relatively low. We are collecting less than 13 percent of GDP in tax revenue. This is far below the sub-Saharan African average of 18 percent. We must therefore improve revenue generation to reduce external borrowing and its adverse effects on the economy.

Revenue Outlook for 2005/06

To enable us fund the budget, while meeting the fiscal deficit target, total domestic revenues are projected at Shs. 2,280 billion, of which Shs. 2,230 billion is to come from net URA collections.  The balance of Shs. 50 billion is to come form Non-tax revenues. This domestic resource represents about 13.4 percent of GDP.

I want to highlight a few important tax issues for the 2005/06 Budget. The full details are contained in the Tax Law (Amendments) and Finance Bill published today.

Income Tax
Credit to Agriculture 

According to the results of the 2002 Population and Housing Census, agriculture accounts for the livelihood of a very large proportion of the population.  Despite this, access to finance is still very poor.  In order to encourage lending to the agricultural sector, I am proposing that interest earned by financial institutions on loans granted to persons engaged in agriculture be exempt from tax.  The details will be found in the Income Tax (Amendment) Bill 2005.

Tax Incentives for Collective Investment Schemes:

The Collective Investment Schemes Act was enacted in 2003 and the Capital Markets Authority has started licensing companies to operate collective investment schemes. These are schemes that collect funds from small savers, who would otherwise not be in a position to access securities markets and invest the funds on their behalf, with the objective of maximizing returns and minimizing risk for the individual investors.

Currently, there are some tax disadvantages which collective investment scheme (CIS) investors are likely to suffer in the absence of fiscal incentives. I propose to exempt income of unit trusts and other collective investment schemes from withholding tax, where income is distributed to unit trust holders. The purpose of this exemption is to encourage savings and investment. The details are contained in the Income Tax (Amendment) Bill 2005.

Excise Duties  

Mr Speaker Sir, in order to boost excise revenues, I am making an upward adjustment of duties on some products to help provide the revenues needed to fund our budget.

Petroleum Products

The excise duty on petrol has been increased from Shs. 660 per litre to Shs.720, while the excise duty for diesel will increase form Shs. 400 to Shs. 450 per litre. The duty on kerosene of Shs. 200 remains unchanged. This measure is expected to generate revenue of Shs. 28 billion.

Mobile Phone Airtime

As a revenue enhancing measure I am increasing the excise duty on air time from 10 percent to 12 percent. I am projecting to collect Shs. 5.2 billion from this measure.

Sugar

I am introducing a specific excise duty rate of Shs. 50 per kg on imported or locally produced sugar. This duty will be paid at the time of clearing the importation at customs. For locally-produced sugar the duty will apply on the ex-factory price. This measure is anticipated to realise Shs. 16 billion. The details are reflected in the Finance Bill.

Value Added Tax 

I am increasing the rate of Value Added Tax (VAT) from 17 percent to 18 percent. This is expected to generate revenue of Shs. 38.6 billion. 

Traffic Act

I am adjusting some fees payable on motor vehicle and motor cycle licences. The fees applicable to buses and lorries will not be affected. This measure is projected to fetch revenue of Shs. 10.2 billion. The details are contained in the Finance Bill.

Tax Administration
Mr Speaker Sir, Reforms have been going on in URA to strengthen its performance. These reforms are aimed at mobilising resources that we need. The URA Act is being amended to realign it with the current reforms.  Strengthening URA is on top of our agenda and in this regard Shs. 68 billion has been allocated to enable URA meet its mandate. 

Local Government Taxation 

Mr Speaker, Sir, effective Financial Year 2005/06, I am undertaking a comprehensive tax reform at the local government level to ensure that adequate revenue is realised. Government has decided to suspend the graduated tax with effect from July, 1st 2005. 

East African Community Issues 

Mr Speaker Sir, Honourable Members, you are all aware of Government policy to promote cooperation in order to achieve regional economic cooperation and integration. Only by integrating our regional economies shall we be more viable and competitive in the world trade. Government will continue to pursue and promote the policy of regional economic cooperation and integration through joint action with other regional partners.

During pre-budget consultations, the Ministers of Finance met in Arusha and reviewed the implementation of the Customs Union CET. Accordingly, a number of changes to the Common External Tariff have been proposed at the community level, but I will single out the most outstanding: 

Pharmaceutical Products 

There has been concern that the imposition of a tariff on medicine, albeit the need to promote the local pharmaceutical industry, was leading to price escalation and thus undermining access to essentials drugs in the Community.  The duty rate on medicaments is abolished.

Solar Equipment and Accessories 

In recognition of the need to develop alternative sources of energy as part of the efforts to modernize our society, solar equipment and parts do not attract duty in the CET.  In this regard duty on deep cycle batteries has been remitted to 0 percent.

Paper for Printing Text books, Examination Papers and Covers

For purposes of enhancing literacy programs in the Community, paper for printing text books, examination papers and covers is remitted to 0 percent.

Speed Governors 

To augment the campaign to reduce carnage on the roads, the duty on speed governors is remitted to 0 percent.

Worn (Second-hand) Clothes

Mr Speaker Sir, the East African Customs Union CET rate on second-hand clothes is being reduced from 70% or US 0.5 cents to 40% or US 0.3 cents per kilogram.

Mr Speaker Sir, I would like to emphasize that the coming into force of the East African Customs Union has set in a new era in the management of our Trade Policy.  All matters relating to rates of import duty and exemptions are dealt with at the EAC level through the established organs of East African Community, meaning that Partner States no longer have the liberty to take unilateral decisions.

Mr Speaker Sir, I wish to report that we have held discussions with our counterparts in Kenya regarding Uganda cargo at Mombasa. The main concern has been the delays; Customs warehouse rental fees and Port storage charges that have affected the smooth flow of our cargo.  Mr Speaker Sir, the Kenya authorities have agreed in principle to consider waiving these charges.  Further, they have also indicated that in principle they have no objection to Uganda developing its own holding facilities at Mombasa port. Government is therefore taking this matter forward.      

Mr Speaker Sir, and Honourable Members it is important to hold on to the current tax base. Any concessions will put downward pressures on revenues and yet there are no alternatives tax handles to recoup any losses from such concessions in the medium term.  The consequence is that, to sustain revenue performance in the medium term to finance rising expenditure needs, the only means available is to improve collection efficiency. This underlines the need for continued further improvements in tax administration capacity and discipline in URA, to reduce corrupt practices causing substantial revenue losses.  

Mr Speaker Sir, all these measures announced will take effect from 1st July, 2005 with the exception of excise duty on fuel products which take effect from 9th June, 2005.

Tax Expenditures

Mr Speaker Sir, Article 152 Clause (2) of the Constitution obliges me to report to Parliament periodically on the exercise of powers conferred upon me by any law to waive or vary a tax imposed by that law. I wish to report that from July 1, 2004 to date I have not exercised powers conferred by any law to waive or vary a tax.

Conclusion

Mr Speaker Sir, in conclusion, I wish to extend my gratitude to all stakeholders whose efforts sustained the long and arduous process of preparing this budget.  

In this Budget, Mr Speaker Sir, we have together committed ourselves to the strategy of Growth and Development. We have committed ourselves to savings and investments throughout the land. We have committed ourselves to improvements in the well being of the rural majority by increasing money for clean water, water for production, agriculture, microfinance, employment and community mobilization and organization. We have committed ourselves to national transformation through Government’s revolutionary support for universal education and the war on HIV/AIDS and other diseases. 

Mr Speaker, Uganda’s dependence must diminish. The spirit of the Martyrs and the Heroes of our country is undoubtedly the spirit of self-sacrifice, self-denial, patriotism, courage and freedom. 

The dividends of free cooperation, free enterprise, hard work and good governance are absolutely enormous and can catapult us into an advanced nation in the foreseeable future. Mr Speaker Sir, my secondary school teacher, Mr Buregyeya, once told me the following quotation he attributed to Prime Minister Churchill’s address to the British people during the 2nd World War: “Our problems are enormous and so are our resources”.

Mr Speaker Sir, the Vision of the Movement incorporated in this Budget, the Vision of a transformed people united in peace and prosperity is enormous but so, Mr Speaker, I believe, are the resources of Uganda’s present day Martyrs and Heroes. 

Mr Speaker Sir, I beg to move. 

For God and my Country. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, you have exhibited your appreciation to the presentation by the minister by the standing ovation you have just given him. I want to add a thank you to you, Mr Minister for the presentation, which you have given under an assignment from His Excellency the President. All of us appreciate that the mandate to present what you have presented is given to His Excellency the President. Fortunately His Excellency the President is present with us. I think he is the one to confirm whether you have carried out the assignment totally well. (Laughter) It could well be that from the mood he may give another relief and –(Laughter)- I wish to call upon His Excellency the President to make a few comments on the assignment given. Your Excellency.

4.43
HIS EXCELLENCY, THE PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF UGANDA (Mr Yoweri Kaguta Museveni): Rt hon. Speaker of Parliament, the Vice-President, Prime Minister, Chief Justice, hon. Members of Parliament and all guests. How do you characterize this Budget? In three words: pro-poor, pro-production and pro-exports. (Laughter) All the taxes fall in those three categories. There is no tax on kerosene because this is something used by the poor people. (Applause) We have abolished graduated tax (Applause)

There are no taxes on any export, not even one. However, I think that at some stage we may have to look at the export on unprocessed leather. This is because we had agreed with Basajjabalaba that he would build a leather industry or we would tax those skins and hides, which are going out. This is the only commodity that we may think of taxing in future. This is because we want those hides to go to our factories, which are coming up in Jinja, for them to add value to them. 

Otherwise these taxes are really progressive. They are not levied on production within Uganda, on poor people and on exports. If you are importing things then of course you should pay some tax because that is the only area where we get money. If you are driving vehicles that means you are not very poor –(Laughter)- and surely you should contribute to UPE by paying some taxes on petroleum. That is one point.

The second point is salaries for primary teachers and university lecturers. We would have wanted to do more but there are so many demands generated by the same Ugandans. As you have heard we had to increase the number of districts since people had started eating rats. (Laughter) Because of having to deal with all those demands, we could not do as much as we would have wanted; but we are moving slowly. Of course the teachers are many, even when you increase by as little as 10,000 the total is big. So, I would like to ask all our compatriots to be patient, we are moving and since we know where we are going, we shall get there. (Applause)

As far as the university professors are concerned, we were supposed to go up to Shs 2.8 million for each professor but we have been able to go up to Shs 2.4 million from where we started at Shs 1.8 million. I think we are moving well. They should be patient. And as for the administrators - there is a complaint that you cannot deal only with the academic staff and forget the administrators, but I would urge the administrators to be patient. The core function of the university is teaching; let us deal with the teachers first. We have not forgotten the administrators but we cannot satisfy all of them at the same time. Uganda is not about to end. Gakyali mabaga. Things are beginning to happen, so they should not be over excited. They should look at some of us as examples.

In 1971 I was earning a salary here in the President’s Office but I left government and went to fight. I did not earn a salary for the next eight years; I was just feeding on Mwalimu Nyerere’s food but here I am, I am not really badly off. Between 1981-1986 we were in the bush. We were not earning any salary but here we are. Let them not be excited. For all those who are demanding for salaries, we are listening and we are considering the matter seriously but they should not disrupt work because that is not how to improve the situation.

Employment is not going up as rapidly as it should. Creation of employment has not come up mainly because there has been some sluggishness in setting up big industries. In the processing of coffee for example, we shall soon be able to employ many and earn all that money, which we have been donating to the outsiders. This is why the ministers agreed to put aside some money to enable us build the coffee processing plant in Bweyogerere. 

We are about to start the processing of bananas in the South West. The people of Karamoja and the North are sitting on some gold called Gum Arabica; many people did not know that Uganda could produce Gum Arabica until I was able to link up with some groups abroad and we brought experts. They did tests and found that the Gum Arabica in the North is very good. I would advise our sisters and brothers in Karamoja to stop cutting those Acacia trees. The types of acacia trees found in other parts of Uganda should all be protected. If necessary the concerned minister should introduce a law to protect them. 

There is also a big demand internationally for Shea butter, Moya - the one that Kony was using thinking it could protect him from the bullets. That product is on very high demand and I have already instructed our office to start liaising with the big companies in the United States to export Shea butter. It is very important for nutrition; it is also medicine for certain diseases and a lubricant of a number of things. So that product will give money to our people.  

Regarding the Forestry Authority, I want to modify a little bit what the minister said. There have been evictions from the forests. Recently I had a meeting with the people concerned and I told them to review these forests where they were set up for ecological reasons and where they were set up just to provide firewood et cetera. What was the logic of setting up these forests? I will get an answer then we shall be able to talk to the rest of the country regarding – meanwhile the evictions will be a little bit slow except of the ones who are encroaching on what were already planted forests. So the people should not get worried about the forest evictions.  

I am glad that finally the industrial park at Namanve is going to take off; we have got money, which you approved here. We are going to use it to build a very modern industrial park and we shall be able to have a number of factories there. Well, I can see that the biblical saying that whatever man sows that is what he reaps does not wholly apply in the case of Uganda. I remember a few years ago some people were against the building of Garden City but it was built, I hear that some of those people were the first to go there. So that is the principle of harvesting where you have sown. Similarly, those who were against the industrial park at Namanve, they are welcome to harvest where they have not sown. It will give us some good money.

In the minister’s figures he talked about Uganda’s export earnings finally going above US $1 billion a year. However, that figure did not include the US $600 million from kyeyo - which we call the remittances from Ugandans living abroad - I do not know why these people do not regard this as part of the export earnings. When I export human labour I do not see the difference between that and coffee exports. It is a service export so it should always be reflected in the figures you are quoting either together or separately, but that US $1 billion does not include the US $600 million from kyeyo.

I am glad that the minister talked about micro finance. I know our people in the countryside are waiting for this policy. I am also glad that the Minister recognised the Savings and Credit Organisations (SCOs). You remember micro finance has been having a problem: first we tried entandikwa, which was interest free money that had no need for collateral, but our people misused it. They thought it was a kasiimo, so that collapsed.  

When we did not succeed through that line we introduced these private micro finance agencies, which are charging people very high interests - 36 percent per annum – and the people are now crying. We must, therefore, get a new solution and that is why I am glad that the Minister is talking about the Savings and Credit Organisations. We shall elaborate it in the Cabinet paper very soon and we hope that will be the solution.  

The SCOs are good savings and credit organisations because they – you know this trinity is very interesting because you have the borrower, the saver, the one who is saving and the lender, they come together in the Savings and Credit Organisations. So, here there is a likelihood that they may not want to hurt each other since they are the same people. Maybe they will give better terms to one another.

I regret the death, which occurred at Kichwamba seven years ago. The Rt hon. Speaker reminded us at the beginning of the meeting and I hope you will now see the impact of spending adequately on defence. By spending adequately on defence we were able to defeat ADF totally and all that area is totally peaceful. (Applause) That is why you hear that tourism is now booming. That area has got a lot of tourist facilities as you know. Therefore, I am very grateful to Parliament and to the rest of the Government for supporting our initiative three years ago when we cut the 23 percent from other ministries and consolidated this money into the Ministry of Defence to be able to give defence enough assets to provide peace in Uganda. I can assure you it is now much easier for us to provide peace in Uganda because the Army is getting better and better equipped.  

Even the problem of Karamoja will be solved. It will be solved since we have the means. There is no way anybody can continue making trouble in Karamoja. We have arrested some of those killers; they are being tried and sentenced by a court martial and we are going to transfer them to Luzira so that they can know what prison looks like. This will make them stop making trouble.

As for Kony, I told you yesterday we are finishing him. Those who are putting us on pressure not to defeat Kony should stop because we are not going to listen to them. They should instead tell Kony to come out if he wants to save himself. That is the way forward, not the other way round. You do not pressurise the one who is doing the right thing. You should instead pressurise the one is doing the wrong thing.

I was very pleased the Minister talked about commercialising agriculture; this is what I talked about yesterday. Poverty in the rural areas is brought about by people there who do not have any commercial activities. I will quote one area, Bundibugyo. Bundibugyo is one of the remotest districts of Uganda; they have got one of the worst roads up to now, even though it is one of the most prosperous. 

The other time when we were in Kyakwanzi in 2003 for the Movement Conference, a delegate from Bundibugyo - and you remember Bundibugyo had been war torn because of terrorism - but a delegate from Bundibugyo told us that in his parish they had 12 pickups, 12 pickups in one parish! Why, because Bundibugyo has got five cash crops, first they have coffee, which they have had for a long time. Secondly they have palm oil, which they grow; thirdly they have Vanilla, forth they have upland rice and fifth they have cocoa. That is all cash. 

On top of that they produce their own food for consumption. Bundibugyo is very prosperous. Even the other time when they were running from ADF at one time I went to Nyahuka near the boarder and they were running from the terrorists. All of them were carrying foam mattresses, as they ran, not rags. So you can see that what Bundibugyo needed was peace. We have now given it to them. If we can give them a road like these roads, which are in other places - and we shall make that road because I have agreed with the Minister of Works and the Minister of Finance - that road will be built. Bundibugyo is very prosperous because of commercial agriculture.

You go to Kapchorwa, it is also somehow prosperous mainly because of wheat, which they grow and sell. In another area they also grow Arabica Coffee. However, they could do more if they could diversify. So, poverty coincides with those areas that do not have a package of commercial crops, which they are selling, or the ones, which have a very low value. 

In Busoga for instance, they sell maize but maize is a very low value crop. That is where the problem is. They sell dhuma, but dhuma is a very low value crop. The same with Kamwenge; they sell maize. Maize can make money but you need to grow maize on a large scale in order to make money from it. If you only grow a half an acre of maize, okay, you have got a commercial activity but it is not an adequate commercial activity. That is the problem of places like Busoga and Kamwenge. I think even a place like Kibanda in Masindi must be having the same problem. So, it should not just be a commercial activity. It must be a commercial activity, which is rewarding, which gives you results.

I have two final points to make. Well, the Speaker said I have not been coming to this House for many years, the Banyankole have got a proverb, they say: “Nyabwengye, nobwengye bwe”. Each one has got his unique wisdom, and it is like a riddle that you have to answer. To answer the riddle you say, “It is surprising how the hen matures her children without breasts” - she has no breasts to feed them but they grow. So, how does the hen do it? My not coming here, “Nyabwebgye, nobwengye bwe”. We shall talk about it some time. (Laughter)

Finally, I would like to use this chance - because I always hear that you are on television; that you are film stars, you are MP television and radio stars. I would like to use this opportunity to inform our citizens about the referendum. (Applause)

This august House recently passed a resolution calling for a referendum to modify the political system so that we can allow those people who are not happy with the Movement to go wherever they will feel comfortable politically. In one of the languages here, in Luganda, the slogan I have been using is to say, “baleke bagende”, let those who are not happy with the Movement go and belong to where they want to belong. Some of them have already gone. 

I would like to talk to the Movement supporters. The Movement supporters have not been supporting the idea of having many political organisations mainly because of our bad experience in the past. However, when we met at Kyankwanzi in 2003 we examined this issue and we were of the view that we should change this. We should review this so that we allow those people who are not happy with belonging to the Movement to find their own political home.

We had three reasons. One reason was that the Movement itself was becoming weaker by having people within who were not happy with it. It was not good to have somebody within who is disgruntled and not happy. So we said, “It was better to let those who are not happy go where they are …” - it was in the interest of the Movement for the Movement to belong to those who are convinced about it and who can fight for it. That was one reason, which I gave at Kyankwanzi. I was able to convince the delegates and eventually when we came to the conference at the International Conference Center I repeated that reason. 

The second reason is that if you saw our voting pattern in 1996, we had about 24 percent of the people who did not vote for the Movement. They voted against the Movement. In 2001 we had about 30 percent who voted against me because I was representing the Movement. If we maintain the present system that means that 24 percent, 25 percent or whatever the number is, will be oppressed. They feel oppressed and they are not happy; we are denying them their rights and we have no right to keep them. We had thought that they would join us because the Movement is very good, it has brought Uganda from the depth, from a deep pit and we thought that -(Applause)- we thought that any reasonable man or woman would appreciate that so that instead of having 75 percent voting for the Movement and 24 percent voting against it, all 100 percent would vote for the Movement. 

Since there are people who did not see the good thing in the Movement and they are also Ugandans like my sister Cecilia Ogwal here, like –(Laughter)- we cannot go on denying these people their freedom to belong to where they feel comfortable. Therefore, that is the second reason. We want everybody to be happy. Let the ones who want to belong to the Movement stay with the Movement. The ones who want go to wherever they want to go; let them go. That is what we are proposing, so that everybody is happy. We the Movement people are happy and the ones who do not want to be in the Movement are also happy. 

The third reason was that this 24 percent and some of their spokesmen would go and spoil our name abroad. They would go and say, “In Uganda there is no freedom”. (Laughter). You can see the hon. Cecilia Ogwal sitting on a branch of a tree and she is cutting the same branch (Laughter). Cecilia Ogwal finished university about the same time I did, maybe a little later. But during Amin’s time she was not in this Parliament. Even during Obote’s time I do not think she was in this Parliament. 

During Amin’s time I was in the resistance. During Obote’s time I was in the bush. Now she is an hon. Member of Parliament here during the Movement. Despite the fact that she does not support the Movement she is still enjoying all the benefits, freedoms and rights but she says, “I am being oppressed”. This is what we call in one of our languages here: Okuwayiriza, to tell a lie about somebody. It is also called, goba in another of our languages, Acholi and Langi. It is esabet in Atesot.  

The third reason we should open up is to end the era of goba, of okuwayiriza, of esabet. For somebody to say, “I am being oppressed” when in fact he or she is not being oppressed, let us remove these - what we call in our languages byekwaso or gengo, meaning “a cover up”. People are just covering up the truth. We should not be harassed outside the country, and misunderstood when in fact these people are enjoying all the freedom but they do not admit it. So, our citizens all over Uganda, these are the three reasons we propose that in the coming referendum we should vote “yes”. I hope the Electoral Commission will shape the question well. All the Movement cadres, MPs and I, we shall campaign for a yes vote in that referendum.

I hear there are some Movement people who have been saying that, “Our supporters should not campaign for a yes vote”. Okay, the referendum law allows anybody to take any position so the members of the Movement can take any position, although I will discuss it with them and try to convince them to support the yes campaign.  

However, I want to inform the Movement people to ask those who are now going to campaign for a no vote on behalf of the Movement, or who say they will - because we have not yet talked to them - I am sure I will talk to them and convince them not to do that. But in case they insist, the question you should ask them is, “Who are you? Whom are you representing? Okay you are a Movement person but are you elected by anybody?” Because when I stand here and say that I would like all the Movement people to campaign for a yes vote in the coming referendum, I am doing so as the historical leader of the Movement. 

Secondly, I do so as a leader who has been elected repeatedly as Chairman of the Movement. Thirdly, I do so as a leader who has been elected as President of the Republic two times by the Movement supporters. All these MPs are elected and the National Conference, which passed the resolution are all elected people from the sub-county upwards; and the NEC is also made up of elected people. So these are the real spokesmen of the Movement. They are the ones whom we should listen to. Hon. Speaker, I thank you very much for giving me this chance. (Applause)

Excuse me, Mr Speaker, I want to thank the Revenue Authority. This Revenue Authority has done a good job. As you heard the minister saying, they have collected beyond the target by Shs 80 billion. Why have they done this? They are dedicated people. They are cadres of the Movement. Some of them are good Ugandans; very good –(Interjections)- never mind. Okay, there are also women and so on. (Laughter)

When we carried out the changes in the URA information started coming that among the former directors and commissioners there would be people to whom the juniors would come and say, “Sir - or whatever - if we do this and do that we can collect more revenue”. Then these people would say, “Why are you bothering to collect more revenue?  We have achieved our target that is the end. You forget about the rest”. That was the spirit in the URA. That spirit has now changed. (Applause)

We are going to collect 13.4 percent of GDP in tax and by doing that we shall be able to fund our budget up to 60 percent. (Applause) The Commissioner General of the Uganda Revenue Authority came with her entire team and told me that she thinks that if we give her the other money, this Shs 38 billion that you have given her, she will be able to collect up to 17.8 percent of GDP. In other words, we can exceed this figure and go up to about 75 percent funding for our own budget.

As I told you yesterday, the money from outside causes some problems. There is the problem of the interest rates being high because of the money, which comes from outside. It causes inflation and when the Governor of Bank of Uganda tries to save Treasury Bills - I have something here but I do not want to read it. Yes, there is a paragraph here. These people had written something for me, which I could read for you. 

Anyway, I want to congratulate URA, specifically the new Commissioner General on the excellent performance of the tax collection this year –(Applause)- which is Shs 80 billion above what we had projected to collect. I want to endorse the proposed tax measures next financial year and they are essential if 60 percent of the Budget is to be financed by domestic resources.  

Reduction of dependence will also help to promote our exports by reducing on the appreciation pressure. The Uganda shilling becomes stronger artificially. We have experienced this on the exchange rate as a result of large donor inflows, which resulted in making our exporters of maize, tea, tobacco and fish competitive. Growth in the export sector is more sustainable as opposed to relying on donor aid and killing the export sector. We cannot afford to jeopardize this success through donor dependency.  

The other problem related to dependency is increase in the level of interest rates and interest payments as a result of mopping up the excess liquidity generated by donor dependence. In 2003/2004 and 2004/2005 we paid out Shs 193.1 billion and Shs 156 billion respectively as interest on government securities issued to stabilize the economy. Government cannot afford to pay such large sums of money at the expense of poverty reducing areas. 

Also as a government focused on private sector growth, the private sector should access affordable credit from the financial institutions. Therefore, we welcome donor support but it must be targeted to the infrastructure so that we make Uganda more competitive in terms of the cost of doing business. If we can work on this railway to Mombasa and work on the railway to Kasese, work on the railway to Apac and Juba, and work on electricity and piped water, this is where we need external money but not this loose cash for capacity building and all that. 

With those few words I fully endorse the statement, which the minister gave on my behalf. He was not impersonating me. (Laughter) Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, on your behalf I want to thank His Excellency the President for fully executing his duties under Article 155(1). He has presented what he is supposed to present to us. It is for us to now consider what he has presented so that the Budget is passed. I want to thank him for the other information he has given us on national matters, including the referendum. It has enlightened us. (Applause) Therefore, I want to thank you, Your Excellency. 

Honourable members, before we end I want to remind you that now we have a lot of work: the Budget and other Bills. It is necessary that we complete constituting our committees. Therefore, I want to appeal to you to come on Friday to continue enrolling so that by Tuesday we convene here to constitute the committees.  

You have received the Budget but what we have been hearing are figures, fractions, percentages and appropriately the minister decided to arrange another venue where we should be considering this and this venue is the Parliamentary gardens. Therefore, I encourage you all to go there and exchange your views, which will eventually help us to deal with this Budget.  

With this, we come to the end of today’s proceedings. As I have said, you come back on Friday and Monday but we shall reconvene here on Tuesday at 2.00 p.m.

(The House rose at 5.30 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 14 June 2005 at 2.00 p.m.)

