

Tuesday, 27 June 2017

Parliament met at 2.28 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this sitting to pay tribute to the late hon. Maria Mutagamba, former minister and colleague here, a member of the Ninth Parliament. At the same time, I would like to announce with sorrow the death of another member of the Ninth Parliament, hon. Peter Omolo, that also occurred during the weekend. 

He was buried yesterday but unfortunately, the time did not enable us to bring him here. However, I would like us to stand up in honour of hon. Omolo before we start these proceedings. 

(Members rose and observed a moment of silence.)

Honourable members, before they bring in the body, maybe we could read messages of tribute. We have a number of messages; there is one from the president of the Democratic Party, hon. Norbert Mao. Among other things, he says: “We will remember her as our deputy secretary general during the difficult period when political parties were virtually banned. We, therefore, join you in mourning a distinguished leader, a woman of extraordinary courage, charisma and solid intellect.

She became nationally known when she boldly took on the challenging task of leading Dr Paul Kawanga Ssemogerere’s presidential campaign in 1996, articulation of the campaign platform and the case against monolithic - She inspired many to join Ssemogerere’s campaign.”

The Aga khan Foundation says: “Over many years, the Aga Khan Development Network and its agencies through its promotion services have been privileged to have known and interacted with hon. Mutagamba. She was always engaging, insightful and devoted to her career. Her long and loyal contribution to the Government of Uganda will always be remembered.” It is signed by Farzana Sunderji, Country Manager, Aga Khan Development Foundation.

We also have another one from the Catholic Chaplaincy of Parliament signed by hon. Lucy Akello. It says: “We pray that the good Lord gives the bereaved family strength during this difficult time.”

There is another message from hon. Remigio Achia Chairperson Board of Trustees of the Parliamentary Pension Scheme. “She has been a member of the Parliamentary Pension Scheme and the board of trustees is saddened by the loss of an active member,” it says in part.

Those are the messages so far received. As others come in, I will inform you. Thank you very much. 

(Entrance of the late hon. Maria Mutagamba)

The National Anthem

The East African Community Anthem

Laying of wreaths

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, before we receive the tributes, I would like to announce the presence of the following members in the Distinguished Visitors’ Gallery:

Hon.  Anthony Butele – former minister 
Hon. Henry Kyemba - former minister
Hon. Prof. Tarsis Kabwegere – former minister 
Hon. Baguma Isoke – former minister
Mr Vix Kingo – parliamentary aspirant - (Laughter)
Hon. Emily Otekat – former Member of Parliament 
Hon. Daudi Migereko – former minister 
Hon. Asuman Kiyingi – former minister 
Hon. Samuel Semugaba – former Member of Parliament 
Hon. Rebecca Otengo - Uganda’s Ambassador to Addis Ababa 
Hon. Dorothy Hyuha – High Commissioner of Malaysia 
Ms Grace Oburu – Judicial Service Commission
Hon. David Wakikona – former minister
Hon. Kassiano Wadri- former Member of Parliament 
Hon. Joyce Mpanga- our senior woman activist
Hon. Rose Akol - Member of Parliament for East African Legislative Assembly (EALA)
Hon. Mulengani Bernard – outgoing member of EALA
Hon. Mawiya Lule – former Member of Parliament 
Hon. Patrick Ocheng - former Member of Parliament representing Bukooli South
Mr Sedef Yavuzalp – Ambassador of Turkey to Uganda
Ms Sarah Nkonge - the presidential advisor. I am trying to get the names of friends who are here. I will announce them as soon as I get them.

Hon. Norbert Mao. I do not know where he is seated today – where are they? Okay they are in that corner and I now announce the presence of hon. Sarah Kiyingi – former Member of Parliament. Thank you, for coming. There is also hon. Sarah Kataike – former Member of Parliament. Thank you, for coming and there is hon. Paul Musamali; he is up there. I think those are the ones in the Gallery as of now. I will announce others as they come.

Rt Hon. Prime Minister, you can now move the motion.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO PAY TRIBUTE TO THE LATE HON. MARIA MUTAGAMBA, FORMER MINISTER/WOMAN REPRESENTATIVE, RAKAI DISTRICT
  
THE SPEAKER: There is also Fr Tarsis Muhereza, you are welcome. I am just missing one more name but I will announce as soon as I get it.

2.57
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I beg to move a motion for a Resolution of Parliament to pay tribute to the late hon. Maria Lubega Mutagamba, and I am moving this under Rule 47 of our Rules of Procedure. The motion reads thus: 

“WHEREAS the Parliament of Uganda received with grief the news of the demise of hon. Maria Lubega Mutagamba, a former minister  and Member of Parliament which occurred on Saturday, 24 June 2017, at Case Hospital in Kampala;

AWARE THAT hon. Maria Mutagamba has had a distinguished career serving the people of Uganda dating back in 1989, when she was elected to the National Resistance Council, and subsequently  represented Rakai District in the Constituent Assembly; was the Deputy Secretary General of the Democratic Party and later, represented the people of Rakai in the Eighth and Ninth Parliament;

RECOGNISING THAT hon. Maria Mutagamba greatly contributed to political and economic development of Uganda when she held the following key positions in Government: Minister of State for Water; Minister for Water and Environment; and Minister for Tourism and Wildlife;

APPRECIATING THAT hon. Maria Mutagamba was a leader who served Uganda with dedication and patriotism; 

NOW, THEREFORE, this Parliament resolves as follows:

    i) It collectively conveys its deepest condolences to the bereaved family, relatives, friends and the people of Uganda upon the loss of hon. Maria Lubega Mutagamba.
    ii) It takes cognisance of the dedicated service and contributions made by hon. Maria Mutagamba to Uganda.
    iii) This Parliament collectively prays to the Almighty God to sustain the bereaved and grant our departed colleague and friend, hon. Maria Mutagamba, eternal peace.”

Madam Speaker, I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Is it seconded? It is seconded by several Members of the House. Mr Prime Minister, you can give your justification. Before that, I would like to welcome hon. Edrisa Tenywa, former Member of Parliament for Kawempe.

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, the justification for the said resolution of Parliament to pay tribute to the late hon. Maria Mutagamba. The passing on of our sister and colleague, hon. Maria Mutagamba, on Saturday 24 June 2017, is yet another sad loss to the country of an illustrious champion of environment protection and promotion of tourism, an effective legislator and a member of Cabinet.

On behalf of Government and on my own behalf, we convey our condolences to the family, relatives, friends and the country at large. 

Madam Speaker, we mourn and celebrate the life of the lady who devoted her life to protecting the environment and the promotion of tourism. 

The country has lost an entrepreneur, an economist, an environmentalist, a political leader and a patriot whose dedication and service to Uganda will be greatly missed. 

Madam Speaker, the late hon. Maria Mutagamba was born to Emilio Lubega and Goretti Nakate of Kakuuto, Kooki in present day Rakai District on 5 September 1952. Maria Mutagamba went through St Aloysius Secondary School, Bwanda for O’level and Mt St Mary’s Namagunga before joining Makerere University Kampala, graduating with a First Class Bachelor’s Degree in Economics in 1976.

Madam Speaker, the late hon. Maria Mutagamba was a patriot who believed in serving the country, irrespective of one’s political affiliation. Growing up in the Democratic Party in which she served in its top leadership position, the late Maria Mutagamba did not hesitate to join the National Resistance Movement to continue her service to the country and the people of Uganda. (Applause) As leaders, we should emulate her example of working across the political divides in the interest of our country. 

Madam Speaker, hon. Maria Mutagamba had an illustrious career. She served as the financial controller with the Bank of Uganda, from 1976 to 1980 and was also a Director of Bank of Baroda, from 1991 to 1999.
 
She represented the people of Rakai as the district Woman Representative in this august House, between 1989 and 1993 and was also a Constituent Assembly Delegate, between 1994 and 1995. 

Between 1999 and 2000, she served as the Deputy Secretary General of the Democratic Party. In 2000, she was appointed the Minister of State for Water, a position she held until 2006 when she was appointed Minister of Water and Environment. From 2012 to 2016, hon. Maria Mutagamba was the Minister of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities.

Madam Speaker, the late hon. Mutagamba was a tireless advocate for environment, women and all those underprivileged and worked to enable them realise their potentials. She advocated and led efforts for planting trees, conservation of wetlands and helped women throughout the country to improve their lives, families and communities.

The late hon. Maria Mutagamba understood the deep connection between local and global problems. She helped in giving ordinary citizens a voice, and in fact, she only recently spearheaded the introduction of solar irrigation in order to combat drought and promote agricultural production.

Madam Speaker, the cause of death of hon. Maria Mutagamba was cancer. At the time of her death, this cancer was concentrated in the liver.

Hon. Maria Mutagamba made a positive mark at every station of her life; she leaves behind a positive legacy to build on. Our duty is to ensure that her dream of empowering the communities, protecting the environment and promoting tourism lives on. 

May the Almighty God rest her soul in eternal peace. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. As I invite the Leader of the Opposition, I would like you to join me in welcoming a delegation from Kasambira Taxi Drivers Association on the Jinja-Kamuli Road. They are here in the gallery. They have come to see their MP but also witness the proceedings. (Applause) 

3.08
THE OPPOSITION CHIEF WHIP (Mr Ibrahim Ssemujju): Madam Speaker, I rise to second the motion for a Resolution of Parliament to pay tribute to a politician of distinguished decorum, a parent, a skilful servant, a passionate Christian, a resolute activist but also humble to recall and that is hon. Maria Lubega Mutagamba. 

I extend my sympathies and continued prayers of comfort to the children upon the loss of a mother, a few years after the demise of their father. I pray that you will be continually consoled by the good works and evident good upbringing that your parents extended to you as children. I can confidently say that you are way beyond the level of fall-back.

Madam Speaker, the emphasised academic proficiency and practical work experience that hon. Maria Mutagamba possessed, did not stop her from pursuing the sometimes “much waters” of politics; more so opposition politics at the time where she rose meticulously to become the acting Secretary-General of the Democratic Party. At this time, you all remember, how it was almost a torture guarantee for one to be labelled a multi-partist, as those who were opposed to the ruling regime were then referred to. 

The hon. Maria Mutagamba did not waver, having developed her youth skill in her youth days. Many of us were told how she among the few other students in the early 70s organised the infamous black Tuesday protest after the death of a student. I need not to remind the House that this was under the era of Idi Amin; the dreaded days. 

Her strong push for recognising multi-party politics in Uganda during the Constituency Assembly and the eventual walkout, were all whole marks of a leader with a strong belief and natural desire to uphold the democratic principles. It came as no big surprise, therefore, when hon. Mutagamba was unveiled as the campaign chief for Dr Paul Kawanga Ssemwogerere for the 1996 general elections. 

The NRM Secretary General, hon. Rose Namayanja herself a Democratic Party bred and nurtured cadre, acknowledged in her tribute that hon. Mutagamba’s best and most impacting moments were the conduct of these campaigns. It is possible that the hon. Rose Namayanja followed Maria, the individual not the NRM ideals, into the NRM.

Madam Speaker, as we eulogise and party tribute to the late hon. Mutagamba, I wish to reiterate to your call in your communication at the State of the Nation Address for the need to urgently develop a policy and possibly incorporate in our Rules of Procedure, an agreed and defined categorisation of who must be brought to this House, once departed.

Yesterday, we were faced with a wrath of the people of Soroti to explain why their son, the late hon. Peter Omolo, was never brought to this House; a matter which you have addressed, Madam Speaker, at the beginning of this session. The same voice came through from Ibanda to the death of hon. Deo Rwabita, weeks ago. We must be seen to accord all our departed comrades equal honours without exception and excuses of time and family consultations. I believe that every family would wish to have a national honour to their fallen member.

In the death of hon. Mutagamba we should pick lessons for those of us left behind. Hon. Maria Mutagamba was a pillar of the opposition politics against the current regime until late 1999 when she opted to join hands with the NRM. She quietly settled in and gave her all to develop her constituency, and make a mark in the respective ministries where she was appointed. 

Hon. Mutagamba never entangled the Democratic Party or the opposition in general to torment, denigrate and/or spy on those she left behind. She continued to hold all with respect, dignity and love. She did not behave like many people who sometimes join the NRM even for issues of butter and bread and they want to give an impression that where they have been it was the worst after spending there 30 to 40 years.

I have sometimes seen former student and youth leaders who were nurtured by the late Milton Obote but who only remembered him upon his death. I am happy Dr Ruhakana Rugunda chaired a committee for the funeral of Dr Milton Obote. The late Maria Mutagamba engaged more in policy guidance to her docket than politicking. 

Amidst meagre budget provisions, the hon. Maria Mutagamba spearheaded the development of Uganda Tourism master plan, among the many interventions that made the tourism potential of this country visible. 

She is further accredited for the tremendous increased safe water coverage in parts of this country. The late never stained her hands dirty with politics of intrigue and deceit. May those colleagues on the other side especially who crossed not very long ago, learn from this good astute lady and take their new fond love with some pinch of caution to avoid burning the bridges that helped them to be identified as potential recruits.

Hon. Mutagamba, your effort through the Rakai Development Association that brought to the fore the plight of the people of Rakai regarding the AIDS scourge was commendable. Many widows and orphans were cared for and given a new lease of life. Your efforts as further seen through the Mama water Africa that focused on supplying water to over 18 districts in this country are commendable. 

As a living tribute, Government should fully fund and implement the Ugandan Tourism Master Plan - a potential for turning the fortunes of this country. This master plan is one of the major accomplishments of hon. Mutagamba, when she was responsible for that sector.  

Hon. Mutagamba, your eyes are closed and the life curtain has drawn; your legacy will shine on especially to those who value humility, dedication and commitment. Madam Speaker, I beg to second the motion. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. As I invite the coordinator of the Independent Members of Parliament, I would like to ask the Prime Minister that I would like you to create room to pay tribute to the following fallen Members: hon. Eddie Kwizera of Kisoro, hon. Deo Rwabita of Ibanda and hon. Peter Omolo. Even though the bodies will not be brought here, let us pay tribute so that the Hansard and the tribute can be given to their families.

3.17
MR ANDREW BARYAYANGA (Independent, Kabale Municipality, Kabale): Madam Speaker, I stand to second the motion to pay tribute to the late hon. Maria Mutagamba. The family and friends of hon. Maria Mutagamba, colleagues in the august House, I wish to express my most profound and sincere sympathises to you all as we mourn our colleague and compatriot, hon. Maria Mutagamba. Please take comfort in knowing that the Lord who gives is the same Lord who takes at an appointed time He deems fit. 

The late hon. Maria Mutagamba, Uganda’s former Minister for Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities served diligently, knowledgeably and proficiently in her various roles as indicated in earlier eulogies.  Today we bid farewell to a woman of many talents and abilities and many tasks as mentioned earlier. 

She broke the barriers of the stereotypes that were labelled and continue to be labelled on women. She did not allow nor conform to the biases against women in the 1960s through to the 1980 but rose above them and became an economist who later on turned into a politician to reckon with.

Through her unequivocal commitment and professionalism, the late hon. Mutagamba swiftly earned the water and environment industry respect. 

She brought the Africa Travel Association Annual Congress to Uganda in 2014 and served as that organisation’s President until the congress in Nairobi a year later. During her presidential year, she helped to include Uganda on the map of American Travel Agents and tours operators, where she made a big impact through her professionalism and personal charm. It was during her term of office when a Ugandan delicacy known as Rolex, became a tourism attraction and earned international fame and was named a tourism product only made in Uganda. 

Hon. Mutagamba was a new politician who served her time as a noble politician, but later became a person who knew how to retreat at the right time. She retired on her own preference in 2016, from elective politics after serving at a Constituent Assembly Delegate. She also served as a Member of Parliament and later became a minister.

Honourable members, I urge us to emulate the late Mutagamba as political leaders and that there comes a time when one should allow for peaceful transition to occur regardless of how good a leader you have been – (MEMBERS: “We are waiting for you.”) (Laughter). When the time is ripe I will do it. I had the pleasure to sit with the late hon. Mutagamba in the Ninth Parliament when I was still a fresher. She encouraged me to be strong, willed and principled and to always speak on the good and desist from temptation to be corrupted by power. 

The late hon. Mutagamba spoke with conviction in her ever calm and motherly manner and encouraged many of us in different ways. Fare thee well, hon. Maria Mutagamba. You have run a good race and fought a good fight. I beg to move.          

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. 

3.21
MR HARUNA KYEYUNE (NRM, Kyotera County, Rakai): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The late hon. Mutagamba as indicated by the Prime Minister, was the Member of Parliament representing the people of Rakai together with me in the Ninth Parliament. We worked together and she was such a secure leader who would always fight for peace and unity. 

In Rakai, she was a uniting factor. As you may be aware, in many districts there are always misunderstandings between local and national leaders but that was not the case in Rakai District because of the late Mutagamba. The late was the first female graduate in Kakuuto Sub County. She inspired many girl children to join school. As you may recall in the 1980s, we were faced with a challenge of HIV/AIDS, but people thought that HIV/AIDS was witchcraft and they would go to visit witchdoctors. 

However, it was through the efforts of the late hon. Mutagamba together with her colleagues, then Mr Vincent Ssemakula Ssetuba and Brig. Kayanja, who formed an association RDA and started outsourcing for development partners. The development partners and NGOs like World Vision and DANIDA came to Rakai with other development partners to sensitize our people that HIV/AIDS is a disease and it is got through many ways. I believe that if it was not the late Mutagamba, I would not be here. 

Madam Speaker, the late was a true Catholic political leader who trusted her God, in fact given her name; she used to say that her fighter was Lady Maria. When I visited her in Case Clinic, she held my hand and said many Catholic prayers: “Kitafe ali mugulu; kitibwa kibe eri Patili” - she was very weak, but she managed to say those prayers. 

I further believe that it is because of her character that she did not appear in papers in any corruption scandals. The late has been in many public offices, but her name has never been cited in any corruption scandals. I think that it is because she was a true Catholic leader. Madam Speaker, the late Mutagamba was passionate about tourism and even when she excused herself from elective politics, she remained a tourism ambassador.

When hon. Kiwanda launched Rolex drive, many short-sighted Ugandans talked negative about the programme, but the late offered herself -(Interjections)- to spearhead the process of promoting Rolex as a tourist attraction in the country. Tourism is not about big things, but packaging attracts tourists. Even the miss tourism drive was entirely the effort of hon. Maria Mutagamba. 

Finally, I thank the President for giving hon. Maria Mutagamba an opportunity to serve her country. I would also like to thank Parliament and the people of Rakai for supporting the late Dr Maria Mutagamba. 

Let me also take this opportunity to request colleagues to turn up in good numbers tomorrow, while we send off our colleague in Kakuuto because it will actually help us to walk the talk. If you do not appear, it will indicate that you have not appreciated what hon. Maria Mutagamba did. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I beg to second the motion. 

3.30
MR CHRISTOPHER KALEMBA (NRM, Kakuuto County, Rakai): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand here to second the motion. I represent Kakuuto County, where hon. Mutagamba comes from. We actually come from the same sub county. She was born in Gamba Village, Kakuuto Parish, Kakuuto Sub county and County. 

On behalf of the people of Kakuuto and on my own behalf, I extend my sincere condolences to the bereaved family and the entire country because Maria has been a mentor, a parent and a dedicated servant. She has also been very committed to her work. In fact, as the minister said, she was a mediator; she did not like conflict. That is why she was not involved in selecting or supporting the Member of Parliament, who replaced her. She just kept quiet. We went into politics and the people exercised their powers and elected hon. Juliet Suubi, without her influence. 

We had problems in Rakai and Kakuuto in particular because that is where HIV/AIDS started and during that time, transportation was hard since the roads were not good. They formed a group called Rakai sisters and the membership to that group included the late hon. Manuel Pinto, late hon. Maria Mutagamba and Brig. Elly Kayanja. They brought buses to help people move from Kampala to Mutukula and Kasese Landing Site. Afterwards, they formed the Rakai Development Association, where many NGOs came in to support them. During that time, we had child headed families that needed support because the people believed in witchcraft. They thought the witchcraft came from Tanzania since people had stolen fish but when NGOs came in, they sensitised the population and they got to know and hence started going to hospitals to test for HIV/AIDS. Therefore, her efforts helped our people and many orphans were supported and went to school. We now have very many educated Ugandans in Kakuuto because of her efforts. 

Hon. Maria Mutagamba, after starting that development association, initiated the start of the women groups; first, it was Rakai Development Association. Afterwards, they brought Danish International Development Agency (Danida); Danida gave us money which formed the Danida Rural Credit Scheme and it is still a revolving fund in Centenary Bank. As we get a new district, I think it will be shared between Rakai and Kyotera Districts. However, she initiated that and funds were brought and assisted many groups. Up to now, if you came to Kakuuto, you would find women groups and savings and credit societies all over the villages. Like in our parish, Kakuuto, we have over 100 women groups. They sit - (Member timed out.) 

THE SPEAKER: Before hon. Mary Okurut takes the Floor, I would like to announce a message from the Parliamentary SACCO. They say that they will miss her for her gentleness, outgoing personality, constructive ideas and commitment to development of the cooperative movement. They will contribute Shs 1,000,000 but it is not here yet. 

I would also like to announce the message from the EALA elect Members. They thanked her for her contribution to the Ministries of Tourism and Water and Environment. They have also contributed Shs 500,000, which I have here. 

3.35
MS MARY KARORO OKURUT (NRM, Woman Representative, Bushenyi): Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, I also stand here to support the motion and to give my very deep condolences to the family. Nobody can stand in the gap right now, except God. May He comfort you. 

Madam Speaker, Maria was a great woman. She was great in every way that you looked at her. When you consider her education; it was not a missed call. As we stand here, we are celebrating the success of the girl-child that has been educated. The beauty about Maria is that she never pushed her education and brilliance down people’s throats. She never boasted and yet she had a first class degree. 

Madam Speaker, whatever degree you get at Makerere, you only need those papers while you are looking for a job. After that, what matters is the degree you get in life. Apart from her first class, the degree she got in life is also a first class degree because she was measured. She was self-respecting and disrespectful of people who had bad manners. She would tell them off. I could mention one or two but for her sake, I will keep quiet. (Laughter) 

Madam Speaker, it is very important that before people can respect you, you respect yourself first and that was Maria. She was a great woman. She did not stop at that. For us in Cabinet, she walked the extra mile. She would call us and ask us if we are okay. If we said we were not okay, she would promise to say a novena for us. That was Maria and God must have received her well because her belief was not merely cosmetic; it flowed in her blood. 

Madam Speaker, we all remember the zeal and charisma that she put in the Ministry of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities. She made Uganda more visible than it was. (Applause) She spoke from the heart and was genuine. 

One time, she told me to be careful and keep that respect because when you bear that name “Maria”, it means we are the mothers of Jesus. 

Through the Ministry of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities, she made Uganda visible. One time she asked me what else from our foods can we do? I told her the Baganda love Luwombo and so she told me if she stayed in that Tourism Ministry, she would market the Luwombo because it is very special. Therefore, she used to look out for those things that were very special. She has left a legacy and we shall remember her with fondness. Maria, you kept the faith in everything you did and a crown of victory awaits you. May God rest your soul in eternal peace.

3.39
MS JENIPHER NAMUYANGU (NRM, Woman Representative, Kibuku): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to support the motion of paying tribute to my senior comrade. I had an opportunity to serve in the Ministry of Water and Environment with my fallen senior colleague. I was blessed that I was replacing her as Minister of State for Water. She mentored us because that was a new ministry which was constituted in 2006. His Excellency had appointed women to that ministry. This was a ministry which had only directorates; with very small buildings; but Maria told us that we were not going to rent space anywhere. We were to sit in those buildings until we build our own offices. Those that have gone to Luzira, where the Ministry of Water and Environment is, there is a building that houses that ministry. (Applause)

Madam Speaker, hon. Maria said that the Ministry of Water and Environment was a family. She came up with an idea to bring this family together; we always had tea together on every Friday, in our compound. This made us to know one another as workers in that ministry; at all levels. I am told that this practice is still there. That was Maria’s initiative.

Maria Mutagamba came up with another idea, where every Monday, we would meet as top management to review what we would have achieved a week before and also to look at our targets for that week. It worked very well because all of us came to understand the ministry better. One would not say that my sector is water and therefore I have no business in environment. We all became very informed about the entire water and sanitation sector.

We also gave ourselves an opportunity to sensitise people about sanitation matters. We agreed that you could not talk about water without making sure that sanitation was handled. My senior colleague would personally lead us to go and clean the town of - Luzira-Kilombe. I remember one time as she picked garbage, there were some ladies eating sugarcane nearby. When she had picked the rubbish, one lady threw another piece and said that “Nakino, jangu okijewo” which means “come and remove this as well”. Maria did not take offence. She went and picked that rubbish and then walked to those two ladies and started sensitising them about the benefits of sanitation.

Madam Speaker, Maria had passion for water. Her proposal was that other than going for water points to the boreholes, we should go out to do bulk water transfer in order to provide multi-purpose water for the people of Kooki from Lake Kagera. Kooki is water stressed. We needed to provide water to the people of Insingiro and Mbarara from river Kagera, among other areas.

I would therefore like to pray that these dreams – even tree planting, she had an idea that we should engage undergraduate students and all students that have completed studies and are not yet in gainful employment to plant trees and we would in turn mobilise money and pay them. This was aimed at having our degraded forest reserves re-vegetated.

I would like to pray that for the memories of this gallant lady to keep with us, we would name a building at the Ministry of Water and Environment headquarters after her. We could have one of the buildings named “Maria House”. This would keep in the memories of politicians and technical people to ensure that whoever goes there knows that the dream for Maria – 

3.39
MS ANIFA KAWOOYA (NRM, Woman Representative, Ssembabule): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to pay tribute to our friend and sister, Dr Maria Mutagamba. I came to know Maria in the 1980s. This was during the “No Lule, no work” time. I was a very young activist and was among the young activists that were arrested at that time. It was Maria Mutagamba that came and pleaded for me. She said that this young lady is not a Muganda by tribe. In actual fact, she belongs to the Government and I was released. It was from that time that I realised that Maria had a good heart and I never looked back.

I met Maria again during the time of the Constituent Assembly. She had her own political beliefs and I too had mine. She tried her best to convince me to agree with her vision which I did not agree with but we remained good friends.

I again met Maria while I worked as a deputy RDC in Rakai District. She took me around the whole district and we became even better friends. In 1996, I wanted to test her charisma. She fanatically looked for votes for her presidential candidate, hon. Ssemogerere. I was also looking for votes for my candidate as well; President Yoweri Kaguta Museveni. We did not clash at any one time. I found her a very good political mentor.

Madam Speaker, there is something that really touched me and that is why I came here. Much as I have six people that perished in a road accident in Masaka, from my village; four are being buried and the two will be buried tomorrow. This gave me the experience of what a Member of Parliament is; all the responsibility to give a decent send-off to the six dead people is on my shoulders and a few other people. 

However, I wanted to come here and say one word or two in order to testify about how religious Maria was. She convinced me and I went to Israel with her. She was so religious that she dragged me to river Jordan and I was immersed in there. (Laughter) When you get there, they dress you in a white gown and you move to the bank of the river. You then pray in whichever words you want to say. I found myself deep. I went down thrice and when I came out, she said; “praise the Lord”; that was Maria. (Laughter) 

She did not stop there but took me to the Wailing Wall then to the Wishing Bridge and other religious places. You know, I am a Muslim -(Interjections) - even at that time, but I felt how touched she was that despite our different religious beliefs, she just took me there to accept that we have only one Lord; the Almighty Lord and that all lords lead to one. I was impressed from that time.

Lastly, I am concerned by my very good Government; at what stage does Government come in? Madam Speaker, you know when I call a spade a spade and when I say that I am disappointed with my Government, I mean it. I am so perturbed; at what stage does Government come in? With due respect, I did not hear it in the Prime Minister’s statement. 

When does it come in and help its senior cadres at the time of need before they depart from here? Some of you will have time like my colleague has had but take my experience as Anifa. Maybe time may not allow me to be brought here, the Muslims will say it is time to go and the Christians are saying we go to Parliament. Please give us our tributes when we are still alive and help us in each manner when we still need it, especially in treatment. We keep quiet here but we are suffering. Treat us when we are still alive.

Maria, you walked the talk, you have battled all the journeys, your smiles that you wore and you are wearing today, may the good Lord rest your soul in eternal peace.

3.51
MS WINFRED MASIKO (NRM, Woman Representative, Rukungiri): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity to pay tribute to hon. Maria Mutagamba. I came to know her during the Constituency Assembly and I remember that we sat in one committee where we protected the entrenchment of the affirmative action in the Constitution.

She worked diligently and we made sure that that was protected and I am glad it has yielded very positive results in this country. I have so much to talk about her but just a few things that I will raise.

One of the areas is that she had a passion for environment and climate change. I would like to remind us that during the 35th Conference of Parties that took place in Copenhagen, she sat for three days and nights without sleep trying to negotiate and come out with an agreement but unfortunately we did not get it as we had planned. However, she worked hard to make sure that the issues of loss and damage and climate change adoption were included in the negotiation text. She worked very hard on that and I think that is something that we need to recognize her for.

She brought so many meetings in Uganda in the area of environment. The prominent one is the Inter-Governmental Panel on Climate Change. She made sure that the science was brought to Uganda and relayed the science behind climate change and that brought Uganda to a very high footing.

You will all recall that she was the President of the African Ministers Council on Water (AMCOW) and during her time, she made sure that she worked very hard to raise the regional integration issues, issues of water, sanitation, and irrigation. 

She talked prominently about many issues that affect third world countries. During her presidency, Uganda managed to get a lot of money and resources that came and helped our country.

Hon. Mutagamba was very hardworking; she worked so hard that even when she was in our meetings - because at one time I chaired the natural resources committee - but every time she appeared before us, she had an answer. She was clear headed and always respected Members of Parliament. 

There is not any one single day that you go to her office and you fail to get her. She welcomed us, listened to our problems and considered most of them —(Interjections)- I would like to say that if we are going to look at legacy and it keeps a positive impact on this country, we need to bring out the national irrigation policy strategy and action plan, which she very much wanted to be put in place so that we can remember her good works to keep a positive mark on this country.
THE SPEAKER: Can I add the national tree-planting day, which everybody has forgotten?

3.51
MS FRANCA AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Agago): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity to give a testimony about the life of the late hon. Maria Mutagamba. I met her in the Eighth Parliament. She was a minister and I would like to testify that she was one of the ministers that stood out.

She would answer telephone calls of Members of Parliament. This is something, which is very rare with ministers, Madam Speaker. She would respond to every call or letter you write to her ministry. I would like to testify that my district Agago benefited a lot when she was the minster of water.

Madam Speaker, when she was a minister of water together with her colleague hon. Jennifer, they made that ministry one for Members of Parliament. Whenever we would visit that ministry, we were not sat there to wait. She would give priority to Members of Parliament and whenever you addressed an issue to her, she would want to follow up. Whenever she saw you in the corridors of Parliament she would say, “My sister, I hope your issue is on; please keep reminding me.”

I would like to testify that the communities of Lapono sub county in my district, those of Amyel, Lapirin, today will remember this great woman lying before this Parliament because she was able to let them drink water. When I wrote to her, she felt so passionate about the issue and acted immediately and within three months, water was provided in these three communities. That is one of the reasons why I had to drive back to say bye to Maria Mutagamba. We shall meet there.

3.58 
MS SANTA ALUM (UPC, Woman Representative, Oyam): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to pay tribute to the late hon. Maria Mutagamba. The late Maria was a very humble person who respected everybody irrespective of age, political parties and whether you were new in Parliament or not.

The person you are seeing on the screen is the sight that will remain in my mind forever. I remember as a Member representing Oyam District, I went to her office concerning human wildlife conflict and she received me with those smiles that you are seeing on the screen. That is what I will continue remembering and that is the person that we are paying tribute to today.

Madam Speaker, the late Maria was very passionate, dedicated and patriotic in her work. She really left a mark. She did not leave a mark in politics or Christianity only but also in Oyam District, especially in Loro Sub-County. I remember I went to her office, complaining about the elephants killing the people of Oyam. No sooner had she scheduled to go to Oyam than the elephants killed four other people at ago. 

She did not take any time but travelled up to Loro, a very remote area. When we were visiting the bereaved families, somebody saw a very big bull and shouted “elephant, elephant, elephant”. We all took off very fast. (Laughter) She was a very brave woman. We recollected and continued with our work up to the end. 

Madam Speaker, one of the people of that area rang me the other day asking whether “the other strong woman who came to see the people who were killed by elephants was the one who was dead”. I said, “Yes.” 

On behalf of the people of Oyam, I would really like to thank her. I would like to say that as politicians, as Christians and the family she has left behind, we should carry the candle and let it continue burning by emulating whatever good she did to this country, Parliament, family and as a minister. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 


4.00
MR MEDARD SSEGGONA (DP, Busiro County East, Wakiso): I thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to support the motion and thank the Prime Minister for moving it. I am speaking about somebody I knew in two capacities; the first needs explanation but the second is that she was my neighbour in our village in Nakasozi, Buddo. I also knew her when I was still a young man when she worked with my father in Rakai Development Association. She used to visit our home and we also used to visit hers. 

She told me that she had a pact with my father where my father told her that if she did not belong to our clan, he would have produced a husband for her. Subsequently, she told me that notwithstanding that we belong to the same clan, I was that husband and that is how we referred to each other – “my wife” and “my husband”. By coincidence, because of her father’s name, she was also Lubega like me.

I grew up seeing her in the Democratic Party where I was a young member below consenting age when she was our Secretary-General and led our campaigns in 1996. At that time, I was in Senior Six. 

I remember, vividly, on 27th August 2008, when I had left some mini-prison in Kyenjojo, she visited me when she was a minister. I asked her whether she would not be sacked for visiting a fugitive and a suspect of terrorism and treason. She said she would rather lose a job than a portion of her history. She said she did owe this not to me but to my father. 

When she was Minister of Water and Environment, she led a campaign in our village for the extension of water to Nabbingo and the project started, thanks to my uncle, Prof. Ephraim Kamuntu. We are expecting the project to extend to Maya. She led a campaign of training the young people in agriculture, especially the art of rearing fish and pigs in our village. She would come and collect a group of young people and train them on how to work. She was a very hardworking woman. 

At times, we celebrate lives ritualistically but we are here to eulogise somebody of substance. I thank you, Madam Speaker and the Government, for according her the opportunity despite her having retired. 

Finally, I teased her, in 2011, when she retired from the parliamentary politics in Rakai. I said, “My wife, how are we now going to survive?” She told me, “People must learn to retire.” She asked me, “When are you retiring?” My answer was obvious, “The man I am pursuing has started showing signs of retiring and when he finally retires, I will equally retire.” (Laughter) I am not about to tell the name of the man. (Interjections) There are suspicions of the person, which means the signs are working and they are visible that he will retire.

We are here to thank God for a life well lived of hon. Maria Nakalema Lubega Mutagamba. May her soul rest in eternal peace. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I would like to announce the presence of hon. Kevina Taaka, the former Member of Parliament for Busia Municipality and hon. Peter Mutuluza, the former MP and current chairman of Mpigi Local Government. Thank you for coming. (Applause)

4.05
MR STEPHEN MUKITALE (Independent, Buliisa County, Buliisa): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I thank the Prime Minister for moving the motion. On behalf of the people of Buliisa whom I represent in Parliament and the mother Bunyoro Kingdom, I would like to mourn and at the same time celebrate the life of my mother-in-law, Maria Mutagamba. 

When I met her, she was together with the late Mathias Nsubuga. I was surprised that the former Secretary-General was together with the then Secretary-General of DP in harmony. I was humbled. I was introduced to her as a son-in-law because she was very close to my in-laws – of the then Masaka District before other districts were curved out of it. Since then, she continued referring to me as son-in-law and I called her mother-in-law.

Hon. Maria Mutagamba possibly gives us a lesson as a country to correct the distortions of our history and more so, the demonisation of the political parties. Maria is one of those who came from the nurturing of political parties and has done a good job. I am also sure such people are many – you have seen them from UPC and DP. We will have a difficulty to tell our children that actually political parties nurtured a lot of leaders yet we have been saying political parties are a problem. I think the problem was not political parties but something else. 

Therefore, the Tenth Parliament has a responsibility as advocates of national dialogue to look into that area so that we rewrite our history; the true documentation. Otherwise, we may have a problem to talk about political parties when we have demonised them.

Hon. Mutagamba was not a minister fighting the backbench’s effort of motions and regulations. Madam Speaker has just talked about the Tree Planting Act. When we were on the Committee on Natural Resources, hon. Mutagamba supported me with hon. Florence Ibi Ekwau to move a resolution of Parliament to urge Government to operationalise the Tree Planting Act. She even supported this in the caucus. Hon. Winfred Matsiko was the chairperson of the committee. When we came on the Floor here, it was shot down by a minister who did not know that we had actually gone through a lot. Since 2009, Cabinet has not brought that law.

Madam Speaker, as we pay tribute, I request that you allow me to bring that motion this week so that as she had agreed – as we are suffering from drought and people are starving because of climate change, we could put in place a good Tree Planting Act, 2003, which is collecting dust without being operationalised -(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, these people are travelling very far by road; I cannot give more time. I will now give two minutes. 

4.09
MR DAVID ABALA (NRM, Ngora County, Ngora): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank you very much for giving me the opportunity to say a few words about our senior Member who has left us. I would to also like thank you, Madam Speaker, for including the name of hon. Peter Omolo.

Yesterday, when we were burying him in Soroti, we nearly had chaos because he was not brought to Parliament. In March this year, hon. Willy Ekemu passed on but he was also not brought to Parliament. It was a bit challenging for the Members of Parliament from Teso to explain. However, I am happy that at least you have decided to include their names on the list. Therefore, on behalf of the people of Teso, I am very happy that you included their names on the list. 

Madam Speaker, hon. Mutagamba did an excellent job in the country, especially in the areas of water, environment and tourism without a trace of corruption, and everyone knows that. That is why I am very happy and that is the reason I am here. I have been following up what has been happening in her office unlike other offices where things are concealed yet there is a lot of trouble inside. 

Madam Speaker, allow me to read a verse from the Bible since she was a Christian. Revelations 14:13 says, “Then I heard a voice from heaven say, ‘Write this: Blessed are the dead who die in the Lord from now on.’ ‘Yes’, says the Spirit, ‘They will rest from their labour, for their deeds will follow them.’” I would like to request the Members of Parliament here that as we deliberate, we should do the right things. To those holding offices as ministers, my advice is that you should do the right thing because those good deeds will follow you until the day you will be buried - (Member timed out.)

4.11
MS BEATRICE ANYWAR (Independent, Kitgum Municipality, Kitgum): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. On behalf of the people of Kitgum Municipality, I send my sincere condolences to the family of the late Maria Mutagamba, my sister.

Madam Speaker, I worked with the late as the shadow Minister of Water and Environment in the Eighth and Ninth Parliaments. Members have described the late in terms of working relationships with her. My first encounter with my sister was when I was the shadow minister and it was over Mabira Forest. Although there was a lot of disagreement in the public fora, we agreed with hon. Maria Mutagamba behind the scenes that it was the way to go. However, because of her position as the Minister for Water and Environment, she could not go beyond that.

Madam Speaker, hon. Maria Mutagamba took most of my alternative policies very passionately and actually implemented them. I served on the Committee on National Resources and whenever we met with hon. Maria Mutagamba, we would not bypass each other. She would tap me and say, “Mwana wa Maria” which means, “daughter of Maria”. As Catholics, we had a special relationship with her. 

Madam Speaker, I am happy that despite my poor health, I am able to come and testify that her soft and personal relationship across the House has made some of us think hard, unlike cases where you find sitting ministers looking at the Opposition as if they have no value to add. Hon. Maria Mutagamba never took anything for granted –(Member timed out.)

4.14
THE MINISTER OF TOURISM, WILDLIFE AND ANTIQUITIES (Prof. Ephraim Kamuntu): Madam Speaker, thank you very much for giving me this opportunity to speak about hon. Maria Mutagamba, my predecessor. I would like to thank the Rt Hon. Prime Minister for moving the motion to pay tribute to hon. Mutagamba.

Madam Speaker, the country has lost one of the best leaders that served with dedication and commitment. These are leaders who serve those they represent with such care and detail and leaders who, if you want to categorise them, Mutagamba exemplified what they call servant leadership - leaders who did not come to be served but who came to serve. This is hon. Mutagamba. 

She showed leadership talents at a very early stage. Those who followed her, and I have done so, whether she was in school, she was a leader. At her place of work in Bank of Uganda, she was a leader. In the political field, Mutagamba was a leader, and a leader with passion and honesty. 

I served with hon. Mutagamba both in Parliament and Cabinet. I also had the fortune of serving after her in the Ministry of Water and Environment. Hon. Mutagamba served the Ministry of Water and Environment for nearly 16 years and by the time I came, she was popularly known as “Mother Water” because she had become a mother to the water fraternity. 

At the time I came to serve, there was almost a riot in the Ministry of Water and Environment when she was reshuffled. The whole of Rakai did not want hon. Mutagamba to be reshuffled. However, it is also ironical that by the time she left the Ministry of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities, there was also almost a riot because people did not want her to leave the Ministry of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities. Wherever she served, she distinguished herself. 

In the Ministry of Water and Environment, they loved her and they did not want her to go and also the Ministry of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities where they thought - When she came to the ministry, it was very funny because I was there as well.  The people of Rakai rioted saying, “How can our Member of Parliament be a Minister of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities?” You know, the mind-set of most Ugandans towards the Ministry of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities is that it is a ministry of leisure, crocodiles, birds and reptiles. They do not regard it as a serious ministry. 

However, during the time that hon. Mutagamba served this ministry, she had turned it around and the tourism ministry today is the leading foreign exchange earner. Actually, it earns more than any sector in this country. It employs many people and its contribution to GDP is almost 10 per cent. The ministry is really moving and thanks to hon. Mutagamba’s contribution.

Madam Speaker, in the Ministry of Water and Environment, I only served for three and half years and I was only known as “uncle water”. Therefore, I could not have come to the level of hon. Mutagamba to be called “Father Water”; she was really “Mother water” and a fantastic lady.

Hon. Mutagamba was not only a national leader. At the international level, Mutagamba was the President of the African Ministers Council on Water. She was also Coordinator of the Global Women Leaders’ Forum for Water and Sanitation. She served as the Vice-Chairperson of the United Nations Taskforce on Integrated Water Resource Management. This is the lady – (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: You have half a minute to conclude.

MR KAMUNTU: Thank you very much. All I can say is that the country has lost. For those she has left behind, we have a challenge to build on her legacy. May God rest her soul in eternal life.

4.19
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (URBAN DEVELOPMENT) (Mr Isaac Musumba): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. There are many things one can say about hon. Mutagamba and many things have been said. However, I will only talk about one of the attributes that I witnessed in her, which is humility. She was a woman of humility and I will demonstrate this by an experience that I went through. 

There was a process of discussing and negotiating the sharing of the Nile waters among the user states. A key meeting took place in Cairo, Egypt, and Maria Mutagamba, for all the years, was the minister representing Uganda in those negotiations. I am talking about meetings like the first Nile Basin Countries Summit that was recently held in Kampala. 

I was then the Minister of State for Foreign Affairs and when the meeting had begun, we got instructions from the President that the negotiations should be headed by Ministry of Foreign Affairs because they were relating to states. We expected the senior minister, hon. Kuteesa, to lead those negotiations but he delegated me to represent the ministry. 

When I got there, I wondered how I would sit in front of the negotiation table and yet a senior minister was sitting at the back. I told her I had those instructions but protocol demanded that she sits in front and continues with the negotiations and I would only report. However, she said the instructions were very clear and she would sit behind and support me. She used to call me her son in spite of the small age difference. As a result of that discussion, we had another meeting in Entebbe where, again, she sat at the back as I signed an agreement on behalf of the Government of Uganda.

Thank you very much. I would like to thank the President for according this lady a state funeral. It is a big statement. 

THE SPEAKER: It is an official burial not state funeral.

4.23
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (SPORTS) (Mr Charles Bakabulindi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Honourable members and fellow mourners, the country has lost a community leader. To me, the late hon. Maria Mutagamba was a sister, a mother, a friend and a uniting factor. 

I have known her since the early 1980s as close family friends. I recall that during my wedding, one of her daughters seated there, who is now an engineer, was a flower girl. We have been so close and I came to learn that hon. Maria Mutagamba took up politics as a tool for a purpose but not life and death. 

To be brief, when hon. Maria Mutagamba crossed from the Democratic Party (DP) to National Resistance Movement (NRM), she had a big problem with some of us who were so close to her. She has an uncle who is a priest, seated here, and he is a strong DP supporter. The discussion I had with her was how she was going to tell her uncle that she had crossed to NRM. She said she had not abandoned the people but had crossed to NRM for a purpose. That was a lesson to me. Some politicians take politics as life and death. 

Even when we would meet the youth in Nateete, her words were clear. She would say, “I have not abandoned you but I want to show you how the country is supposed to move”. Maria was so objective that if she was guiding you, she would show you what would build you but not what would only please you.

Madam Speaker, we have lost a colleague. As I said, she was a rare uniting factor. Some people came here and said she was a uniting factor in Rakai. We all come from Rakai and Kakuuto but there was a lot of politics in that area. The late Maria, standing alone with the late Pinto, Brig. Kayanja and other men, would convince the people and we would take decisions. I do not want to say so much. May her soul rest in eternal peace.

4.27
MR REMIGIO ACHIA (NRM, Pian County, Nakapiripirit): Thank you, Madam Speaker. On behalf of the people of Pian and on behalf of the Parliamentary Pensions Scheme, I extend my condolences to the family of Maria Mutagamba. Maria Mutagamba approached us, through her daughter two weeks ago, to assist her with her treatment. Unfortunately, because of the law we have, getting clearance from the Medical Board has brought us this situation. 

Maria Mutagamba has not been sick for only one week. She was in touch with us through her daughter and I think there is a problem that we have raised many times - the issue of getting clearance from the Medical Board. The law says that before you can pass money for a medical bill, you must get clearance from the Medical Board. We are here today because we could not get that clearance. We need to look into this matter very seriously.

Secondly, I feel a bit of pain. Whereas, as the Parliamentary Pensions Scheme we were not able to come in, at the level of hon. Maria Mutagamba, was it necessary for us to run around to inform Government that a former senior minister was sick? As hon. Anifa Kawooya said, at what point does our Government come in to look at these issues? 

Even though we are paying tribute now, her sickness took some time. They were even planning to go to India. We were visiting her and I talked to the Government Chief Whip to find a way to intervene. Unfortunately, a lot of the senior people that were supposed to be met were not available. I am really pained. We need to see what to do. Some of these things look simple for the family because your pension fund is allowed to pay some of these bills but the law makes it complicated and you get stuck. 

Madam Speaker, very soon, as the Chairman of the Parliamentary Pensions Scheme, I will propose some amendments to our law so that we perhaps do what NSSF has done. They have hired services of experts in certain hospitals to give clearance to some of these -

THE SPEAKER: What has it done? Explain that last point.

MR REMIGIO ACHIA: Madam Speaker, NSSF has had the same problems. They outsourced prequalified respective private hospitals and senior doctors who can give an opinion on the status of any of their staff. Based on that written information from the prequalified service provider, they are able to treat their people immediately.

Parliament as an institution should also go that way. We should find our own prequalified medical service providers who can give us an opinion so that we can intervene and respond to our Members’ needs as and when the need arises. That is my prayer to this House. 

I am making a bi-annual report as required by our law in a few weeks and I would like to include that prayer as an amendment to our law to allow us to serve our Members. They have their money there and they deserve to access services from that money but not for us to pay after they have gone. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, before hon. Lugoloobi comes up, I would like to report that the Parliamentary Commission met yesterday and one of the decisions we took is to invite the joint medical board to come and meet the commission and see how we can resolve the issue of clearances because it is very frustrating.

Secondly, I am sending the backbench commissioners to the National Assembly of Tanzania, which has a programme of collaborating with hospitals outside the country. I would like the Members to go and establish how they do it and then come and see how we can deal with it because we are frustrated and it hurts.
 
4.31
MR AMOS LUGOLOOBI (NRM, Ntenjeru County North, Kayunga): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity to pay tribute to my departed friend, hon. Maria Mutagamba. 

I would like to give testimony of a person who has been a mother. There are people that we call mothers of the nation who are actually not mothers of the nation; this one was a true mother. Before I became a Member of Parliament, I was a simple civil servant and I walked to her office because we had a terrible need for water in our district. Because I came from the area, I felt that I had a duty to assist the community. Therefore, a simple civil servant walked to her office at lunch time, because I was not allowed to go during working hours.

Remember, a simple civil servant would not be allowed to access a minister anyhow. I got to her office and she was having lunch and the secretary allowed me in. I told her about the water crisis in our district of Kayunga. Immediately, she responded by saying “I will provide seven boreholes to your district.” She asked me to come back the following day and she assigned an engineer; we went and started surveying different areas in order to drill boreholes. 

For the record, Madam Speaker, I thought I should mention these areas because the people of those areas were so grateful. We were in a crisis and this should be remembered. The people of Kayunga asked me to extend this message to the bereaved family –(Member timed out.)

4.34
MS MONICA AMODING (NRM, Woman Representative Kumi): Madam Speaker, I rise to pay tribute to a great woman. Her story can be summarised as a life of overcoming barriers and breaking ceilings. She was the first woman to get a first class degree from Rakai and Uganda during a time when education for the girl child was a big challenge. Tracing her journey up to Parliament, she was able to stay here for more than three terms serving in very high offices. Most importantly, the legacy that the late Maria Mutagamba has left us with as women leaders is very important and I celebrate her life even in her demise.

Madam Speaker, it is in her time that as a country we were able to increase the access of water coverage in the country from about 35 per cent in 1996 to now over 86 per cent countrywide. Therefore, we celebrate her as a great leader with great legacies.

Madam Speaker, Kumi District, where I come from, is going to get connected to the water supply. We are a hard-pressed district and in her time, she was able to negotiate that World Bank contract or partnership that we have to be able to connect water to our district. My colleagues may not get the opportunity to pay that tribute to her. However, as the people of Kumi, we celebrate her life and legacy, and we also testify that we are beneficiaries of her good service in terms of access to water in the country.

I would also like to pay tribute to the late Mutagamba in the sense that she managed to humanise the Ministry of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities. Initially, that ministry was not appreciated but then she started the beauty pageants. Many times we associate those beauty pageants as ways for women to showcase nakedness and all that. However, because of this particular turnaround, beauty pageants in Uganda now attract more respect and decency associated to them. It has not ended at that but has taken Uganda higher in terms of promoting our legacy and the tourism sector. 

Madam Speaker, before I joined Parliament, we always looked around for great women leaders in the women’s movement and the name that always strongly came out was Maria Mutagamba. In my case, her life can be summarised as one who broke ceilings, overcame very many barriers and that her life was that of a giant; she had the strength of a lioness yet very soft, resilient and strong.

We looked at her life as a life of humility, a trait that I value and associate myself with. I believe that many Members were able to interact with her and learn one or two things. She was humble but very committed, firm and strong on what she did and believed in. I celebrate her life as a great and extraordinary woman that walked our country’s path and –(Member timed out.)

4.38
MS ANNET NYAKECHO (Independent, Tororo North County, Tororo): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for this great opportunity. On behalf of the people of Tororo District, I would like to extend my sincere and heartfelt condolences to the family of the gallant woman, the late hon. Maria Mutagamba.

Madam Speaker, I remember when I had just joined the Ninth Parliament, I was moving in the corridor one day and I was shocked to see a lady who looked exactly like my late mother. I stopped, looked at her and said, “Is mummy in this Parliament?” Every time I would meet her, she would remind me of my mother and because of that, I held her in very high regard and with a lot of respect. I would always remember the talk of discipline my mother instilled in me every time I saw her. Therefore, she has left a mark in my heart and that is why I would like to thank you for giving me an opportunity to say a word as I bid farewell to her.

Madam Speaker, I would like to give the family a verse from the Bible. Ecclesiastes 3:1 says that there is time for everything; time for us to be happy and time for sorrow; there is time for somebody to live and a time to die. Therefore, it should not come as a shock to them because this is bound to happen once you are a human being and I would like you to take heart. 

Above all, I would like to thank God and I would like to thank the late Maria Mutagamba for the distinguished service she rendered to this country. I remember when she would wear her attire of the Uganda flag while promoting the tourism industry, especially during the beauty pageants. It was a very beautiful thing to me because many of us were afraid of dressing up in that attire the late hon. Mutagamba wore. However, it left a mark and due to that, I think that the tourism industry was able to move from where it was at that time to where it is today. 

Therefore, the ministers who came after her should emulate the late Mutagamba’s leadership when given a position of responsibility. The ministers should also take certain things seriously and leave a mark like she has. Today, people are talking about the water and sanitation ministry; how I wish we would have something similar said about the rural electrification network -(Member timed out.)

4.38
MS CECILIA OGWAL (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity you have given me to pay tribute to my dear sister and friend, the late hon. Maria Mutagamba. 

There are common statements that say that there are people who rise from grass to grace and one would have expected that you reach a position of grace after you have eaten grass. However, I would like to testify that I am very proud to have associated with hon. Maria Mutagamba. She was a woman with an excellent background in terms academic studies and exposure; she had everything she needed to be an expert wherever she was. Therefore, the late Mutagamba did not fall in the category of people who rise from grass to grace but she had always been part of grace and I would like to thank God for that.

As a woman, I looked at the late with a lot of pride; she looked after her family, cared for her husband and was mindful of her responsibility as a leader. At no time did she reach a crossroad and say she cannot manage her household affairs. Therefore, this is something that we, as women in leadership today, should be mindful of. Being in leadership does not mean that you look back or turn your back on your family or become too busy for your husband or children. The late Mutagamba was never too busy for her family and I can testify to that.

Madam Speaker, I came to know her in the Constituent Assembly and I was amazed to listen to Members saying that she crossed; from where to where? Maria Mutagamba never crossed because that was a no-party system. We all operated under a no-party system and whoever said that Maria Mutagamba crossed has to repent and reverse their statement. We were all under a no-party system; it was a monopolistic political system and it was all embracing and encompassing and that is where Maria Mutagamba performed and that is where most of us performed. We all articulated matters of national importance and that is where we converged.

Of course, in our articulation, there were some people who were very strong on multipartyism and there were others that were strong on continuation or monopolism but you can never say that Maria Mutagamba crossed to the NRM party because there was no party called NRM by then. There was a system which was monolistic, which belonged to all of us, and nobody should own the victory that the NRM, as a monolistic system, gained as the NRM of today. That was then. The excellent things I said in the Constituent Assembly were attributed to the monolistic system and not to the NRM system. 

Therefore, Madam Speaker, I stand here to say that the late Mutagamba, who was my friend and the campaign manager of Dr Paul Ssemogerere in 1996, did excellent planning and execution of our plan. It was only when we reached the west that things became difficult and the DP members started complaining about UPC stealing the limelight. We did not know what to say but we said she should do what she can. When we arrived in Bushenyi, DP had failed to find a venue but with our smart methods of doing things, we found a venue and we had an excellent campaign.

Maria Mutagamba remained a uniting factor; she never looked at anything with a sour taste in her mouth and that is what I remember her for. 

I, therefore, would like to reiterate what the Speaker has said; Members, we are very concerned about the way our colleagues die in a manner that causes us pain. We know that everybody is bound to die but we would like somebody to die for a good cause. Therefore, we are trying to find ways of putting in place a system where your health situation can be evaluated and assessed so that we can take action while you are still strong. 

That is what we are trying to do, but do not expect me to serve food when I have just started cooking.  We are praying that in future, we do our best through the Speaker and leadership to ensure that we take care of our colleagues because this kind of thing makes us feel guilty that maybe there is something we could have done to keep the late live longer. 

I would like to thank God for the life of Maria Mutagamba. I would like to tell the family that her time has come; let nobody tell you that something happened to cause her death. Her time had come and it is good for her to die in this kind of environment. May God rest her soul in eternal peace. 

4.47
MS SUUBI KYINYAMATAMA (NRM, Woman Representative, Rakai): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank all the Members for the support they have given to us as the people of Rakai and to the late Mutagamba’s family. We are appreciative of what you have done for us since the time of her death. We promise you that we will stay strong and keep her legacy.

I have a lot to talk about the late Mutagamba because she was a leader, a mother, and a library to the workers, the girls, women and activists in this nation and the world. I would like to inform Members that I am who I am because of the late Mutagamba. When I was growing up as a child, my father told me that he was not going to sell his cows for nothing, that he wanted me to be like the late Mutagamba. She never disappointed us in Rakai and she did not disappoint this Government and the nation at large. 

That is why you have never heard her name in any scandal and that is why everyone is talking about her as a God-fearing person. There are those that are God fearing in talking but their actions do not reflect so. 

She has been an exemplary leader. When I was going to campaign, she told me that she was very happy to see me, a young girl, join politics. She told me she joined politics when she was young and it was very challenging but she advised me to pray to God, keep my word and I would make it till the end. I am happy that she has made it till the end and that she saw me through replace her. 

When I won, she told me that she had groomed very many young girls. She advised me to tell the young girls that wanted to join the race to go to her office because she wanted to talk to them, like she did me. I called them indeed and they went there. She sat us down and told us not to fight for politics. She told us that is why she groomed us and created way for us. She sat and saw us through and here I am. 

I do not know what to say. She called me after I was sworn in and told me that she had set a challenge for me; I had to be a strong woman, God fearing and above all, serve people and not political interests. (Applause) She taught me to be an objective leader. I am challenged and I pray to God that I keep my word with her - (Member timed out.) 

THE SPEAKER: I will give you one minute because you are the successor Member of Parliament. 

MS KYINYAMATAMA: I would like to call upon all honourable members and the Speaker to please be there for us tomorrow. We are already strong enough to receive you. There is free transport for all the Members. Thank you so much and God bless you. May her soul rest in peace. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, normally, we run the tribute up to about 6.00 p.m. but I have been advised that the family wishes to travel while it is still light because they are travelling by road to Rakai. They would like to get out of Masaka when it is still light, so I really regret that I cannot give that time.

However, I would like to thank the members of the family who are here - Marianne Mutagamba, the daughter; Martin Mutagamba and Michael Mutagamba, the sons. We also have Hilda Musubire, our own, who is with the Public Service Commission; we welcome her. We have Caesar Lukalu and Mr Kyabaggu, her brother, and her in-laws from Machakos in Kenya who travelled this morning to be with us today.

Prime Minister, each time we have these tributes, we talk about health insurance; when will it happen? I am saying this because a time came when hon. Maria Mutagamba did not know what to do about her health. At the State of the Nation Address, as I was seeing off the President, someone whispered to me that hon. Mutagamba was not well and she was admitted at Case Clinic. I told the person that I would find time and go there. I did not go on the 7th because we were preparing for the budget. 

On the 8th, after the budget speech, I told the President that I had received information that hon. Maria Mutagamba was not well and that she was in Case Clinic. He said that he had also heard about it and we were going to do something about it. In between, hon. Herbert Ariko, the Member of Parliament for Soroti Municipality, came with her daughter to my office and told me that hon. Mutagamba really felt abandoned. She was sick and we, leaders, did not know. I told them that I would go and visit. 

After a day or two, I went there and spent some time with her. Normally, people pray for me but she ordered me to pray for them and I prayed for her. She was really in bad shape and she was not sure of how she was going to manage. I told her that I would take her medical forms and I drove to my house and wrote a letter in the night. 

The following day, I drove to State House without an appointment and gave the letter to the President and told him what was required for hon. Mutagamba. Of course, that is now water under the bridge but the point is that she did not know where to go to get support. That is the question we all have. 

She was out of office. What does a Ugandan that has no support or backing of a ministry or the medical board do? I wish we could find a solution because it happens all the time and we just speak about it. I really hope at some stage we shall find a solution as a country to that situation by getting proper insurance for our people. 

Honourable members, I would like to put the question that the question be now put. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: The question is that this House do pay tribute to hon. Maria Mutagamba, as proposed by the Prime Minister.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: Clerk, you are directed to extract the Hansard and the text of the tribute and give it to hon. Maria Mutagamba’s family. As you have been informed, there will be transport tomorrow to Gamba in Kakuuto for the burial.

The East African Anthem

The National Anthem

(Exit of the late Ms Maria Mutagamba)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I would like to thank you very much for your time and your patience. The House is adjourned to tomorrow, 28 June 2017 at 2.00 p.m.
 
(The House rose at 5.00 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 28 June 2017 at 2.00 p.m.)
