PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES(HANSARD)OFFICIAL REPOR TTHIRD SESSION - FIRST MEETING THURSDA Y, 15  JUNE 2023PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA9110 BUDGET SPEECH, 2023Thursday, 15 June 20231400 hours, to receive the address of His Excellency, the President on the National Budget for the Financial Year 2023/2024; and 2. The Kololo Ceremonial Grounds to be the precincts of Parliament for the above-mentioned purpose.Given under my hand at Parliament House, Kampala this 15th Day of June 2023. Anita Annet Among,Speaker of Parliament. ”COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIRTHE SPEAKER:  Your Excellency, the President of the Republic of Uganda; Gen. Yoweri Kaguta, together with the First Lady, Mama  Janet Kataaha, who are both gracing this function virtually from State House; Her Excellency, the Vice-President of the Republic of Uganda; His Lordship, the Chief Justice; the Rt Hon. Deputy Speaker of Parliament; His Lordship, the Deputy Chief Justice; the Vice-Chairperson of the NRM and the Central Executive Committee members; the Rt Hon. Prime Minister and Leader of Government Business, together with your deputies; the Leader of the Opposition in Parliament; Cabinet ministers and ministers of state; colleagues, Members of Parliament; traditional leaders; distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen.I take this singular honour to welcome you to this auspicious occasion of the Budget Day. IN THE PARLIAMENT OF UGANDAOfficial Report of the Proceedings of ParliamentTHIRD SESSION - 2ND SITTING - FIRST MEETINGParliament met at 2.20 p.m. at Kololo Independence Grounds, Kampala.The National AnthemThe East African Community AnthemPRAYERS(The Speaker, Ms Anita Among, in the Chair.)The House was called to Order.PROCLAMATION BY THE RT HON. SPEAKER OF THE PARLIAMENT OF UGANDATHE SPEAKER:  “WHEREAS Article 101(2) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda requires that His Excellency, the President of the Republic of Uganda, may, in consultation with the Speaker, address Parliament from time to time, on matters of national importance;AWARE that His Excellency, the President of the Republic of Uganda has, in accordance with Article 101(2), indicated to the Speaker of Parliament his intention to address Parliament today on issues of the National Budget for the Financial Year 2023/2024;NOW, THEREFORE, in accordance with Rule 17(1) of the Rules of Procedure, I hereby proclaim that;1. Parliament shall sit at Kololo Ceremonial Grounds on Thursday, 15 June 2023 at 9111THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 15 JUNE 2023During today’s sitting, we will receive an address by His Excellency, the President on the National Budget for the Financial Year 2023/2024.Honourable members, you will recall that in the last sitting on 7 June 2023, His Excellency, in his State-of-the-Nation Address, intimated to us that he had tested positive with COVID-19. It is against this background that during today’s sitting, we shall receive the address by the President virtually. Since then, he has regularly updated the nation on his recovery while various sections of the public are busy praying for the President for his full recovery. As Parliament, we also continue to pray for the President because as a nation, we want him to be back on his feet and work for the country.We thank all the citizens of Uganda who have joined in the prayers for the President. Your Excellency, we would like to assure you of our unwavering support, love and prayers for faster healing for you to be able to guide this country.It is, however, unfortunate that a few insensitive Ugandans have kept on sharing some false and alarming information by alleging that the President is very sick and that he is admitted to the Intensive Care Unit (ICU); our President is very okay and he is with us virtually. (Applause)I urge all citizens of goodwill to spread love, not hatred. Let us wish each other well so that can live in a better country. (Applause)As Parliament, we convey our wishes to the President for a faster recovery. As the Bible says in Isaiah 53:5, “… and by His stripes, we are healed…” Indeed, you are going to be healed. As a God-fearing nation, we commit our President to the Almighty God for his complete healing. We actually miss him here but we know you are with us in spirit.Honourable members, the delivery of the Budget Speech today is a constitutional requirement under Article 155 of the 1995 Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, which stipulates thus:“The President shall cause, to be prepared and laid before Parliament in each financial year, but in any case not later than the fifteenth day before the commencement of the financial year, estimates of revenues and expenditure of Government for the next financial year .” The National Budget is an enabling tool for the Government to implement its development agenda and policies, in pursuit of the aspirations that the President talked about during the State-of-the-Nation Address.  Honourable members, today’s Budget Speech will, therefore, be communicated to the citizenry on what the Government intends to achieve and match it with the strategic plans under the National Development Plan III, how resources are going to be allocated and where they will be got from. Your Excellency and honourable members, the Legislature duly executed its constitutional obligation of appropriation, which is enshrined in Article 156 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda. The Legislature executed this timely and exhaustively as prescribed in Section 14(1) of the Public Finance Management Act, 2015 and rules 151 and 152 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament.Honourable members, I want to sincerely thank you for executing your constitutional obligation. Thank you so much.Your Excellency, I will briefly highlight the key milestones realised by the Legislature in the budget consideration process.1. There was an approval of the National Budget Framework Paper, which is the beginning of the budgeting process, for financial years 2023/2024 – 2027/2028 on 31 January 2023. This was pursuant to Section 9(5) and (8) of the Public Finance Management Act, 2015 and Rule 145 of the Rules of Procedure;9112 BUDGET SPEECH, 20232. Parliament also approved the Ministerial Policy Statement for Financial Year 2023/2024 – can I have order in the House – in line with Section 12 of the Public Finance Management Act, 2015 and Rule 149 of the Rules of Procedure;3. We also considered the tax and revenue Bills. These tax and revenue Bills are the sources of money. The Bills were considered on the 2nd, 3rd and 16th of May 2023, pursuant to Section 8 of the Public Finance Management Act, 2015 and Rule 150 of the Rules of Procedure; and 4. And lastly, we approved the budget for Financial Year 2023/2024 on 18 May 2023, pursuant to Section 14 of the Public Finance Management Act and rules 151 and 152 of the Rules of Procedure.However, during the consideration of the budget, as the Legislature - and we want to register our disappointment - out of the 83 ministers we have in Government, only a handful was in the House and this was the second time we were having a handful of Cabinet ministers when considering the national budget.Your Excellency, as we receive the Budget Speech, I wish to highlight the following salient observations: 1. Local government financing, as a share of the national budget, continues to stagnate at about 11 per cent over the last decade. This implies that the budgets of the local governments are insufficient to adequately stimulate the desired growth envisaged under the Fiscal Decentralisation Strategy;2. The capacity of the local authorities to raise local revenue remains dismally low. This has impeded their ability to fund a number of priority areas. So, we need to identify more areas where we can be able to get funds from;3. The continued roll-out of the Parish Development Model requires addressing existent challenges, which this Parliament has already identified – and Parliament, together with the Executive, should work to ensure that the PDM becomes a success since we are putting a lot of money into it;4. The increased domestic borrowing amidst the increased public expenditure exerts pressure on the economy. As the 11th Parliament, we request that we reduce public borrowing;5. The high unit cost of implementing infra -structure projects, notably in sustainable energy development, integrated transport infrastructure and service programmes. This is mainly attributed to over-depen -dence on foreign entities and having the projects supervised by foreign persons who are paid highly instead of making sure that local content is encouraged; and6. Continued accumulation of domestic arrears by the Government has a disruptive effect on the performance of the private sector.Your Excellency, all the aforementioned observations point to the need to widen our revenue base to support adequate financing of our national priorities. I, therefore, urge the Executive to work hard to expand the tax base and increase the revenues that are collected for us to fund the priority areas.Your Excellency and honourable members, in the coming financial year, we urge the accounting officers to ensure efficiency and effectiveness in the budget execution by, among others, plugging the existent budget leakages, strengthening internal controls, reducing wastage and loss of public resources. We also have MDAs that understand that they have to present their budgets to Parliament during the presentation of the Budget Framework Paper, but they fail to do it. So, they need to do whatever they do within the law. This will enable Parliament to do its work perfectly. We need to work with each other for us to pass a budget that covers the whole country and, which has a national character.[The Speaker]9113THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 15 JUNE 2023Your Excellency and honourable members, our role as legislators will not only stop at appropriating and approving the budget. I have had a lot of sentiments to this effect: “What do we do oversight over?” Oversight is one of our roles, and, as we give out money today, we must do oversight over the money that we have approved and given out. That is your role, Members, and you must do it. There should not be talk of conflicting oversight roles. The only institution that is mandated by the Constitution to do oversight is the Parliament of Uganda. The rest are just coming in, but our role is constitutional. When the new financial year commences on 1 July, we will require parliamentary committees to scale up their oversight role. I have had incidences where ministries were saying: “We cannot go from committee to committee.” You are doing what you are supposed to do. When required to go to a committee and present your issues, that is what you are supposed to do. Therefore, Hon. Kasaija, the next time you are required, kindly have your ministers in Finance present. Recall, this is according to Article 79 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, which gives us the right to do oversight legislation, representation and appropriation. On that note, I would like to inform you that pursuant to Articles 164(3) and 196 of the Constitution, and Section 16 of the National Audit Act, 2008, the 11th Parliament has timely considered almost all the Auditor-General’s reports. As per Article 163(5) of the Constitution, we are sending the reports to you for treasury memoranda. We want actions that have been taken on what the Auditor-General found out about the MDAs. And constitutionally, there is a timeline to that. Therefore, I congratulate the Parliamentary public accounts committees, especially the Local Government Accounts Committee and PAC (Central), for the good work you have done. As Parliament, we will continue to effectively play our roles of oversight, appropriation, representation and legislation as enshrined in Articles 78, 79 and 163 of the Constitution. We shall ensure that we do our work as per the requirement of the Constitution that we swore to uphold. We request that we work together with the Executive to make Parliament a people-centred Parliament. I would like to congratulate you, Mr President, the NRM Party and the people of Bukedea District for electing a woman to the position of Chairperson, LC V , by over 90 per cent. I also want to congratulate the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development for having the budget ready today.  Your Excellency the President, and honourable members, we are ready to start; we are only waiting for the Budget Speech to be presented. I want to thank you so much, and I say all this, for God and my country. Presentation of the Budget speech by His Excellency, the President of the Republic of UgandaTHE SPEAKER:  Honourable members, I have duly been notified that the delivery of the Budget Speech will be by the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development on behalf of His Excellency the President, who is virtually present in the sitting.The President will make additional remarks after the minister has presented; and he is watching whatever we are doing. This means that even in his absentia, we are supposed to respect rule 10(4)(a). Let us get the budget as we wait to hear the President’s remarks. I now invite the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to deliver the Budget Speech to the nation.2.47THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLAN -NING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOP -MENT  (Mr Matia Kasaija):  Your Excellen -cy, the President of the Republic of Uganda; Your Excellency, the Vice-President; the Rt Hon. Speaker of Parliament; Your Lordship the 9114 BUDGET SPEECH, 2023Chief Justice; the Rt Hon. Deputy Speaker of Parliament; Your Lordship, the Deputy Chief Justice; the Vice-Chairman of the National Re -sistance Movement Party; the Rt Hon. Prime Minister; the Honourable Leader of the Op -position in Parliament; honourable ministers; honourable members of Parliament; Your Ex -cellences the Ambassadors and Heads of Dip -lomatic Missions; distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen. Madam Speaker, in fulfilment of Article 155 (1) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, I prepared and now would like to present to Parliament, on behalf of His Excellency the President, estimates of revenue and expenditure for the Financial Year 2023/2024. Parliament, on Thursday, 18 May 2023 approved this budget. My statement today only highlights the budget as appropriated by this Parliament. Madam Speaker, His Excellency, the President declared the 2021-2026 term or ekisanja  one for socio-economic transformation. While opening this 11th Parliament on 24 May 2021, the President said, and I quote: “Now that we have laid the foundation by building roads, hospitals, schools, water sources and other public services, the focus should be turned to creating wealth, jobs and income.” This addresses the 39 per cent of Ugandans that are still in a non-money economy. Madam Speaker, the NRM Government has laid a strong foundation to accelerate the economic social transformation for all Ugandans. The budget for the next Financial Year 2023/2024, therefore, has been prepared to advance this strategic mission. Consequently, the theme of the budget has been retained as “ Full Monetisation of Uganda’ s Economy through Commercial Agriculture, Industrialisation, Expanding and Broadening Services, Digital Transformation and Market Access .”In my statement, I will address the following:1. The performance of the economy during the Financial Year 2022/2023 as well as our future economic prospects;2. Accountability for the Financial Year 2022/2023 budget;3. Financial Year 2023/2024 budget priority interventions; and4. The financing strategy for the Financial Year 2023/2024.The recent economic performanceMadam Speaker, Uganda’s economy has remained resilient and is on a steady recovery path – (Interjections) – yes! Do you want me to repeat it –(Interjections) - I will repeat it at an appropriate time. The economy this year is projected to have grown by 5.5 per cent compared to 4.6 per cent last year. This year’s performance compares favourably with the average growth rate for Sub-Saharan Africa estimated at 3.6 per cent for Calendar Year 2023. The size of the economy is estimated at Shs 184.3 trillion compared to Shs 162.9 trillion, last year. This is equivalent to $49.4 billion compared to $45.6 billion, last year. This expansion is on account of the good performance of the services sector, which grew at 6.2 per cent, compared to 4.1 per cent, in the previous year. Agriculture has also performed very strongly, growing by 5 per cent despite the dry spell in the first quarter of this financial year. In particular, food crops, livestock and fishing performed very well. The industry grew at 3.9 per cent, driven largely by manufacturing and construction activities, especially in the oil and gas industry. Inflation and interest ratesMadam Speaker, inflation is reducing steadily on account of well-coordinated fiscal and monetary policy. Inflation has significantly decreased since October 2022 when it peaked [Mr Kasaija]9115THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 15 JUNE 2023at 10.7 per cent. Last month, the pace at which prices were rising slowed down to 6.2 per cent. Prices of key items such as soap, sugar and fuel at pumps, among others, have significantly reduced. With respect to the cost of money, commercial bank lending interest rates have increased slightly to 19.3 per cent in April 2023, up from 18.8 per cent in April 2021. This was mainly caused by the increase in the Central Bank rates of 10 per cent since October 2022 in order to fight inflation. In order to reduce the cost of money for the private sector, the Government has taken the deliberate policy to reduce domestic borrowing, which is a major driver of commercial bank lending rates. In addition, the Government has also provided long-term and affordable capital through the Uganda Development Bank, Emyooga , the agricultural credit facility and the Small Business Recovery Fund to large, medium, small and micro enterprises. A total of Shs 2.7 trillion has been provided to date.Private sector creditDespite the increase in interest rates, the total private sector credit increased from Shs 19.5 trillion in May 2022, to Shs 20.5 trillion in April 2023, representing an annual growth of 4.8 per cent. The growth in lending to industry and agriculture was 6.2 per cent and 3.3 per cent, respectively. Trade and personal lending recorded an annual growth of 14.1 per cent and 19.1 per cent, respectively in the same period. This underscores the ongoing Government intervention to ensure that agriculture and industry access adequate and affordable financing on a sustainable basis. Exchange rateMadam Speaker, the Uganda shilling has remained stable against major global currencies despite the strengthening of the US Dollar. Between April 2022 and April 2023, the Uganda shilling depreciated by 5.8 per cent against the US Dollar, compared to another depreciation rate of 8 per cent within the East African Region. Twekubireko mungalo, banange . (Applause)Let me repeat this: the Uganda shilling remained stable against major global currencies despite the strengthening of the US Dollar. Between April 2022 and April 2023, the Uganda shilling depreciated by 5.8 per cent against the US Dollar, compared to an average depreciation rate of 8 per cent within the East African region. The stability of the exchange rate is due to an increase in foreign direct investment inflows into the oil and gas sector, significant recovery in tourism and the recent good performance of exports. External TradeBy April 2023, Uganda’s exports of merchandise goods amounted to $4.2 billion, compared to $3.1 billion over the same period of the previous financial year. This represents a 35.5 per cent increase mainly driven by an increase in exports of gold, coffee, fish, sugar, beans, maize and light manufactured products to the regional markets. The NRM Government has provided support through different initiatives to boost exports. These include the provision of long-term and affordable capital, investment in transport infrastructure and energy in particular, and building industrial parks. These efforts have started yielding results. The manufactured exports have emerged as a major contributor to merchandise exports. For example, in the year 2022, Uganda exported sugar worth $163 million, cement worth $87 million, plastics worth $61 million, soap $31 million and beer worth $29 million. There were no exports of any of these items as recently as 2006. (Applause)  Thank you very much but I need to hear it louder - (Laughter) - so that this coming financial year, we work harder like horses.At the regional level, by April 2023, we had recorded a trade surplus with the East African Community trading partners of $1 billion. 9116 BUDGET SPEECH, 2023Tanzania remains the only East African trading partner where we recorded a bilateral trade deficit of $154 million. Our trade balance will be strengthened further as we continue to boost exports and enhance domestic manufacturing capacity to replace some imports. Foreign direct investment and remittances, and tourism Madam Speaker, foreign direct investment inflows to Uganda amounted to $1.5 billion by April 2023. Workers’ remittances increased to $1.3 billion in Calendar Year 2022 compared to $1.1 billion in the previous year. This helps to finance our foreign exchange requirements such as imports and debt servicing. Tourism revenue increased to $847.8 million by April 2023, up from $777.8 million, in the same period a year ago. EmploymentThe November 2022 National Labour Force Survey put the size of the labour force at 23.5 million people. Out of these, 10 million were employed, representing only 42 per cent employment rate. Another 8.2 million, equivalent to 35 per cent, were engaged in subsistence agriculture and nine out of every 10 employed Ugandans were working in the informal sector. Close to 380,000 employment opportunities have been created under the Presidential Initiative on Wealth and Job Creation, but we still need more. EmyoogaMadam Speaker, the target of the Government is to create over 2.5 million jobs in the next five years. This will be achieved by effectively implementing the Parish Development Model, industrialisation, wealth creation and the full monetisation of the economy. I will elaborate on how we will implement these initiatives later.Fiscal performance Madam Speaker, the fiscal deficit is estimated at 5.1 per cent of GDP this financial year, lower than the 7.4 per cent last financial year. This is due to the reduction in both recurrent and development expenditure increased grants. The fiscal deficit has been financed through domestic borrowing and external loans. The total domestic revenue collections amounted to Shs 21.7 trillion by May this year and are projected to be at Shs 25.6 trillion by the close of this financial year, which is just a few weeks away. The total domestic revenue is equivalent to 13.9 per cent of GDP and covers 68 per cent of the total expenditure, including interest payments on our public debt, but excluding the principal repayment of both external and domestic debt.Economic growth strategy and outlook Madam Speaker, the economic growth strategy underlying the budget for the next financial year and the medium term includes the following:1. Increased domestic revenue mobilisation and a reduction in non-concessional borrowing to ensure debt sustainability;2. The effective implementation of the Parish Development Model and Emyooga  Initiatives; 3. The effective implementation of the various export strategies and enhancing access to global and regional markets; 4. Support the private sector by reducing the cost of doing business through: a) The construction of the Standard Gauge Railway and the rehabilitation of the Meter Gauge Railway;b) Development of small-scale solar-powered irrigation schemes to address climate change and ensure our food security; [Mr Kasaija]9117THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 15 JUNE 2023c) Maintenance of both tarmac and murram roads; andd) Continued investments in industrial parks and energy transmission lines;e) Provision of affordable credit for micro and small enterprises and low-income groups through the Small Business Recovery Fund; Emyooga and Microfinance Support Centre; and funding for medium to large enterprises, through the Uganda Development Bank;f) The provision of quality seedlings, pesticides, fertilisers, storage and marketing in the agro-industrialisation value chain in order to increase agricultural production and productivity;g) The rapid development of oil and gas production, specifically the construction of the East African Crude Oil Pipeline and the National Oil Refinery; h) The expansion of our skilled labour force to meet the demand of a diversified economy, especially industrial skills;i) The mitigation of the negative impact of climate change on the economy and our livelihoods; j) The implementation of the Greater Kampala Metropolitan Infrastructure Development Master Plan; andk) The maintenance of peace and security of persons and property as the bedrock on which the above is based.Madam Speaker, as a result of these interventions, Uganda’s economy is projected to grow at 6 per cent in the Financial Year 2023/2024. See what I was telling you! Over the next five years, the economy is projected to grow at an average of 6.5 - 7.0 per cent per year. Twekubireko mungalo  as Ugandans, banange ; these things are not common everywhere. Financial Year 2023/2024 budget priorities Madam Speaker, the budget for the next financial year is aimed at achieving the following broad objectives:1. Urgent completion of key public investments with higher multiplier effects on the attainment of NDP III targets and the NRM 2021 – 2026 Manifesto;2. To enhance revenue mobilisation and collections; 3. The full-scale operationalisation of the Parish Development Model; and 4. To enhance the Government’s efficiency and effectiveness through rationalisation of public expenditure and payroll audit, among others.The key priorities funded to achieve these objectives are the following: 1. Boosting household incomes and microenterprises2. Commercialising agriculture to enhance production and productivity and improve competitiveness of agricultural products;3. Supporting private sector growth;4. Investing in the people of Uganda – and I must emphasize that one; 5. Improving the stock and quality of infrastructure; and6. Expediting the implementation of strategic interventions in innovation, research and development, and the minerals, oil and gas industry. Madam Speaker, in order to effectively implement these strategic priorities, the Government shall ensure peace and security, good governance and the rule of law, as the bedrock for economic activities.9118 BUDGET SPEECH, 2023I now turn to detail the key actions we will be undertaking in these strategic priorities: Boosting household incomes and microenterprises Madam Speaker, the Parish Development Model will boost household incomes as well as the development of microenterprises. Since the launch of the Parish Development Model in February 2022, a total of Shs 590.2 billion has been disbursed to all 10,459 parishes nationwide, translating into Shs 50 million per parish. The balance will be disbursed by the end of this month. Next financial year, the Parish Development Model has been allocated Shs 1.1 trillion.The Emyooga Initiative will further boost household incomes and microenterprises at parish and sub-county levels by directly funding parish and sub-county enterprise groups. By March 2023, seed capital worth Shs 494 billion had been disbursed to 6,721 constituency-based Emyooga  SACCOs. Over 600,000 individuals had successfully applied for credit from their parish-based associations. Nearly half (46 per cent) of these were women - abakyala mwekubire mungalo. Women are very persistent; when they say they will do something, they do it – 25 per cent were youth and 4 per cent were PWDs.These SACCOs have also mobilised savings of Shs 76 billion and a further Shs 80 billion recovered from the loans given to beneficiaries. Now, somebody said the Emyooga  is non-performing; he does not know what he is talking about and I am sorry for that type of person. This demonstrates the sustainability of the Emyooga  initiative. Next year, Shs 100 billion has been allocated to the Emyooga  initiative.Madam Speaker, in order to grow local enterprises, 19 skilling centres have so far been established across the country under the Presidential Industrial Hubs Initiative. So far, 28,750 trainees have successfully completed training in skills programmes and 6,110 trainees are undergoing training in various fields.The skilling centres include Our Lady of Fatima Catholic Church Nakulabye, Luzira Prisons, Sub-Way Crested Towers, Wabigalo Parish Community, Butikirwa Kigoowa-Ntinda and Makerere Community Hall. This support will continue over the medium term. Next financial year, Shs 60 billion  has been allocated for skilling the youth.Commercialising agricultureMadam Speaker, during this year, additional funding amounting to Shs 110 billion was provided for food security interventions in Government institutions with farms, including the UPDF, Uganda Prisons, Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries, National Agricultural Research Organisation and National Agricultural Genetics Resource Centre and Databank. The priority actions to commercialise agriculture next financial year include the following:1. Support agricultural research for the development of climate-resilient crops and animal species;2. Promote environmental conservation, restoration and protection of degraded water catchment areas and forest cover;3. Construct small, medium, and large-scale irrigation schemes in water-stressed areas. These will include the construction of earth dams at Unyama in Gulu, Namalu in Nakapiripirit, Sipi in Bulambuli and Kabuyanda in Isingiro, among others;4. Implement large-scale mechanisation and irrigation; and5. Improve farmer mobilisation, education and partnerships with large commercial farmers for the production of strategic commodities such as coffee, maize and tea to meet national and international demand.[Mr Kasaija]9119THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 15 JUNE 2023Madam Speaker, Shs 2.24 trillion has been allocated for food security, irrigation, climate change mitigation, value chain development, agricultural research and disease/pest control, among others. Supporting private sector growth Madam Speaker, the private sector has been directly supported through industrial parks’ development, promoting Small and Medium Enterprises (SMEs) and facilitating tourism.Industrial development and investmentMadam Speaker, eight Government-owned industrial parks are currently operational at Namanve, Jinja, Bweyogerere, Mbale, Soroti, Mbarara and Kasese and Luzira. In addition, there are three industrial parks developed under a public-private partnership arrangement at Kapeeka, Mukono and Buikwe. The Uganda Investment Authority has acquired 12 square miles for industrial development, provided by various local governments in 18 zones across the country. Uganda’s global reputation as an investment destination has been boosted significantly in the recent past. Uganda has been named the No. 1 investment destination in East Africa by AIM Global 2023 at Dubai.In addition, our country has been ranked among the top 10 African countries for the best investment destinations in Africa by the African Development Bank. It is now also ranked the first in East Africa for capital market growth by Absa Bank. SME developmentMadam Speaker, SMEs in the manufacturing and export sectors will be supported with US$ 20 million under the Investment for Industrial Transformation and Employment Trust (INVITE Trust), which will provide grants and concessional credit to qualifying SMEs.  These SMEs will access new and innovative financing products with long-term financing of up to 15 years. This intervention aims at increasing Ugandan manufactured export products, generating direct and indirect jobs for more than 200,000 workers and safeguarding existing jobs for 530,000 workers.Madam Speaker, an allocation of Shs 209.28 billion has been provided through the INVITE project next year. Tourism Uganda has increasingly been recognised as a tourism destination and is ranked by CNN as one of the top 10 tourist destinations in the World. We will, therefore, promote domestic and inbound tourism, including the use of digital platforms. Uganda will also be marketed as a global and regional centre for Meetings, Incentives, Conferences and Exhibitions (MICE). Hospitality standards will be enforced through the licensing, grading and classification of tourism facilities. Shs 249 billion has been allocated for the promotion of tourism. Madam Speaker, all the private sector interventions I have detailed above have been allocated Shs 2.37 trillion.Building human capital Madam Speaker, Uganda has registered visible improvements in healthcare outcomes, access to knowledge and a decent standard of living. On average, a Ugandan now lives longer – at 64 years, up from 53 years just as recently as 2015 – attains more years of schooling and enjoys a higher income per capita than ever before.Let me repeat this because it is interesting, especially to me who is working day and night to make sure that the youth and the sick are helped to recover: Uganda has registered visible improvements in healthcare outcomes, access to knowledge and a decent standard of living. On average, a Ugandan now lives longer 9120 BUDGET SPEECH, 2023– at 64 years, up from 53 years just as recently as 2015 – attains more years of schooling and enjoys a higher income per capita than ever before. Health Access to healthcare by Ugandans remains a key priority of this Government. Consequently, 381 health centre IIs have been upgraded to health centre IIIs. Dr Jane, you will confirm that.In addition, 250,000 health centre IIIs have been upgraded to health centres IV , equipped and are now functional, largely supported by the Uganda Intergovernmental Fiscal Transfers (UGIFT) programme, co-funded by the World Bank. Construction and equipping of 31 new health centre IIIs in sub-counties without any health facility are now 90 per cent complete. The health referral system has also been enhanced by fully functioning 143 Intensive Care Units (ICUs) and five High Dependency Units (HDUs) in national and regional referral hospitals across the country. Next year, the Mulago Super Specialised Hospital and the new state-of-the-art Intensive Care Unit at the Uganda Cancer Institute will be fully operationalised. They will provide specialised care to all Ugandans and reduce medical referrals abroad. In addition, all existing health centres IV and health centres III will be facilitated to offer quality healthcare to all Ugandans. In this respect, health worker supervision and management will be strengthened to reduce absenteeism. After the on-going payroll audit, the ban on health worker recruitment will be lifted. Government will, in the next few weeks, resolve the plight of medical interns and doctors designated as senior house officers, in view of their important role in supporting the healthcare system. Please, interns, calm down; we are coming to rescue you. In the meantime, I have provided Shs 22 billion to clear outstanding arrears for medical interns and senior house officers for the Financial Year ending June 2023. Education We have registered significant progress in access to education.  Uganda’s literacy rate improved from 70.2 per cent in 2012 to 79 per cent in 2021. Education enrolment in public schools is now at 8.8 million children in primary school, 833,000 pupils in secondary and 174,000 students in tertiary institutions. These children were 8.8 million in primary schools and in secondary they are only 833,000, where did the rest go?To improve delivery of the recently launched curriculum, 3,100 teachers were trained and inspection of learning institutions was enhanced using the e-inspection system. The Teacher Effectiveness and Learners Achievement (TELA) system has helped reduce teacher absenteeism and improved pupil attendance. The Education Management Information System (EMIS) has been revamped to support data management and decision-making in education. To enhance sports development, talent identification, nurturing, and professional development have been emphasised.The Mountains of the Moon University was operationalised during this financial year. Upgrading of facilities was completed at Uganda Technical Colleges in Lira, Elgon, and Bushenyi. Next year, the construction and equipping of two-unit laboratories in 21 secondary schools currently without any, will commence in line with the Science Technology Engineering and Mathematics (STEM) Policy.Government will continue with the construction of 115 seed secondary schools under the Uganda Inter-Government Fiscal Transfer Programme (UgIFT) in sub-counties without any.[Mr Kasaija]9121THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 15 JUNE 2023Madam Speaker, after the on-going audit of the Government payroll, the ban on recruitment will also be lifted to enable cover the staffing gaps in education. Government will continue to support sports activities and entertainment talents and enforce copyrights for performing artists.Safe Water The national coverage for safe and clean water for human consumption now stands at 70 per cent; with 67 per cent in rural areas and 72 per cent in urban areas, but we still need more. In rural areas, gravity flow schemes have been completed at Lirima in Manafwa, Lukalu-Kabasanda in Butambala and Nyabuhikye-Kikyenke in Ibanda. Piped water systems have also been constructed at Nyakabingo in Rukungiri, Kabuyanda in Isingiro, and Orom Water Supply System in Kitgum-Lamwo. In addition, 40 solar-powered mini-piped schemes serving 173,000 persons have been constructed across 15 least-served districts including Lyantonde, Sembabule, Yumbe, Rakai, Buyende, Kamuli and Kakumiro.In urban areas, nine piped water supply and sanitation systems have been completed in Dokolo, Padibe - Lamwo, Odramacaku - Arua, Kagadi, Morulem and Alerek (Abim), and Kambuga II in Kanungu. Access to safe and clean water will be enhanced to achieve 85 per cent coverage in rural areas and 100 per cent coverage in urban areas by the year 2025. Next year, the main activities towards this goal include the construction of 1,540 boreholes in 1,050 villages and town wards; building 49 large, 67 medium and 80 small piped water schemes in both urban and rural areas, and the rehabilitation and maintenance of 50 water systems in growth centres.Interventions that build human capital have been allocated Shs 9.57 trillion, representing 18.2 per cent of the total budget.  In addition, the Government, together with the World Bank, are implementing the $500 million in Uganda through the Intergovernmental Fiscal Transfer programme to construct health centres III, IV , seed secondary schools and micro-scale irrigation facilities in local governments that do not have these facilities. Enhancing Infrastructure Stock and Quality The stock and quality of infrastructure is a key enabler for economic growth, development and social transformation. Transport InfrastructureTransport infrastructure development has been a major hallmark of Uganda’s recent economic development. The road sector in 1986 totalled 7,900 km. Today, it has expanded twenty-fold to almost 160,000 km. While only 6,700 km of today’s road network is paved, the road network now allows access to even the remotest parts of Uganda. Next financial year, we will substantially complete 16 national road projects including Atiak-Laropi, Moroto-Lokitanyala, Kawuku-Bwerenga, Namugonde-Bugiri, Nsambya-Mukwano, the Kampala Flyover and Rushere Town and Kyamate Access roads. In addition, priority will be accorded to maintenance of existing road networks, both national and District Urban and Community Access Roads (DUCAR). The Bukungu-Kagwara-Kaberamaido (BKK) Ferry and related landing sites, and Lake Bunyonyi ferries and their landing sites will also be completed.Madam Speaker, emergency repairs of the Kampala-Malaba Metre Gauge Railway were completed this year. (Applause)  My team will have to come and explain this.The full rehabilitation of the Kampala–Malaba and Tororo–Gulu Metre Gauge Railway will 9122 BUDGET SPEECH, 2023commence next financial year. Forty-nine per cent of the right-of-way for the Kampala-Malaba Standard Gauge railway has been acquired. The construction of the Malaba-Kampala Standard Gauge Railway will commence next financial year, for which Shs 535 billion has been provided. Madam Speaker, in the air transport sector, the redevelopment and expansion of Entebbe International Airport is at 85 per cent complete and due to be completed by July 2024. The construction of Kabalega International Airport now stands at 91.7 per cent and will be completed by September 2023. We shall also rehabilitate and upgrade the following aerodromes that are under feasibility studies: Kidepo, Pakuba, Mbarara, Gulu, Arua, Kisoro and Kasese. Madam Speaker, an allocation of Shs 4.5 trillion, representing 13.3 per cent of the total budget has been budgeted for road maintenance and construction; railway development and rehabilitation; and water and air transport development. Of particular significance, an allocation of Shs 1 billion has been provided to each district, city and municipality for road grading, murram and compacting. In total, Shs 176 billion has been allocated for this purpose.  (Applause)We have also secured US$ 608.7 million, equivalent to Shs 2.25 trillion to address flooding, traffic congestion, poor road infrastructure, un-signalised junctions and unemployment in the Greater Kampala Metropolitan Area (GKMA) covering Kampala, Wakiso, Mukono and Mpigi districts and their municipalities. This will upgrade 504 kilometres of roads including junction signalisation in eight urban authorities; rehabilitation of 30 storm water drainage points; upgrade 23 markets and construct 25 artisanal parks, and industrial workspaces for small-scale manufacturers. (Applause)In collaboration with the World Bank, the Government is implementing a $360 million Uganda Support to Municipal Infrastructure Development (USMID) programme to improve infrastructure and address operational challenges in the cities and municipalities.  Power infrastructurePower generation, transmission and distribution infrastructure have continued to expand. Generation capacity increased to 1,378.1 Megawatts as at March 2023 from 1,343.9 Megawatts in March 2022, an increase of 34.4 Megawatts, although that is again not enough. With the commissioning of the Karuma Hydropower Project planned for September this year, generation capacity will increase to 1,976 Megawatts. The 6-Megawatt Nyagak III Hydropower project is also due for commissioning by end of this month. In transmission, a total of 417 kilometres of transmission lines were added to the main grid during the year, bringing the total transmission line network now to 4,011 kilometres.To enable evacuation of power from the 600-Megawatt Karuma Hydropower Project the 248-kilometre Karuma-Kawanda, the 55-kilometre Karuma-Olwiyo and the 76-kilometre Karuma-Lira lines have been completed. Twekubireko mu ngalo . (Applause)Next year, 761 kilometres of transmission lines and associated power substations will be constructed to improve the stability and reliability of the networks. We will also build the capacity of the Uganda Electricity Generation and Transmission companies to manage the generation and distribution networks after the expiry of the ESKOM and Umeme concessions.Madam Speaker, next financial year, Shs 1.3 trillion has been allocated for electricity interventions. Digital transformationTurning to digital transformation, 4,717 kilometres of optic fibre have been laid across the country. Geographical coverage of broad Band services stands at 66 per cent and 25 [Mr Kasaija]9123THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 15 JUNE 2023broad-band sites have been upgraded to 3G, providing services to over 700,000 Ugandans. Free Wi-Fi  hotspots have been established at nine border posts namely; Lwakhakha, Mpondwe, Mutukula –  (Interjection)  - no, I am still very fine. Sorry, he has interrupted me. Free Wi-Fi hotspots have been established at nine border posts namely; Lwakhakha, Mpondwe, Mutukula, Busia, Vurra, Katuna and Elegu. (Applause)Next year, Wi-Fi will be deployed to 820 locations targeting schools, hospitals and markets in selected sub-regions. The Greater Kampala Metropolitan Network will be upgraded to monitor service provision over the national backbone infrastructure. (Applause)  We will also digitally transform public service delivery by connecting all essential services such as schools, hospitals, tourism sites and the police to the national backbone. Madam Speaker, an allocation of Shs 192 billion has been provided to accelerate digital transformation. (Applause)Expediting strategic initiatives The development of oil and gas, the beneficiation of minerals and investment in science innovation and research are key strategic initiatives that will significantly support that socio-economic transformation.Oil and gasThe final investment decision for the development of the East African Crude Oil Pipeline was taken on 2 February 2022. We are fast-tracking the construction of the East African Crude Oil Pipeline (EACOP) and the National Oil Refinery. In addition, the right-of-way for the Kabaale (Hoima) – Buloba refined products pipeline, and the financing for the refinery and associated infrastructure will be concluded. Preparatory work for the development of a petrochemical industry at the Kabaale Petro-based Industrial Park will also be expedited. I have allocated Shs 447 billion to fast-track the development of petroleum resources next financial year.Science,  Innovation and ResearchMadam Speaker, Government is supporting several innovation and scientific research initiatives that will propel Uganda industry into the high-technology economy. These include; 1. Vaccines research and development, including therapeutics and diagnostics to enable Uganda to enter into the pathogen economy;2. Automotive industry technology development, and 3. Chipset and robotics manufacturing. During this year, we enhanced the salaries for scientists by Shs 508 billion. We shall continue to support scientists and innovators to undertake the process of Intellectual Property registration, train and sensitise stakeholders on Intellectual Property. We have provided Shs 257 billion to support Science, Innovation and Technology development. Mineral beneficiation In order for Uganda to reap the benefits of mineral resources, Uganda’s mineral deposits will be quantified to ascertain their value before beneficiation. We shall also operationalise the recently approved mineral legislation to regulate Artisanal and Small-Scale Miners (ASMs). For the development of minerals, an allocation of Shs 54.3 billion has been provided.Maintaining security, good governance and the rule of lawSecurity, good governance and the rule of law are the bedrock for the success of our socio-economic interventions. In order to guarantee the security of persons and property, the capacity of security and intelligence agencies will be strengthened to address any security threats and build national defence capability. 9124 BUDGET SPEECH, 2023In order to enhance good governance, Parliament’s legislative and oversight role will be strengthened to ensure the proper use of public funds, among others. Madam Speaker, you faulted me on something; our not attending parliamentary committees, but I will comment on it in the conclusion.Furthermore, we will ensure compliance with rules and regulations in public financial management, and also implement Parliament’s recommendations on the use of public funds. To improve efficiency and effectiveness in Government, we will further automate financial management systems. These include: the Programme Budgeting System for budget preparation, monitoring and reporting; the Integrated Financial Management System for budget execution, the Human Capital Management for personnel and payroll management, e-Government Procurement, e-Passport and the one border posting, among others. The Integrated Bank of Projects has recently been re-launched to improve Public Investment Management, including the tracking of project performance. Projects whose implementation has been unduly delayed without sound reason will be removed from the Public Investment Plan.The rationalisation of Government agencies will commence in the Financial Year 2024/2025. In addition, the Government has stopped the creation of additional administrative units and agencies.To enhance access to justice, the target is to reduce court case backlog by about 6,000 cases by the end of June 2024 from the 50,000 outstanding cases. A total of 115 districts already have complete frontline criminal and civil justice service delivery points comprising a police station, court, prison, prosecution services and legal aid services, among others. The target is to have 119 districts with justice service delivery points by the end of June 2024.The construction of the Supreme Court and Court of Appeal buildings in Kampala and the Soroti and Rukungiri High Court buildings will be completed. In addition, the High Court buildings in Alebtong, Budaka, Lyantonde and the Magistrate Court buildings in Karenga, Patongo and Abim will also be completed. Madam Speaker, the functions, which include enactment of legislation, oversight and accountability role, will further be strengthened and in this regard, the construction of the Parliamentary Chambers is on-going.Security, governance, the Legislature and the administration of justice have been allocated Shs 9.1 trillion next financial year, up from Shs 8.1 trillion this financial year. Fiscal Strategy for Financial Year 2023/2024 and the medium termThe fiscal strategy for the next financial year prioritises enhancing revenue collection, rationalisation of public expenditure and ensuring long-term debt sustainability. This will reduce reliance on external financing for socio-economic transformation. Therefore, the fiscal strategy will focus on the following:1. Continued effective implementation of the Domestic Revenue Mobilisation Strategy; 2. Repurposing the national budget to achieve a high multiplier effect of Government interventions on the economy, and improve the efficiency and effectiveness of Government programmes and projects;3. Mobilising external concessional loans and utilising non-concessional loans for projects with high economic and financial returns;4. Limiting domestic borrowing to an average of 2.2 per cent of GDP in the short to medium term, to avoid crowding out the private sector through rising interest rates;5. Reducing the budget deficit to within a maximum limit of 5 per cent of GDP, and [Mr Kasaija]9125THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 15 JUNE 2023gradually converging towards the EAC target of a deficit of 3 per cent of GDP. Next financial year, the budget deficit will be reduced to 3.5 per cent of GDP.In order to live within our means, we have reduced consumptive expenditure. During the next financial year, there will be no purchase of new vehicles for political leaders and public officers except for hospital ambulances, medical supplies or distribution, agricultural extension services, security and revenue mobilisation. Travel abroad has also been restricted to statutory functions and critical legal and resource mobilisation functions. We will also regulate expenses on workshops and seminars.During this year, domestic arrears worth Shs 166 billion were settled. The Government is committed to paying verified suppliers, court awards and compensation for ranches. Next financial year, Shs 200 billion has been allocated to settle domestic arrears.Madam Speaker, to improve the absorption and utilisation of external loans and grants, Government has undertaken the following measures:1. Requiring accounting officers of ministries, departments and agencies to provide quarterly physical performance briefs to the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and Office of the Prime Minister, on the performance of externally financed projects under their jurisdiction. 2. Ensuring project selection, design, approval, and analysis shall be undertaken before the project is approved for funding;3. Providing a dedicated fund for land acquisition and right of way instead of earmarking funds for particular projects to address delays in compensation;4. Commencing project implementation only on sites where there are no right of way and other physical encumbrances;5. Requiring all environmental and social safeguards to be enforced by the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development and the National Environment Management Authority during project design;6. Enhancing dialogue with development partners to ensure smooth implementation of externally funded projects; and7. Placing all project coordinators on performance-based contracts to improve accountability for project performance. Domestic revenue mobilisation for Financial Year 2023/2024Madam Speaker, domestic revenues for Financial Year 2023/2024 are projected to amount to Shs 29.67 trillion, of which Shs 27.4 trillion will be tax revenue and Shs 2.3 trillion  - will be non-tax revenue. This represents a revenue effort of 14.3 per cent of GDP.Under the Domestic Revenue Mobilisation Strategy, the objective is to improve revenue collection to between 16 to 18 per cent of GDP over the next five years, from about 13.5 per cent of GDP currently. Next financial year, priority has been placed on improving tax administration, including the use of ICT to fight tax evasion and rationalising tax exemptions to improve their effectiveness and reduce revenue leakage.Madam Speaker, the Government is undertaking the following tax measures and reforms in tax administration to further improve revenue mobilisation:Rationalisation of tax exemptionsTo reduce revenue losses from exemptions, next financial year, we shall commence the rationalisation of tax exemptions. However, we will continue to provide tax exemptions, based on the following;9126 BUDGET SPEECH, 2023(i) Apply the criteria, including minimum requirements for the application of any new tax exemptions;(ii) Assess the costs and benefits of all tax exemptions to ensure adherence to initial objectives; and(iii) Streamline and clarify the roles and responsibilities in the governance of tax exemptions.(iv) Madam Speaker, the respective provisions of the tax laws that provide the following exemptions have been repealed;(v) Deductions allowed for accelerated wear and tear on plant and machinery. Normal depreciation will apply henceforth.(vi) Exemptions on V AT for diapers, inputs for processing hides and skins into finished leather and inputs into iron ore smelting into billets. Tax law amendmentsThe tax laws have been amended to improve the tax system and ensure fairness. These measures will generate additional Shs 615 billion next year, equivalent to 0.3 per cent of GDP. The amendments are detailed in the respective tax laws approved by Parliament. However, I will highlight a few of these amendments later.Income taxMadam Speaker, the Income Tax Act has been amended to allow taxpayers who obtain credit facilities from SACCOs, non-deposit-taking microfinance institutions, self-help groups and community-based microfinance institutions to deduct the entire interest on loans from these institutions as a business expense while determining their taxable income. This is the practice for taxpayers borrowing from commercial banks and microfinance institutions. The objective of this measure is to extend this benefit to borrowers of microfinance institutions and moneylenders. This will support low-income individuals and groups to enable them to access financial services and improve the profitability and survival rate of the SMEs.In addition, a withholding tax of 10 per cent has been imposed on commissions paid to agent bankers to equalise their tax treatment with other agents operating similar businesses such as mobile money agents. Madam Speaker, the V AT Act has been amended to:1. Exempt the supply of concentrates and seed cake from V AT to incentivise local manufacturing of animal feeds and premixes.2. Allow non-resident taxpayers to file returns and pay tax in United States Dollars to facilitate the compliance of non-resident taxpayers operating in Uganda.3. Require foreign remote service providers of electronic goods and services to account for V AT on the goods and services sold in Uganda so as to bring e-commerce transactions into the tax system.4. The scope of electronic services on which V AT is applicable has been expanded to include, among others, films, games of chance, advertising platforms, streaming platforms, cab-hailing services, cloud storage and data warehousing.Excise Duty Act The Excise Duty Act has been amended to remove the excise duty of $9c per minute on incoming international calls originating from the United Republic of Tanzania. This will include Tanzania in the One Network Area comprising the other East African Community Member States.Phone users in the East African Community will now be able to make and receive calls at [Mr Kasaija]9127THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 15 JUNE 2023local rates regardless of their location within the One Network Area. Madam Speaker, the size of investment capital required for an investor to benefit from excise duty exemption on construction materials has been reduced to $5 million from $50 million for Uganda nationals. Foreign investors will be required to have investment capital of at least $50 million in order to benefit from this exemption.In order to deter undervaluation, excise duty on mineral water, bottled water and other water purposely for drinking has been imposed at 10 per cent or Shs 75 per litre, whichever is higher. The Excise Duty Act has also been amended to clarify the taxation of spirits for human consumption on one hand and the exemption from excise duty of spirits used as raw materials for the production of disinfectants and sanitisers.Tax Procedures Code Act The Tax Procedures Code Act has been amended to waive any interest and penalty on tax arrears outstanding as of 30 June 2023, in order to address requests from taxpayers who have cited the hardship caused by the COVID-19 lockdown. This provision is, however, limited to taxpayers who come out and pay by 31 December 2023. Where the taxpayer pays part of the principal tax outstanding by the deadline, the payment of interest and penalty shall be waived on a pro-rata basis. After that date, URA will decisively enforce recovery of all taxes and penalties. Ratification of the Convention on Mutual Administrative Act Assistance in Tax Matters (Implementation) Act Parliament has enacted the Convention on Mutual Administrative Act Assistance in Tax Matters (Implementation) Act, 2023. This is to increase cooperation among tax authorities in participating countries to tackle tax avoidance and cross-border tax evasion. This will assist URA to receive correct information to deter illicit financial transactions, where the country is estimated to lose revenue amounting to between Shs 300 billion and Shs 500 billion annually. Tax administration reformsMadam Speaker, sustainable revenue collection requires efficiency in the management and administration of the tax system. The following measures will be undertaken:1) Strengthening the taxpayer register expansion programme framework, which is collaboration between the Uganda Revenue Authority, the Uganda Registration Services Bureau, Kampala Capital City Authority and the Ministry of Local Government, in revenue collection. This framework targets to improve the environment for business formalisation and growth;2) Supporting local governments to enhance their revenue effort, including using electronic systems;3) Undertaking V AT field audits, complex audits and strengthening debt recovery; 4) Leveraging ICT to analyse data and integrating with other Government systems to properly identify the taxable transactions and taxpayers;5) Improving taxpayer awareness to know their rights and obligations and enhance stakeholder engagements;6) Continuing tax education and awareness intervention across regions, sectors, and genders;7) Further strengthening of URA staff  compliance to procedures, guidelines and standards to curb corruption tendencies and minimise revenue leakages, including staff deployment in areas with the highest risk for revenue collection;9128 BUDGET SPEECH, 20238) Utilising the alternative dispute resolution mechanism by negotiating with the taxpayers for settlement of tax disputes out of the court system to avoid delays in the resolution of tax disputes; 9) Using ICT systems such as electronic fiscal receipting, and invoicing system (electronic fiscal devices) and the digital tracking system, taxes stamps and rental tax solution and telecom sector activities;10) Continuing the on-going integrity drive to combat corruption and other vices essential for improving revenue collection; and 11) Intensifying the surveillance of wider coverage of porous borders to curb smuggling through extensive intelligence-focused operations supported by the use of drones and body cameras.Strengthening regional integration and tradeBudget consultations with our regional ministers of Finance were held on the 8th to 12 May 2023 in Arusha, Tanzania and agreed to make some changes in the East African taxation structure. To make our industries more competitive, attract investments and remove the remaining barriers to trade among African countries, we agreed, as East African Community partner states, to change the taxes paid on goods coming from outside the East African Community as follows:1. Zero per cent duty levied on imports of raw materials and capital goods;2. 10 per cent duty charged on imports of intermediate goods;3. 25 per cent duty charged on imports of finished goods not readily available in the region;4. A maximum rate of 35 per cent of duty charge on imports of finished goods readily available in the region; and5. Small adjustments to promote import substitution and the value addition of our local industries. Ratification of the Convention on Mutual Administrative Act Assistance in Tax Matters (Implementation) ActParliament has enacted the Convention on Mutual Administrative Assistance in Tax Matters (Implementation) Act, 2023 to increase cooperation among tax authorities in the participating countries to tackle tax avoidance and cross-border tax evasion. This will assist the Uganda Revenue Authority to receive correct information to deter illicit financial transactions where the country is estimated to lose revenue amounting to Shs 300-500 billion annually. Public debtUganda’s public debt stood at Shs 80.2 trillion , equivalent to $21.7 billion as at the end of December 2022. Of this amount, external debt was Shs 47.9 trillion, equivalent to $12.9 billion. While domestic debt was Uganda Shs 33.4 trillion, equivalent to $8.9 billion. Public debt is projected at Shs 88.9 trillion equivalent to $23.7 billion by 30 June 2023. In nominal terms, Uganda’s debt to GDP is projected to drop to 48.2 per cent this financial year ending this month, from 48.6 per cent at the end of June 2022. The reduction is due to the Government commitment to debt sustainability. This is slightly below the Government policy target of not more than 50 per cent of GDP and also below the 52.4 threshold provided for in the charter of fiscal responsibility as at the end of Financial Year 2023/2024.The debt service to domestic revenue is projected at 34.1 per cent for the financial year ending June, compared to 30.6 per cent in the previous year. [Mr Kasaija]9129THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 15 JUNE 2023The increase in debt service cost was due to external, commercial and domestic borrowing. This takes away money from the budget, which would have funded other Government priorities such as health and education. Debt sustainabilityTo maintain debt sustainability, Government will work to: 1. Ensure effective implementation of the domestic revenue mobilisation strategy to boost the capacity to increase domestic revenue collection; 2. Reduce expenditure in areas of lower priority in order to support fiscal consolidation; 3. Access new sources of financing including climate and green financing, leveraging private equity for infrastructure investment and scaling up public-private partnerships and leveraging non-traditional innovative funding structures and identifying appropriate credit enhancement mechanisms; 4. Limit non-concessional debt to high-impact, high-return projects, such as the standard gauge railway projects, development of industrial parks, power transmission lines, water for production and tourism roads; and5. Reduce domestic borrowing. Measures to Deepen the Debt Market My ministry has been working with the Bank of Uganda to reform the Domestic Capital Market and make it more competitive, these reforms include;Rolling out of the use of a mobile money platform for investing in Government treasury bills and bonds to broaden the investor base by enabling ordinary Ugandans to participate, increase competition and reduce the cost of borrowing.Finalise a framework for creating new and innovative Government bonds to finance the budget including infrastructure bonds for financing infrastructure projects, green bonds for financing climate-smart projects, Sukuk bonds for integrating development finance based on Islamic banking principles, among others. The draft Bills to operationalise Islamic banking in Uganda are ready for submission to Parliament. I urge Parliament to expedite their enactment to allow the private sector to access this source of funding. Resource Envelope for Financial Year 2023/2024 The resource envelope for Financial Year 2023/2024 amounts to Shs 52.7 trillion as detailed below; (i) Domestic revenue amount to Shs 29.7 trillion of which Shs 27.4 trillion will be tax revenue and Shs 2.3 trillion will be non-tax revenue;(ii) Domestic borrowing amounts to Shs 3.2 trillion; (iii) Budget support is Shs 2.8 trillion; (iv) External financing for projects amounting to Shs 8.3 trillion of which Shs 3.0 trillion (the report has Shs 3.01 trillion) is from grants and Shs 5.3 trillion is from loans;(v) Appropriation in aid collected by local governments amount to Shs 287 billion;(vi) Domestic debt refinancing will amount to Shs 8.4 trillion; and(vii) Other financing Shs 222.0 billion (the report has Shs 229 billion). Madam Speaker, total expenditure will be Shs 52.7 trillion. Wages and Salaries will amount to Shs 7.3 trillion and Non-wage Recurrent Expenditure is Shs 13.5 trillion . The Government of Uganda  Development Expenditure amounts to Shs 6.11  trillion and  9130 BUDGET SPEECH, 2023external project support financing is Shs 8.3 trillion . Domestic arrears worth Shs 215.8 billion will be settled. Appropriations in Aid of Shs 287 billion have been provided for. External debt repayments amounting to Shs 2.6 trillion  and interest payments of Shs 6.1 trillion  will be made . Domestic debt financing amounts to Shs. 8.4 trillion.Madam Speaker, I have attached provided the details of the Resource Envelope and other allocations for the Financial Year 2023/2024.Conclusion This budget is dedicated to those Ugandans who are currently not in the money-economy. To those individuals and households whose income per year is below 20 million, they now have the opportunity to utilise the support that the NRM government has provided under the Parish Development Model, Emyooga  and other Government initiatives. This budget supports taxpayers who are recovering from the after effects of COVID-19. For industrialists and entrepreneurs, it improves the environment within which you are operating. It aims to lower the cost of doing business, reduce the time spent transporting goods, including agricultural produce from farm to markets. It also ensures that what you produce and manufacture is competitive in the regional and global export markets. This budget supports the transformation from a raw material based economy to a manufacturing and knowledge-based economy. It, therefore, promotes value addition, business growth, and jobs creation for the youths, women and all Ugandans. It is a budget that provides opportunities for every Ugandan to have a stake in this economy. I, therefore, dedicate this budget to those Ugandans who are working hard day and night to expand and modernise our economy and country. Madam Speaker, I beg to move. (Applause)  THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Hon. Kasaija, the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. I have a slight correction on the resource envelope for the Financial Year 2023/2024, and this is for our Hansard; the figure for Other Financing is Shs 229.0 billion and not Shs 222 billion. The Public Debt Stock is Shs 80.8 trillion, not Shs 80.2 trillion. That is what is on your record. So, the Hansard should be corrected. On the inter-governmental fiscal transfers, which is phase two and the Uganda Secondary School Expansion Project, these loans were approved in 2021. What is delaying their implementation is the acquisition of ownership of land. One of the conditions that was given is that the schools must give ownership; there should be evidence of ownership. Therefore, we request the local government and the Central Government to ensure that there is ownership of this land for implementation of the loan. Otherwise, we are already paying the interest. I heard Members heckle on the issue of the Metre Gauge Railway. A loan was passed in 2021 by Parliament and was returned in 2023, after change of terms of borrowing. So, the loan is still with the Committee on National Economy. The Metre Gauge Railway is not completed, so it is incorrect that it is completed. Thank you.MR MATIA KASAIJA:  Thank you, Madam Speaker.  Some of these statements were made in anticipation that as soon as we resume Parliament, action will be taken. They are now being added onto the budget of the coming year. However, where the record is inconsistent with yours, I apologise. I will go and check with my team and see where the mistake is and thereafter, correct it in writing. Thank you.THE SPEAKER:  Thank you very much, honourable minister, for the report. I want to congratulate you. Honourable members, as I said before, the President is attending virtually and would like to make his remarks on his budget. [Mr Kasaija]9131THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 15 JUNE 2023Constitutionally, the finance minister is the President. I now take this opportunity to invite His Excellency the President, to make his remarks and crown the Budget Speech. Your Excellency, you are most welcome. Kindly, address Parliament, and by extension, the nation. 4.17 THE PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF UGANDA (Gen. Yoweri Kaguta Tibuhaburwa Museveni): Her Excellency the Vice President, the Rt Hon. Speaker, His Lordship the Chief Justice, the Rt Hon. Prime Minister, all the other leaders of the State and the party, Your Highnesses the cultural leaders, ladies and gentlemen.I thank the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development for reading the Budget on my behalf. As I told you, in the State-of–the-Nation Address and as the minister told you a little while ago, our economy will be $55.2 billion by the end of the coming financial year. This will mean that our economy will have grown by 37 times in size compared to Uganda’s economy of 1986.Therefore, we have done a good job on three tasks. These tasks should be clear to all of you who get involved in running public affairs. Otherwise, you will make a lot of mistakes. The three tasks are: i.  Minimum economy recovery; that is what we set out to do in 1987; iii.  Expansion of the sectors that had recovered; andiii.  Diversification from the original narrow spectrum of the colonial times of the 3Cs and 3Ts. Remember, I have told you many times about that economy of the colonial times of the 3Cs and 3Ts. The 3Cs are cotton, coffee and copper and the 3Ts are tobacco, tourism and tea. Therefore, we restored that small economy, which had been destroyed, and that is what we called the minimum recovery. Secondly, we expanded that small economy, that is why, for instance, you hear that coffee which was 2 million bags is now 9 million bags. Tea, which was 23 million kilogrammes in 1986, is now 60 million kilogrammes. Therefore, the above have been achieved due to the following;Recovery expansionDiversification from the original narrow economy of the 3Cs and 3Ts, to many more commercialised products such as fish, which was dying of old age in Lake Victoria. At one time, we had 22 fish factories but now, we have about 12 fish factories.Maize was just for roasting on the roadside; people did not know that maize was a source of money. In fact, they used to make a distinction between what they called cash crop and food crop. Food crop was not supposed to be cash crop. So, maize was a food crop but now, it is both a food crop and a cash crop. Bananas and milk - that is how my tribe had been left out of the money economy by the colonial people. Milk was just for drinking and making the Banyankore women very fat but it was not a source of money. Milk, which was being sold in towns, was coming either from abroad or Kenya Cooperative Creameries (KCC). Beef, cocoa, beans and gold, among others, have now been added. Therefore, minimum recovery, expansion and diversification should be clear to all of you who talk so much about some of these things. Those are the three tasks. However, we also added a fourth task - the knowledge economy. For instance, automobile technology. When you talk of Kiira, you are now talking of a new economy; you are not even talking of simple manufacturing; you are talking of high knowledge – high tech manufacturing. So, this is the fourth task - Transformation. 9132 BUDGET SPEECH, 2023Minimum recovery, expansion, diversification of what was there, but also, a new type of economy based on science and high technology. For example: automobiles, pharmaceuticals, vaccines etc. This is in addition to some limited industrialisation for some of the products in the areas of: sugar, steel products by recycling scrap, soap manufacture, beer, beverages, cement, etc.Therefore, apart from the hi-tech, we are already moving on that low technology value addition, to our raw materials. And these are very interesting figures. This value addition, which is sort of partial industrialisation, is aimed at two missions:i. Import substitution. Mulekele awo okusaka ; do not import; make locally. But also, export promotion. When I was writing this short speech here in my house – when some people said I was in the ICU – because it allows me to do one or two things - I asked my people to crosscheck these figures because if they are true, they are very interesting. The import substitution value of these industrial products is about US$3.6 billion; ekyo nali sikimanyi ! I did not know that these small factories of emitayimbwa , soap, are saving us US$3.6 billion, which we would have to look for if we were still importing them. But apparently, they are also bringing into the country as export earnings US$1.6 billion. Awo omukazi omunyankole weyagambira nti biriyo ebeire eshagama . There was a munyankore woman who  was catching locusts - the other time when we had an invasion of locusts, many people did not know that some Ugandans were not happy with me because I killed the locusts quickly. Some Ugandans, who eat locusts, said: “This man has spoilt our food; he should have allowed us to deal with these locusts.” They wanted to catch and eat them.So, in the 1930s when the locusts invaded our area, a Munyankore woman went into the papyrus swamp to catch them and she was carrying a child on her back. She was so excited about catching the locusts – those papyrus plants, sometimes, can be very sharp if they are broken. The papyrus fragments cut the throat of the child, who was on her back. The woman felt some warm liquid and thought it was sweat. When she finished catching the locusts, she realised that the warm liquid was blood and exclaimed: “Eh, I thought it was sweat – biriyo ebeire eshagama.  It has turned out to be blood!” So, I did not know that the little work we were doing - I thought it was sweat, but apparently it is blood; it is something serious. We are saving you Shs 3.6 billion in import substitution and earning for you $1.6 billion from the export of not just coffee and these other things, but industrial products. I was very happy to get that figure. However, the big proportion of our economy is still a raw-materials economy. So, please, especially the NRM cadres, understand this very clearly. For this economy that we are saying has grown, as Mr Kasaija said, to $49 billion and will be $55 billion by the end of the next financial year, you should know that that kibalo –  that estimation – is mainly a raw-materials economy – economy ekyali mukutunda embidde;  selling the sour bananas before you process them or selling unprocessed coffee. Although I am putting on a Fine Spinner’s shirt, still, much of the cotton is sold as raw material. Maize – imagine we sell maize ow’empeke  – maize grains – and import animal feeds. You can imagine! Animal feeds are mainly from maize – you sell grains of maize and import animal feeds more expensively! Our poultry farmers, those in piggery and even the cattle keepers are crying for animal feeds. Until recently, we have been importing leather from outside – you can imagine – amaliba ; skins and hides. Until recently when I built that [Gen. Museveni]9133THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 15 JUNE 2023leather factory in Kawumu, our people were importing leather from China and India. I heard all of you make speeches there, but I am begging all the NRM cadres: this is where history demands collective and cohesive action from the NRM cadres. Now that we have got an educated workforce – you heard what Mr Kasaija said: 80 per cent of Ugandans can now read and write, up from 43 per cent. Now that we have got an educated workforce, enough electricity, good roads and we are building or repairing the railway system – in the speech I did not add this, but Mr Kasaija talked about it: we have got cheap money in the Uganda Development Bank for industry - every effort must be made to add value to all our products because this is what is lacking. Why add value to coffee? It is because you will earn more than 10 times more when you add value to coffee unlike the way we are selling it now. We need to add value to cotton, timber, cocoa and fish products – although the factories are producing fish fillet, we can add more value. We also need to add more value to gold – we need more gold refineries. We need to add value to iron-ore – we do not want to sell unprocessed iron-ore to anybody; we need to sell steel. We also need to add value to copper, vermiculite – there is a lot of vermiculite in Bugisu. We need to add value to phosphates – you can imagine we are crying that there is war in Europe; so, we cannot get phosphates, but we have phosphates in Tororo here. The Chinese man who had come there had his money stolen by our people. He was stupid – he was giving bribes to idiots and thieves. He should have helped me to get them and I would have hanged them. However, we shall get other investors. We need to add value to phosphates, petrochemicals, maize, bananas, etc. By doing this, this economy will jump to $550 billion instead of nearly $55.2 billion that we are talking about – laudable though, it is. I am happy that we have gone to $55.2 billion, but I am not satisfied. During the Address on the State of the Nation, I quoted the economy of South Korea in 1961 – I hope you can compare it with that of Uganda in 1961. In that speech, I said South Korea’s economy was about $2 billion, but it is now almost $2 trillion. Imagine that little country has got a GDP, which is half the GDP of the whole of Africa. Africans tebaswala  – Africans have no shame! South Korea is half the size of Uganda, but they now have a GDP, which I think is almost $2 trillion. I hear all these people quoting this when they go to meetings. “Africa’s GDP is now three-something trillion”. I really feel embarrassed. Why can’t these people keep quiet? How can the whole of Africa have an economy smaller than Japan – because Japan has got $5 trillion? Here you are now, talking about the GDP of Africa being Shs 3 trillion. You are not even embarrassed; I am embarrassed to talk like that.That is what I was telling the NRM MPs in Kyankwanzi. You are talking of oversight, okay; thank you, very much but is it in order to do oversight on backwardness and you feel satisfied that you are overseeing backwardness? Thirty-nine per cent of the people are outside the money economy. Coffee raw material, which is 100 per cent, is given away for free. You should be transformation agents. Why do I say that? And I would like anybody to challenge me -when I get out from this Coronavirus isolation, I will be able to face anybody who wants a challenge.It is because the $55.2 billion we are talking about presupposes only a quantitative expansion of our economy through creating more products. You grow more coffee, maize and raw materials; that is how you end up growing by 6 per cent, the one Hon. Kasaija was talking about.However, if, instead of simply growing coffee beans, I process a kilo of coffee from bean to powder, I earn $40 instead of earning $2. What is that percentage now? No, I am not ready to accept that plan of slavery for Africa.9134 BUDGET SPEECH, 2023My envisioned economy of $550 billion acknowledges the already achieved goal of quantitative expansion but adds another element of qualitative leap through value addition. That is not all, however. Remember, there are still 39 per cent of our households that are still spectators, instead of being part of the players. These are the “ Bakolera ekidda kyoonka . Tic me ic keken”  - working only for the stomach.  Here below is a report written for me by Maj. Agaba, one of our army officers, about one of our wealth creators, Mr Nyakaana of Rwengaaju, near Fort Portal. This army officer wrote for me a report after she visited there with cattle rustlers from Karamoja. These young cattle rustlers contacted me when I was in Barlegi. I met them and asked, “Okay, do you think stealing cows is good? Let me show you how people who like cows do things.”So, Major Agaba went with them to Fort Portal and other places. When she came back, she wrote this simple report. Even today, another huge group of cattle rustlers went there.Mr Nyakaana’s farm sits on 1.25 acres and does the following economic activities:Zero grazing: It has a total number of six cows, out of which five are lactating.  These five cows produce 116 litres of milk per day.  A litre of milk in the area ranges between Shs 1,000 and Shs 1,200.EarningsHe sells 100 litres per day and spends Shs 40,000 per day on their feeding. That is 100 litres x 1,000= Shs 100,000 - 40,000 (expenditure). So, his daily net income from cows is Shs 60,000. This is his net income now; he has deducted the costs. Daily:  Shs 60,000 Monthly: 60,000 x 30 days = 1,800,000.  Annual: 1,800,000 x 12 months = Shs 21,600,000This is from milk on 1.25 acres. His other enterprise is poultry. He has got 7,500 birds – this is language I do not use myself because enkoko are not enyonyi . This is buyaaye  of foreigners, which you copy. Enyonyi  is enyonyi ; enkoko  is enkoko . You cannot say enkoko is enyonyi . You must be mad; you cannot be from Africa here. I have even heard some people calling cows “animals”. I feel like fighting. You cannot call my cows animals. Ente is ente; enyamaishwa is enyamaishwa . Please, deal with your foreigners, but do not bring your confusion to us. However, she is the one who wrote this; that Mr Nyakaana has got 7,500 birds, out of which 4,500 lay eggs. He collects 120 trays of eggs per day and sells each tray at Shs 12,000.Earnings120 trays x 12,000 = Shs 1,440,000 per day. He spends Shs 1,000,000 for feeding these hens and another Shs 40,000 for labour costs. Shs 1,440,000 minus Shs 1,000,000 for feeding and another Shs 40,000 for labour costs. This, therefore, leaves him with Shs 400,000 as daily net income from chicken. Shs 400,000 per day times 30 days is Shs 12,000,000 in a month. While Shs 12,000,000 times 12 months is Shs 144,000,000 net. Moreover, this is someone from the village with a net Shs 21,000,000 from milk and Shs 144,000,000 from eggs. This person has a feeds processing plant, which produces feeds for cows, chickens and pigs. The person also has manure; he produces manure for his farm and sells it to other people at Shs 600,000 per month. Also, this person has gas production; he produces a lot of gas from his farm and has plans of packing it in cylinders for sale. I am going to get Maj. Agaba’s report, cover it properly with a glass and put it in the Uganda Museum. This is not my own speech; Maj. Agaba wrote it for me. I want history to come [Gen. Museveni]9135THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 15 JUNE 2023and see what I have been telling you; what you can do on 1.25 acres.  I am tired of talking as if I want you to come and clean my house or look after my cows. So, I will put it in the museum - This is not my speech as a whole but this is a report by Maj. Agaba. She wrote it very well and this is how I put it in this speech.Nyakaana now employs 15 people on this 1.25-acre farm. Some time ago, I pointed out that if seven million one-acre farmers, created a mere 10 jobs each - not Nyakaana’s 15 - we would create 70 million jobs more than the population of Uganda. If you want to know if this is possible, find out how many Africans came from other countries here. We have Banyarwanda, Barundi, people from South Sudan and Tanzania came because of the few economic activities which were going on during the colonial times. There was coffee, cotton, ebikajjo (sugar cane). That is how they came and this was because the internal labour was not enough; the labour within Uganda was not enough so these Africans from other areas had to come. Even now, if we implement this, we shall have very many jobs and Ugandans will not be enough.Therefore, no games, delays, corruption, aloofness by leaders and officials on the issue of value addition, and no relenting on the PDM and Emyooga . Uganda is unstoppable. When we tell this to people politely, they do not seem to get it. On the side of agriculture, I did not talk about irrigation, or solar powered irrigation because that is very crucial to stabilise agriculture.You heard your Budget of Shs 52 trillion. While I support that Budget because there is no other solution in the short run, it is important to know - Hon. Kasaija talked about it but it should be highlighted that Shs 17 trillion of that Budget is to pay debts. He talked about it towards the end of this speech but it should be highlighted that out of the Shs 52 trillion you are talking about, Shs 17 trillion is to pay debts; amabanja . Many of these debts were being pushed by the neo-colonial public servants until recently when I put down my foot and insisted on approving every loan. This is why you hear these loans take time to be approved because I insisted on approving every external loan. Otherwise, all this money was not worth borrowing. If you audit it, it was not borrowed for a good purpose. The way forward is to borrow less - and I am glad the minister talked about it - or not borrow at all. With discipline, we do not have to borrow at all. URA is also still under collecting taxes - these URA people - I saw Mr Musinguzi on the TV but they are also not doing good work. Their tax GDP ratio of 13 per cent is not serious. In Europe, countries like Holland have tax GDP ratio of 39.7 per cent.We say in our language ekitatta muyima, tekimumalako  nte (When a cattle keeper still has life, he will get new cows even if the old one dies).  We shall learn from the mistakes of the past and perform better. What I want the NRM cadres to understand is, in order to do the industrialisation I talked about, we do not have to use Government money. Government money has already been used on the basic things like infrastructure, security, among others. The strategy is to handle the private sector well because it can help us industrialise our country, provided we are able to handle them well.I would like to thank all Ugandans who have been praying for me. I have been watching you pray for me at the Office of the National Chairman of the NRM Party, Hon. Babalanda, Hadijah and the Bazukkulu , praying at the All Saints’ Cathedral Church Nakasero, signing on the board here near the gate, and all others who have been wishing me good luck. I really appreciate it. It is good to know that I am not as bad as some people try to portray me, and that there are Ugandans who appreciate.I would like to also congratulate our people in Bukedea regarding what the Rt Hon. Speaker spoke about. I followed our girl there; Akol was elected as the chairperson with a big majority after the death of the former chairperson who 9136 BUDGET SPEECH, 2023was also from the NRM. I congratulate all those who were involved.  Once again, I congratulate the Rt Hon. Anita Among because she helped us a lot. It is not illegal for the Speaker to have a clan. Is it Constitutional that the Speaker must have no clan, including a political one? If it is not unconstitutional, then I salute her.The NRM people who stepped down for Hon. Akol, I thank you and wish everybody good luck. Next time, when I appear on television, I will talk about Coronavirus because I am now an expert and a veteran of it. So, count me among the veterans. Thank you very much.THE SPEAKER:  Thank you very much, Your Excellency, for successfully delivering the budget speech and crowning it. I reiterate our commitment as the Legislature that we will do our work as enshrined in the Constitution, and be mindful of the money economy. We will do all it takes and ensure that there is value for money. We will not allow anything else but increase money in the economy in order for us to get what we want. Thank you.ADJOURNMENTTHE SPEAKER:  Once again, I would like to thank the President of the Republic of Uganda, together with the dignitaries we invited, and have attended this very special function. In a very special way, I thank Maama  Janet Museveni for taking good care of our President. We pray for you and your family, and we wish our President a quick recovery. We want you out there to do work for this country. I adjourn the House to Tuesday, 20 June 2023 at 2.00 p.m.The East African Community AnthemThe National AnthemTHE SPEAKER:  Thank you very much, honourable members. All of you are invited to the poolside at Serena for an evening. (The House rose at 5.02 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 20 June 2023 at 2.00 p.m.)[Gen. Museveni]