Thursday, 30 June 2011

Parliament met at 2.20 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Your Excellency, the Vice-President, and the hon. Members I welcome you to this sitting. As you will appreciate we have now begun the real business of Parliament. However, we have to move in an organised and systematic manner.

Normally, the programme of business is determined by the Business Committee chaired by the Speaker but given the current circumstances, it has not been possible for the committee to sit since Government, which is the main supplier of business for Parliament, has so far only indicated two items of business. The items of business indicated by the Government are the State of the Nation Address which was delivered by His Excellency the President on 07 June 2011 and the second item is the Budget Speech which was presented by the Minister of Finance on 08 June 2011. These two are now available and I wish to urge Members to study the documents carefully in preparation for the next stage of handling these items.

I would like to put you on notice that starting on Tuesday, 5th July, we shall commence with the debate on the State of the Nation Address and this debate will last for two weeks. I expect that it will be concluded on 15th July.

I am aware that many honourable members are interested in participating in this debate. Therefore, all the Members will be given five minutes only. The public address system will be timed so that at the fourth minute the light on the microphone will warn the Member on the Floor and at the fifth minute the microphone will be switched off automatically. I advise Members to be precise in their contributions, avoid unnecessary preambles and to note that when a matter has already been raised by another Member, you should not dwell on it but use your time to raise new issues. If Members observe these guidelines, the Speaker will be able to cover as many Members as possible.

In that regard, I would like to make a small adjustment to the sitting days of Parliament. I wish to suggest that Monday afternoons and Friday mornings can be used during the debate on the State of the Nation Address. By doing that, we will have more time available for Members to contribute to the debate. This is a sacrifice that we have to make in order to accommodate the number of Members who wish to speak. As I promised you, I do not want any of my Members to be recorded with zero in the score card. I want to ensure that all of you are able to speak.

You may be aware that the Budget, which is the life blood of Parliament, should be passed by 31st August. We have a short time left for that budget process to be complete and therefore, as soon as we finish with the State of the Nation Address, Parliament will handle the budget. Therefore, I am giving notice to the Leader of the Opposition and the Shadow Minister of Finance that they are required to give a response to the Budget on the 18th July. This will be followed by the Chairperson of the Budget Committee. Thereafter the plenary of Parliament will break and allow committees to sit and consider the ministerial policy statements on the Budget. I expect this to end on 12 August 2011. My office will monitor progress on the handling of the policy statements and adjust the programme where necessary. Thereafter, Parliament will resume to have a general debate on the budget and to consider the reports of the committees of the House.

I wish, therefore, to alert the Prime Minister and Leader of Government business to ensure that the ministerial policy statements are compiled by the ministries. In the past they have been here by the 30th but admittedly we are in a transition period but please ensure that they are delivered in time so that committees can consider them appropriately. Let me just ask for your cooperation.

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: Madam Speaker, I am seeking guidance on a point of procedure pursuant to Article 94(1) of the Constitution; on the Rules of Procedure. I am one of the Members of Parliament who greatly attaches importance to constitutional matters because the Constitution is binding to all of us. I would like to read that provision verbatim: “Subject to the provisions of this Constitution Parliament may make rules to regulate its own procedure including the procedure of the committees.”  

Historically, Parliament after Parliament in Uganda had pronounced itself on the Rules of Procedure before adopting them. The Ninth Parliament was supposed to hold a special session to officially adopt those rules. This is so because under Article 2 of the Constitution, the Constitution is supreme and binding to all organs of state. In the event that someone goes to Court tomorrow and challenges the laws we have passed, we will have problems in answering such a challenge. In my understanding the word “may” does not arise because many Members of Parliament have already expressed interest in amending those rules. So, as the rules committee proceeds on amending and attending to those amendments, I am humbly begging that we find a session where we shall pronounce ourselves so that we demystify the doubts - right now we are depending on assumption and a territory of assumptions cannot guarantee certainty in law. So I beg Madam Speaker to consider this such that we have a session where we can officially pronounce ourselves.  
I am one of the people who are convinced that the Eighth Parliament’s rules are good enough but they need a few amendments. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Lukyamuzi, the Rules of Procedure of Parliament do not die with a Parliament, they subsist. The Eighth Parliament was in the process of amending the rules and that is the work the new rules committee is going to do. The rules do not die; the rules are valid. 

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: But, Madam Speaker, under Article 94(1) we are supposed to be seen to own those rules as the Ninth Parliament.

MR NASASIRA: Madam Speaker, is it in order for hon. Lukyamuzi to continue arguing with you when you have made a ruling? In any case, these rules are called the Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of Uganda. They are not called the Rules of Procedure of the Eighth Parliament. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Lukyamuzi, I think you were absent for very long, the rules of the Eighth Parliament are the Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of Uganda. 

PRESENTATION OF NAMES OF MEMBERS DESIGNATED TO BE MEMBERS OF PAN AFRICAN PARLIAMENT (UGANDA CHAPTER) IN ACCORDANCE WITH RULE 12 OF THE RULES OF PROCEDURE

2.29
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr John Nasasira): Madam Speaker, in accordance with rule 12 on the election of the Pan African Parliament and Appendix D of that rule 12, there is the interpretation that, “In these rules, unless the context otherwise requires, all Parliamentary words and expressions used shall have the same meaning assigned to them in the General Rules of Procedure of Parliament, and ‘Election’ means the process of approval of names nominated by Political Parties or Organisations represented in the House and presented to the House by the Speaker.”

I wish on behalf of the NRM political party to present the following nominated Members to the Pan African Parliament:
1.	Hon. Beatrice Barumba Rusaniya, Woman Representative, Kiruhura
2.	Hon. Peter Abraham Lokii, Jie County
3.	Hon. Sarah Kataike Ndoboli, Woman Representative, Budaka and;
4.	Hon. Kakoba Onyango, Buikwe County North. 

Madam Speaker, I beg to present.

2.31
MR HUSSEIN KYANJO (JEEMA, Makindye Division East, Kampala): I wish to thank my senior colleague, the Chief Whip of the Government side. I am standing on behalf of the Opposition to indicate that given the nature of the debate we had yesterday, we were thrown into serious consideration of these names and we have not yet finished with these consultations. By next Tuesday, Insha Allah, we should have these names. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: For the record, hon. Members, rule 12 also requires that the interests of the Independents be taken into account. I have received a letter from hon. Amooti Otada, who wishes to be considered for the Pan African Parliament. In view of that, you may wish to consult over it so that we resolve the matter. Please, on Tuesday, let us take a decision.

MR NASASIRA: I am wondering since the Opposition is not ready, is hon. Otada taking their place?

THE SPEAKER: Since the Opposition is not ready, I think we can wait until Tuesday and there is no harm. 

MOTION THAT PARLIAMENT DO RESOLVE ITSELF INTO A COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY FOR CONSIDERATION AND APPROVAL OF VOTE-ON-ACCOUNT FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2011/2012

2.33
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Madam Speaker and hon. Members, on 27 June 2011 I laid before this august House the Vote-on-Account for Financial Year 2011/2012. Subsequently, the Shadow Minister for Finance raised an issue on why some institutions did not have provisions for wages.

I wish to inform the House that the institutions that did not have a provision under the wage category are autonomous agencies and these agencies are not part of the traditional pay roll and therefore, their salaries are categorised as contract staff salaries in the government chart of accounts, which is classified as non-wage item while the salaries of the traditional civil servants are charged against item 211101, which is general staff salaries, categorised as wages.

This is what we have traditionally been doing for administrative purposes. Notwithstanding the above clarification, I would like to appreciate the issue raised by hon. Ekanya, the Shadow Minister for Finance, because it has enabled us to show with more clarity the total of Government’s wage bill and it is also necessary, given that this is a new Parliament.

Accordingly, I have reformulated the Vote-on-Account to ensure that the wage provision for this institution is properly reflected under the wage column no. 1, which I have submitted to this House.

I wish to inform the House that the reformatting does not in any way change the totality of the budget and the votes affected by this change are Vote 109 - Law Development Centre, Vote 110 – Uganda Industrial Research Institute, Vote 117 – Uganda Tourism Board, Vote 118 - The Uganda Road Fund, Vote 121 - Diary Development Authority, Vote 140 – Uganda Management Institute, Vote 141 – URA, Vote 142 - National Agricultural Research Organisation, Vote 143 – Uganda Bureau of Statistics, Vote 152 – NAADS Secretariat, Vote 153 – PPDA, Vote 154 – Uganda National Bureau of Standards and Vote 116 - National Medical Store, Vote 155 – Cotton Development Organisation and Vote 160 -  Uganda Coffee Development Authority.

Madam Speaker and hon. Members, I would, however, want to clarify that there are still some institutions such as the National Medical Stores, Cotton Development Organisation and Uganda Coffee Development Authority which do not have a wage provision because these institutions have been allowed to retain and supply non-tax revenue at source. The revenue and wage bill are not remitted to the Consolidated Fund but are presented and approved by their board and spent at source. I beg to submit.

2.38
THE SHADOW MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Geofrey Ekanya): I want to thank the Minister of Finance, hon. Omach for accepting the views of the Members of Parliament and for taking corrective action.

However, the statement of the Minister that contract staff and general staff salaries are categorised differently in charts of accounts is really not in line with the standard accounting system because as I stated last week, in Government we have so many contract staff whose wage and non-wage items, revenues or expenditures were clearly separated. And when you look at the information that we have, you realise that there are very many, for example, the National Roads Authority and many others. So, the reason that the minister has given in defence should not be accepted by this House.

Secondly, the minister in his statement, admitted to have taken corrective action, but I do not know whether the technical staff of the ministry are really seriously helping the minister. I am saying this because this is basically from the technical staff. For example, you cannot present a statement to say that you have separated wage and non-wage for the Cotton Development Organisation and the Coffee Development Authority yet at the same time you say, you have not. This is just simple and in primary school English, it is a big contradiction. It means the technical staff did read through and edit this document before giving it to the minister for presentation.

In the circumstances, I wish to propose, and that is why I stood up here yesterday to say that we are like an animal that is caught between a rock and a hard place. Today is the last day for this financial year. We cannot defer this matter anymore and we have to pass it. But I want to say that the minister should not use that as an excuse. Let us allow the Vote-on-Account to pass, but next week the minister should present the remaining sectors for purposes of record and information. This will help the Auditor-General, the Accountant-General, the parliamentary committees of finance, budget and PAC while doing their oversight functions. Otherwise, for the minister to say that these institutions be allowed because they have non-tax revenue – we have other institutions like Makerere University that also handle non-tax revenue. Makerere University collects income and spends it, but their wages are separate. So, the reason that the minister has given does not stand. The technical staff of the ministry should do their job. They should not let the minister come here to face embarrassment.

So, hon. Minister, if you accept that you will separate the items for the Cotton Development Authority, the Coffee Development Authority and the National Forestry Authority, we proceed to pass this while waiting for you to lay those before the House for purposes of information and record. I beg to move. Thank you.

2.42
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Nathan Nandala-Mafabi): Madam Speaker, thank you very much. First of all, the chart of account is not fixed yet it is for identifying items. There is no way you can contract staff that cannot be identified under salaries. What you would have done – maybe, you could create 0100 to cater for staff on contract.

Having said that, even if we said that we are time barred, there are some clarifications that the minister must respond to: we have the National Medical Stores with no values yet this is a Government body! Even if they are going to collect money, we must know what percentage – assuming we are paying them Shs 8 billion with some percentage for salaries; that must come out clearly. This will help Ugandans to know how much National Medical Stores is taking in form of salaries out of the money we are sending to them, which you have called non-wage. The same applies to the Coffee Development Authority and the Cotton Development Authority.

But I also want the minister to explain to us if he has the budgets for the universities, which must be approved. Do you have these budgets because I do not see them here; they should have been attached. This would help us to analyse the money they collect at source. We have to get to know that money as a projected collection this financial year and what they intend to spend. We are asking for all this because we need to find out whether the collections are not causing these institutions to cheat our people. The more they collect, the more expensive education services become. So, where are the budgets for the universities, because under the law, those budgets must be here? Thank you.

2.45
MS FLORENCE NAMAYANJA (DP, Bukoto County East, Masaka): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I also would like the Minister to make some clarifications. While these are funds to be accounted for, a list of accounting officers has been provided. However, when you look at the list for the local governments, you realise that almost all of them are in acting capacities. While the law provides for the accounting officers to be substantive in their positions, could the minister explain why people who are qualified to take up these positions substantively are not appointed to account for these funds? We have seen situations where in some institutions people hold positions in acting capacities for more than six months. Could the minister clarify on that?

MR OKUPA: Thank you, Madam, Speaker. Mine is just to remind the minister that as he gets up to respond to these issues, he does not forget to answer the question that I raised the other time regarding the independence of the Road Fund.

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Mine is probably about seeking guidance from you. Given what we have gone through, I know that our rules dictate that when the Vote-on-Account comes, we have to pass it. Could we amend the relevant rule so that in future when the Vote-on-Account is brought here, maybe we first send it to some committee for three or four days for further scrutiny before a report is brought here to have some of these anomalies checked by that committee? Otherwise, it appears the technical people just lump up the figures deliberately because they know we have to just pass them, yet with irregularities in some of the estimates.

THE SPEAKER: I think there is no problem with that, but in my communication today, I indicated this is a transition Parliament. Therefore, many things that ought to have been in place are not yet in place. But certainly, we can take that into account for the session. Minister, please respond.

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. On the issue about accounting officers on temporary basis, I would like to say that this will be looked into. Otherwise, as of now, this is the list of accounting officers who will be operating the Budget for 2011/2012.

On the other issues that have been raised, as our Rules of Procedure indicate, the Vote-on-Account is ordinarily debated and completed within one day. This is to enable Government to start spending a-third of what was read by the minister during the Budget Speech and anything that needs to be clarified or adjusted will be done through the various ministerial policy statements as we discuss them at the various committees and as we go through the appropriation of the budget. So, we will be able to deal with all these issues that have been raised at the time of this appropriation. I thank you, Madam Speaker. 

MR EKANYA: Madam Speaker, we are really trying to cooperate with the Minister and this is very simple English. The Minister said, “Accordingly, I have reformatted the Vote-on-Account to ensure that the wage provision for those institutions is properly reflected under the wage column No. 1, which I hereby lay on the Table…” and the minister read “the Law Development Centre, the Uganda Industrial Research Institute, the Uganda Tourism Board, the Road Fund, the Diary Development Authority, the Cotton Development Organisation and Coffee Development Authority among others.” But there is no change in the votes; is he fooling this House? We are trying to ask him to concede so that we pass the Vote-on-Account the way the rule says, so that he can bring the separation next week, for purposes of information. But he is taking us for granted and he says we have to pass it within one day, even when it is wrong? Is this House supposed to be used anyhow? 

THE SPEAKER: Let us not get into a debate. Hon. Minister, please just answer. We have other work to do. 

MR OMACH: Madam Speaker, when making my submission, I read the names of Vote 116 - National Medical Stores; Vote 155 - Cotton Development Organisation and Vote 160 - Uganda Coffee Development Authority and I said that whatever has been raised by this House now will be addressed. If you want us to give this submission next week, so be it. 

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Before the Minister comes next week to answer, I found on the list of the minister two missions that they claim have been opened - the mission in Tehran and the consulate in Guangzhou - and the Minister wants this House to approve funds for those missions; but as far as I know, those missions have not been opened. Why are you asking Parliament to approve money for those missions? We would like you to make a statement on that or the Minister of Foreign Affairs to come and tell this House when those missions were opened. Can you imagine, Madam Speaker that the Minister is even looking at that paper? That paper has got a lot of faults -(Interjections)– No, it is Ankara in Turkey and Guangzhou in Southern China. 

2.53
MR VINCENT SSEMPIJJA (Independent, Kalungu County East, Kalungu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. When we were at the districts, we used to hear reasons being given that Parliament had not passed the Vote-on-Account and we would spend almost three months without getting any monies; but I think we are passing this Vote-on-Account so that the monies go the next day to where they are supposed to go. 

Secondly, I want the honourable minister to assure us on the ministry’s earlier commitment that the wage component, which goes to the local governments, will be separated from the other recurrent expenditure because we have had scenarios where some districts cannot fully pay or if they pay, they are left with nothing to run their districts. So, it was a good promise and would be welcome if the wage component and the unconditional grant are separated, and I think you talked about pension and the development grants. 

Hon. Minister, I would also benefit from your knowledge about the formula that is being used in allocating funds to the different districts, because I heard that it changed. 

THE SPEAKER: But hon. Members, I think you are going into the general debate on the Budget. Today we are dealing with Vote-on-Account, we are supplying one third of the Budget so that Government and the institutions start working. You could engage the others when you go to your committees and when we report back for the budget debate. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, we accept that we need to pass the Vote-on-Account but there is no reason for us to pass money on non-existing entities. Even last year we passed money in these areas and we ate the money because they never opened. 

THE SPEAKER: Which areas?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: The law says not more than a-third; that means that you can pass even less than a-third. Why doesn’t the Minister come up and tell us what exactly is on line because even if you look at the development fund, not all this money is going to be spent in the first four months. Why don’t you withdraw some of this money from these embassies that we have been assured are not there and we move on? There are more mistakes here, by the way. 

MR OKUPA: We are all ready to approve the Vote-on-Account today but we do not want to approve them with inaccuracies. Hon. Minister, for purposes of Ankara and Guangzhou, these are non-existent missions. It does no harm for you to remove them and bring a supplementary at an appropriate time for us to help you. Otherwise, we cannot approve non-existent things, which even still have last year’s money. We are ready to pass this Vote-on-Account today but without these inaccuracies. 

2.57
MS JESCA ABABIKU (Independent, Woman Representative, Adjumani): Thank you, Madam Speaker. We are not hesitant in approving this proposed budget but as stakeholders in ensuring accountability of this country, we must be knowledgeable of what we are approving and as soon as we say yes, that will be the beginning of accountability. Therefore, some of these issues that have been raised are to clear our minds so that we have the surety. Specifically, on this issue of spending money at source, it is by law; the law has been made by us and we are accountable but at times laws provide loopholes. When somebody is engaged in spending money at source, it is so tempting. I will say that this august House is entitled to a guarantee that when we authorise money to be used at source, corruption is not bound to prevail. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

2.59
MRS MARGARET BABA DIRI (NRM, Woman Representative, Koboko): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for the presentation. I would like to get some clarification. 

I have been in this Parliament for a while and we have been passing the Vote-on-Account in the same way we have just done today. I do not know what is different this year that they want details of this budget -(Interjections)- yes. The Eighth Parliament observed the indicative budget showing how much money we were going to get. It is reflected in our general budget. 

Definitely, if we pass this Vote-on-Account, we shall be able to see whether this money has been under-spent or over-spent. That will come later. I am begging the Opposition to allow us pass this Vote-on-Account and proceed. Thank you, Madam Speaker. (Members rose)

THE SPEAKER: No, hon. Members. Hon. Nandala-Mafabi, please wind up. The Minister should answer so that the questions do not continue coming.

MR NANDALA MAFABI: Madam Speaker, it is because of your leadership that we are raising these issues. These issues have been existing. We could raise them and no action was being taken. The issue of missions was one of the issues we raised last year by asking, “Why do you appropriate money for non-existing missions?” Now you are here and we are telling you this was wrong. We do not want to –(Interruption)

MR BYARUGABA: Madam Speaker, I would like to inform my honourable colleague that these two missions he is referring to are overdue. We have been struggling to get more than two. Now that we have these two, you are suggesting that they are not there. How can you open an embassy in Guangzhou where you do not have a building? There is some element of capital input. You must have a structure –(Interjections)- and then, you must have money to even pay salaries. You also need the same for [MR NANDALA-MAFABI: “I have got the information.”] Actually, we are even thinking about Juba. The few we have are not enough. We are trying to say, “Can’t we have these other two?” I am a Chairman of the Foreign Affairs Committee and that is why I am rising on a point of information. I beg this House to kindly allow as many embassies as possible. We are looking for trade –(Interjections)- I thank you.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: We thank you very much for that. In fact, we are trying to help you. We are saying that last year, we appropriated money for these places. If they never functioned; you should have castigated the Ministry of Foreign Affairs that, “What did you do with our money last year?” If you are going to come here and support them when they took money last year, I think you are making a mistake. We are helping you. What happened to last year’s money? That was the question. The missions are not there. So, they have not done anything up to now.

If we went through this, we could raise many issues. But what we have seen now are these two issues. Why doesn’t the Minister concede to these ones because there are more we could raise? Otherwise, we never saw where last year’s money went. 

THE SPEAKER: But hon. Members, I know that we have not seen the policy statements. I do not know what the Ministry of Foreign Affairs is going to report in the policy statement. We are debating in anticipation. If he does not put them there, we shall catch him on the balance of the budget. Minister, please, answer and we proceed.

3.03
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, the information we supply here comes from the respective ministries. For the case of the missions, this comes from foreign affairs. If the missions are not there, then the money will not be spent. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I put the question that this House do dissolve into a Committee of Supply for consideration and approval of Vote-on-Account for the financial year 2011/2012.

(Question put, and agreed to.)

COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY

Vote-on-Account for the Financial Year 2011/2012, Central Government Recurrent Expenditure

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, I put the question that the total sum of Shs 775,826,720,000 under the Central Government be provided for as Vote-on-Account for recurrent expenditure for the Financial Year 2011/2012.

(Question put, and agreed to.)

Central Government Development Expenditure

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that the total sum of Shs 1,512,898,357,000 be provided for as Vote-on-Account for development expenditure for the Financial Year 2011/2012.

(Question put, and agreed to.)

Local Government Recurrent Expenditure

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that the total sum of Shs 418,399,877,000 under Local Government be provided for as Vote-on-Account for recurrent expenditure for the Financial Year 2011/2012.

(Question put, and agreed to.)

Local Government Development Expenditure

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that the total sum of Shs 133,487,753,000 under local government be provided for as Vote-on-Account for development expenditure for the Financial Year 2011/2012.

(Question put, and agreed to.)

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

3.07
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Madam Chairperson and hon. Members, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of Supply reports there to. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that the House do resume and the Committee of Supply reports there to.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding_)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY

3.08
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Madam Speaker and hon. Members, I beg to report that the Committee of Supply has considered the Vote-on-Account for the Financial Year 2011/2012 and supplied it with some amendments. 

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY

3.10
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Madam Speaker and hon. Members, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of Supply be adopted. 

THE SPEAKER: I put the question that this House to adopt the report from the Committee of Supply.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted.)

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO AUTHORISE GOVERNMENT TO INCUR EXPENDITURE OF SHS 61,333,333,333 ONLY TOWARDS THE THERMO POWER SUBSIDY UNDER VOTE 017 - MINISTRY OF ENERGY AND MINERAL DEVELOPMENT ABOVE VOTE-ON-ACCOUNT AMOUNT FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2011/12

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, before the Minister comes I would like you to join me in welcoming youth from the Forum for Democratic Change; they have come to observe the proceedings of Parliament. You are welcome. (Applause)

3.10
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Madam Speaker and hon. Members, I beg to move for a resolution of Parliament to authorise Government to incur expenditure of Shs 61,333,333,333 only towards the thermo power subsidy under vote 017 Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development above the vote on account amount for the Financial Year 2011/12. I beg to move as follows: 

“WHEREAS in 2006 Government approved a short-term plan to use thermo plants to mitigate Uganda’s electricity shortages,

AND WHEREAS the power tariffs at that time were unaffordable for most consumers of power, and Government took a policy decision to buy down tariffs and approve budgetary subsidies to the power sector aimed at keeping tariffs at affordable levels;

AND WHEREAS the subsidies were approved to stay until the commissioning of Bujagali Hydro Electric Power Plant of 250 megawatts in October 2010;

WHEREAS the commissioning of the said Bujagali Hydro Electric Power Plant delayed due to unforeseen circumstances and is now expected in October, 2011; and that is one year later than planned; 

AND WHEREAS on 08 June 2011, Government presented before this Parliament that statement of revenue and expenditure for Financial Year 2011/12 in accordance with the provisions of Article 155 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda;

AND WHEREAS Government has in the said state of revenue and expenditure provided Shs 92 billion to the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development in the Budget for Financial Year 2011/12 for the thermo power subsidy;

WHEREAS Parliament has just approved Shs 30,666,666,667 only as Vote-on-Account for thermo power subsidy under the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development; 

AND WHEREAS Government having considered the implications of the current risk of not meeting the subsidy requirements on the electricity generation considered it necessary to spend Shs 61,333,333,333 only above the Vote-on-account to immediately pay outstanding subsidy owed to the thermo power general during the first quarter of Financial Year 2011/12.

NOW, THEREFORE, I beg that this House do authorise Government to incur this additional expenditure of Shs 61,333,333,333 only above the Vote-on-Account during the first quarter of the Financial Year 2011/12 and this will bring the total authorisation to Shs 92 billion in accordance with my prayer.”

I beg to move.

3.15
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Nathan Nandala-Mafabi): Madam Speaker, mine is a grievance on the English, which is used. He says: “Outstanding”, how can it be outstanding when the first quarter of 2011/12 starts tomorrow on 1st July, 2011? So, what does he mean by “outstanding owed”? We do not owe anybody. In any case, since we have already budgeted for each quarter, this money must be already in the vote. The first quarter of starts tomorrow; how can he say we have money outstanding? We have just passed a Vote-on-Account, which means we have budgeted for that money on our recurrent expenditure.  

MS BETTY AMONGI: Madam Speaker, we do not have the motion yet this is a very important issue that we need to scrutinise and debate. I do not think it is only me without the motion.

MR OMACH: Madam Speaker, copies of this motion were distributed – they are outside on the table.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I have got confirmation that they are on the table –(Interjections)– I am still waiting for the Minister to respond to the issues raised. 

MR OMACH: Madam Speaker, in the first submission on the Vote-on-Account we had these two prayers, one for the Vote-on-Account and one for this very motion which I have just read and it was attached and this -(Interjections)- distributed to all. I am saying in our submission on the Vote-on-Account, which I presented on 27 June 2011 -(Interruption)

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: Madam Speaker, I am rising on a point of order pursuant to Article 79(1) of the Constitution. Under that provision, the Members of Parliament have a duty to examine and scrutinise every aspect related to what Government is proposing. Aware of that obligation, is the honourable minister in order to continue explaining to us on no substance regarding what we are supposed to know? Would we be responsible Members of Parliament? Why doesn’t he withdraw the motion?

THE SPEAKER: No, hon. Members, the Minister is the mover of the motion and I think what he is doing is justifying his motion which is okay. Please, justify -(Interjections)- clerk, where is the motion? But hon. Members I understand you have got the motion!

MR OMACH: Madam Speaker, on the 27th of this month, I presented the Vote-on-Account and in that submission, of which I gave 400 copies to this august House, I attached this motion on all those 400 copies. But the amended version of the Vote-on-Account did not have this motion attached. It is one Parliament and the submission was received and that is why I have now presented it and I have requested that the Members do debate it and do pass it.

THE SPEAKER: But hon. Minister you are not helping us. Can you justify the motion?

MR OMACH: Madam Speaker, the current tariff as far as electricity is concerned is extremely high and we have been giving support to particularly the thermal power generation of up to 92 billion every financial year -(Interruption) 

MS ALASO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, and I really want to appreciate you for giving me an opportunity to follow what is going on. I understood that a few minutes ago the Vote-on-Account which we passed was meant to give money to Government to operate for the next three or so months. That is what I understood. Now I am trying to understand this motion, not the justification, but this additional request for money. Is it a supplementary on Vote-on-Account? What is it? Couldn’t it have been in the vote-on-Account? I just want to follow what the House is doing. Otherwise, I am really lost.

THE SPEAKER: That is exactly what I have asked the Minister to do; explain the purpose of his motion. That is what I have asked him to do. Allow him to explain. First allow him to explain.

MR OMACH: So, Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, the purpose of this is to frontload. Instead of paying this Shs 92 billion in three or four different quarters, we are saying that we pay all this 92 billion to be able to subsidise the tariffs for the whole year so that we do not have this situation where the public of Uganda would have this problem of having to pay much higher tariffs. That is the purpose of our prayer, that we frontload this and it is paid once in the first quarter of the Financial Year 2011/2012. And with your permission, maybe the Minister for Energy would like to throw in some more light on this. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: No, hon. Members let us receive the explanation behind this motion then you can ask your questions. Can the Minister for Energy explain what she is doing? (Mr Nandala Mafabi rose_) No, no, hon. Nandala.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, it is true we want power. I want the Minister to explain “outstanding”. The words “outstanding subsidy for the first quarter” - we have not started, so how do you talk of arrears today when we have not even consumed the power?

THE SPEAKER: Let the Minister explain what she wants to do and then the other Minister will tell you whether the year has started or not. (Laughter)

THE MINISTER OF ENERGY AND MINERAL DEVELOPMENT (Ms Irene Muloni): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Hon. Members, I would like you to appreciate the difficulties that the energy sector has been going through right from last year when insufficient generation was being put on to the grid and therefore thermal generation was brought on board as an interim measure. You recall that last year and up to date, the fluctuation in the foreign exchange rate, the rising oil prices and the subsidy that was being applied to the thermal generation, which was given by the World Bank, was exhausted last year in October. So, all these put together result in outstanding subsidies which Government has been applying for thermal generation. If we do not frontload by way of approving to spend this Shs 92 billion, the end result will be an increase in the tariff. That is the matter of fact. 

MR OKUPA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I just want some clarification in order to be very clear with what the minister is stating. 

One, the Minister of Finance stated that he is paying these arrears. Two, he came and contradicted himself and said, “We want to pay for the whole year.” These are two different things. Now, the Minister of Energy has come to say, “We want to pay such that we stop the escalation of prices.” To me, interpreting this is that we want to lend this businessman money a year in advance, which is wrong. We have already provided for 31 billion to cover the first three months. Can’t this businessman wait until September when we approve the overall budget and then we pay the balance? Why the hurry? These are things which make us suspicious when you bring this element here. 

Madam Speaker, this issue of frontloading I remember at the time when we broke off the other day the reason we brought the issues and the Minister said we cannot frontload I am surprised that now the Minister is coming here defending the frontloading. I remember the discussion we had with the Minister and we said we cannot frontload. But I am surprised that the Minister wants to frontload yet two days ago he said no in that meeting that we had. 

3.30
HTE SHADOW MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Geofrey Ekanya): Madam Speaker, I thank God that I have been in this Parliament for some time; this is going to be the fourteenth year. I want to inform hon. Omach and the Minister of Energy that we badly need this money but they should allow Parliament and the necessary systems to work. The Constitution is very clear; yesterday we constituted committees and there is a Committee on Energy and a Committee on Natural Resources. There is also a Committee on Budget and hon. Tim Lwanga is the chairperson. There is also a Committee on Finance. I have been a Member of the Committee on Budget where hon. Rose Akol was the chairperson; the ministries of finance and that of energy brought requests in April immediately after elections. We discussed these requests and their justification was that the IDA loan, which was supporting this sector is exhausted and the person who represented the Minister of Finance then, hon. Ruth Nankabirwa said that the request from the Ministry of Energy was not clear to them and that they needed more information from them to the extent of how much they exactly need in terms of subsidies to subsidise the entire thermal energy because we have Aggreko, Electromax and we have others in Mutundwe and Arua. They were intimidating the MPs that if they did not approve that money that day there would be a shut down. 

The Members of the committees on budget and natural resources visited these thermal plants and discussed with the management. At the end of the day we came back and approved a supplementary of Shs 92 billion in April and I have the documents. The Minister of Finance agreed in the meeting that they were going to sit with the Minister of Energy to look at the total requirements of that sector so that during the budgeting process this item is sorted out once and for all. But I am today surprised that today hon. Omach – and to show you all that the Ministry of Finance is not yet convinced by the Minister of Energy, in the entire budget for this sector they have brought only the money required for the entire financial year, that is Shs 92 billion. Even if you gave them this Shs 92 billion – and according to the information that I have as said by the minister – to cater for outstanding subsidies which starts tomorrow; what about the next two to four months?

So, Madam Speaker, I ask the Minister of Finance and Energy to go back to the drawing board and do the proper thing and this matter is referred to the committees on budget, finance and energy and then they bring us a report here and we pass it. We have no problem with that because we are the ones who need these subsidies. How much does the Ministry of Energy need in form of subsidy; is it Shs 1 trillion or Shs 500 billion for the next 12 months? 

The Constitution is very clear. In Article 154(5) it says: “Any sum issued in any financial year from the Consolidated Fund account under Clause 4 – that is the Vote-on-Account - of this article in respect to any service of Government shall not exceed the amount shown as required on an account in respect of that service in the Vote-on-Account approved by Parliament by resolution for that financial year.” 
(b) “That amount shall be offset against the amount ­– understand the phrase ‘shall be offset’ – provided in respect of that service in the Appropriation Act for that financial year when the law comes into operation.” 

To offset means: if you have my Shs 100 million and I have a problem, first give me Shs 50 million and when we sign the agreement and transfer the documents, we shall offset the Shs 50 million; you give me the balance and we conclude the deal. But if you want all the Shs 100 million before the Appropriation Act comes into force; this is a total contradiction. So besides the ministries of energy and finance not being together, this motion is legally untenable on the Floor of the House.

3.34
MS ROSE AKOL (NRM, Woman Representative, Bukedea): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to confirm what hon. Ekanya has just said. In April we gave Shs 92 billion as supplementary to Vote 007 as a subsidy for the thermal plants. That Shs 92 billion was to clear invoices running from January 2011 to June 2011. I also confirm that there is no invoice outstanding as of today, according to what we approved as supplementary in April. What I believe the minister requires is money to cater for subsidies running from 1 July 2011. 

If there is a provision on the Vote-on-Account I believe that these suppliers can supply their goods then when we approve the budget in September – it is just three months from now – you cannot then come and maybe request for - I do not know. You have a provision of three percent according to the Budget Act. You may request for a supplementary or by then there will be money we would have approved then you can pay any outstanding invoices because even by April you had outstanding invoices from January. Why can’t we now approve this Shs 33 million? 

And on top of that this is a very important document that the Minister is reading; he says by October the Bujagali Hydropower Station will be operational; it is about four months to go. We do not even have details of the thermal plants, which are going to be catered for – the other time they gave us these details but even then after approving Shs 92 billion we still had load shedding for unknown reasons. We need to know why it was so yet we were assured that there would be no more load shedding after the Shs 92 billion had been given. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, if it is true that this House appropriated money to support the sector up to June 30, which is today, and we have now given you a Vote-on-Account totalling to Shs 33 million -

3.38
MR WILBERFORCE YAGUMA (NRM, Kashari County, Mbarara): Madam Speaker, we appear to be watching uncoordinated movement but from what I see here, Vote-on-Account, we immediately pay outstanding subsidy owed to the thermal power generator during the first quarter of 2011/2012. Some of us have just joined Parliament and since it is our first time, when you talk of April, some of us get lost. But what I get from this statement is that this payment is so crucial that if we don’t pay, then these thermal power generating companies will not be able to produce power for our consumption. 

MR NZOGHU: Madam Speaker, I am totally humbled by the submission of my colleague when he tries to derail the House when you and other Members have clearly guided this House by altering the language in a wrong way when Members have corrected it. I just want to ask why in this case he is trying to say that “outstanding” is not understood by this honourable House. Is he in order, Madam Speaker? 

THE SPEAKER: You know, hon. Minister I don’t know whether we really need to debate this matter. What is “outstanding?” if you were given money to run to the 30th of this month, which is today, what is “outstanding?” 

MS MULONI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. “Outstanding” means that the subsidy that Government has been meeting towards the tariff for thermal generation for the period that the IPP - power generators have supplied us with electricity and we have outstanding dues. And the reason I gave earlier was that given the fluctuation of the dollar because the IPPs are paid in US dollars. Now if our budget is in Uganda Shillings and the dollar has fluctuated over a period of time, it means for the same unit of electricity that they are supplying us we are paying a lot more. That is exactly what it means. 

In addition, the cost of oil is - you have seen how oil prices have been fluctuating. Last year when the budget was read, a barrow of oil was fluctuating between US $75 and US $80. Today it is above US $100. So, when you put all those into context –(Interjections)- Madam Speaker, let me explain. 

THE SPEAKER: Let the Minister explain. 

MS MULONI: Let me explain so that Members can understand - 

MR KYANJO: Madam Speaker, it would be most unfortunate for people watching television at home to begin detecting that the House is not either united or does not understand what is going on, which is not the case.  It is also fatal for the Government to be embarrassed continuously. I would propose that as a matter of procedure if you don’t mind, you suspend the sitting so that the ministers can consult their staff who are still around so that we can have a thorough explanation instead of haggling with them. I beg to move.  

3.43
MR EMMANUEL DOMBO (NRM, Bunyole County East, Butaleja): Thank you, Madam Speaker. According to the various sources of information that have just been given to this House from those who were in the previous Parliament and did pass a supplementary and the current need, it will be very difficult for us as a House now to go over this matter without sending it to the committee -(Applause)- because our committees are fully constituted. It is only than that we can reconcile the records and the Minister can put her stated cause, bring documentary evidence and we come back the following day and pass this motion. But what is being said on the Floor of this House, by even the Minister is merely a conversation because there is no specific evidence to show what the money is going to do. I thank you, Madam Speaker. 

3.44
MR MUHAMMAD NSEREKO (NRM, Kampala Division Central, Kampala): Madam Speaker, thank you very much. Just like the previous Member said and hon. Ekanya, we have instituted committees, whereas there is dire need for power in this country, this is the taxpayers’ money that we are coming to play about with. We really need to know the nitty-gritty, even as far as going to the agreements that were signed so that we can come out with something explicit. We know how fast the Government wants this to be put to rest but equally the taxpayers also want to know where their monies are being allotted to. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Yeah, hon. Minister, you know the words which are causing a problem are: “Above the Vote-on-Account to immediately pay outstanding subsidy of the thermal power generators during the first quarter of financial year 2011/12.” No one has given us an explanation about what happened to the Shs 92 billion that we gave you. 

MR OMACH: Madam Speaker and hon. Members, we undertake to pass this motion through the appropriate committee of Parliament. 

THE SPEAKER: Okay, hon. Members, the motion stands committed to the Committee on Budget and they may incorporate the Committee on Natural Resources and then give us a report. Thank you. 

STATEMENT BY THE MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES ON THE FOOT AND MOUTH DISEASE SITUATION IN THE COUNTRY

3.47
THE MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (Mr Tress Bucyanayandi): Madam Speaker and hon. Members, this is a statement to Parliament on the current Foot and Mouth Disease status in the Teso region. The document is being circulated but I will continue as you receive it.  

Foot and Mouth Disease was noticed and reported by the Kumi District Veterinary Officer as early as January, 2011. The infection subsequently spread to the neighbouring districts of Bukedea, Pallisa, Nakapiripirit and Amuria at about the same time. By the end of February, the disease had spread to Tororo, Amudat, Kumi, Soroti, Serere, Kitgum, Sironko, Bulambuli and Abim districts. But I am happy to report that in most of the districts, the disease has been contained and they are clear of it although there are still outbreak hotspots in Katakwi, Bukedea, Kumi, Sironko, Abim and Bulambuli. 

Now, clearly as you all know that this is a disease of economic importance in the sense that it is of social and economic importance to livestock in the whole world. It is highly contagious; affects many animal species; is difficult to control; has major impact on trade of animals and animal products and causes dramatic reduction in livestock productivity wherever and whenever it occurs. There have been several Government interventions to try and contain this disease:

The first intervention has been of course to place quarantine and restrict the movement of animals.

The second intervention has been an investigation to try and identify the strains of the virus. It has been confirmed that there is a mixture of serotype O and serotype SAT1 viruses in this outbreak. SAT1 stands for South Africa Serotype one. There are several serotypes originating from South Africa.

To date, a total of 420,000 doses of FMD vaccines were imported and of that, 211,000 doses have been used in the Teso region to try and combat the disease. I have attached an annex to show the distribution of the doses sent in that region.

Financial support has also been extended for surveillance purposes as well as support to enforcement staff in that area. So, technical support has also been given.

By way of way forward, the ministry remains committed, of course, to improving animal health, delivery of services to all stakeholders and will continue to sensitise the public on prompt and early reporting on animal diseases as they occur. 

I want to conclude by saying that as I wrote this statement, two supplementary issues came in and I want to respond to them. They are not written here because I did not have them. One was a question as to whether the vaccine used was still potent. I cannot say yes or no here and now but I can say this is a matter for further investigation. I will ask trained officers to find out because it is likely that in between importation and delivery to the field and the cold chains, some of the vaccine may have lost potency. So, I cannot answer this question now.

The next question was as to whether the cattle markets can be auctioned at this stage. The answer is no because prevention and restriction of movement is still in force. What happens when this kind of thing happens is that you allow a period of 90 days between the last cured animal. In other words, if animals A, B, and C were attacked and A and B are cured but C is still sick, from that day onwards, we count 90 days before we lift restrictions. So that is the measure that is being taken and I want to thank you for bringing this topic up. So from now onwards, they are going to maintain surveillance and ensure that we contain the disease. I thank you.

3.52
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman Representative, Serere): Thank you, Madam Speaker and I want to thank the hon. Minister for his response. The issue of Foot and Mouth Disease in Uganda doesn’t seem to have got the attention that is required to help the livestock sector. Every time you hear about interventions, it is when there is an outbreak. 

In other parts of the world, serious preventive measures are taken. You need to go by road from Zimbabwe to Botswana and you find at the border, personnel disinfecting vehicles by spraying for Foot and Mouth Disease. Human beings get out of their cars and their shoes are sprayed to prevent transmission of Foot and Mouth Disease from one country to another. Here it is a laissez faire attitude. I want to lament the failure of the ministry of agriculture to make interventions that would save real livelihoods in these communities where people depend on cows. 

My concern is that it is now very easy for the commissioner to slam a quarantine. It is easier for him or her to come, impose a quarantine and walk away and forget the fact that children will lose a term because they cannot find school fees; people cannot find food and milk. Entire financial distress is experienced by these communities but the commissioner just turns his or her back and says, “I have done my part”. This is evidence in the interventions that follow after the quarantine has been imposed.

Madam Speaker, Serere District, which I represent, has 200,000 heads of cattle. Since the imposition of the quarantine, only 25,000 have been vaccinated. What is going to happen as the others continue to be unwell, sick or infected?

Soroti District has 130,000 animals and only 23,200 have been vaccinated. So is it the view of the ministry that we just sit by and watch and hope that God does a miracle? Should we pray for the cows that they get healed? Should all the animals in Teso wait for these 420,000 doses when you know the animals are actually more?

Madam Speaker, the challenge is vaccine shortage. The second challenge is that even where the vaccines have been given, the local governments have not been able to find resources to help the inadequate personnel to move around and vaccinate all the animals and do surveillance. So there are problems of operational finances.

I think that the ministry should intervene, send money and help with the vaccination. Also, the districts are depending on interns; if universities don’t send interns, you find a district has only one veterinary district officer and maybe one or two in the sub-county. They cannot manage the outbreak of the Foot and Mouth Disease. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

3.56
MS KYABANGI NAKATO (NRM, Woman Representative, Gomba): Madam Speaker, I am actually seeking clarification from the minister. My district is not talked about and yet this disease was detected in January this year and since then, there was some vaccination between January and February of 20,000 head of cattle out of 70,000. Ever since February, there has not been any vaccination and the quarantine is still going on. We are wondering what is happening; so I am requesting the Minister to explain the issue of Gomba. Thank you very much.

3.58
MS ROSE AKOL (NRM, Woman Representative, Bukedea): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the Minister for coming up with this statement but I am a bit disappointed. I expected the Minister to have issued a statement showing the number of doses so far issued to the district vis-à-vis the number of animals that actually exist in those districts so that we know the performance; whether you are at 10 percent or 20 percent because if you are giving only 32,000, I know we have over 200,000 animals in Bukedea so what about the rest? It means that this is no effort at all because animals are still dying.

I also want the Minister to investigate by sending some people there. My people are complaining that actually some of the animals that are being treated are the ones dying. I do know whether the handling process of these vaccines is correct or not - that one needs to be investigated also. 

I want to inform the Minister that despite this quarantine people are actually killing their animals for meat. Now they call it “super match”, you will not hear them calling it meat, they call it “super match” but the problem is that these animals are being killed in toilets and other dirty places and then they are sold to people on the black market. I think there is a need to see how these meat eaters can be availed with meat during this quarantine because we are actually creating a problem.

MR KAKOBA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the hon. Member for giving way. The clarification I want to make is about strengthening the point my colleague hon. Akol has talked about. If you look at this statement on paragraph one, it is said that the disease was first reported in Katakwi in early January 2011; but if you look at paragraph three, it again says that currently some areas are clear of the disease but there are outbreak hot spots in Katakwi. The clarification I want to make is that if this disease was reported in Katakwi in January, how come that Katakwi is still a hot spot? Does it mean that nothing has been done ever since it was reported? I wish the Minister could explain that.

THE SPEAKER: I will give all the cattle territory Members three minutes each.

MS AKOL: I want to make an appeal to the Minister that before you send the amount of drugs that you are giving to the districts, make an assessment of the number of animals because just 3,200 compared to 200,000 is a very small effort towards treating this disease. Our children are no longer going to school, they are at home. I hope you treat this as an emergency.

4.03
DR KASIRIVU ATWOOKI (NRM, Bugangaizi County West, Kibaale): Madam Speaker, Foot and Mouth Disease is a very bad disease and the presence of this disease in any country disadvantages that country because it cannot export meat or meat products. For as long as this disease continues to linger around Uganda, despite the potential that we have to export meat, we cannot.

I would have wished that the Minister, in his appendix, would give us how many animals have been vaccinated instead of how many diseases have been worked on in the Teso region. The number of animals that have been vaccinated would have given us a picture whether the disease is being tackled.

Secondly, since Parliament appointed me as the chair of the committee, when minister appears before the committee, he should come with this information. Decentralisation is a good policy and Uganda has been hailed because of it. However, sometimes it is a big disadvantage in some areas, as hon. Alaso did point out; the Commissioner for Veterinary Services has no direct control over the staff in the districts. He cannot direct them or discipline them if they do not do what is required. There was a proposal and I do not know whether it has been adopted - it said that disease control in the ministry and the staff of veterinary department should be centralised so that they are directly controlled by the Commissioner for Veterinary Services. Until we do that, these diseases will continue to flourish. We need to be serious and discuss how we are going to have the livestock sector survive.

4.05
MS JACQUILINE AMONGIN (NRM, Woman representative, Ngora): I would like to thank hon. Alice Alaso for tabling this issue in the House yesterday. However, I have a few issues to raise to the line ministry. When you look at Ngora District, since November last year when we were still campaigning there was quarantine and up to now we have it. Cattle cannot move, butchers are closed and yet in the whole of Teso it is Ngora that has not suffered from the Foot and Mouth Disease. We wrote to the ministry of agriculture to explain to us what we needed to do. They said that cattle - even if they were not affected by the disease - they needed to be vaccinated.

When they were distributing the vaccine, Ngora was not included. Children are remaining home because for us in Ngora we depend on cattle. When we sell then we can pay school fees and buy food and earn a living. We cannot even sell meat. There has not been any communication; they say that the best they can do is to treat but for how long are we going to wait? 

The other issue that I want to raise is that we have around 230,000 head of cattle in the whole district but they are just there idle. We do not know the way forward and I think the ministry should really come up and give us a timeframe on what the districts that are not affected but are suffering should do otherwise for us it is a big problem out there. A follow up mechanism should be put in place. Most of the cattle that were treated with vaccines from the ministry of agriculture in the neighbouring districts of Bukedea and Kumi are now sick. We are wondering whether they are using expired drugs or not. 

THE SPEAKER: You have a point of information? Somebody has to be on the Floor before you inform them.

4.09
MR SAMUEL SEMUGABA (NRM, Kiboga County West, Kyankwanzi): I have stood up on the issue of Foot and Mouth Disease and other related diseases in animals in Uganda.

First and foremost, the ministry of agriculture and I hope the Office of the Prime Minister - are the ones going to kill the veterinary department in Uganda and that is why His Excellency, the President is concerned about NAADS. They have phased out the extension workers in the districts and this has been swallowed up by NAADS. They are employing them on contract. We do not have extension veterinary workers on the ground to carry out the vaccination. The district veterinary officer cannot carry out vaccination of animals alone. I propose that the institution of the extension workers even in agriculture – agriculture will die a natural death because NAADS is a programme that will cease and the extension workers should be restored.

His Excellency, the President is complaining and that he is not aware that extension workers were phased out. When an outbreak occurs, the minister of agriculture should carry out massive immunisation other than sending just small doses because if you have 300,000 animals in the area and an outbreak has come and then you send very few doses, what will you have done? You will have done nothing because according to my experience, even vaccinated animals after six months can get re- infected.

In addition to that, some of these vaccines are expired because you find when they were procured during the previous infection; they are dispatched to districts when they are not yet tested. It happened at one time in my region. I, therefore, propose that the ministry works out a mechanism of establishing animal or veterinary clinic centres in cattle corridors so that we can check the blood of the animals for Foot and Mouth Disease and other diseases; so that we can easily check and prevent the spread of the disease. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: I thank you.

4.12
MRS MARGARET IRIAMA (NRM, Woman Representative, Moroto): I thank you. First of all, I want to thank you for having given me this time since we started debating in this House.

My comment is on the statement that has been given by the Minister concerning the Foot and Mouth Disease. Now when you look at the rate at which this disease has affected animals since it was diagnosed in January, I imagine so many animals should have been affected. 

When I look at the report, I have seen Abim and Nakapiripirit – when you look at the direction of Abim and Nakapiripirit, other districts are within and when you look at the movements of animals, it means that the number of animals that have been infected should have gone up. I am now wondering what the ministry of agriculture has done to ensure that the medicine has been dispatched especially to this region and if so, I need to understand whether this is perhaps another Tsunami. Is it the intended action that the vaccines have not been dispatched to these districts? I need that explanation and I thank you very much.

4.14
MR MAJEGERE WAIRA (Independent, Bunya County East, Mayuge): I thank you. My concern is on the statement made by the Minister. Surely when you look at the statement, it is a little wanting especially if you look at item No. 4 which is the way forward. I expect the ministry to give us a way forward by detailing the steps that the Minister is going to put in place in order to mitigate the problem. 

If you look at the statement, it is like the objective of the ministry which was picked from many of the objectives and you do not expect to sensitise the public to be informing you that there is a disease here when cattle are dying. I think you should tell us the measures you are going to put into place in order to mitigate the problem in place. I thank you. 

4.15
MS ANNE AURU (NRM, Woman Representative, Moyo): I thank you. My concern is on the statement of the honourable minister. I expected the Minister to give us information on how many cattle have died from those districts so far because his statement is important so that Parliament is able to give recommendations and make an informed decision.

Perhaps some of these districts have lost a lot of cattle and Parliament would come up with a recommendation that a certain family or individuals who are heavily affected should be considered for restocking. I feel it is still important for the honourable minister to give us that information.

The disease outbreak started in January and it quickly spread to very many districts and yet the Minister has informed us that there have been measures put in place. Why is it that the spread is continuing? He should be able to give us that information. I am not from the cattle corridor but I think we are debating national matters.

4.17
MR GREGORY MATOVU (NRM, Bukanga County, Isingiro): I thank you very heartily for recognising that Bukanga also lies in the cattle corridor and is also affected by the same quarantine that affects Teso. I thank the minister of agriculture for the paper he has presented. 

I will be brief. I will ask him one question. In his conclusion he said that a quarantine restriction is only lifted after at least 90 days when the last infected animal has been healed. In Bukanga, the quarantine has been instituted there and it has lasted over ten years - [HON. MEMBERS: “Ten years!”] I have a witness here besides me; the former RDC, hon. Julius Bigirwa. He was the former RDC and he can confirm to this House that for the three years he was there, the quarantine was in place. My question, Mr Minister, is it possible that the Minister as much he has laboured to give an explanation to our colleagues, should do further research in order to furnish this House with areas that have been affected in a similar way to enable us conclude this matter once and for all? Thank you.

4.19
MR KAB BITEKYEREZO (NRM, Mbarara Municipality, Mbarara): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister of agriculture for doing some trials. However, when you look at the introduction of the report particularly paragraph 2, it says that by the end of February this disease had spread to Tororo, Amudat, Kumi, Soroti, Serere, Kitgum, Sironko, Bulambuli and Abim districts. But to my surprise, when you look at the doses that were given to the Teso region – these places were completely forgotten. My question is: why didn’t the ministry of agriculture honestly think about Tororo where the disease had been reported there first?

Two, I happen to come from Mbarara Municipality, but remember I am surrounded by areas that have animals. If you go to Mbarara Municipality, you will see the veterinary offices in a complete non-functional state. In fact they are covered by grass. I think hon. Matovu can bear me witness. This means the ministry of agriculture has a very big role of monitoring these offices to make sure things work instead of just giving statements when things are going on very badly. You have to remember that people who depend on animals are completely finished. They can’t now pay school fees for their children and they cannot even afford salt because this is their sole source of income. I want to think that our lives will cease to exist when we keep silent on things that matter, Madam Speaker.

I would like to suggest that the ministry of agriculture gives us a detailed statement with interventions for purposes of helping the affected people start earning their incomes. Also, there must be centralisation of veterinary services in this country. This is so because decentralising them has not worked for the people. Mr Minister, as you go to visit your constituency in Kisoro, kindly pay a visit to the veterinary offices in Mbarara. You will see that they are completely covered by grass. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

4.22
MS ELIZABETH KARUNGI (NRM, Woman Representative, Kanungu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Much as we are talking about the Foot and Mouth Disease in regard to the places mentioned, I would like to inform the Minister that in Kanungu, there is a serious problem with another type of animals - not the cows necessarily. The animals from the Queen Elizabeth National Park have killed some people and still threaten more lives. I am so glad that this issue of animals has come up –(Interjections)– please, protect me.

As I was saying, much as we talk about the cows, we should also consider the issue of animals from the forests especially those in Kanungu. As I talk now there is a lady who already lost her life with her child and the husband being seriously injured. More lives are also under threat with many people fearing to go to their gardens. So, we need immediate intervention. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

4.24
MR JOHN BAPTIST LOKII (NRM, Matheniko County, Moroto): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to say that we are deliberating on a tough subject. Each time I hear any livestock disease outbreak in Uganda, I develop headache. This is because most of the livelihoods of the people in the cattle corridor are derived from the sale of livestock products. 

The ministry has suffered because of inappropriate policies. A case in point is the paradigm shift from the public animal health service delivery to the private animal health service delivery. This paradigm shift meant a change in policy. The disease control mechanisms were also privatised to the local farmers. This has seen the control of some of these diseases completely defeating the local farmers. Now we are hearing of cattle dying in the various districts of Uganda with the country losing a lot of resources. The households are suffering because they cannot get access to food and income. 

I, therefore, challenge the ministry of agriculture to activate the contingency plans for livestock disease control because these are currently being activated by NGOs especially the Food and Agricultural Organisation of the United Nations. Little effort comes from the Government to take full control of the livestock vaccination in Uganda. We are only relying on outside support. So, where is the role of Government? What is the ministry of agriculture doing? Why do we have to leave all these things to the NGOs? If there is a budget, then it is better to have all the vaccines supplied to districts that fall into the cattle corridor.

The ministry has also suffered because of the mergers. This ministry was merged where we had the crop and the livestock sub-sectors being put under one ministry. That was when we started meeting challenges in controlling livestock disease outbreaks. I therefore, suggest that in future the department of livestock be made independent of the ministry of agriculture.

4.28
MS GRACE BYARUGABA (NRM, Woman Representative, Isingiro): Madam Speaker, thank you for this opportunity. The issue being debated is very tricky. As the Member of Parliament for Bukanga has pointed out, we the people of Isingiro have lived with this problem for over ten years. As Members of Parliament from that district, we faced a lot of difficulties in trying to respond to questions arising from the reoccurrence of the Foot and Mouth Disease in that area during the campaigns. 

Yes, the conditions have been explained very well by hon. Alaso and that is what has been happening in that part of the country. But there is one thing that people are not pointing out. That is the reasons for the reoccurrences of this disease. In my view this has been due to Government’s failure to be strict in terms of control. I am sorry to mention that you may find some of these districts that have been listed suffered because the disease spread from Isingiro was not controlled. This could be because we are bordering a country where vaccination is almost non-existent. So if that border is not well controlled, a disease may spread from that neighbouring country to the entire Uganda. It is high time the Government of Uganda and the neighbouring country negotiated control of this disease. 

The ministry of agriculture constructed a market - I cannot put a figure to it but it was a very expensive market – to have our animals sold but since that market was commissioned, it is non-functional. A lot of money was injected into it but nothing has come out of that simply because the ministry has been giving us controls that are halfway –(Interjections)– I don’t know what to call it. I wish they could come out with an everlasting solution to this problem. 

Yesterday, we talked about lightning and the problem is that we use fire fighting methods and we do not think through when the problem occurs; we just do a, b, c, d, e and once it sort of subsides, Government keeps quiet. May I use this opportunity to call upon Government, especially the ministry of agriculture, to take serious measures –(Member timed out_)

4.30
MR JEREMIAH TWA-TWA (NRM, Iki-Iki County, Budaka): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am happy that finally I have caught your eye in this historical chamber. I rise to tender basic technical advice but before that, I would like to emphasise that the matter that we are discussing is very important in both economic, social and health terms. 

Already on the economic part, you have heard that people are losing money; they are not taking children to school, et cetera. You should also take care of the health component because the children and people in that area have no access to milk; they have no access to meat, and most likely they will get malnourished or they will get anaemia. 

Honourable colleagues, allow me to tender in technical advice, which I would like to give to my colleagues. They are my colleagues because they are scientific like me. I know that this is a preventable disease that is transmitted and can be controlled by immunisation. But in order to do it very well, you actually need to plan effectively and immunise a critical mass of animals in order to break the transmission cycle; but if you do it anyhow, you will continue having the disease. So, I request the ministry of agriculture to implement a programme which is scientific. 

Lastly, I also prefer that in the next report, in order for us to comprehend how much work or how effectively the programme has been implemented, we would like to know the animal population in the district, and we would also like to know how many animals have been covered. That way, we can help or we can advise on whether the prevalence or the percentages, which have been covered, are adequate or not. However, what is given on paper is not enough to just quote doses of vaccines which have been sent to a district. Maybe they have been given to the animals; maybe they are still sitting in the stores. So, we need to be very careful because technically, I cannot take this kind of report. I really implore the ministry to come up with something slightly better. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. 

4.33
MR GOERGE EKUMA (NRM, Bukedea County, Bukedea): Madam Speaker, I beg to be protected – 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, he represents one of the areas infected. Please give him time. 

MR EKUMA: Two weeks ago I made sure I went to my constituency and assessed the situation of the effects of quarantine to the people of Bukedea. The animals are sick in some places and I even wrote to the Minister of State for Animal Husbandry asking him to impose partial quarantine in Bukedea such that people can protect their cows in order to get money to take their children to school. 

I want to appreciate the senior minister for his response but I also want to challenge the senior minister that it is now six months since the outbreak of the disease. I remember when we had an outbreak of Ebola, the Ministry of Health was very fast to react and they eliminated Ebola; how come the Foot and Mouth Disease has lasted six months and you are only responding now? I want to tell you that no senior official from the ministry of agriculture has moved to the Teso region to assess the impact of this disease until yesterday when we started making noise. 

I want to thank my sister, Alice Alaso, for airing this out yesterday. I had a discussion with the Minister of State for Agriculture a month ago but Mr Minister, this problem is really killing our people. Meat is a delicacy for the people of Teso and if it has turned out to be a forbidden fruit, then what are we going to do? Our people are sick; our people cannot take children to school! Please hon. Minister, come down and assess this yourself. Thank you. 

4.37
MR JOHN SSIMBWA (NRM, Makindye Division East, Kampala): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I may not rearing animals in Makindye East but I may be keeping them somewhere where my colleague, who represents such constituencies, resides. 

From the statement of the Minister, we are talking about numbers, we are talking about districts which are known but at a certain point, he talks about some districts where he believes or where he thinks the disease has decreased or is no longer in existence. Members of Parliament would have wanted to know whether it is not a point of hiding behind the word “some” for purposes of the inefficiency of the ministry. Members would like to know some of those districts that he has talked about, where the disease has been controlled so that if he is giving wrong information, then he could be assisted by the representatives from those districts. 

Secondly, from the statement, it is clear that the Minister is talking about the disease being contagious and the scientists have proved that. But when you look at the interventions, you do not find any to do with those districts where the disease has not been detected, and we are talking about the disease being preventable. So, is the ministry only waiting for it to move to animals in a certain district and then they move behind it or there is an intervention of guarding it from moving to other districts?

The ministry should also come up with those interventions so that in districts where the disease has not been detected, measures are put in place to prevent it because we shall keep on continuing running after the disease. If it is in Katakwi, they will run to Katakwi; if it is in Karamoja, they will run to Karamoja. I expect the minister to come out with preventive measures for districts, which have not been affected by the disease.

4.39
MS LOWILA OKETAYOT (NRM, Woman Representative, Pader): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to appreciate the seriousness and the economic importance of the Foot and Mouth Disease as has been raised by the Member from the animal-keeping district.

If you look at the intervention that has been carried out by the ministry, as clearly outlined in the statement, you realise that there was a very big gap. To me, that explains the reason why the disease has spread to many districts. I do not see what has been done as far as sensitising the people in these areas is concerned. It is always very important when dealing with a disease which is very contagious like this to carry out serious sensitisation and then campaign intensively. This would have helped to control the spread of the disease. This is what we need to take note of. The people have to know the economic importance of this kind of disease in order to also help in controlling the spread. Thank you very much.

4.40
MR MICHAEL WERIKHE (NRM, Bungokho County South, Mbale): I thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for the statement and his initiative to try and fight the Foot and Mouth Disease.

Under paragraph 2, it is indicated that by the end of February, the disease had spread to certain districts, including Tororo. When you go to the appendices, Tororo is not included. I do not know whether the minister can clarify as to whether Tororo is now safe from the disease.

Under paragraph 3, page 2 - I assume this is number 2 in terms of pages - (c), “The procurement was 420,000 doses of the vaccine. Out of this, 211,000 doses were used in Teso region.” What happened to the balance? Was this used elsewhere? If so, which other areas utilised these other doses or they are still being stored? If so, we still have a lot of areas that are not fully covered.

To correct the record, Teso region – I do not know whether we should have this corrected because when you look at Mbale, Kween, Bulambuli, Kapchorwa and others they are neighbours to Teso region but they are not in Teso. I do not know because it is assumed that 211,000 doses went to Teso yet Mbale, Kween and other districts are not part and parcel of Soroti. I would like the minister to correct this record otherwise, I appreciate his initiative. Thank you.

4.43
MR PETER OMOLO (FDC, Soroti County, Soroti): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I wish to take this opportunity to thank the Minister. I really feel for him. I am sure he should have given us a very good minister of agriculture - unfortunately, the conditions under which he is working may not allow him to exhibit his abilities. This is because as he is giving us this report, saying animals from the affected areas were vaccinated, we have a letter here telling us that even the animals that were vaccinated are still falling sick. The issue at hand is that, they doubt the vaccine or the handling of the vaccine. That may make you fail to handle your duties as expected of you.

I would like to remind this House that I grew up in a family of a veterinary officer. What I used to see happening, when I was a small kid, was routine vaccination of animals. Year in year out in this House, we have talked about Foot and Mouth Disease in the west, Teso or in Karamoja but there is no routine vaccination of animals against any viral disease. We only wait for an outbreak of a disease then we vaccinate. We are doing fire fighting but we are not doing anything preventative. We should come up with a policy for routine vaccination of animals against viral diseases every year, to avoid continuous attacks.

After losing our cows to our neighbours, to our uncles, a cow has become so precious that when a cow is sick, you are equally sick. Hon. Ecweru knows what it means. The few we have are really cherished. We handle them like children. Do not be surprised to realise that areas, which have been attacked by this disease will have famine next year. A cow is a tool for us. We use the oxen for ploughing; now the ploughing is not going on because the oxen are sick. So, when we make an alarm tomorrow that we need food, please hon. Ecweru, take note of that.

Do not be surprised to realise that performance in primary and secondary schools is going to drop because our children have not been able to go to school due to lack of fees. If they go at all, they will be sent back home. That is going to affect us academically.

We have resorted to selling land to take our sick to hospital because we cannot sell the cows. Tell me what we are going to use even when they recover from the sickness. What are we going to live on? 

It is a very serious matter and Government should take drastic steps. If anything, they should begin sending things to us in advance before we show problems. Food should be sent in advance because there is going to be a shortage of food. (Member timed out_)  

4.46
MS FEMIAR WADADA (FDC, Woman Representative, Sironko): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Mine is to appeal to all ministries to borrow a leaf from the Ministry of Defence. Look at how they utilise their money that is allocated to them; their staff are well-dressed, they have uniforms, they have all the ammunition they need. But the ministry of agriculture - since January there has been Foot and Mouth Disease. If it was affecting defence or security, it would be suppressed by now. But because it is affecting agriculture, they do not really need to care; they do not really mind. That is why everyone is suffering. It is not only the MPs representing their people, but even the people out there are really suffering because they are the ones going through this. That is their source of income. Look at the nurses. They are not dressed in uniforms. You cannot even differentiate between a nurse and a fellow patient. 

That is why I am asking other ministries to borrow a leaf from the Ministry of Defence and utilise their funds effectively. Thank you.

4.48
MR LATIF SEBAGGALA (DP, Kawempe Division North, Kampala): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for giving opportunities to even the meat-eaters. The issue of FMD is very vital to us as Members of Parliament. This is because almost 80 percent of the people we represent earn their livelihood from agriculture. The ministry of agriculture has indicated in their report what they have done since the outbreak. 

I heard the Member representing Bukanga saying that the quarantine has been there for the last ten years; but even three years is already long enough. As we go through the Budget, the sector of agriculture must stop working like a fire-brigade. If we are to boost this sector, the ministry must come out with a clearer policy. 

Hon. Akol told us that even the animals, which were vaccinated, died after some days. I want to assure you that vaccination is a preventive measure; and if you prevent a disease in animals which are already infected, then there is no way those cows can be saved. Therefore, the ministry of agriculture should indicate clearly in their budget framework how they are going to handle vaccination on a routine basis. 

4.51
MR JOCOB OBOTH (Independent, West Budama County South, Tororo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I was happy to note from the Minister’s statement beginning with Tororo as one of the affected districts but the other information that the Minister should be aware of is that Tororo District is one of the districts, if not the only one in this country, which hosts the National Livestock Research Institution (NLRI). 

I want to know from the Minister the distribution of the vaccines. Could there be a possibility that this district has turned out to be a laboratory for experiments? The effect of the FMD in Tororo District – my other colleagues from Tororo will bear me witness; children are not going to school. Most of us here from Tororo, with the exception of a few, they must have sold a cow or two to take you to school. The pressure on the local politician from those who are demanding school fees is great. The ministry of agriculture should rise to the challenge and help us to deliver the services. I would like to know: why Tororo? Was it a deliberation omission or commission that they were left out, being the only district that hosts the NLRI?

On the other hand, is FMD the only disease that affects livestock in Uganda, or is it being handled like most clinics in Uganda do? When they see a cow dying they say, “This is Foot and Mouth Disease”. Is this a presumption or you have some scientific evidence to this?

THE SPEAKER: Other Members will get an opportunity during the debate on the State of the National Address.

4.54
MS JENNIFER MUJUNGU (Independent, Woman Representative, Ntoroko): Madam Speaker, Ntoroko District has got a group of people called the Batuku, who are cattle keepers. It is fortunate that we do not have the problem of Foot and Mouth Disease, but we have a problem of Tsetse Flies. They cause Nagana disease, which is killing our cows at a very high rate. 

So, I appeal to the minister of agriculture; as he puts in place measures to prevent Foot and Mouth Disease in other areas, he should also not forget Ntoroko. We are at the border with Congo and there are animals that cross the border from Congo to our area. There are even some animals that come in from Mbarara, and in the long ran there is the likelihood that there may be an outbreak of Foot and Mouth Disease. But at the moment, we have Nagana which is badly disturbing us. So, hon. Minister, kindly support us. 

4.56
MR SAM OKUONZI (Independent, Vurra County, Arua): Madam Speaker, since this week started, I have noted with concern that the reports of the ministers are shallow. And even today, this has come out to be the case. For me, this is the first time in Parliament and I am wondering whether this is the trend of reports in Parliament.

I have been a civil servant for over 15 years, and I have written ministerial reports for ministers and ministers would engage us in debate to write comprehensive reports. So, I am wondering whether that position has changed. In particular, I would like to thank hon. Kiyonga for initiating very good ministerial statements for the Ministry of Health, which are far better than this. (Applause) There are a number of issues, which have been raised in this Parliament and all this information is available in the ministry. So, I am wondering whether the ministers are not taking the initiative to compose proper statements so that we can all be satisfied with what is happening in the country. 

When you talk about immunity, I would have expected to know from this report the “hard immunity”. Hard immunity is the term used to show the proportion of animals that need to be vaccinated in order to prevent the disease. I would have expected that to be indicated in this report. I would have expected to know the total population of animals. I would have expected to know the required vaccines. I would have expected to know the potency of these vaccines. I would have expected to know the facilities available for storage and distribution and I would have expected a surveillance report that, “We have now done the following things and this is the result of our activities.” 

4.59
MS JOY ATIM (Independent, Woman Representative, Lira): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. Much as my district has not been mentioned in the report, I realise that at the moment, we do not have that. But it is not two years since my district was affected by Foot and Mouth Disease, and there was nothing that was done to that district. I have a question to the Minister: what do they have in the respective districts? Do they have the capacity to keep these vaccines so that in case of any emergency, they can act upon it and just give reports to the ministry? I fear because we know this bureaucracy that happens; when they request, it takes a lot of time for the vaccine to reach the respective districts. 

I say this because Lira District has been affected by raids and we have only restocked our animals and in the last two years at least we were affected by Foot and Mouth Disease. I fear we may again be affected. Can you take control measures immediately? Can we be updated on the respective districts that already have this in stock and in case of any emergency, assure us that they are well catered for? Thank you.

5.01
MS FRANCA AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Agago): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Until recently, when the Karimojong and the NRA decided to rob us of our cattle, the people of Acholi were cattle-keepers -(Interruption)

MR ALERO: Madam Speaker, can the speaker holding the Floor prove that it was the Karimojong that robbed their cattle? Thank you. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, it is on the Hansard of this House that the Government of Uganda has been carrying out a disarmament exercise to stop certain communities from raiding. (Applause) But the Member has not said which particular Karimojong. So, it is okay. (Laughter)

MS FRANCA AKELLO: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for your wise ruling. I would like to urge the honourable member, who raised the point of order, to go to the archives of this country and read much more about the history of where he comes from. (Laughter) I only forgot to add the word “raiders.” Maybe it would have given him a little more comfort. He may be a Karimojong but not a raider. So, the Karimojong raiders have been robbing us of our cows and they rendered us cattle-less and so we became non-cattle keepers but we are still cattle keepers. 

In regard to the Minister’s statement, I looked through the interventions that the ministry is making. I want to appreciate but it is almost equivalent to a father who notices the child has got convulsions and has Malaria and decides to sit at home and say, “Go under the pawpaw tree and dig up the root of the pawpaw tree,” to give him some little bit of relief when the child is convulsing. This is very bad. Those of us who border Teso really rely on the cattle from Teso and I can assure you it has affected my district.

Very recently on Friday, I had my thanksgiving ceremony and I was looking for cows to slaughter for my people. We did not have any because my district does not have cattle anymore and so, we could not buy because we used to rely on the cattle from Teso. So, because of the quarantine, all of us are not able to eat meat now and the price of meat in Agago has tripled because of this. Therefore, when we speak about Foot and Mouth Disease, honourable minister, it is a very serious issue. It affects us because those of us who are from the east and the north mainly rely on Karamoja and Eastern Uganda for cattle because we are not used to these other long-horned ones. (Laughter) So, we rely on those other ones from the other side of the country.

I want to urge the Minister to be a little bit proactive and make sure that vaccination is a planned and routine activity. It -(Member timed out_)

5.06
MR AHMED AWONGO (NRM, Koboko County, Koboko): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to appreciate the statement made by the Minister on the Foot and Mouth Disease situation in the Teso region. The Minister has scared me so much especially when he said that this disease is very contagious; that it is the most dangerous disease in the world and it has a lot of economic effects on our population. Hon. Alaso made it worse when she said that before entering Botswana, all vehicles must be sprayed and even people’s shoes must be sprayed against that disease. With that in mind now, I would like to pose the following questions to the honourable minister:

One, how sure are we and how safe are we that in spite of these very many vehicles coming from these areas, which are affected, we are not going to spread this very disease to other parts of the country by means of these vehicles and also the people who come from those areas? 

Two, I would like to request the Minister to let me know whether the neighbouring districts are going to be safe in the long run if the Ministry of Agriculture does not take immediate steps to ensure that the disease is halted in the Teso region. I thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Actually before the next Member comes in, I want to augment what hon. Alaso said. I travelled with her to Botswana via Zimbabwe. Obviously we flew there. So when we reached Kazungula, first they said, “Let all the trucks get into the dip.” And then they said, “You come out” and I said, “No, we came by air.” Then they said, “We do not care whether you came by air; you must put your shoes here first.” And we had to come out of the car, dip our feet and then go back. Otherwise, they would not let us through. It is very serious by the way. 

5.09
MR MICHAEL OROMAIT (Independent, Usuk County, Katakwi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. This is the first time I am talking in this House. The issue of Foot and Mouth Disease first hit Katakwi in November 2010, during our campaign and it was one of the tools I used for coming to this House. Katakwi is a centre of gravity for disasters: when Kony hit Teso, Katakwi was hit hardest; when famine hits Uganda, Katakwi is hit hardest; and when floods hit Teso, Katakwi becomes a lake. You are aware that the Foot and Mouth Disease was first reported in Katakwi but as I talk now, nothing substantial has been done. I personally lost 80 cows; I would not be suffering now. 

As I speak now, even the Karimojong have quarantined our people – they are back in camps besides the animal quarantine. For how long are we going to suffer in Katakwi? So, hon. Minister, please take drastic steps to rescue the animals of Teso and let it not be a reactionary action, but preventative. With due respect to the ministers in this House, please improve on reports or else – this Parliament is the youngest and most active – anything will happen. Thank you.

5.12
MR CYRUS AMODOI (Independent, Toroma County, Katakwi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries for the statement he has issued, but this statement is very shallow. In the introduction he says: “The disease spread in early January 2011 …” but in Katakwi the disease was reported as early as October 2010, whereby most of the parents were not able to take their children to school because Teso depends largely on animals for economic survival despite these animals being previously raided by various parties that I may not be able to name because some of them do not want to hear that.

When you look at paragraph 2, it reads: “By the end of February, this disease spread to Abim … some districts are clear.” But how come, hon. Minister, you have not cleared and lifted quarantine in the districts which are now disease-free as mentioned in your statement? When you look at the doses that you have issued to the people of Katakwi – where the disease spread most – as contained in the appendix, they are just 30,000 and yet Katakwi has over 200,000 head of cattle. I wonder whether the 30,000 doses can serve the 200,000 animals!

I appeal to the Minister that when you are looking at these critical issues, as my friend hon. Oromait has been elucidating, you should look at Katakwi on a critical side. Katakwi has suffered most of the tragedies that face this country -(Member timed out_)

5.16
MR VINCENT SSEMPIJJA (Independent, Kalungu County East, Kalungu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I know I am contributing last on this point and the Members have made good points. So, I will be brief. I am the Vice Chairman of the Uganda Meat Producers’ Cooperative Union and so I have a mandate to talk for the farmers. The Minister has done a good job to come up with a statement on the Foot and Mouth Disease but as you realise, we need to tackle disease control in its entirety. 

This is the biggest problem and as farmers, this is what is hindering the export of meat from this country. I hope one day the honourable minister will come up with a paper on disease control in its entirety. If we do that, in one year our farmers will certainly be reaping money. Everyone wants to buy our meat but the problem is we do not meet the international standards because of disease control.

Lastly, on uncoordinated guidelines during vaccination - when you wrote this, you talked about vaccines but you were careful not say that they are free. So in some areas, people think these vaccines are sent by the ministry free of charge but in some areas when these vaccines reach, the veterinary officers say that the farmers must pay – sometimes up to Shs 30,000 but you know that money is not little. So, we must be sure whether the vaccines, especially of these very serious diseases - I think that statements must be very clear whether the vaccines are free or not so that we can vaccinate all the animals. 

5.19
MR WILLIAM NZOGHU (FDC, Busongora County North, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to give a few issues, basically three of them. First of all, I want to acknowledge that the ministers that we have in this country have all the facilitation it takes – they have all the police escorts and at times army escorts plus thousands of civilian escorts. I wonder how a minister may fail to get statistics from the people of Uganda. 

I know that the Government has taken various measures to address the issue to do with agriculture. Among those is agriculture zoning. I would like to say that in this august House, the challenge that we basically have, basing on what the various speakers have said, is that we are lacking whom to hold accountable. The Minister has not told us where the problem is. He is only telling us about the problem, but where is the problem?

In this context, the Minister should have ably told us; one, during the Eighth Parliament, I listened carefully - actually I was watching when the Eighth Parliament approved a loan that was going to address some of these issues. And today, I would have, therefore, expected that the statement would be giving us an assessment of what the budget performance is vis-à-vis the activities that they planned. But I don’t see anything to that effect and I thought that this honourable minister would also have told us where the districts have failed and what needs to be done in order for these districts to perform where they have failed. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

5.22
MRS RUTH ACHENG (UPC, Woman Representative, Kole): Madam Speaker, I thank you very much for giving me this opportunity. I would like to say that Foot and Mouth Disease is not new in the country and I would like to request the Minister and the entire ministry of agriculture to look at how the infected animals are affecting people’s source of income. 

So, also putting into account that the Foot and Mouth Disease is a viral infection, I am requesting the ministry to include it in their work plan, budget for it and make a daily routine vaccination programme instead of waiting for when the animals get infected and then we rush to treat them because viral infections cannot be treated, they are rather prevented. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Mateke had a policy issue. 

5.23
MS SARAH MATEKE (NRM, Woman Representative, Kisoro): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to appreciate that we have a problem in this country and I would like to request the Minister of Public Service to give some light. I have been working in the Public Service and if I can recall very well, the Ministry of Public Service requested the agricultural officers at the district level to decide which departments to go to. And if they wanted, they could either retire or would be absorbed in the NAADS Department. So, most of them preferred to go to the NAADS Department because that is where there were lots of money. So, this burden shouldn’t all go to the minister of agriculture. The whole problem started with having our agricultural officers or extension workers going to work in the NAADS Department. So, I would like to request the Minister of Public Service to tell us what they are thinking about this department at the local government level because they are no longer functional. I don’t know what they have in plan. Thank you very much. 

5.25
MR TONNY AYOO (NRM, Kwania County, Apac): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Much as my colleagues have been talking majorly on economic and social impact of FMD, I would like to put it to the House that in this report much as it is not comprehensive, this disease can be transferred to human beings. And if these animals have been dying as we are aware that meat is a delicacy to many people in Uganda, maybe it is only in India where meat is not taken seriously, but meat is very important in this country. 

In the interventions that have been put in place the minister, I think that it is very important for us now to consider having the animals that are dying of FMD being burnt and we have it on record so that human beings will not be eating them because we will be going to another level of problems. So, I think the Minister – (Interruption)

MR BITEKYEREZO: Let me thank you so much for giving ne this chance to inform the honourable member that Foot and Mouth Disease is not transmitted to human beings as far as the medicine I know is concerned. I thank you so much. 

THE SPEAKER: So we are free to eat that meat?

MR BITEKYEREZO: Madam Speaker, the only disease, which we can get from animals through eating their products, is brucellosis which is transmitted by brucellosis.

THE SPEAKER: Than why is there quarantine? Let us hear from one of the cattle eaters and cattle keepers, hon. Alaso. 

MS ALASO: Madam Speaker, I am a little bit excited by that statement. If that is true, why doesn’t the ministry then allow us to slaughter our animals and at least make some little money locally? We could slaughter, eat and perhaps make some little money; we are not going to fall sick. I think the Minister should really help us on that. That would provide some relief.  

MR AMOS OKOT: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to correct the honourable member who was giving information about Foot and Mouth Disease that it cannot be transmitted to human beings; there are some strains of viruses under FMD that can be transmitted to human beings. I can read for you these articles if you permit me:

“Foot and Mouth Disease infecting humans: Humans can be infected with Foot and Mouth Disease through contact with infected animals but this is extremely rare. Some cases were caused by laboratory accidents. Another viral disease with similar symptoms of Foot and Mouth Disease occurs more frequently in humans especially in young children. The causes are Coccidia A Virus, which is different from that of Foot and Mouth Disease.” 

In these situations, the one that has been reported by the honourable minister he said that the virus is SAT1 and O which calls for serious scrutiny of the vaccines to be used because the way he has reported, we don’t know what kind of vaccines they are using but these are two different viral serotypes that are affecting the area. We need a specific vaccine that can handle it. Thank you very much.

MR AYOO: Madam Speaker, I think from the interjections by honourable members, you can see that there is still a danger and we may not need to encourage our people to eat animals that have died as a result of FMD while we think that more research may still need to be carried out in that area.

I still think the ministry should ensure that these animals, once they die, are burnt to prevent more infection. I want to present the scenario of FMD in Lango. Much as the Minister has presented that Lango is still safe, we engage in serious livestock business with the Teso sub-region plus many other regions. So, I would think that much as it is not indicated, the ministry should embark right now not only on chasing after where there is an outbreak but also carrying out mass immunisation of these animals across the country so that tomorrow we are not again on the Floor of this Parliament saying, “It has broken out in Lango or West Nile”. 

I think we should use this opportunity so that a programme is done and the whole country is covered with vaccination. This is because if you get down to the villages as of now, you will find that the farmers are living with pockets of FMD in respective villages and they are not bringing it out. This is true if you go deep down. In my constituency last month, somebody called me and said they have elements of FMD and the veterinary staff are sometimes very stubborn. Not until there is a very serious outbreak, they will not inform ministries -(Member timed out_)

5.32
THE MINISTER OF STATE IN THE PRIME MINISTER’S OFFICE (TESO AFFAIRS) (Ms Christine Aporu): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank the minister of agriculture for bringing this statement to Parliament after hon. Alice Alaso raised the issue yesterday. The debate today confirms that Teso region districts are sick with FMD. When you talk about the quarantine, the six months’ closure of the markets, the abattoirs, the vaccines, it is a confirmation that Teso is sick with FMD.

For the last six months, it has been very difficult for the people of Teso especially those in the trading centres and municipalities. New abattoirs and slaughter houses were erected but they have been rendered white elephants because no business is taking place there. The other issue is the products from the cows: the milk, ghee, meat. You heard hon. Akol say “super match”. Meat products are now called “super match” in Teso because they are stealthily being sold like they used to smuggle those super match cigarettes. So it is quite a big problem.

The issue of high cases of Brucellosis are also rising in the health centres because it is being attributed to drinking milk from sick animals. So we need a scientific explanation also. The restocking exercise is failing because of the Foot and Mouth Disease.

We had achieved in Teso but now the graph is again coming back down because of the Foot and Mouth Disease. All the local governments in Teso have reported the issue of the sick animals and they are still questioning nomadism because people who moved with cows from Ngora through Kumi to Bukedea - it is said their animals were the first ones to be identified that they were sick. So, it is my proposal that we map out the most affected areas to try to curb the Foot and Mouth Disease in the region and also to amend this statement to read “the status in Uganda” and not Teso only because most of the Members have spoken about their districts.

We want to appeal to our Members of Parliament, especially those from Teso, that a programme is coming. We want to go out to talk to our people because they are depressed. People have not taken children to school, cows are dying and yet they are supposed to burn the meat. So we want to request the ministry to utilise the veterinary scouts to appeal to the people but also to work with the Police to make sure that the meat that comes into the districts of Teso is also right meat because they have also noted so many heads of dogs so we want to note because people are now worried about this “super match” meat that comes in.

The situation is not good especially to me as the Minister for Teso. Definitely we want to pray that the commitment of Government to get down to address not only the issues in Teso but also the country is strong, and to go to radio and make a statement to the cattle traders, butchers and to those people who won contracts for the re-stocking exercise. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

MR EKANYA: Madam Speaker, thank you very much. I am just rising up on a point of guidance. I was looking at the Constitution and the way the Members have spoken. This is a matter of national emergency and it would really call upon this House and Government to declare that region a national disaster. But since it has not come out from the Members and since it is maybe not human beings, I would propose that the minister in charge of this sector goes back and reads the Hansard because this financial year, this House approved a supplementary budget when there was the reoccurrence of Foot and Mouth Disease in this country. 

We approved a substantial amount of money in the Budget Committee where I have been a Member. The minister then was hon. Bright Rwamirama. Animals died and as they were dying, he was saying they were doing tests and vaccines were ordered from South Africa. It happened that some officials of that ministry abused the fund. Some of them participated in the elections but they lost. I don’t want to mention their names but I really want to urge the Minister to go back because he does not have the capacity to handle the issues the Members have raised here today.

In fact if it were in the past Parliament, your statement would have been dismissed even before the debate. I urge that the Minister goes back, reads the Hansard, looks at how much money the House approved and gives us the quantity and type of vaccine that was imported into the country, where it was distributed, how it was stored and personnel involved in, how many animals were lost since then to date, and the number of animals that continue to die. 

You should tell us the capacity in terms of human resource that you have and the budget that you now require to handle this matter for the next one year. We really need a comprehensive approach because the President said that this country would be very rich and directed the minister of finance and other ministers to ensure that each homestead within this financial year gets four animals at least. I have information that people from Saudi Arabia wrote a letter to the ministry of trade asking to approve export of 2,000 live animals every week but Government could not afford because of these problems. I really urge hon. Bucyanayandi to go back and come with details, including the budget and resource capacity so that this House can support you to solve this problem once and for all. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Bucyanayandi, I am really concerned about Bukanga being under quarantine for ten years. How can that community be condemned to poverty for ten years?

5.41
THE MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (Mr Tress Bucyanayandi): Madam Speaker and hon. Members, first I want to express my sincere thanks to you all for the contributions because as you talked I was listening and taking notes. What you said is valid and an input to what we are going to do so I must thank you very much for that.

I must say I was interested because personally I am a practical farmer with livestock so what you were saying is very valid.

To summarise, much of what you said was about sanitation. It is true that we must improve on the sanitation of animals in this country. I used to get worried when I was in Kisoro after seeing cows being walked from Ankore all the way to be sold to the Democratic Republic of Congo. I had a farm on the way they were using and this worried me a lot because such an incident could come up. Sanitation is extremely important and it going to be included in our programme of work. Massive vaccination is also important but I want you to appreciate the relative technicalities involved in this because vaccines are not imported at once, they must be imported after identification of the serotype that they are going to handle and I mentioned some of those. This has to be done gradually but persistently over time in a given programme of work.

Yes, it is true, we must carry out increased surveillance in our work and that I must appreciate. What you have said in terms of vaccination, surveillance and sanitation is also true for other diseases apart from the Foot and Mouth Disease. It is true for East Coast Fever, Nagana and all other diseases like Contagious Bovine Pneumonia. All these affect our animals. Having said that, we do appreciate that the statement was short and I must appreciate the Minister for Karamoja who raised me last night and said that I must make a statement and I said, “Yes, I will”; and also that it would be brief but half a loaf is better than no bread at all.

This is a brief statement but I am aware that I could have written volumes and volumes on this subject and others but this will come later on. 

It is also true that we have to improve on our extension delivery services. As I sat in the ministry for two weeks now, I looked at the work of NAADS and other extension services and appreciated how handicapped they are. They say that they are doing advisory services; yes, it is advisory, if I was to go and advise a colleague who had animals and is doing well; my work would be only to advise if I stopped there. But as I sat with my staff in the ministry, I said they must do advisory and also extension work.

The difference between advisory and extension is this one; when you are advising, it is for someone who knows but when you are doing extension you reach out to a farmer and teach him. I must say this is not happening and I hope as long as I am in this ministry, I will cause change so that extension services reach the farmers and teach them using the known extension approaches.

I have already written to the extension staff especially abolishing co-funding by small farmers in rural areas. They are already poor, why should they co-fund extension services? I have already instructed them not to recruit new people when you have extension service people sitting there and doing nothing while being paid. They should start with using those who are experienced. They are getting Government salary so why should we have parallel extension services?

I have already indicated that for available inputs they must be monitored by the farmers’ forum and the farmers’ assembly as a way of improving accountability and improvement in delivery system.

Having said that, I want to end by saying that we are going to come up with a comprehensive policy statement in the near future, we are going to give you our work plans and programmes. Should it be necessary we shall request you for additional funding where we find a shortfall. I expect that you will be my allies. Finally I want to end by saying -

MS ALASO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. When I listened to my colleagues, this seemed to be a serious national matter. Is it possible for the Minister to commit the ministry here that after every four months they can update us on the state of the Foot and Mouth Disease in the country so that we follow? Perhaps then we will be able to monitor the situation so that it does not become the Isingiro type of quarantine.

MR BUCYANAYANDI: Thank you hon. Alaso for that and for triggering the debate yesterday. I think it safe to say that I am going to ask the ministry, especially those in the veterinary department, to go out - and I will put the suggestions to them as you have made them to me this afternoon. I should be able to report back as soon as possible. 

Finally I want to say that in the whole agricultural sector it is the animal industry that has registered some modest increases.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members I want to thank you for today’s input and I allowed this very long debate because of the sensitivity concerning the sector. We shall continue the dialogue in the State of the Nation Address and in the Budget. I will ask the committee on agriculture to take an interest in what we have discussed and make use of it. For now, I want to adjourn the House to Tuesday at 2.00 p.m. for the State of the Nation debate.

(The House rose at 6.01 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 5 July 2011 at 2.00 p.m.)

