
THE REPUBLIC OF UGANDA

IN THE PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA

Official Report of The Proceedings of Parliament

FIFTH SESSION - 7TH SITTING - FIRST MEETING

________________________

Tuesday, 21 June 2005

Parliament met at 10.56 a.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this meeting. 

MR SEBULIBA MUTUMBA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am a bit worried about the clash between the sessions of committees and those of the plenary of Parliament. I do not know whether you have designed a clear programme where the sessions of the committee will not coincide with the sittings of Parliament? Most members, including me, are supposed to be in the committee. Members were sent messages inviting them for an urgent meeting yet at the same time Parliament is sitting. What advice do you have for us such that we do not miss the proceedings of the House? You can even see the attendance; most of the honourable members are in the committee meeting already.

THE SPEAKER: Maybe you came late but yesterday I said that we should not have any committee meetings in the morning until we dispose of this business.  I am aware that the Committee of Social Services is meeting a delegation from Makerere and other public universities, but these are exceptions. There is a general rule but we can have exceptions. However, it does not mean that others are not here. I am going to proceed with listening to members as they make their submissions. At an appropriate time I will decide to put a vote and then we can go to Committee Stage. 

The general rule was that the committee should not sit in the morning but yesterday I received a request from the Chairperson of the Social Services Committee that there was a very urgent matter to handle with Makerere and other public universities. I said, “Okay you can go on, but others should come and be with us”.

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE WAREHOUSE RECEIPT 
SYSTEM BILL, 2005

MR OKUPA: Mr Speaker, yesterday you proposed that I move a motion today –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: I told them to include it after the First Reading of the Bill, but apparently the minister is not here and, therefore, we should move on to the next item.

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE CONSTITUTION
 (AMENDMENT NO. 3) BILL, 2005

(Debate continued)

THE SPEAKER: No, before you come to that, which will generate a longer debate, let us first dispose of this motion. I said the motion should be item No. 4 and then the Constitution (Amendment No. 3 Bill) will be item No. 5.  

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO RECOGNISE THE RT. REV. JOHN TUCKER MUGABI SSENTAMU, ARCHBISHOP OF YORK.

11.00
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (Kasilo County, Soroti): Mr Speaker, I move a motion for a resolution of Parliament to recognise the Rt Rev. John Tucker Mugabi Ssentamu, Archbishop of York, moved under rule 40(b) of the Rules of Procedure.

THE SPEAKER: Seconded.

MR OKUPA: “WHEREAS Parliament notes with gladness the timely appointment on the 17th day of June, 2005 of the Rt Rev. John Tucker Mugabi Ssentamu, former Bishop of Birmingham as Archbishop of York - the second highest position in the Church of England - and as the first black person to hold such a senior position in the Church of England; 

AWARE THAT the Rt Rev. Ssentamu has gained commendable experience in various prominent pastoral positions since 1979;

AND RECOGNISING that the Rt Rev. Ssentamu served in different capacities in Uganda, namely as a barrister and judicial officer in the Judiciary of Uganda and promoting social justice before fleeing the Idi Amin regime in 1974;  

FURTHER AWARE that the Rt Rev. Ssentamu stood up for justice, liberty and racial equality in different communities, including the Church of England;

AND COGNIZANT of the fact that although the Rt Rev. Ssentamu has lived in the United Kingdom since 1974, he has maintained close ties with the Church of Uganda and participated in Uganda AIDS Network; 

NOW THEREFORE, this motion is moved that this House resolve as follows:

1.	That it collectively conveys its citations to the entire Church of Ugandan community, to all Ugandans as well as the Church of England upon the appointment of such a deserving clergyman to a high office.

2.	That it takes cognisance of the distinguished services rendered and contributions made by the Rt Rev. Ssentamu in different capacities.”  

Moved by hon. Elijah Okupa, MP Kasilo County, Soroti; and seconded by hon. Dr Nabwiso, MP Kagoma County, Jinja; hon. Reagan Okumu, MP Aswa County, Gulu; and hon. Perez Ahabwe, MP Rubanda County East, Kabale.

THE SPEAKER: Has hon. Nabwiso signed it?

MR OKUPA: He did.

THE SPEAKER: Okay. Permit me to correct you a little, the term you have used “barrister” is not the right term for the Uganda system. Ssentamu - he was my student as I told you - was an advocate, not a barrister. Barrister is a term used in the UK but here we use “advocate of the High Court”. So we can say “advocate”. Proceed.

MR OKUPA: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for the correction. On Friday the 17th, a Ugandan, Rt Rev. Ssentamu, made history and Uganda was all over the world media because of this man, the Archbishop elect of York. He has made history because for the last 500 years in the history of the Church of England this is the first time that a black person is being elevated to that position. It is on that note that all Ugandans are proud that Uganda’s name has been lifted. 

The people of Wakiso where the Archbishop elect Ssentamu comes from, are all overjoyed. But who is Archbishop Ssentamu? He was born in 1949 at Masooli, Gayaza road, Wakiso District. He is the sixth of 13 children. His parents were both teachers; his being a teacher of the word of God is, therefore, not surprising.

He holds a degree in Law and a doctorate in Theology. Before he left the country he worked as an assistant researcher for the Uganda Penal Code and later as a magistrate in Gulu and Mengo, before he was elevated to the position of Judge of the High Court.  

What do we learn from the Archbishop elect? He is a person who has stood for justice for all: the minorities, the majority, and the black community. He is a tolerant person. At one time while he was reading, children in the United Kingdom confronted him. Because of racial discrimination they abused him, they spat on him but he told these children, “You have wasted the saliva, which is more useful in your body than where you have spat it”. That is the level of tolerance we learn from the man Ssentamu, now Archbishop.
  
He has brought good news of the Bible not only to the poor but also to the rich. He believes in giving liberty to those who are oppressed in all forms He is committed to proclaiming the death and resurrection of Christ. He is a calm and approachable man. All these good qualities have enabled him to be elected to the second highest position in the Church of England. He emerged the first of the four other Bishops with whom he contested. 

The Archbishop of Canterbury, Dr Rowan Williams, has described him as someone who has always combined a passion for sharing the Gospel with a keen sense of the problems and challenges of our society, particularly as far as racism is concerned. Christians have described him as a caring pastor and an exciting communicator; those who have listened to him on BBC bear me witness, he is an exciting communicator. He firmly believes that religion and politics must go hand in hand. Christian leadership cannot promote a “do not rock the boat” situation because the Church must be above social status, gender and politics. 

What do we learn from Ssentamu, the Archbishop? In 1974 when he was Judge of the High Court he refused to return a not guilty verdict in a case involving one of President Idi Amin’s cousins –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Judge of the High Court or a magistrate? Get it right; he was a magistrate.

MR OKUPA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. There was a mistake in the literature I was reading. I was saying that in 1974 he refused to return a not guilty verdict in a case involving one of President Idi Amin’s cousins. You can see the type of man he was in the Judiciary, and I think that is a lesson to our judiciary. Irrespective of all the pressure he got from whatever authorities, he believed in the truth. That is a good thing and that is what we expect of everyone. 

Mr Speaker, I am also grateful to the Queen, who accepted this appointment on recommendation from the Prime Minister, Tony Blair. If it were in some of the least developed countries where there is dictatorship, Prime Minister Tony Blair would not have recommended him. The Archbishop has been a serious critic of the Tony Blair government including the Iran-Iraq war. The Prime Minister went ahead because he saw truth and justice in what he was saying.  

We also learn that even if you are a minority, as he is one of the only 92 clergy who come from minority groups in the Church of England where they are 1,100 clergymen, it does not mean that you cannot lead the majority who previously appeared superior. I think we have a lot to learn from that. Mr Speaker, I conclude by saying, may God use him and lift him to greater heights. Thank you.

11.14
MR REAGAN OKUMU (Aswa County, Gulu): Mr Speaker, I stand to second the motion in recognition of the Archbishop of York. 

There is a large Ugandan population in the United Kingdom, which has been a blessing in disguise. Our community, whom you know very well, are supporting this economy heavily by remitting a lot of foreign money into our country. They have now been strengthened by one of their own that has been promoted to a higher stature. I hope this will bind them closer to Uganda.

I also want to take this opportunity to thank the Queen of England and the entire people of the United Kingdom. This further shows that there is a binding relationship between the people of Uganda and our former colonial masters, the British. While the French pursued the policy of assimilation during their colonisation process, assimilation is now coming indirectly where our past colonial masters and the former colonies are being assimilated through either the economy or social activities. For this kind of recognition we are very grateful to the Queen of England and the people of the United Kingdom.  

I want this Parliament to be proud and stand firm to support many other Ugandan nationals. And this comes at a time when we are amending the Constitution. This Parliament should support dual citizenship because this is how we are going to enrich our country by linking up with Ugandan nationals, who because of various reasons have become citizens of foreign countries. This Parliament should strongly support dual citizenship because it does not only raise our social status but also our economy.  

This reminds us that the Archbishop of York left this country during a time of dictatorship and now as we amend the Constitution we hope for stability during the process of transition. We appeal to the Archbishop of York - being a Ugandan national himself - to pray for Uganda during this transition. 

Finally, I want to say that Ugandans should always support and recognise fellow nationals who are abroad irrespective of their social background and political differences. We have so many Ugandans abroad who by their own initiative and wisdom have been placed in high positions of responsibility in some of the biggest bodies of the world, including the UN. I would like to take this opportunity to remind the country that at one time a Ugandan was vying for the position of Secretary General of the United Nations. Unfortunately, because of his past political views, his own people fought Mr Olara Otunu - in fact his own government fought him. This is not fair. We should always support Ugandans when they are out there because apart from these political differences, they give all of us pride.

I end by praying to the Almighty God to guide the Archbishop of York to offer good leadership. This will be an example of what Uganda can offer not only to Uganda but also to the rest of the world. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much.

11.19
MR GODFREY AHABWE (Rubanda County East, Kabale): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. First, I will not deceive you that I know much about Archbishop Ssentamu. However, I was fascinated that two days ago on BBC it was news the whole night that a Ugandan had been elevated to the rank of Archbishop of York. I was fascinated that a black person could ascend to such an important office in the country that for centuries regarded blacks as tourist attractions, as slaves and their continent of origin as a dark continent. 

It is very interesting to know that kind of history. You remember that it was only in 1877 and 1879 respectively when the Church Missionary Society and the White Fathers Missionaries brought light to Uganda. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Spiritual.

MR AHABWE: Mr Speaker, I have used the word “light” in reference to the dark continent that was so before their arrival. You will also remember that it was only in 1969 when the first black Archbishop, the late Eric Sabiiti, of the Uganda, Rwanda and Zaire Province of the Anglican Communion, was enthroned. It thrills me that over time Christianity as a mission has proved not to be racial and has proved to be multi-national. Therefore, black missionaries have started penetrating Europe to the extent of taking up very important offices like the office of Archbishop. 

Probably this is the time that Africa can also awaken and co-exist with others, not to be colonised as a way of revenge but co-exist not only in spiritual matters but also in social, political and economic matters. It is for this reason that I am here to second the motion to pay tribute not only to the person who has been elevated but also to those who have seen the light finally that a black person can also serve them spiritually. 

I thank the Queen of England who is the head of the Anglican Community in the world. 

I also thank the Archbishop of Canterbury who is the spiritual head of the Anglican Community in the world. I also congratulate His Grace the Archbishop who has been elevated to this very important office. He is not only black but also originates from black Uganda. I thank you.

11.23
THE MINISTER, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER, GENERAL DUTIES (Prof. Mondo Kagonyera): Thank you Mr Speaker. I stand here on behalf of the Government to support the motion moved by hon. Okupa to pay tribute to a Ugandan who has been elevated to a very high office in the Church of England. I want to thank hon. Okupa for bringing this motion, and you, Mr Speaker, for allowing members of this House to pay tribute to Archbishop Ssentamu on his ascendance to this very high office. 

Indeed every Ugandan and all men and women of good will are very happy that such a thing has happened to an African. Christian faith is only growing in one continent in the whole world, and that is the African continent. I am talking about the Christian faith, meaning all Christian churches: Catholic, Anglicans, Pentecostal and all the other churches. Therefore, it is befitting that Africans should be recognised in the leadership of the churches. 

Recently when Pope John Paul II died, Pope Benedict XVI succeeded him. We were very happy because the comments we heard about him were very good. I remember listening to a woman who was earlier excommunicated telling the world how brilliant the new Pope is. However, some people thought it was time for an African to be Pope. My view is that it was a little too early. I may be wrong but surely those people who had such sentiments have every right. Mine was a little more realistic. It was realism rather than anything else.

Africans are entitled to leading Christian Churches at all levels in the world. Therefore, we look forward to the time when we shall have an African at Canterbury and an African at the Vatican. We look forward to that. I certainly would buy myself a ticket this time to go to witness these occasions. Colleagues will remember that the last time we had someone from Africa become a Pope, St Augustine, was very many centuries ago. There are Africans who are capable of leading the world. After all we have an African leading the United Nations and in spite of everything, he is doing a very good job. 

The Foreign Secretary of the United States of America is an African woman. We might soon have an African as Prime Minister of England. 

Honourable colleagues should know that Uganda is a very interesting country. Uganda has a number of firsts. The first one is a scientific one. Members would like to know that Ugandan children start walking earlier than any other in the whole world. Yes, they do. The doctors can help me. Why? I have no idea but they do, we are told. Two, Uganda is very famous because of the martyrs who selflessly gave up their lives for the sake of their faith. It has never happened, and it is not likely to happen anywhere else in Africa. Now we have a Ugandan, the first in the whole of Africa, Archbishop of York. Therefore, Ugandans should be proud of being No. 1 in many aspects and should continue to aspire for more.

The Government of Uganda has always supported Ugandans wherever they are pursuing excellence. There may be a few occasions on which we have not been able to. Hon. Reagan Okumu has mentioned our brother, Olara Otunu. I do not know the details of what actually happened but if anybody cared to find out I am sure the Government could not have had bad intentions. I can quote one example. I have read somewhere - and this is sad I should not be saying it now when we are praising someone but I think I should – let me not say it. I will have another opportunity to say this –[Hon. Members: “Say it”.]- No, we should remain on the jovial side. 

I have read somewhere and I hope Olara Otunu did not say this. He is reported to have said that the Government of Uganda has a dangerous plan for the people of Acholi. Imagine! Well, I am not going to elaborate. We have a plan for the people of – how can anybody in his sane mind make a statement like that? If a person can entertain that type of thinking, we were right not to support him for the position of Secretary General of the United Nations.

MR ERESU: Mr Speaker, I have been following the submission by the honourable minister and I cannot hesitate to seek the following clarification. When he says that he read somewhere that one of those Ugandans, Olara Otunu, stated somewhere that the Government of Uganda had a plan for the people of Acholi, I do not know which plan it is because there could be so many plans. A plan is a very wide word. Could the minister give us an insight into what kind of plan Olara Otunu implied when he was quoted so that the people of the Acholi region also get to know what sort of plan it is? Is it a plan for development, a plan to kill Kony -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: But we are not debating Olara Otunu. This was a by the way. You are trying divert us to Olara Otunu. I thought the minister had said it in inverted –(Interruption)- when somebody refers to a “plan”, it has a meaning. Why don’t we concentrate on the subject matter of our motion?

PROF. KAGONYERA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Honourable  members, I was disinclined to bring this kind of thing in such a wonderful debate. I apologise to members for having slightly diverted it, but I thought that something ought to go on record with regard to this. 

There was a time when Ugandans leaving for Britain and other places we being mistreated. These people were regarded as anti-government. I remember the Government of Uganda, of which I was part, took a firm stand and told the British Government that even if these people were anti-government, they were Ugandans who had every right to be treated with dignity. We made that decision and communicated it to the British Government. Therefore, I would like us to use this opportunity of good tidings to Ugandans to ask us to get back together and realise that we can ascend to the highest levels without being violent. 

What we can learn from Archbishop Ssentamu’s appointment is that we can climb up the steps to the highest levels of management in any society. I want to join hon. Okupa and other members in congratulating Archbishop Ssentamu for rising to such a high office Archbishop of York and to wish him and his family - I am sure people have not mentioned Mrs Ssentamu but certainly she must have played a very important role in making sure that Bishop Ssentamu was comfortable in body and mind to qualify for this very high office. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

11.36
MR DEUSDEDIT BIKWASIZEHI (Buhweju County, Bushenyi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. When the present Secretary General of the United Nations took office, I was a student in England. On that day in the school where I was were students from over 50 countries and so many from different African countries and that day brought us together to celebrate the elevation of our son. We had very many students from Ghana and that is when I came to learn that people from Ghana had distinguished themselves in various disciplines. For example, I came to learn that there were so many distinguished accountants and lawyers from Ghana known in England and New York. 

During that celebration, we were joined by people from various continents and that is why I would like to thank hon. Okupa for bringing this motion to recognise one of our own who has been elevated to that office. He is an honour to all of us in Uganda.  

There is a school of thought that ambassadors of countries are appointed and approved by Parliament before they are posted. We have now got many good ambassadors and I think Archbishop Ssentamu is one of them because he has distinguished himself as an ambassador who will be a point of reference. Therefore, if you are a Ugandan in London and you get lost, simply say, “Archbishop Ssentamu”. That is very important to us. 

I am a catholic but when I was in England I used to pray with the Church of England, which is similar to the Catholic Church. I do not see any significant difference because I am associated with family friends who belong to that Church. At one time a Reverend was praying for the Uganda martyrs and he singled out the late Bishop Luwum as one of them. I am happy to learn that now, apart from knowing one of our Bishops as a martyr; we also have an Archbishop in the hierarchy of the Church of England. This is a lesson to us as Ugandans. One can excel in his field and be very important. I want to suggest that Ugandans start a culture of recognising their distinguished people within and outside the country. 

Recently when we were in America we were able to meet distinguished people of the Uganda community there. For example I came to learn that we have Ugandan experts working in the buildings of the Boeing planes! We found some distinguished university lecturers, anthropologists, and very distinguished people in various fields. Therefore, it is good that we start a culture of recognising these who are reference points and can help to motivate others to follow them. 

I would like to thank the British Government, particularly the British Prime Minister Tony Blair, whom I had an opportunity to vote into office on the 1st of May 1997. I was fascinated by their culture of permitting Commonwealth members who are non—citizens, to vote. I am happy that he has recommended Archbishop elect Ssentamu, who was all the time critical of him.  

I would also like to thank Her Majesty the Queen for accepting him. As Prof. Kagonyera has mentioned, the Church in Africa has strong roots. It is good to sow the seeds where the soil is fertile, which is what Uganda is for Christianity, among other things. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

11.40
MR DAVID WAKIKONA (Manjiya County, Mbale): I support the motion moved by hon. Okupa and I thank you, Mr Speaker, if I heard you correctly, for teaching Ssentamu, the Archbishop elect. This is a lesson that teachers are very important and should be rewarded accordingly. I saw them demonstrating and I think they had a cause because you can now see what you have produced! We are talking about him because you taught him.

Idd Amin is known for very bad things but I have to congratulate him here for being the cause of Ssentamu’s exile to England. If he had not been there Ssentamu would be here and he would not be the Archbishop. So, Idd Amin, although very bad, in this aspect I congratulate him wherever he is.

To the British and to other countries like America or the Western world, they should know that people who seek asylum are not beggars and can turn out to be very useful citizens, as you can see from what Ssentamu has become. He sought asylum but he has turned out to be No. 2 in the Church of England. 

MR SEBULIBA MUTUMBA: I want to ask the honourable member holding the Floor to clarify. Is it in order for dictators to send people scampering all over the globe and later be congratulated for doing so? For instance, even the martyrs in Namugongo, should we also congratulate the Mukanjagas who murdered them? Should we congratulate African dictators for being the cause of many peoples’ fleeing? 

MR WAKIKONA: Mr Speaker, I said that Idi Amin is known for very bad things and he was a bad man. I singled out somebody who said the Jews killed Jesus but we all pray because of Jesus. We condemn all the bad things people do but appreciate the positive things, which come out of that. 

I am a Christian. It is not until you accept to die that you will see the Kingdom of heaven. Death is bad but it leads to the Kingdom of Heaven. Mr Speaker, to God there is no colour. The minister said that it was not yet time for a black Pope. To God colour does not exist and you should know that, Mr minister. One of the manufacturers of the G4 - which flies the President of Uganda - in Savannah, Georgia, is a Ugandan from Kabale, Magabo. These are the planes, which we use here. Blacks have been in classrooms with Whites and the former have proved that they can perform much better than the latter. So, do not underrate even a Black Pope.  

PROF. KAGONYERA: Mr Speaker, honourable members should not misunderstand me. There is no doubt in my mind about the competence and capability of Blacks, which starts with me. (Laughter) The person who created the first artificial element in Dalton’s Atomic Theory says that matter can neither be created nor destroyed. Indeed, it was destroyed. 

You remember when the atom was exploded, but the first person to create an artificial element, who started at the University of California, Berkley - although the credit was taken by his professor - was a Black student. So I have no doubt that Blacks are very brilliant people and history, especially scientific and social, is replete with such people. Therefore, mine was not to suggest that we are incapable, I was just being a little bit realistic. That is all.

MR WAKIKONA: So, you can see that Whites actually stole from Blacks. We were first to know some of these things. It is not a mistake that we are now trying to recover what we lost. 

Mr Speaker, I was talking about donors. As we try to balance our Budget by funds donated, I would like to call upon the donors to continue sending their money since they can now see what they are receiving from the people whose programmes they fund and facilitate. 

Lastly, I would like to call upon the Government to instruct our foreign missions to trace these Ugandans wherever they are. Here the Government should also try to find out what Ugandans are doing so that we have a list or documentary about them and at one time when we recognise heroes and people who have done a lot for this nation, this entire list should come up and we recognise them. I thank you.

11.48
DR JOHNSON NKUUHE (Isingiro County South, Mbarara): I thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to add a few words to congratulate your former student. 

What do we know about Ssentamu? The little I have read is that he is almost my age, 56, has one wife and two adult children. He is a lawyer and has two brothers, Pastor Kayanja and Archbishop Makumbi, who are living in Uganda. So the family seems to have a liking for higher authority. 

He had a disagreement with Amin’s Government, which was the cause of his arrest. I could not establish for how long but that we can find out - he was imprisoned in Uganda before he left in the 1970s. He went to England and studied for the Ministry of God after which he became a priest in Birmingham. Later he became a Bishop and now he has been appointed Archbishop of York who is second only to the Archbishop of Canterbury in the Church of England’s hierarchy of the Anglican community. That is as far as facts are concerned. 

We are happy that one of our own can rise to such a high position and in fact it is a challenge because this man would not have risen to that if he had just continued to move with the system. Amin was suppressing people so it was safe to lay low. It is a challenge to those of us who are saying, “Am I really safe, can I speak my mind?” This man has proved that you can speak your mind. You may suffer in the short term but in the end you will be rewarded. Therefore, I admire people who are like him, who are prepared to risk their neck and limb for the long term good of society and humanity generally.  

The other point that I have heard people talk about is that Africans have risen to high positions. There are very many people from Uganda who fall in that category in America, Australia, United Kingdom as you may already be aware but the question is, why are they running away from here? Why don’t we come back and sort out our situation so that we can achieve excellence in our country, within Africa? I hope the Archbishop will try to do something about the brain drain so that he can turn it into brain gain.  

My final comment is to my colleague who was saying that the foreign missions should do something about Ugandans in the Diaspora. Honourable member, I have read the Auditor-General’s report about our foreign missions. Most of us think that there is nothing good they say about those missions. None of them is accountable, none of them follows procedures and they are all financially strapped. If you are asking these donors to help, the missions are actually the ones in need of help. Maybe if you had said we should go and pray for them - because if you go to our London mission you will almost cry. In fact even the people who were sub letting had to run away because the thing was not being maintained. It is not painted. The Auditor-General’s report says this building needs a coat of paint.  

These people are excelling because there are systems in which they are working. That is why a person like Ssentamu can excel. They are failing in their own home countries because the systems there are not working. When you see systems being undermined, you should ask the Archbishop to pray for us because the moment you undermine systems you are –(Interruption)

MR KAKOOZA: Thank you, honourable colleague for giving way. We have a proverb in our culture which says that when you do not go to other mothers to see how they cook you think that yours is the best one: that “atanayitayita y’atenda nyina okufumba”. When these many people go outside, you have heard that it is on record that the people on nkuba kyeyo send Shs 7 billion per year here and we benefit economically. It is also important that they go out because they acquire skills and then they send in their investments here. We should not look at the systems, which send them away.

DR NKUUHE: I thank you honourable. What you are saying is only partly true because much as they bring back resources, and we enjoy those resources, they might cause inflation. In fact what you lose from their being outside is much more than they bring in. Therefore, you will have to look at the balance sheet.

Anyway, I am happy that the Rev. Ssentamu has made it and we want him to pray so that we can create systems within Africa. That way our own can excel and rise to higher levels, here. I thank you, Mr Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, very much.

11.52
MRS RUTH TUMA (Woman Representative, Jinja): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank hon. Elijah Okupa for bringing this motion to the Floor. I would like to inform this House that the Rt Rev. Ssentamu is a person whom I have known for quite a long time. I know him as a student, a magistrate, a friend and a fellow Christian. I knew him as a family man because of my work and his. We belonged to the same Church and always met for Bible study and communion. My family and his shared a lot.  

I also know the problems he encountered before he ran for his life in 1974. He went to the UK and started serving the Lord. He became a Bishop and he has a wonderful wife who has supported him and made him what he is today. We thank God for that. She has made sure that the Mothers’ Union in the Church of England emulates what the Mothers’ Union in the Church of Uganda are doing here. We have very close ties with the Mothers’ Union of the Church of England.  

Mr Speaker, I know a lot has been said about the Rt Rev. Ssentamu. I would not like to repeat that but one thing, which we should all know, Ssentamu has been an outstanding performer and a wonderful communicator. As you know in Britain, it is merit, which counts. Among all those white clergymen, a Ugandan has been picked to be Archbishop of York! We know York is No. 2 to Canterbury. As history has it, most people who are sent to Canterbury come from York so there is a possibility that a Ugandan may become No. 1, the Archbishop of Canterbury. Thank you. 

12.00
REV. HAMLET KABUSHENGA (Kinkiizi County East, Kanungu): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I wish to support the motion congratulating a son of Uganda upon this astonishing achievement. I have not had the opportunity to be contemporaries with him, I wish I had, but I have been to some places in the UK where I have felt three important things that are associated with him. 

The first one is that he has developed a reputation in his record of accomplishment as a parish priest, as a man of faith, a faith that changes darkness into light. I remember one day I met a Christian who had been in a Church where Ssentamu was the parish priest. He wanted me to pray for her and I asked why I particularly needed to pray for her and she said, “Well, Rev. Sentamu is our parish priest, I know that he prayed for a very desperately crippled lady who got healed. I associate Africa with strong faith.” I humbly said, “Yes, I am from Africa and I have faith but my faith my not be that strong”.  

He has won a reputation as a defender of social justice. He is ideologically sensitive and so as I congratulate him I would like to say that in him we see God acting in God’s style. Hon. Wakikona made that point although the emphasis was on congratulating Idi Amin, which is not right. We must congratulate God. If you remember how the Christian Gospel started, the persecution of those who believe in Christ made them stronger than they were. Those who read the Bible will know that verse in the book of Joshua, which says, “Wherever you put the sole of your feet, I will give to you” and we see this being fulfilled in Ssentamu. Although John Ssentamu had a heart to serve this country through justice, an evil man sabotaged him. God has allowed this justice to flourish in another place.

Secondly, I want to emphasise that when we hear people who make great achievements, we should not romanticise their experience of leadership. It is not an easy ride and what we need to learn from him is treading the journey that he has treaded. He was first of all Bishop in Stepney, which is a very difficult area with a lot of racism, in the South of London. He exercised great discernment there. 

When he was a made a diocesan Bishop, he went to Birmingham. For us in Uganda we may think, “Oh, Birmingham that great city! Has he not been a wonderful man, has he not had a great time?” Birmingham, for Church ministers in the UK, means racial and religious conflicts. It is one of the most multi-racial and multi-religious places in the United Kingdom. It is a very great community of Africans and Muslims 

Archbishop Ssentamu, who could sustain a Christian spirit of love and respect for others to an extent that he caught an eye of the United Kingdom, is a great man. It indicates a man of character who does not put himself first, who recognises the rights of other people to live and to exercise their beliefs, and so we must look beyond his great achievement to the great sacrifice that he has made as a minister.  

Thirdly, I would like to congratulate Africa that in an increasingly global world, Uganda and Africa are going to get a fair hearing in the Anglican Communion. When we talk about globalisation in the context of economics, we talk about others benefiting with their high technology and we Africans who are not highly educated or highly empowered technologically being at a great disadvantage. What we see happening in economics is also happening in theological practice. Discussions of policies are carried out globally and here we only see things happening around us without participating because of our lack of empowerment.

DR NKUUHE: I want the Reverend, who I think knows his colleague, to clarify two issues. Why does a man of God who loves and tolerates different opinions vehemently oppose homosexuality when in fact it is a very big percentage of the people in the society he serves? 

Secondly, do you think there is a lot of hope for the Anglican Church as far as economics and social justice are concerned? From history among the people who were compensated as slave owners, the last to be compensated was a Bishop in the Anglican Church.

REV. KABUSHENGA: Thank you very much. I will come back and give whatever clarification I can but moving on from having a fair hearing in a globalised Church environment, I want to come down specifically to the issues being discussed within the Anglican communion. To be a person that is tolerant of the beliefs of others does not make you a chameleon Christian who does not have an identity. 

I stand to be corrected if I am wrong that now Archbishop Ssentamu is in the family of evangelicals. We who say true Christianity comes from the Bible and whatever the world makes of it, are accountable to it. We cannot change it; it is that evangelical faith that stands to say the prevalence of homosexuality in the world may be an issue of concern but if it stands contrary to the teaching of the scriptures; we who derive our belief and our ministry from the scriptures have no choice but to be obedient to the Bible from which we derive our faith. (Applause) 

I would say that Archbishop Ssentamu is strong on the position not only of the Bible but also of the Anglican communion. The Anglican community has been discussing issues of human sexuality and we have had a time when part of the Anglican communion wanted the Anglican Church to ordain and recognise same sex marriages. 

The great conference, which establishes the common belief of Anglicans stated that, “Marriage is ordained to be a life long relationship of one man and one woman in a loving fellowship of companionship of their lives”. So I must say that while I hail Archbishop Ssentamu for holding on to that faith, he has no choice if he is one who looks to the Anglican communion; that is the position he must support. 

I must continue and say that not only are Africans privileged in having a voice in the theological discussions going on in a globalised environment, but also the evangelicals - those who say true faith is derived from the Bible and is not man-made - have also got a voice in Archbishop Ssentamu. I congratulate him. 

I believe that this brings him into the House of Lords of the United Kingdom, and I believe that his influence will go beyond the ecclesiastical to the social and economical arenas. He will be able to promote the cause of social justice not only because he originates from Uganda but also because that is the will of God for all people to benefit from God’s creation. I, therefore, wish to add my voice to those of the many in congratulating this man of God upon being recognised and given such a responsibility. I wish him a very prosperous ministry. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

12.10
MR MIKE SEBALU (Busiro County East, Wakiso): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank hon. Okupa for bringing this motion and I think it is good practice for us to always recognise Ugandans of outstanding performance wherever they may be. And that is a very good point of departure, using one of our own, Archbishop Ssentamu, who has definitely registered outstanding achievement in the Church of England. 

I would like in the same vein to thank the members who have supported this motion, especially the two not so Black Members of Parliament who have put a very good case for the Black race wherever it is. They have made a very good case and I would like to congratulate them.

Mr Speaker, Archbishop Ssentamu was here some time back and he was in the Sheraton where he gave an interview. One thing that I would like to acknowledge is that in the interview, despite the fact that he has made outstanding achievement wherever he is, he was able to identify himself with his motherland and he did register and appreciate the achievements that Uganda has made over time. 

That is something to write home about because some of our people who go out of this country and end up being high achievers tend to disown or even disassociate themselves with their motherland. So, I would like to really recognize Archbishop Ssentamu for that gesture of good will to his motherland, recognizing the achievements and identifying with it. 

Like my colleagues have said, it is important for us to create a data bank where we can identify Ugandans of outstanding performance wherever they are so that they serve as role models of excellence. Archbishop Ssentamu is one of the very many that are out there and have been able to register outstanding achievement. That is worth recognition. The fact that we are recognizing the Archbishop in this House is a very good point of departure.

The achievement of the Archbishop is a result of consistence and it teaches us one thing: if you are consistent in your area of specialization, you can reach great heights. So it is good that Ugandans emulate the good example set by the Archbishop so that we are consistent in whatever we do for purposes of registering higher achievement.  

Lastly, the best way that we can recognize the achievement of the Archbishop is by passing - since we are in the constitutional amendment process - the principle of dual citizenship. I definitely appreciate the fact that the Archbishop is a Briton by any definition for him to be able to make such achievement. 

However, it would be good for him to associate with his country under the arrangement of the dual citizenship. If we are to take citizenship to the spirit, later you may find him not benefiting from some of the arrangements that are in Uganda due to the fact that he may be seen as non-Ugandan if you are to go by the constitutional provisions as they are now. The only way we can recognize him and many others and give them a chance to be able to use the contacts that they have made wherever they are, the kind of expertise that they have registered so that they add value to this country, is by passing the principle of dual citizenship so that they can enjoy their rights there just like they can also enjoy them here.

I beg to support this motion and I thank hon. Elijah Okupa for having come up with this motion in order to recognize one of our own who has made remarkable achievements in his area of specialization. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: I thought that would conclude the debate but the Rt hon. Prime Minister has just come in.  He has asked for just one minute. 

12.15
THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): I thank you, Mr Speaker. I have been chairing a very important meeting and you are going to hear an important statement tonight. I have only one point to make, namely that Africa has been getting a lot of material assistance from abroad but now it is our turn to offer spiritual aid. (Applause) I congratulate the Archbishop.  

THE SPEAKER: Okay. Thank you very much. The motion by hon. Okupa is very clear and you have ably contributed to it. It is my duty to put the question to this motion in the terms spelt out in the motion itself. I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: I thank you very much. I thank the mover, the seconders and all of you. (Applause)

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE CONSTITUTION 
(AMENDMENT NO.3) BILL, 2005

(Debate continued)

12.16
MR WILSON MURULI MUKASA (Nakasongola County, Nakasongola): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the minister, the chairman and the committee for bringing us to this level with this Bill.  

I support the Bill in general, with only few areas in which I think it would have been better to either preserve the status quo or the proposed provisions should have been more definite to help the process of passing this Bill.  

In Article 89(2), which has to do with the replacement of Article 89 of the Constitution, the Bill proposes that the person presiding in Parliament, that is to say the Speaker, should have a casting vote. I fail to understand why the minister has proposed this in the Bill. I feel that this will undermine the impartiality of the Speaker and I fear that once this happens the confidence the House may have in his guidance and ability to manage the House for the common good of this country will certainly disappear. 

As a result, this will be a difficult House and managing it will become an uphill task. And in a multi-party situation that is going to be even more difficult. So I wish to concur with the chairman of the committee that the status quo is better. The current provision in the Constitution is better and it should be left as it is so that we can have a manager of the House who is believed and accepted by everybody.  

About the vote of censure, the Bill in clause (2) of 118 leaves the question pending. It says, “The formulation for the rules of procedure to go along with the censure will either be done by a law or by the Rules of Procedure”. We are left hanging because it does not give us good guidance and it is not decisive enough. If the procedure is going to be by the law, who is going to initiate it and when will it come? If it is going to be by the Rules of Procedure, how will it be handled? All of this will cause unnecessary delays because when we debate, who is going to take lead?  

Therefore, the Bill should have come out decisively about censure of ministers. The censure should be done here in Parliament and I think the issue should be left to the Rules of Procedure. After all when the Rules of Procedure are being formulated they will eventually come here and be accepted by Parliament. Also the words “either” and “or” should be deleted. 

As regards the amendment of Article 105(2), I find no harm in having this amendment, not now, today, or tomorrow. Where we are and where we are going we can conveniently and comfortably lift the presidential term limits and there would be no problem at all. The fears, which some honourable members have expressed, are more imaginary than real. First of all, Article 102(2)(b) of the Constitution, which has to do with the age limit, remains intact and that is already a kind of bar in itself. Beyond 75 years, your dream of being President of this country is gone.  

However, there is a more important thing to consider. The Ugandans who survived under past dictators are not the same Ugandans today. This is because a lot of fundamental change, indeed we can even say in socio-political terms, a chemical change has happened. We cannot go back to dictatorship as some people fear. This is because the spirit of constitutionalism and respect for the rule of law has taken root. 

Secondly, factors, which promote and encourage the growth of dictatorship, have been shattered. We have been told and agree that the economy is improving and it will continue to improve. That is another big hindrance against dictatorship. We have an independent press. They are private radio stations and televisions, and they are not going to go away today or tomorrow. In fact they are becoming more independent. 

We are lucky that today we have a security and defence system in place. It is national, patriotic and it is not going to go away. It is not going to be manipulated by sectional interests so that they can seize power and unleash dictatorship on to the rest of the Ugandans. In fact we commend the Uganda Peoples’ Defence Forces (UPDF), which now has a defence policy and programme, which is going to make it better and more responsive to national needs. So there is no need to fear.  

There has also been demystification of the gun and other instruments of coercion. Today if you threw a gun here people would not run away as they used to do in the 1960s. Instead they would grab the gun. Today if a soldier came here trying to play it rough, he would be put in check. This is the spirit that is reigning and it is not going away.  

Also, popular democracy has taken root. People are taking decisions right from the family, the village level, right up to national level. So when you look around, these fears are ill founded and have no basis at all.

Lastly, there is the international community. We cannot be an island in Uganda where dictators reign freely. You have seen and you hear everyday the remnants of dictatorship being curbed and people being helped by the international community to join the happy community of democratic nations of the world. I, therefore, urge members to ignore these fears that they have and boldly support the lifting of the presidential term limits. I thank you.

12.25
PROF. VICTORIA MWAKA (Woman Representative, Luweero): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I stand to support the Bill for the review of the Ugandan Constitution. I thank all stakeholders in this exercise right from the Ssempebwa Review Commission, the Executive and the wide consultation, which took place when members were sent on recess to go and ask the people what their views are.  

The committee pointed out that there was need for a review and they gave some reasons. One was that the Constitution had some misgivings. I also want to add on to their list, which is well spelt out in the report, that the Constitution has been overtaken by events. 

Mr Speaker, you remember I was the Vice-Chairperson of the Constituent Assembly, and I remember where you used to sit. When the Constitution was being debated there was anxiety. This was because of previous bad experiences due to Multi-party politics, the wars that had been going on, a list of bad leaders, and coup d’etats. The people countrywide were sceptical of their leaders, therefore, most of the provisions, which were put there were because of fear.  

I use the words, “overtaken by events,” to mean that so many changes have taken place, good ones by the way. We have had smooth leadership for 20 years and because things are moving on well, there is justification for change. I want to add to that aspect of being overtaken by events. This change is to take care of the aspirations of the people of Uganda. I get perturbed when some groups of people who have been advocating for Multi-partism and the opening up political space are the same people decampaigning the referendum. 

The best way to change the political system would be through a referendum because the Movement came in through a referendum and should, therefore, go through a referendum. It seems as if such people do not know exactly what they want. I feel that holding the referendum is the best way and when we come to it I hope that members will agree and not oppose this provision as we did when we were having this debate some time back. 

DR NKUUHE: I thank the honourable member. She has asserted that the Movement came in as a result of a referendum. Could I remind you that the Movement came in around 1986/89 and the referendum was in 2000, so which came before which? Is what you have said really the fact? 

PROF. MWAKA: I have understood what you are asking. I know that the Movement came in because of war. But we had to go back and ask the people, “Do you still need the Movement?” And they said yes, they still needed the Movement. We are going back to ask them the same question and according to their answer, we will ask them why. I think you asked the question when actually you already knew the answer. 

The second aspect, which I would like to touch is the need for a smooth transition from the Movement system of governance to the Multi-party system. As the committee noted, we need commitment, dialogue, tolerance and good understanding of issues. I am saying good understanding of issues because we sometimes debate to satisfy our own ego and that is why we lack consistency. This time I beg members to be consistent in their arguments. 

About the regional tier system, that is one of the best achievements of the Movement Government as we talk now. Way back in history there have been changes of government and language simply because people had stigma. For example, traditional names were erased from the Ugandan language, Buganda became Mukono, Kayunga, Mubende as if Buganda does not exist. Likewise Toro became Kabarole, Kamwenge among others. 

When we move to the regional tier or federal system as it was advocated for by Buganda, we will have people living together in harmony, accommodating each other’s differences in what we call a symbiotic relationship and I feel that is the best way to cement that. We will know that we have Uganda, but we will also know that we have Buganda or Toro. This will strengthen decentralization and make it more accommodative as far as people are concerned. 

There is need to polish up decentralization by reducing the haemorrhage brought about by corrupt district executive officers. If we could have some of the powers, which have been decentralized returned to the centre, we would reduce that haemorrhage. For example in Luwero we have been having a problem with our District Executive Officer who is now being investigated. The case is in court and the council agreed that he should be interdicted. We have so many of this kind so definitely the Executive is justified to suggest what it has.  

As regards the need to amend Article 105, I just want to quote one of the delegates of the Constitutional Convention, which framed the American Constitution in 1787: “Term limits were extensively debated but rejected because elections are for getting rid of politicians who do not perform while on the other hand, term limits are for eliminating politicians who are performing”. 

My conclusion, therefore, is that we should be getting rid of bad leaders through elections because that is yardstick enough to show whether a leader is bad and should be kicked out. But we should preserve good leaders by lifting the term limits so that as long as they are still wanted by the population they should remain. 

Mr Speaker, I advocate for lifting term limits so that if we see that the incumbent president is still a good leader, he should be left. After all, opening up political term limits does not mean that he will be elected automatically. When we come to the elections he can be rejected. We are just suggesting lifting of term limits so that we can vote and see who is good or bad.  

Lastly, why am I advocating for opening up? We know that experience is very important because in democratic governance it helps to build a young nation. Uganda is still a very young nation. Good leaders, therefore, should not be banned from serving their people. In academia, the judiciary and even at places of work, experience matters; why then should we say that politics does not need experience? The longer the service, the better. As a check and balance, elections are enough. This business of putting a full stop where there should be a comma may not work. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much.

12.37
MR BERNARD MULENGANI (Bukooli County Central, Bugiri): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to join my colleagues and thank the committee for their report. I would like to contribute to these particular issues particularly Article 105(2). 

Various people have argued on this Floor that maintaining the Article as it is in the Constitution will help the country deter dictatorship. That beats my logic because we should be not individualizing Article 105. It is important for Parliament to make laws that are consistent. In this case, when you look at Articles 1, 2, 3 and 4 of the Constitution, which empowers the people, maintaining Article 105 as it is in the Constitution today will deprive people of those powers. To maintain consistency, therefore, it is only prudent and viable for this Seventh Parliament to amend Article 105 as recommended by the committee. This then clears the contradiction in the Constitution. 

Yesterday one of the members said that he had, held consultations with a president of another country, who is guiding him in the way Uganda should be governed. I believe that in this country we as Members of Parliament should guide our own country. Moreover, if we are seeking ways of guiding this country by consulting leaders of other countries who in the recent past stopped the convoy of the President, then what type of advice shall we get that will really lead this country to prosperity? 

After having spoken against the deletion of 105(2) together with some members, I wonder if, when this Article is lifted, it will hinder those that are interested in standing against the NRM candidate? If not, I request that members should not say words that reflect panic over the unknown future. 

I also know that some members have referred to the Mustard Seed, page 250 where it says that there are people within the country who have got presidential qualities and who could run this country. This statement, to me, does not imply that opening up term limits hinders other people who want to run. In any case, the only formula of justifying what is written in the Mustard Seed is by lifting term limits and by Article 105(2) being deleted and amended, to enable individuals with those qualities to come out and compete favourably. 

Also who said that this country will be given to people to lead simply because they have the qualities? There should be competition. Nobody can get power on a sliver platter. Everything should be competed for and the people allowed to decide who is able to lead them.

On the issue of amending the Constitution and letting the Speaker have a vote, I want to stand with the committee and strongly object this. The credibility of the Chair should be maintained. 

Mr Speaker, I would also like to contribute to the issue of amendment of Article 80 where it says that the person who has completed a minimum formal education of Advanced Level standard or its equivalent, which shall be established in a manner and at a time prescribed by Parliament or by law, as proposed in the Bill. I propose that the committee look at it further. There is attending senior six and coming out with triple failure. You will have attended but we really need to qualify. Whereas one goes up to senior six, one must have got some principles at least -(Interruption)

MR OGWEL LOOTE: I thank the Speaker and my colleague for giving way. The information I want to give him is that once you have attended any level and you have not successfully satisfied the examiners, whether you call the Police with 999, without principal passes there will be no award of a certificate. There is no certificate for failures. 

MR MULENGANI: Well, thank you for your information but you are trying to amplify what I am bringing out. That is, there should be a minimum even after attending A’ Level. In fact I am of the view that we should have quantified this to be at least a degree. 

Lastly –(Interruption) 

MR ODONGA OTTO: Thank you for giving way. Mr Speaker, I want the honourable member to clarify something. Three minutes ago he was saying the power of the people should not be removed away from them, by maintaining Article 105(2). Don’t you think you can remove the same power by maintaining academic qualifications? I see this as contradictory.

MR MULENGANI: Mr Speaker, hon. Otto is a paralegal student. He has been known on the Floor of parliament several times as a paralegal, who is very eloquent. I want to clarify to him that these are two different issues. Powers of the people in as far as the Constitution is concerned involves voting and electing leaders –(Interjection)- and participating. If we have qualifications put in place for certain offices, why would Parliament be left with those that have caused it problems? You have seen members being taken to court because of qualifications or their equivalent. I think hon. Otto just wants me to mention something but I will not mention it on the Floor of the House.

Lastly on the issue of the CAOs, some members were saying on the Floor of Parliament that the CAOs should be brought to the centre to reduce corruption. I want to be on record that not all CAOs have stolen government funds. Even at the centre there is corruption going on. What is important is that we the leaders put in place stringent measures of how to monitor performance of the CAOs. In the meantime I also agree that the CAOs should come to the centre. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

12.49
DR JOHNSON NKUUHE (Isingiro County South, Mbarara): Mr Speaker, thank you for the opportunity to contribute to this lovely debate. This week will go down in history as one of the saddest or one of the most important weeks in the history of this country. This is because the decisions we make are going to not only to affect us but also our children, grandchildren and great grandchildren. We have a historical opportunity to make the right decisions and everybody in this country is looking upon us to rise to the occasion. 

I thank the chairperson and the committee for the report. On page 5 of the report they say that the Bill has 98 clauses and they are proposing that we delete 60 of those clauses. If this were an exam and you were given ten numbers would you say, “Perhaps I should delete six, and do only four?” If you did this you would have a big problem. Anyway, they may have their reasons and they have justified their problems But look at what we are doing exactly. The Constitution we are trying to amend took so many years to make and we are trying to do this in a very short time. I am telling you, much as most of us think that we should go along, we should really pause and reflect. In my work I deal a lot with farmers and students and I talk a lot about the performance curve. 

Each one of you has a performance curve. The animals you keep, the chickens, the diary cows, the bulls, everything has a performance curve. It may be very good at the beginning. Later it tapers off and starts not performing well as it was doing at its optimum. I say that is the time you should change not because you hate those chickens, bulls, diary cows or he-goats, but for the good health of the herd you have to change. 

In the same way we should also look at our own performance curves as individuals, as countries and as companies. We tend to have a lot of fear of the unknown. You might say that, “These things have been good so why do we not keep them?” Unfortunately, we are human and humans grow up, they grow old and they begin to lose their – for instance, we used to – (Interjection) – let me first finish, then you seek clarification. For instance, if you are going and play tennis or compete in 100 metres athletics, there is a certain age limit. The human body is subject to wear and tear and that is a fact of life. You can seek your clarification now.

CAPT. BASALIZA: Thank you, Mr Speaker and thank you honourable member for giving way. I respect Dr Nkuuhe and that is why he has given me time to seek clarification. From my knowledge of biology at advanced level, I see Dr Nkuuhe as being a man of 65 years. Actually, he is older than President Museveni. Yesterday he said that the President is tired and he should go home. 

I am seeking clarification as to why Dr Nkuuhe has never given up representing the people of Isingiro when he is older than the President. I am also asking why he is trying to compete again in the next elections? Thank you very much.

DR NKUUHE: Let me clarify this. First of all, I am not older than the President. I am actually 55 and I think he is 62. There is a big difference and I would like to tell you that we were at school together and he was ahead of me. He used to be president of the Christian Union and I became president of the Christian Union after him. I followed in his footsteps. Therefore, I can say a thing or two about him with authority. So, - (Interruption)

MR MIKE SEBALU: Thank you very much, Dr Nkuuhe for giving way. I am following your argument and you are developing it to a level that makes me appreciate it. However, you seem to be losing one thing along the way. When you talk of opening term limits, does that pre-suppose that there are no inbuilt mechanisms of changing leaders, say through elections? Is that what you are suggesting? Because opening term limits per se is one thing. There are other methods provided for changing leaders, say using the people through elections. Your argument seems to preclude other arrangements.

DR NKUUHE: Let me clarify the point. From a lot of experience, the performance for most countries seems to be that around eight or ten years, people have already reached their optimal performance and they are beginning to go down. In fact, even MPs should consider this seriously except that many times only 40 percent of MPs come back anyway. But for the president, you cannot have half a president coming back. 

We have had the same leader since 1986. At that time America had Regean as President and Britain had Margaret Thatcher as Prime Minister. Can you imagine what it would be like if these people still had those leaders? Who are we not to change? Why do you not want to benefit from this change? As for me, I think we should retain term limits for about six reasons.

One is the performance curve -(Interruption) 

MR MBABAZI: Thank you hon. Nkuuhe for giving way. Just a question because I get confused when you talk about change, is there a suggestion that there should be no change?

DR NKUUHE: No. What I am actually saying is that our current leader is performing over his time. He reached his optimum around 1996, 1997 and 1998 and we can go to various parameters if we want to measure. So, in my view he should not have stood in 2001 because then he would have left when his curve was shooting. But now his curve is going down. That is what I am saying. I think we should retain term limits, because the performance of our leader is going down and that is natural.

Secondly, the Constitution was really right to put up that provision.

Thirdly, our good leader has already made a promise. In my culture we say that a man should rotate only in bed not on his tongue. In other words, you should not say this and then turn around and say something else. And it is a global trend in Africa. 

In fact I had an opportunity to attend the World Economic Forum and one of the speakers was President Mkapa. He spoke good news to my ears because he said, “I am retiring. We had the numbers to change the Constitution and people even said we should change it but I said no. It might be good politically but ultimately, in the long run for Tanzania, it is better that we maintain term limits.” I really admired him. 

In South Africa, Mandela did not even finish two terms and now he is the most famous person. In my view, we are not even talking of third term but of 20, 25 and 30 years. 

Also, there is a lot of pressure from development partners. I would not want anybody foreign to interfere with my government but in actual fact if you do not sort your house, others will tell you to sort it out. That is why these colonialists actually dictate to us because they find us fighting each other and then they take advantage of the situation. Why do we not sort it out ourselves? Why do we not retain term limits so that everyone, even those who do not support what is happening can feel that at least they have won or lost fairly?

Finally, people are fond of asking, “Why do you think our history went wrong?” It went wrong because leaders tried to over stay their welcome. Yes, the moment leaders started changing and postponing elections the –(Interruption)

PROF. KAGONYERA: Hon. Nkuuhe is an educated man. He knows the history of Uganda. Can he give us specific examples of where problems arose because certain changes did not take place? Because he knows –(Interjection)- wait, you know only too well that Obote was elected only in 1962, four short years later we already had problems and indeed in 1971, 1979,1980, and 1985 we had the changes that hon. Nkuuhe cherishes. Is he in order to say that we got into trouble because we never had changes when in fact our history is replete with those changes?

THE SPEAKER: You have analysed the situation in your own way and he has analysed the situation in his own way. You have to expect these kinds of differences in our analysis.

MR REAGAN OKUMU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Actually we have had problems in this country because leaders have failed to stick to their promises. Obote failed to stick to his promises because he abrogated the Constitution of Uganda. When Amin took over power in 1971 he pledged that he was going to restore this country to democracy. He failed to stick to his promises. 

When President Yoweri took over power in 1986, he pledged to rule for four years and after that there was an extension. In the year 2001 he pledged that he was going for his last term. Now he wants the Constitution amended. That is the fear that most people have because leaders of Uganda in the past have not stuck to their promises. We are afraid of instability in this country because of that history.

DR NKUUHE: Thank you very much. I could not have articulated it much better than that. What I was saying in actual fact is that we have had problems because people over stay –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Nkuuhe, you have taken over 20 minutes and overrun your time.

DR NKUUHE: Can I conclude by saying that I admire our leader? He is from my district and he is my friend so it would be in my interest to want him to stay. That would be a natural thing but I tell you I love Uganda more than I love my district and I think for the stability of this country and for sanity in our politics, let us retain and be subject to the laws that we write. Let us all be under the law and retain term limits and there will be sanity in the politics of this country and we shall all live to benefit from that sanity, I thank you very much.

(The House was suspended at 1.04 p.m.)

(On resumption at 3.03 p.m._)
 
THE SPEAKER: Welcome back, honourable members. In the public gallery this afternoon we have pupils of Tendo Primary School located in Nabweru sub-county in Wakiso district of Buganda. Please join me in welcoming them. You are welcome, with your teachers. (Applause)

MR ERESU: Mr Speaker, we sit in this corner and since the presidential address our microphones have disappeared and we risk many things. The other day when one of the members was passing he nearly had his trousers torn by the remaining stump. We request that this be restored for our convenience.

THE SPEAKER: In a particular way I want to welcome the hon. Member for Masaka District. You are welcome.

PERSONAL STATEMENT

MAJ. JOHN KAZOORA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I beg your indulgence to make a personal statement on a matter, which I think is very urgent.

Thank you, Mr Speaker. This is a personal statement made by me John Kazoora, MP Kashari, Mbarara District. I wish to refer to the lead story of the Monitor newspaper of today Tuesday, 21 June 2005 namely, “Kagame speaks out on Museveni’s third term”. That story grossly misrepresented my contribution to this House yesterday. I wish to put the record straight. 

In the preamble to my contribution yesterday I did state that on Friday, 17 June 2005 I met His Excellency President Paul Kagame of Rwanda as a delegate of AMANI Uganda Chapter. I said President Kagame had underscored that parliamentarians, especially those in the Great Lakes region, should address themselves to the important and pertinent questions and issues of the day to make themselves relevant, otherwise history would make them irrelevant and he said I could quote him on this.  

At no moment did I say or claim that His Excellency the Rwandan President had directed that I deliver a message as alleged by the Monitor. In that respect, therefore, I was not delivering any message from President Kagame, let alone a special one. My reference to President Kagame was a simple preamble to my substantive contribution to the debate in the House and I take full responsibility for that debate. I would like to state categorically that at no time in my one hour and 40 minutes’ discussion with His Excellency, Paul Kagame, did the issue of the third term debate in Uganda crop up. It did not at all.

Permit me, Mr speaker, to point out that my contribution to the debate was carried live on TV and there is the Hansard to corroborate what I said. Moreover, the New Vision of the same date got me right. What I said was not too complicated for any average news reporter to understand. In that regard, therefore, I wish to categorically disassociate myself from the Monitor perspective of what I said and I hope the paper will put the record straight in the interest of my person, the reputation of the paper and all other concerned stakeholders. Mr Speaker, I thank you.  

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. That is the end. There is no debate of such a statement. Therefore, we should proceed with the debate, but I do not know how you are going to do it. The Attorney-General and the chairperson of the committee are not here so I really do not know.

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE CONSTITUTION
 (AMENDMENT NO. 3) BILL, 2005

(Debate continued)

MS NAMUSOKE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have no intention of interfering with the progress of the debate but I seek your intervention. I do not have the report of the committee on this particular bill and I have inquired from other members but they do not have it either. May I be helped to get this committee report? 

THE SPEAKER: The Office of the Clerk will look into this so that you are availed with a copy of the report. As I said, I do not see the owner of the motion, who is the Attorney-General, or the Minister of Constitutional Affairs –(Interjection)– what! I do not know whether they will not challenge you as to whether you are competent to be Attorney-General but anyway, you are the Leader of Government Business.

PROF. NSIBAMBI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I will temporarily take charge of that post.

3.09
MR ANTHONY YIGA (Kalungu County West, Masaka): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity to contribute to the debate on the Constitution (Amendment No. 3) Bill. I have three issues.

I have found out in the report of the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs that they are persuading Parliament to discuss and amend only 38 clauses instead of the 98 as contained in the Bill and that the 60 clauses should be handled by future Parliaments basically because of time constraints.

There is one issue, which you could assist us and clarify on because when we were agreeing on how to handle constitutional amendments the principle was that we should require the two-thirds during voting at the second and third reading of the Bill. But I can see that the committee is insisting that we should carry out administrative action and have each clause –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Let me explain that. We are handling a Bill, which had a first reading here and currently we are dealing with the general debate. After this we shall have a committee stage and when we come to that stage there is no way you can administratively deal with a Bill of this nature. 

I think what they are saying is that at the committee stage when we come to call various clauses, their position is that those Articles be stayed or deleted from the Bill. That is the only thing. Then we shall, according to our rules, deal with that recommendation and dispose of it. So, do not get worried that we can administratively amend a Bill, which has had a first reading.

MR OULANYAH: The honourable member is concerned because we used the word “administratively”, but it was in relation to voting at committee stage. I think that is what he is referring to. The committee made recommendations that administratively, arrangements should be made so that the two-thirds vote is taken at the committee stage in the process.

MR YIGA: Mr Speaker, thank you very much for that clarification, which you have given and I would like to rest the matter. However, I find difficulty with having a two-thirds vote on each and every clause because we may even take more time than we envisaged –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: As I have indicated honourable members, before we suspend the proceedings I intend to call off the general debate some time this week, maybe on Thursday so that we concentrate on the most important phase, which is the committee stage.

MR YIGA: Mr Speaker, I would like to give my views on the presidential term limits as proposed by the amendment of Article 105(2) to provide for indefinite illegibility for those who want to stand for elections to the office of the President.

Yesterday I listened to most of my colleagues who were presenting and aired their views especially those against amendment on this particular Article. I would like to allay their fears that I do not see any problem with amending this Article, more especially since Uganda has benefited a lot from the last 19 years when we have been led by one man called Gen. Yoweri Kaguta Museveni. For 19 years, the country has enjoyed stability and it has really developed. 

This means that if we had another person in future who could also lead Uganda for more than two terms, I think this country could move forward in great strides. So, in the interests of development, peace and stability of this country, this is one of the reasons I am recommending that. I urge my colleagues who are pessimistic to allow the amendment of this Article so that Ugandans can decide. After all we are not saying that somebody will be in office by force of the gun but he or she will have to go through an election. 

Since we are all saying that power belongs to the people, let this be an opportunity for us to demonstrate that it is Ugandans who decide whom to elect and for which office without limitations or restrictions.

I think what we should be more concerned about is how we can build strong institutions to manage this country. If we have strong institutions, a professional army like the one government is trying to build, a professional police, professional security agencies, professional inspectorate of government and many others, I think we would be able to sort out most of these problems The problem has been that in Africa we have had weak institutions but if we could have stronger institutions, then we would be able to check excesses in government and excesses by political leaders. So we should urge the building of stronger institutions so that we can be able to check any excesses.

We should also emphasize voter or civic education. This is an area in which this country has been challenged a great deal. Even as I speak, the Electoral Commission is challenged as regards civic education for the forthcoming referendum. We should have a strong Electoral Commission, which is able to carry out civic education not only during times when we expecting to vote but also after voting. Ugandans should be made aware of their civic duties that as citizens they are supposed to vote during national elections. If they are made aware of their responsibilities, they would be able to vote wisely when it comes to voting. That is why I am recommending that we amend this particular Article. I have no problem with it.

Lastly, I also support the amendment of Article 182(2) to have the appointment of the chief administrative officers done by the Public Service Commission. As of now we are saying we have got a problem in our local governments. Chief administrative officers are very weak. They are the officers of the local governments and they are accounting officers yet in most of the districts there are problems There is a problem of political influence and chief administrative officers have given in to it. It is now the politicians who have taken charge and many things are actually getting messed up in most of the local governments. 

Professionalism is lacking in management and one cannot get value for money. Shoddy work is the order of the day and you find that there is no chief administrative officer who can be taken to task to account because they always have so many excuses. You find that it is the councillors who are the ones who won tenders and they are the contractors and bosses of these chief administrative officers. So it becomes very difficult for them to discipline them or bring them to order.

Then another problem is that it is not easy to remove any chief administrative officer from his job. Virtually all local governments have failed. I believe that it would be easy for a civil servant to be removed from office if he is not useful. But when it comes to the chief administrative officer, you have to go to the council where there has to be voting but most of these councillors are the contractors. They are benefiting from the monies, which the chief administrative officers advance to them and nobody can actually come out and say, “Enough is enough, let so and so go”. 

By having these chief administrative officers appointed by the centre, it would be easy to usher in professional management and remove these errant officers in case one of them actually makes a mistake. So I would like to -(Interruption)

PROF. KABWEGYERE:  Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to inform the honourable member and the House that the issue is not only that of controlling chief administrative officers from the centre because of the money they handle. It is also in their interest that they can be transferred from one district to another and promoted, which has not been the case up to now. So it is in the interest of the chief administrative officers to be able to move laterally and vertically when they are being handled from the centre. I think this would be good for the system and for the officers.

MR MIKE SEBALU: Regarding what the honourable minister has said, in terms of building professionalism you must create an environment that gives one the ability to enhance their potential. For that purpose I would like to inform my colleague that the office of chief administrative officer, which you left, will definitely become better with this amendment and you may consider going back.

MR YIGA: I would like to thank you all for your information.  

In conclusion, I support this amendment that chief administrative officers be appointed by the Public Service Commission and deployed by central government to work in districts where vacancies may be. Thank you very much.

3.21
MR JAMES KAKOOZA (Kabula County, Rakai): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I will start by thanking the committee for reducing the number of Articles within the Bill. Specifically I will go to the report of the committee on page 10, which deals with citizenship. I do not agree with this part of the report that says that we should deal with the issue of dual citizenship in the next Parliament. 

This morning we found it very important to convey our congratulations to our fellow Ugandan who acquired the highest position in the world. Mr Speaker, it is on record that the Sixth Parliament started debating dual citizenship in 1999 so this is not the first time. So when the committee says that we should deal with this issue in the Eighth Parliament, I find it very awkward and unbecoming. It is on record that people who go to nkuba kyeyo contribute to our economy and yet they find complications when they come back to check on their investments. Economically, we benefit from these people so I do not see why, when we have got a chance of amending this Constitution, we should deal with this as if it has been a problem for a long time.

MR SEBALU MIKE: Point of information. Thank you very much, hon. Kakooza for giving way.  When you interact with the Ugandans outside; I would like to specifically give the example of Ugandans in South Africa who have very good jobs within the South African system. They have taken on South African citizenship and have surplus savings that they would like to invest home.  When they come home, the legal framework doesn’t encourage them to come back and invest, and yet that kind of arrangement would be very beneficial to our economy.  Some of them are doctors who have acquired a very, very high level of expertise, of which we fly out some Ugandans to South Africa and yet it is that technology, which they want to bring home.  

So the earlier we handle this matter, the better for us; and the longer we delay with it, the longer we disadvantage ourselves in terms of accessing some of this technology and expertise that some of our people have acquired in the places where they have acquired citizenship.  So I really support the idea by hon. Kakooza. It is something we need to handle. It is not so controversial, we can still handle and conclude with it so as to allow our people to enjoy their rights where they are and get some benefits back home.

MR KAKOOZA: Thank you for that information and maybe my time will be also compensated.  

Secondly, hon. Speaker, I will go to the report of the committee on Parliament.  I support the committee about dissolving Parliament.  As democracy is growing and the independence of conscience of the Members of Parliament who are elected from the people, I think they are really capable of making the best decisions for the country.  So I don’t feel that we should have a dead law where the Executive and Parliament could be dissolved and we waste resources.  I feel right now as the Executive is working in harmony with Parliament, a general consensus can be reached and something can be handled without even wasting time and we say that we go back to the people, that we dissolve Parliament as that takes a lot of time.

Honourable Speaker, I would like to talk about the replacement of Resident District Commissioners in Article 203 of the Constitution.  As we are moving into multi-parties, I feel that a party, which takes power, has got its members and the objectivity and strategy input of the party is to improve on social life.  When you take a situational analysis since this Government came into power, you find that the cost committed to RDCs is becoming a public liability. If we still feel that the donors are contributing 40 per cent and we are contributing 60 per cent to our internal revenue, the best way to reduce the public expenditure is to do away with such a cost so that we can invest such monies spent on people who have become a liability to Government elsewhere.  

Another point, hon. Speaker, is that we should accept changes.  I have heard the contribution of members saying that when somebody overstays in power, he can become a dictator.  But to me, it is that, there is no formula of a dictator.  

I have got a book here, they have been grading people who have been dictators, this is new research.  Among the people who are mentioned, President Museveni has never been in this standard of world making, to become a dictator. According to world standards - this is a research, which I have; I can lay it on the Table for members’ consumption.  

What I am trying to say, is that Article 105 is almost outdated because if we are going to be mandated to have free and fair elections, where somebody can exercise his will to vote for a person he wants, let the vote take its course, people vote for a candidate they want.  It is like people have been pleading for consistence in the laws and whatever people are saying is that we should have consistence.  We have had a President for 20 years, we want to maintain what he has been having; the achievements are there on record, and so I don’t see any problem since the chance is there to amend Article 105.  We should do it according to the environment.  Thank you, hon. Speaker.

CAPT. FRANCIS BABU (Central Division, Kampala): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and hon. members.  I stand here to support the amendments, but mainly I will be concentrating on Kampala, Article 105, and then I will speak on the dual citizenship.   

Mr Speaker, Kampala as it is now, and after looking at its management, we need to turn the city probably into one of the best cities on the African Continent.  It has certain attributes: One, when you have a city that is well developed, well planned, it attracts investors.  

Secondly, it is a pride of the nation; it is the face and when people visit your country, most of our foreign visitors stop in the city.  The city as it is now was more-or-less designed in the 1950s for a population of about 300,000 people.  As we talk now, the population is hitting a limit of about 1.6 million and during the day it goes up to about 2.5 million people.  The roads, the transport system, the services like the sewerage systems and all these are having a little bit of a problem and the pressure is increasing every day.  

The local Government system that is in place can’t support the capital city.  The revenue collection is not at the mark and therefore the Central Government in my sincere opinion, should contribute in running the capital city of our nation.  To do this, we need to give Kampala a special status as a capital as opposed to cities.  It must be looked at as any metropolises that are going to form a capital.  Since our country is not a very rich country, and we can’t go and build a new capital city, we have to redevelop this particular city with the present setting as it is while looking at the possibility of increasing it.  

The other points that we must look at when we are looking at this city is the way it was built.  A lot of people have never realised this, but Kampala is one of the most beautiful cities on this continent.   All it needs is to be improved in many different ways.  I know a few people who have never travelled quite a bit would not understand this.  

But if you have been on the African continent and you have seen several towns, you would see the beauty of this town and country. If I am allowed to blow my own trumpet, it is one of the most beautiful cities on the African continent; and I will not – I know we have a few problems in the city because we are not managing it well and so on and so forth.  But I do know that if it were done very well, probably Kampala would be one of the most beautiful cities on the continent.  It will attract more investors and more people; and therefore the special status, which is being proposed by both the committee and the Bill, I would like to very strongly support. I ask you to look at it and see if we can improve the management; to see if this city can really get to the mark ,so that most people can realise the beauty that this city has got.  It was not very well designed, I would like to agree; it is a very old design but it can improve.  We can plan it better, have better physical planning but it will need more resources and more capacities of our people to do it.

Article 105(2):
I have heard a lot of arguments on this; I have heard a lot of people say all sorts of things.  But one thing we must do when we are debating this Article is to separate, one, the concept of term limit and individual.  There has been a lot of tying up the individual with this Article.  I would like to disagree, let us look at the concept first.  

In fact I was arguing with a friend of mine, the litmus test is not to block anybody to stand for election; the litmus test is for someone to say, “I have done enough, goodbye.”; with or without the law. A lot of people would like to use this Article to stop individuals; I disagree.  I think that is not the best way to do it, the best way to do it is for any leader after their plans, after their programmes have been done, and they say this is the time to go.  

I found a lot of people arguing and using examples of our other friends.  But I would like you to stop for one moment and look at the rate of implementing programmes in those countries.  If you take a country like the United States, which a lot of people have quoted, with the level of development and resources they have, they can develop a programme in a shorter time than most of the third world countries.  

In most of our countries, a government would take about three to four times the time, to be able to implement a programme as compared to our friends in the developed countries.  It therefore requires one to think a little bit harder.  First, on the term of five years, which we have given so that the people can have the right to be able to try and find out whether somebody has performed in the five years, where everybody has a right to go to the polls and choose whoever they feel should stand for these elections.  

Secondly, competition: some people have said let us block somebody because we are going into competition, we do not want somebody who will compete better than us.  You are saying, democracy has certain tenets: one, you want choice; two, you want competition.  If that is so, then why do you block one person?  Let the people be the ones to decide who is going to be the next President of this country, we do not block them by using the law.  A lot of people have been arguing that, “No, he has done enough, let him go.”  Let the people decide that he has done enough and the next person should be the President.  I think those rights should be given to the people so that they can choose whoever they please. A lot of you profess to be democrats but your job for the last few months has been to block only one person. 

Somebody even had the guts to stand up in this House to say that people did not have manhood. Another person stood out there and said that some of us were puppies.  You have reached very far!! To say that I have no manhood! I only ask you that we go and find out whether I have manhood or not.  It is really pathetic for somebody to stand up in this House and tell a man like Babu, who is six feet tall, to find out if I have manhood or not.  It is very unfortunate! In fact, I want to challenge the person who said it that we should meet some time and I show her how good I am.  (Laughter)  Mr Speaker, somebody described me as a puppy the other day –(Interruption)

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Speaker, I rise on a point of order. Yesterday you made a ruling when hon. Salaamu Musumba challenged the manhood of several Members of Parliament.  She retracted her statement and said she was talking about political manhood.  Is hon. Babu in order to be obscene and exhibit an extreme sexual urge, and yet hon. Salaamu Musumba was talking about political manhood?  Is he in order?  (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Yes, you are right; I ruled hon. Salaamu Musumba out of order when she said that people have lost their manhood without a test; and I think hon. Babu is saying that he is challenging people having lost their political manhood, and therefore he wants that kind of test.

CAPT. BABU: Mr Speaker, thank you very much for your wise ruling on that one.  The very fact that – can you imagine a man like me who stands up and speaks and you understand what I am saying, that I have no political manhood; my political manhood is ticking, still very strong!  (Laughter)  

Mr Speaker, the other day I read in one of our dailies, one of our honourable friends had said that Ministers were puppies.  Two days later she withdrew it and said that they were not puppies but they were – she used a different word – she said we had lost total competence.  I wanted to stand out here and say, “It is unfortunate that the deliberations of our Cabinet cannot be made public.”  If those deliberations would be made public, you would find out that some of us are not only potent politically but we also speak, and that we respect our leader and respecting him means that you do not go around calling other people names; and I think, time has come - and I am requesting that whatever political differences we might have, time has come that we must respect each other and call each other respectfully.  (Applause)

Mr Speaker, as I end let me say this, the people of Uganda have a right to decide on who should lead this country through a ballot box and it is that ballot box that should decide; that is where the numbers should be decided. 

Secondly, Mr Speaker, since we are going into political space and people can have political parties, if they feel that their leaders shouldn’t continue beyond a certain period, let the political parties have those limits.  Let them have them in their constitution. If they feel that they don’t want anybody because they also want to become leaders, let them go and compete with that leader in their political party. They should not come to compete with our leader.  If I have a football team that I want to play a game, I will not field somebody who cannot score. If my center forward, the best scorer, is the one I have and you want to limit him, you are making me incompetent.  I will field the best candidates I have so that I can get into Government and make sure that my programmes are made –(Interruption)

MR ARUMADRI: Thank you, hon. Minister.  You are alluding to a football team but you also forget that they are FIFA rules.  When the rules say that you have got two yellow cards you will not play in the next match. So, I hope you have got the information. (Laughter)

CAPT. BABU: Mr Speaker, that was so elementary that I have to tell my friend that he is quoting the wrong rule for what I was trying to explain. Nobody has got yellow cards; ours has never got a card.  In fact, it is your people who have been getting red cards, not even yellow; our man has never got a card and until he gets the card, I am not going to –(Interruption)-

MR MWANDHA: Mr Speaker, maybe, hon. Babu was not here yesterday, but you repeated again and again that let us look at the merits and demerits of opening up without tying it to any individual including President Museveni. Now, the hon. minister is creating the impression that we are opening up for President Museveni; his arguments are actually supporting opening up for the President. Now, suppose there is a different person, another person who may not be like President Museveni, would the hon. Member still want to open up?  Is he going to continue to go against your advice yesterday and continue referring to President Museveni? 

THE SPEAKER: Well, I think I have repeated this advice so many times, but there is no way. What happens if my advice is not taken in the proper way of doing things? I will just mark you where you wrong against my advice.  But people have gone that way. I have still maintained we deal with merits and demerits of the case and I think that is how he started. This is just coming at the end that he is bringing in this issue. But otherwise, he himself said we should deal with the merits of the case.

CAPT. BABU: Mr Speaker, thanks for your wise ruling. In fact, I was going to tell him that I am actually opening it for myself because I will stand one of these days and I would like as many terms as I can get.  Let us stop talking about other people. I want to be President and if that rule is out I can have more than two terms; why should I speak about somebody else?  

So, I think time has come for us to be sincere and the reason I brought the name of this gentleman is because of the kind of barrage of abuses that are being directed to the Head of State of this country by certain quarters, which are totally uncalled for. They have personalised this thing and I think it is a bit unfair. That is the reason why I said that the time for calling people names and insulting them must stop.  

People say we pay pilgrimages; everybody is paying “pilgrimage”. I go to Rwakitura, which is two hours away; somebody goes five hours in an aeroplane to pay “pilgrimage”.  Really this is not fair. Others have gone to different parts of the world to pay pilgrimage. I have been to Rome, others have been to Mecca, and this is the pilgrimage. So, this business of calling us names is totally unacceptable. We can also stand here; we are politically potent and extremely good speakers just like you.  Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

MR MWONDHA: Honourable Francis Babu promised that he would address himself on three issues. I was eagerly waiting for his contribution on the third issue of dual citizenship and in his case this would be very pertinent. 

THE SPEAKER: Well, he ran out of time.

MR ZACHARY OLUM (Nwoya County, Gulu): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity to contribute on this very important Bill. I will address myself on three issues. First I would like to address myself on the qualification for appointment of Judges. Mr Speaker, I would like to attest to the fact that our Judiciary is very well respected locally and internationally.  Recently I was in Nairobi with the Chief Justice of Uganda, Benjamin Odoki and Justice Kanyeihamba and we got great praises for the Judiciary in Uganda. I would like to commend them for the great job they are doing in this country.  This reputation has not come out of nothing but because of the integrity of the people manning the Judiciary and also the experience, which they do exhibit in many of the cases that they handle.  I would like to agree with the committee that there is no need to change the qualification from 10 years to 7 years for appointment as a Judge of Uganda. 

Mr Speaker, I went to the extent of talking to the people on the Law Council to find out whether we have a shortage of people who qualify for appointment as Judges.  I was informed that there are over 500 qualified advocates who have served for more than 10 years and who could be appointed as Judges.  I would urge Government to abandon this idea because there isn’t any compelling reason why we would like to lower the qualification from 10 to 7 years of a practicing advocate.  Otherwise, one would suspect that we would like to introduce other elements within the Judiciary, which might not be very good for our future politics.

As we now enter the period of multiparty democracy, we would like to see the great independence of the Judiciary and also great competence for them to be able to serve this nation.

Secondly, Mr Speaker, I would like to talk about the creation of the leader of opposition. We have heard in the past, leaders of opposition here but the way they have been treated and the way they were accorded respect in this country leaves a lot to be desired.  It is normally the party in power or the people in Government who heap a lot of insult and disrespect to people who hold different views. 

I would urge Government that now that we are going to move into an era of multiparty democracy, when we create this position of a leader of opposition, it is important to accord them respect. In that respect, I would really like to thank hon. Babu for urging political leaders in this country to respect one another irrespective of our political views. It is very important to give respect where it is due and that is the only way we are going to have an amiable environment for political development in this country. 

I would like to say again it is always the people in power who make it difficult for the opposition to operate. And I hope when we move into that new dispensation of political life, the political parties that are in opposition should be allowed to breath and operate as normally as possible. Normally it is the Government that panics when opposition get out into the countryside and begin to criticise their policies and begin to canvass against certain actions of Government. It is necessary for political actors to have a code of conduct and I hope that we shall be able to put into our laws rules and regulations that govern the individual conduct of political leaders as well as political organizations. These are necessary regulations to be able to ensure that we move forward smoothly and work as a nation. I think the opposition is a very important organ in our political life. 

Recently, I read an article from Canada in a Commonwealth newspaper where a party in power won all the seats and there was no opposition. One side was empty. So, when they came to sit in Parliament, they really felt ashamed. They had to rearrange the sitting in Parliament to ensure that there was a semblance of some togetherness. They even arranged for leaders of political parties who were in opposition to be able to ask questions in Parliament through some members of the Government side. This was because they realised that opposition was necessary to prick them and to be able to create a situation whereby people would know that their concerns are being taken into account. So, it is important to realise that opposition in politics is very necessary, all we have to do is set the rules of the game correctly and we can drive this country forward.

Lastly, Mr Speaker I know time is almost up. I have listened to all the arguments about Article 105(2). I have not been convinced that there are any compelling reasons to remove this term limit. All we are talking about is that there is a transition we are going through and I think the Prime Minister yesterday was very clear, he said this is a period of transition. We need a person who can drive us through. This has been a common sort of contribution in this House. We are tying this Article 105 to an individual. I myself have not been convinced that there is really any reason for us to remove the term limit. By tying this Article to an individual, we are running the risk of not creating institutions for continuity. 

We are all mortal. It is now 20 years and if we could not create institutions in 20 years, we are not going to create them again given another 20 years. So, there must be a deliberate effort for us to create institutions for continuity so that anybody can come forward and step in the shoes of President Museveni. 

By comparing our system with the British System, we are making a very big mistake because those are not similar systems I think we should get closer to the American system which makes the President very powerful; he is everything. But you need to contain him. Seeds of dictatorship is in everyone of us. It is very intrinsic in all of us and this must be contained. I think people who have talked about term limits were very wise and there was consensus in the CA on this matter. 

Mr Speaker, I would like to end here by saying that I don’t support the idea of removing Article 105(2). The limits must stay as they are, but we 
must bear in mind that those who argue that the people were consulted on this Article are not telling the truth. A submission by Government brought in this Article but it was not in the terms of reference to the Constitutional Review Commission.

Secondly, the White Paper of the government was actually used to sell to the population this issue of removing the term limits. So, when I hear my brother, hon. Peter Mutuluuza, arguing that his people have told him so, I think it is himself who went and told the people that we must remove these term limits. So, let us not use the people to really justify something that Government really wants to happen. And at least, my people, if I told you what they say, you would be shocked. The people have said they would not support the removal of the term limits because they have suffered over these 20 years and you are going to have a continuity of the suffering if you have got the same people who are going to continue in power. That is what the people say. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Dr Kezimbira-Miyingo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Because of shortage of time, I will limit myself to two items but maybe link up with a third issue within the amendment of the Constitution, which is relevant to one of the issues I will discuss.

Mr Speaker, I want to begin with Article 105(2). During the Constitution making process which I attended, I was one of the people and I am recorded for that thought, although we had put down the two term limit for the President, an occasion could arise where the people could find an individual good, competent and has performed so well they that would call for this person to have another term or even more.  I was very clear on this so that today when I support the opening up of Article 105 (2) is not because it is something that I have just realised today as some people think; that this is something that people have been bribed into. Some of us thought about this right away from the Constituent Assembly, that even if we could as ourselves as Members of Parliament be able to run for more than two times, it is possible that a President also could run for more than two terms if he had performed well and the people desired that person.  

Mr Speaker, the second reason why I support opening up of Article 105 (2) is because of my duty that I am here to bring the voice of my people.  I can tell this august House that when the Ssempebwa Commission travelled through this country, my constituency was one of those that was visited and I personally participated in all the meetings of Prof. Ssempebwa in my constituency. First of all, the preparatory meetings that were held within the constituency and subsequently when the committee came into the constituency and I remember very vividly, many of my people - in fact I do not remember any coming up in the center of the hall where we were, where a microphone had been placed for people to come and give their views and coming up and giving their views, that they wanted –(Interruption)

CAPT. BYARUHANGA: Mr Speaker, I thank you very much and I thank the Minister for giving way.  It was reported in the press that when he was in his constituency, a section of his constituents wanted to give him a memorandum and the Minister said, he does not handle the memorandum of multi-partyists because for him he is the chairman of the Movement; they should take it maybe to Masaka Municipality and give it to hon. Kawanga who is a multi-partyists to deliver it on their behalf. Could the Minister clarify whether that statement was correct because he did not refute it?

MR MWANDHA: Mr Speaker, could the Minister clarify as to the proportion of people who attended the famous meeting where Ssempebwa’s commission was collecting views compared to the total number of people in his constituency?

MR NANDALA:  Thank you very much Bwana Minister, my clarification is simple.  Was the issue of term of limit one of the aspects during the Constitutional Review Commission to be asked about; how did you as a minister know about it in advance?

DR KEZIMBIRA: Thank you colleagues.  Can I begin with the last one of hon. Nandala Mafabi; yes, it was consulted on, and this was consulted on unless you did not go back to your constituency.

Secondly, the number of people that attended the Ssempebwa Commission was a representative number of my constituency, because they came from all over the sub-counties that I represent.

Then the other one by Capt. Byaruhanga, the Ssempebwa Commission came at a time, the incident you are referring to was when we were discussing the White Paper and people wanted to present ideas of parties like, the Democratic Party will not want an RDC, really that was not for me to present.

Mr Speaker, I was saying that I brought the voice of my people, my people came and gave their own stand on the opening up of Article 105 and therefore, I stand here to convey their voice that Article 105 should be opened up to allow any capable man or woman to be able to run for one or more terms as the people may so decide.  

Of course, Mr Speaker, it may be difficult to completely leave out the fact that one person has performed so well and has led to this idea. If the performance was bad, maybe this idea would not have cropped up; but here is the person who has performed so well and the idea has come up, so let it be; let the Constitution be amended.

The last point I would like to speak about is the issue of the Chief Administrative Officer.  I support very much the amendment of the Constitution so that the CAO is appointed by and can be disciplined from the center so that the haemorrhage of the loss of funds that has occurred in the districts can be reduced by all of us having a say into the management of finances. We also need to ensure that the most capable people compete for these positions rather than localising them within a district so that only people from that district are selected, yet they may not be able to perform to the standards required. I thank you Mr Speaker.

MR SEBALU MIKE (Busiro County East, Wakiso): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  We are in the process of amending the Constitution and definitely we are handling matters of transitio;, we cannot run away from commenting about the transition because it is a reality, we are going to manage, and the way we manage it will determine the way we govern ourselves.  So it is pertinent to look at how best we are going to manage this arrangement.  Definitely, when you are handling an exercise of that nature, it becomes imperative to look at all the available resources at your disposal for purposes of ensuring that- (Interruption)

DR NKUUHE: Point of clarification.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we are going to be very strict with time. We extended to seven minutes; when you hear the first bell, then it means you have one minute or two. Should you surrender for these, “information” because you tend to do that, so that the time is extended, we do not intend to do that.

MR SEBALU MIKE:  Most obliged, Mr Speaker, I do not intend to disobey your advice at the expense of hon. Nkuuhe, so let me continue with my submission. 

Mr Speaker, as I was saying, that when we are managing this kind of arrangement we need to enhance all our potential to ensure that we create a necessary environment by availing our people an opportunity to do things the best way they can do them.  For that matter, we can’t run away from the fact that we need strong, tested and committed leaders to hold the country together at a time like this, and there are certain benchmarks that we need in place if we are to transit logically in a very predictable manner.  We need security, stability and unity; what I could term as a whole, common good if we are to really move on well. Therefore, my considered opinion and view is that we must allow all the best available - and I am choosing these words very carefully - all the best available to do the job; and it is from those available potentials that we need to pick one to lead us.  

I can’t run away from mentioning the different people who are expressing their intentions. I do respect them and I do respect the political organisations to which they subscribe and I have no doubt that they believe that those are best available to help us through this kind of transition.  

Likewise, I have the opinion that we must use all the available, without putting some out of contention.  Let us get all the available and the Ugandans will choose the best among the available from different sources and lead us through this kind of transition.  So, for that matter, I believe that it is in our interest that we allow all our best potential to be utilised in this transition; In this case we are already moving into a multi-party or political organisations.  (Interjections) I am being harassed from behind.  So, Mr Speaker, let our political organisations out of their own internal democratic mechanisms come up with people that they propose to be Presidential candidates and these will be brought to the general public who are the umpires and the best out of all the possible will be determined.  

So let us leave this matter to the people, let us leave it to the political organisations.  I have heard people say that some people are no longer popular or they can’t win a vote. You can’t say that; let them go to the people and we find out who exactly is a vote winner or who still enjoys the support and the mandate of the people.  So the whole idea of bringing this principle around is to allow everybody to have a chance to participate and at the end of the day the population should be able to use mechanisms in place through elections to decide who the leader of this country should be.

Finally, I would like to look at our past. Good leaders do not come that easy and that is common knowledge really, they do not come that easy.  For instance, I want to use the Ugandan example, we have had 9 leaders; how many of them have been good if you are really determining the goodness?  There has been 9 of them and in my view; one of them has been good. Now if you are going mathematical and you are using the probability, what is the probability that the next one will be good? Mathematically that will be one out of nine, which is a very risky scenario.  

In my view, I do support the idea that the principle of opening up should be looked at in its own merits. It should be considered so that at the end of the day we determine the leaders through other mechanisms like elections and we strengthen institutions that handle matters to do with election, we do a lot of civic education so that people know whom to choose, why they have to choose him and at what point they need to discuss a leader if he is found to be wanting in leadership aspects.  Mr Speaker, I beg to support the opening of the principle.

MR WANJUSI WASIEBA (Mbale Municipality):  Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity to contribute to this constitution amendment.  First, I want to start with the elections: the Presidential, Parliamentary and LCV Chairman.  I think this kind of arrangement was actually voiced during the Constituent Assembly.  But at that time we thought that our people might be mixed up because we had not known the culture of voting.  As we are all aware, we participated in the election of 1962 and thereafter, it used to become difficult to hold elections every five-years.  So I think this is very good and my bosses who are the voters are very happy about this, and are looking forward to voting the three different groups at the same time.  

Mr Speaker, about Article 105(2), I did consult my people in Mbale Municipality and the response was good that they need to open.  I think during the Constituent Assembly, Members of Parliament decided that one person who is in the name of the President should be captive in a sense that his period of time should be given as two periods of five years each instead of leaving it like we did on the Members of Parliament.   I think it is not fair to all of us to be able to give a time limit to one cadre and leave it open for the rest of us.  I think it is good for us to open up; the three divisions in Mbale all agreed to this, and we look forward when the time comes to be able to go for voting.

Mr Speaker, we are going into a multi-party era and it would be good - this is the wish of my constituents - it would be good if each party was able to choose its own torch bearer rather than one party or the other party choosing it for the other.  It should be made very clear. I would like to urge my colleagues that we should make this very clear so that when we go for elections, each party should be able to freely pick up its torch bearer to lead them for the elections.  

Mr Speaker, the next item I wanted to speak about is the second official language, which we were proposing should be Swahili; I remember in the Constituent Assembly we did talk about this, we discussed it but at one point it was shot down because I think we had not organised the numbers.  

Swahili for one thing, it would unite the East African countries since we are looking forward to the East African Federation. Our two other sister countries use Swahili most and it would be good for Uganda to join the other two so that it becomes easier for us either to trade or to communicate to one another by using Swahili.  I am glad that the Ministry of Education in our schools, both at the lower and higher levels, is promoting this; they are taking Swahili very seriously.  

Mr Speaker, I want to talk something about dual citizenship. I think it is a very good idea that we open up.  Because as it has been said in the press, we know that there are many Ugandans who are outside there and have been sending here quite a bit of money. I understand that the money that is being sent here by Ugandans outside is almost the third in rank as compared to the other income earning areas.  So, I would encourage Ugandans to be allowed to belong to other areas because even if we don’t officially allow them, when they get out there, they change their citizenship, sometimes throw away their passports and at times find ways of becoming nationals of other countries. So if we legalise it, it will definitely give us an opportunity to keep it up.

Mr Speaker, because of time, I will thank you, very much.

MR CHARLES ANGIRO GUTOMOI: (Erute county North, Lira): Thank you very much. Mr Speaker and hon. members, the views of my constituents about the constitutional amendments with regard to Article 105(2) is that we strongly oppose it.  In fact, they have given me reasons, which therefore should be taken seriously.

Mr Speaker, on the Floor we have been hearing that President Museveni has done very well and therefore he should be allowed to continue, I think to me - I had wanted even to inform hon. Babu that His Excellency the President of this country has got three red cards.  

The first one has been the cattle rustling exercise, which has still been undefeated, and it is continuing. The second one has been the Kony issue; and then the third one is creation of poverty in this country, especially in the North.  You can imagine if I were President Museveni, I would just resign and give leadership to my colleagues.  
But unfortunately, Mr Speaker, it seems some people in this country have stopped thinking and because they have stopped thinking, they believe that one person can lead up to the end.  But we have a saying that if you eat meat everyday it is likely that you can become very sick and you can end up in hospital or otherwise.

So, I think the problem is; we are not advising our President effectively and I think because we have no able person to take over from President Museveni now, that is why we have that problem in that system and that is why we must go for a multi- party system.  We have so many current leaders in the multi - party system, if there was time, I could name so many of them. At least 20 of them who can take up, but unfortunately, it is impossible because the system has found it not realistic to give it over to opposition.  

It has been seen, Mr Speaker, that in this House, even outside the House, we have failed to differentiate between criticisms and insults.  I have never insulted my President and nobody in this House has ever done so; and if anyone has done so, what steps have been taken for insulting him?  

I think what we understand very clearly is that nobody in this country is supposed to criticise the President of this country and if you criticise, that is where the ISOs, the ESOs, the GISOs must therefore work on you; spend all the money in the name of an enemy and then waste that money without any conclusion and that is very unfortunate.  It contributes to the mess of the poverty we have in the North.

Mr Speaker, in our constituency we have people in 12 camps. When you go to those camps, you can easily see that we have failed to unite the people of this country. We have failed to bring peace and development to our people.  When you ask them about this transition, they are saying that, since President Museveni wants to rule for life, why can’t you give him opportunity to rule for life because he has not accepted anybody’s advice.  After handling this period of two year’s term, he now finds it very sweet to continue, therefore you give him; that is what we are saying.  

Otherwise they are saying, “we are tired of President Museveni”. Even me, I am tired, because if I eat meat everyday, I think I get tired because I am a normal person.  I am healthy and the only judgment for me is to change “diet” - by changing presidency so that we can lead this country.  Instead, we are building rulers, not leaders in this country.  

So, unless we accept - because even going to consult the masses we are representing, unless for those who are not representing the masses in this House, they have a right to say, let them be consulted on their behalf.  But we are representing the masses and have the power to resolve here. Let us not waste these monies to go and consult them.  That is why we are saying elections for the presidency, for chairpersons of LCV and councillors are done on the same day to save money.  

Now what are we saving, when we go out to consult these people; that is obvious! Do we accept that there should be political transition, and then we say, yes, who will say no there and we are representing them?

Mr Speaker, this is an insult on our people and if we are not serious, what my people are saying is that when you say they are not voting wisely that is the biggest insult ever put on them.  If I have my candidate and there are 10 candidates and I choose one, vote for him or her and you say I have not voted wisely what does that mean?  It is an insult!  That one later, at the end of this regime those who say we have not been voting wisely must be taken to court, but at the moment, they are free to say anything because to us when you criticise you are insulting.

Mr Speaker, I wish when we are speaking here, we could go and see what is really on the ground about what we are trying to do, then we would say I think there is need to now stop the war.  If you can’t stop war because we are going to give the no term limit, that means no end of the war.  We are even beginning to imagine that Kony is not there; this is the manipulation of the highest degree.  Who in this House or in this country has ever seen Kony or talked to him?  

We just hear that Kony is in Sudan; when we ask the people in Sudan, they don’t know of Kony; but who is Kony and where is he?  We see in the newspapers the same man with some twisted hair and no change in appearance; does he exist really?  I think we must really challenge our military men; they have done us a disservice in this country. Because today you are talking about weakening Kony, tomorrow you are talking about being very weak, and next time getting his Kaunda suit, the last day his wife coming home.  How many wives does he have?  Now this is a serious matter.  So my people are saying, if President Museveni wants to rule this country for life, you grant him the third term, but it won’t be the third term; it is going to be “sad term”, “mad term” –death- and that is what we now know in the North.  Thank you very much.

PROF. MONDO KAGONYERA (Rubabo County, Rukungiri):  Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and hon. members.  I would first of all like to make a small comment on what the previous Speaker has been saying since we are not allowed to ask for clarification.  But I want to state this, it is important even if he did. The only thing I say, I would like to advise the hon. Member that there are other people, including leaders, who hold views that are completely opposite to the ones he holds and they are entitled to those views.  He should know that if one is tired of this or that, and someone is not tired of it, you better be aware.  If there is anything like solving problems of Uganda, we are not going to do that in that belligerent manner; we can’t.  I can’t see a solution in that.

I beg your pardon Sir; I will make my observations just in general principles.  The first one, I want hon. members of this House to know, that although I was not in the Constituent Assembly, my views about making the Constitution were expressed elsewhere, including radio and television, and I had this to say about the Constitution standing the test of time.  I disagreed with that and the records are in Radio Uganda and Uganda Television.  I said that Uganda was a young country; conditions and circumstances were changing nearly every day, and whether you liked it or not, situations were going to present themselves when you would need to amend the Constitution.  So, I am not stating anything new.  I am saying that it is in order for the people of Uganda through their leadership to amend their Constitution to suit circumstances.

A former leader in Kenya, Sir Michael Blander, was once addressing us and he said that politicians and political events change with time and conditions and they do that all over the world. Mr Speaker, recently President Clinton questioned the wisdom of term limits in the American presidency.  Only yesterday, I saw hon. Sabiiti, mentioning that there were people in America who were saying “Wait a minute, it is not reasonable for people who were not born in America, to be barred from becoming president”.  Why?  They wanted Schewarzenegger to stand for presidency of the United States of America.  So there is nothing unusual about personalities being taken into account when changes take place.  People talk about building institutions.  We are in the process of building institutions in this country through building persons, resource human beings who are the most important components of building institutions. That is what we are doing now.  Obviously Parliamentary Democracy in Uganda has grown from the time when we had absolutely nothing in Amin’s days.

Mr Speaker, therefore, I want to state that amending the Constitution is a natural thing.  Everybody in the world does that to their constitution.  It is a little bit difficult for me to comprehend that people would accept the amendment of so many parts or articles of our Constitution and they consider some untouchable as if they are sacrosanct or ordained by God.  This whole Constitution was made by Ugandans. (Interjections) Please, I am not accepting.  I have a short time.

Mr Speaker, my colleagues should recognise that we are going through not only transition in Uganda, but we are going through a transition in the region; we are going through a transition in Africa.  Leaders are proposing an African Union.  We are going into a federation of East Africa.  Are you not going to amend your Constitution to take those changes into account?  The answer is, yes we shall.  Therefore my view, Sir, is that I would think that hon. members should restrict themselves to whether we are amending our Constitution through constitutional means or not.   That is what they should question.

As far as I am concerned, if we are making any amendment to any article of the Constitution through the provisions of our Constitution, we have a very right to do so. By the way, I would like to assure everybody that if there was anything, any provision that we are recommending in these amendments that were not supported by my people, I would hesitate to support it.  It is a two-way function.  We can advise our populace as to what we think is good for them, but we would also be wise to listen to them.   

There are people who are interested, they are keen, they are knocking on the door of No. 10 on Downing Street; they are busy in the papers taking names of corrupt leaders to International organizations. The solutions to Uganda’s problems lie here, not in foreign capitals.  
By the way, when they talk about the corrupt, we also know that people on the other side are not angels.  People in glass houses should stop throwing stones.  We know them only too well.  I thank you, Mr Speaker and hon. members.

MR NSUBUGA NSAMBU (Makindye Division West, Kampala): Thank you very much Mr Speaker. I am saying that Uganda has very bad events because most of our leaders have been removed by force. In fact, I want to remind you, even the very government we are now saying is wonderful, entered this country by force.  If this government was remembering the Ten-Point Programme, it would have decided to think of lifetime presidency.  I am saying, they would not have thought of creating a life presidency.   The problem we have had in the past, we have been led by deceit.

The Movementists came and promised that they would be in power for four and a half years.  When the four and a half years they asked for elapsed, they said, “No, give us another five.”  This was the time when they created a research on the Constitution.  The Constitution took more than four years.  When the Constitution was being made, they said, “Let the President stay in government for five years.”  But shortly after, they said, “No, let us try two terms” 

Now the two terms are running out and what do they say, “No, we have led you so well” –[An. Hon. Member: “Point of information.”]- do not inform me.  I know that we were still excited at that time. Even if he asked for 20 years, we would have given him that because we loved the liberators.  But surprisingly, after these 10 years, the same people who suggested the two terms are now telling us, “Let the person remain in power until he decides to leave by himself.”  

I must remind you people that people are suffering at the moment. You also agree that they are very poor, that is why you bring in the jargon, “Let all become rich.”  It is not a question of saying just like that–(Interjection)- Mr Speaker, you protect me.

THE SPEAKER: Certainly.

MR NSUBUGA NSAMBU: We have in fact weakened the traditional leaders because the honourable people think we can do it better. As a result, even if there was a chance for whoever wanted to restore their traditional leaders, and some people went to Ankole in a bid to restore the Omugabe, we still would have resisted it.  We never wanted the people who surrounded to lead people by virtue of being Princes.  

So you find that few, though they would have been in Ankole, those who wanted Omugabe would have accepted his restoration.  But now we are indirectly trying to create another Kingdom of Museveni, he would probably be the first King. For that reason, I feel that I cannot accept lifting the presidential term limit because deceit has been too great in the Movement system.

On the question of Judges, I think that seven years is adequate.  We are not short of manpower as far as the Judiciary is concerned. The Judiciary needs experience more than it needs books. You need to be at the bench to learn how things go.  I have found that what we study in the classes tends to be very different from what we learn on the bench. 

When you get there, and see how people toss you up and down, you learn how things can be done. For that reason, I feel that a period of seven years is really adequate for one to be appointed Judge.  All I could say about this matter is that, probably the size of judicial powers to the Chief Magistrates and other Magistrates below should be widened.  

On the question of citizenship, I think the line we have taken is very poor.  We are speaking of citizens, but the people we are bringing in, passing through all outlets, are welcomed and settled; not as recognised citizens, but once they enter Uganda, we settle them. You find that there are some officials who buy land for settling those foreigners who have failed to get settlements somewhere else outside Uganda.  

The question of dual citizenship, therefore, would have been good if it was awarded only to people who are fruitful.  But the present citizens, who are being allowed in Uganda, are looking for survival, that is all. They are not the people you can rely on as developers of the country.  For that reason, I am afraid I have to say that we should not have this dual citizenship at the moment, because the exercise is quite doubtful and cannot be said to be profitable to Uganda.  

On the question of Swahili: this was discussed during those days when we were having so many traditional leaders and it failed.  Later, it came up during the Constituent Assembly (CA); still it could not go through.  Even on the Coast where Swahili comes from, it has no respect; Kenyatta himself said Swahili was a narrow language, it lacks a good vocabulary and its origin is not really known.  The Organisation of African Unity (OAU) tried it and they even printed some books. But where are the teachers and the books? Who is qualified in Swahili? We are still looking for him in vain.  

THE SPEAKER: It is time.

MR NSUBUGA NSAMBU: I cannot say “finally” before I say that we still demand our “federo.”  This fake federal, which you are giving us, is not the one we are asking for.  

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, we are not dealing with that now; it is not relevant to the Bill.

MR NSUBUGA NSAMBU: I am a human being; it is like a bell that always rings the same sound.  I tell you what my people say and you say there is a Bill?  

Well, the Movement system has been fighting poverty up to now. It has also accepted that its people are very poor; and they now think that by changing the system or appointments of the leaders, there will be improvement.  That alone cannot do it. But if that is one of the grounds, why we should accept this lifetime presidencies, I am sure time will come when that will end but people will still be very poor. This is because all the industries and everything have gone.  It is you people, who destroyed the banks. You now want people to put up new banks; it was you who destroyed the Cooperative Societies; now you are calling those people back!  Having failed, you should admit that we have failed; do not deceive us.

The time when poverty was planted in this country is when you came in here. If a man had a million shillings, you give him only 30 percent; I do not think that that will ever be removed –(Laughter) Mr Speaker –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: It is time honourable Nsubuga Nsambu.

MR NSUBUGA NSAMBU: Mr Speaker, -[An. Hon. Member: “Point of order.”] Order? Who are you ordering? (Laughter) That is the end of my speech. (Laughter)

MS MINDRA JOYO EUGENIA (Woman Representative, Moyo): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me the chance to make a few remarks on the constitution amendment. I would like to talk about the dual citizenship. It is well and good; I welcome it that Ugandans should have dual citizenship, because there is a lot of brain drain.  

A lot of our people who are educated have gone out to look for greener pastures outside Uganda. Some of them acquire citizenship of the countries where they work; they earn good money and send some of it back to Uganda to invest and help in the development of our nation. 

Now, we should give chance to those people to be able to retain the Ugandan citizenship or to reacquire it if they have already denounced it, so that they can also participate not only in the development of the country but also in the politics. We should allow them to came back and participate. 

Beside the Ugandans who have migrated, there are other people who also come as investors to work in Uganda and they may stay here for quite a long time. They should also be granted citizenship by the constitution after they have stayed for a certain period, say of about 10 years. 

Now, what I would like us to consider critically is the political participation of these Ugandans. Should they stand for any post for elections? What about those who have acquired citizenship and were originally non-Ugandans, do we allow them also to participate in our politics?  And if we do, when it comes to holding ministerial posts, how do we consider their positions? Will we give them certain sensitive positions like Defence or Finance? I would like clarified on that. Do we treat them equally with those who have never migrated out to enjoy the foreign political privileges?  I would like clarification; it may be from the Attorney General. 

Now concerning their children who have been born outside, I know by virtue of their inheritance or their parents being Ugandans that they are also Ugandans.  But, I have noticed a tendency for children who grow from abroad, especially in the well developed countries, when they come back here, it is not very easy for them to fit in some of our structures, like politics and so on. So those will need a real reconsideration of what they can do for us.  

Now, the second point I would like to consider is the appointment of the CAO. When I went to consult the people during the Government White Paper, my district of Moyo generally agreed that the Public Service rather than the District Service Commission should appoint the CAOs because when they are appointed within the district, the local authorities there influence them. For example, they are influenced by the Chairpersons of the District Councils and other authorities there. So, they cannot carryout their responsibilities properly and in the end a lot of money is misappropriated and the district ends up losing.  

Even when the Public Service Commission appoints the CAO from the centre, the monitoring part of it must be done carefully. Because if the CAO is left indefinitely in the same district for many years and no monitoring is done from the centre or the district, and no report is sent, there is likely to be mismanagement. Things will fall apart and he will not be able to carry out the responsibility properly and the same mistakes will be repeated. 

The people also said that it was good to appoint the CAO locally, because they will warn the people of their soil.  But when it is opened up, even a person born in Moyo can go and attend an interview in Arua, Gulu, or anywhere as it used to be during colonial times, and soon after independence. 

Now connected to that is the power of the IGG. The IGG must be independent and whatever they investigate must be respected. Timely actions must be taken on the wrong doers.  In the past, it has been seen, even from my own district - I got a report that even when the IGG goes and investigate, it takes a very long time to follow up and handle culprit. In the end, the report becomes stale and useless because nothing is done. 

 So, if we want to eliminate corruption or reduce it, at least the wrong action that has been found by those handling offices and funds must be dealt with.  We must give full powers to the IGG to be able to handle those people who have done wrong.  Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you.

CAPT. CHARLES BYARUHANGA (Kibale county, Kamwenge): Thank you, Mr Speaker.  I commend the committee for the good report and in particular their recommendation that this Parliament handles Articles that are related to the transition, because this is in line with the words of wisdom. The late honourable James Wapakabulo said, “ While a constitution should be updated from time to time in order to reflect changing realities, changing a constitution … to satisfy this or that section of the public is recipe for disaster.” 

Mr Speaker, I will only comment on two areas, which I think even the committee, should have recommended that we drop them now.

One is the appointment of the CAO by the centre. Mr Speaker, Uganda has been one of the shining examples of decentralisation, and it has borne fruits although we adopted it aggressively. I also want to inform this House that I have keen interest in decentralisation and I have taken interest in studying various countries, which are practicing decentralisation. My considered opinion and advice to Government is that the issue of appointing a CAO from the centre on the flimsy excuse of transfer-abilities to accountability, pressure from councillors, reforming tender boards and 90 per cent of the money coming from the centre, is a serious policy change; it is an attempt to decentralise. Mr Speaker, that is a reversal of the devolution of the functions and responsibilities in centralisation. 

We have spent very many years, money and time teaching and building capacity in local governments and building the capacity of local people to handle their own affairs. If we change policy, we shall have wasted a lot of money, which we have spent on building capacity. And besides, the CAO does not manage only funds. The CAO is also the head of the civil service in the district. To have an expatriate appointed by the centre, to head the civil servants appointed by the district service commission is a requisite for disaster.

 We already have serious excuses and applications by the town clerks, the DDHS and DEOs that they want to be in the mainstream of education. They also want to be appointed by the centre. And this is a reversal of decentralisation, which I think we should not attempt now. What we should do is to amend the Local Governments Act to strengthen the district service commissions, which appoint these officers, who appoint and disappoint, so that they can discipline them. 

We should amend the Local Governments Act so that we do not subject CAOs to the political harassment of the councillors, because to move sijuyi a resolution sending them away, we should strengthen the laws so as to strengthen the institutions that monitor the use of funds in these local governments. So, the strengthened district service commission could in consultation with the Public Service Commission discipline these civil servants in the districts other than having the politicians to do it. 

My second contribution is on Article 105. In Uganda, we do not have an institutional culture. We have been having the power of personal culture. Term limits therefore are a necessity and a prerequisite because our institutions are not functioning properly to deliver a proper democracy. In a bid to show that government derives its power from the people and that the people are supreme, the founding fathers of constitutionalism have this to say. I will quote them briefly. One, I will quote Abraham Lincoln who said that this country with all its institutions belongs to those who inhabit it. Whenever they grow weary of the existing government, they can exercise their constitutional right of amending it or their revolutionary right to overthrow it. 

Another one said, we must confine ourselves to the powers described in the Constitution and the moment we pass it, we take an arbitrary course towards despotic government. That was James Jackson. 

Hillary Clinton says that we must stop thinking of individuals and start thinking about what is best for society.  And lastly, James Madison said that all men having power ought to be distrusted to a certain degree. They are all potential dictators.

Mr Speaker, I have quoted all these and I will also quote Jimmy Carter who said that for the first time in the history of our country, the majority of our people believe that the next five years will be worse than the past five years. Also, Prof. Kanyeihamba, in his book prophesised that the promulgation of the 1995 Constitution was arguably the finest hour of the NRM administration.

 However, the leadership appears to concentrate more on political games- to stay in power and exclude others from it as long as they can. None of us is against President Museveni as an individual. But I could quote the President of Philippines, who once said that no President can beat the whole edifice of a nation, all that he is called upon to do is to add a fine stone so that those who shall come after him may add other fine stones that will go for a strong and enduring structure. 

We can only contribute; we should keep in our mind that no single individual outlives a country, and be cautious because history is bound to judge us harshly. Let us all protect Our Uganda because it is very important. Let us preserve Article 105 and allow it to stand the test of time. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI (Kinkiizi County West, Kanungu): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I will speak briefly on three points: First on the proposed powers of the Inspector General of Government to carry out investigation in the fight against corruption and other abuses of office in government. 

Mr Speaker, unless we stand together and firmly on the question of corruption, and establish mechanisms to effectively fight corruption, all our efforts will be in vain. I therefore support, the idea that the office of the Inspector General of Government, which has proved itself in the past to be doing an effective job be strengthened to become able to perform its function even better. I support the idea that the powers of the Inspector General be increased to carry out inspection without fettering from any source. (Applause)
 
My second point is about special courts relating to terrorism. This phenomenon of terrorism is a new thing. It is something that has come up in recent history, especially the type of terrorism that we are facing today. Therefore the traditional court system- the administration of justice that we have that has evolved out of the practice and culture that we had over the centuries does not adequately respond to the problem of terrorism. 

Therefore it is only right again if we are to fight this evil of terrorism to create special courts, which have special powers and may develop special tools to handle this problem of terrorism. These tools, I think, will discourage people who have tendencies of resorting to terrorism when they have lost political argument, especially in a democratic process; and one of them is facing me there.

Mr Speaker, my third and last point is on the question of power to the people, and the proposed removal of term limits from our Constitution. I have had occasion to address this issue in other fora and I am not sure that this is the right way to do it. But I would like to say that in the recent debate in London, I made a presentation on the issue. I have a written presentation, which I would like to lay on the Table for the benefit of members to study, especially hon. Aggrey Awori. 

Mr Speaker, the struggle that we had waged all these years was one to restore the sovereignty of our people, that they may determine their own destiny; that is what the struggle was all about.  

All the sacrifices that the people made, the comrades that we lost, the times that we wasted, if you can call it wasting, all this was in order to give our people the power to determine their own destiny- (Interruption)

DR NKUUHE: You mean to say that the destiny of Ugandans is Museveni? Because that is the only thing you are asking us to do, that we give the people power to determine to keep Museveni forever. The destiny of Uganda is beyond one person and as far as I can see, one or five is just about one person, thank you.

MS AMONGI: Thank you very much honourable minister.  When His Excellency came to address Parliament recently, he vividly told this House that the people do not desire to go to multi-party, but he went ahead to say that the Movement leadership will go out there and avidly campaign for the return of multi-party system. 

Now what a contradiction; on one hand you say that for Article 105(2), it should be the people’s views that shape their destiny, but on the issue of multi-party, you ought to offer leadership to the people to open up political space.

MR MBABAZI: Thank you very much Mr Speaker.  I very well know hon. Nkuuhe, we grew up together, and he was a bright young man. So I want to inform him that we are not debating Mr Museveni. The Constitution is not about Mr Museveni and his term; we are talking about term limits in the Constitution and that is what I am talking about. 

When I talk about the power of the people to determine their destiny, I am saying that this was captured in Article 1 of our Constitution; Article 1 says power belongs to the people and they will choose or determine how they will be governed and who will govern them through elections and the referenda. Those are the words of the Constitution and we are saying when you look at Article 105(2), it seems to contradict that because it seems to limit the power of the people. Why?  What is the rationale of limiting the power of the people to determine who leads them? 

 I have not heard any rationale basis either given by hon. Nkuuhe or those who oppose him; they have not given it because they do not have one.  The greatest crisis that Africa has faced as hon. Nkuuhe has implied was that the problem of Africa has been poor leadership. When you look through the history of Africa, when our people were colonized or even before that, when they were enslaved, the problem was leadership. Our leaders were not able to stand up to the challenges.  

Therefore, today Africa is the most backward continent in the world simply because of that same problem.  Uganda is a good example of that. The leaders we have had, whom hon. Nkuuhe talked about from independence up to the time we took power after an armed struggle; it was a crisis of leadership. Therefore, up to now, when people like hon. Nkuuhe or hon. Angiro, say that they are tired, well fine; when you are digging and you get tired, you do not ask the land to go away. You go and retire and find some way of rejuvenating yourself.  So those of you, who are tired, do retire and leave those who are able to do the work to continue with it.

Mr Speaker, it was John Adams who said, there is no right clearer and few of more importance than that the people should be at liberty to choose the able and best leaders and that men and women of the greatest merit should exercise the most important employment. This is as true today as it was at the time when John Adams made this proposition in the debate during the promulgation of the American Constitution.  

When Hon. Nsambu was talking- I have never seen a greater contradiction. He said, let us limit leaders who are aspiring to be presidents or who are presidents but when it came to the Chief Justice he said, let us have the most experienced. 

So which one should we take? Should we go by experience and ability or limit leadership by operation of the law?  To me, it is obvious that if I asked Dr Nkuuhe, what he would do, if he happened to be in theatre to undergo an operation and he was asked to choose between a junior doctor who was on internship or who has just completed it and was going to operate for the first time, and a doctor who had experience, who had operated 100 cases, and 95 of them successfully; whom would Nkuuhe choose. 

I can answer for him because I know his answer, I know everyone’s answer; everyone would go for the most able and experienced doctor.

PROF. KAGONYERA: When I was Chairman, Appointments Board at Makerere University, the whole Board agreed that we had two people, the late Prof. Kyalwazi and Prof. Odongo; that their competence and experience deserved them life professorship at Makerere and this is not a joke. We decided that they would serve as long as their bodies allowed them to serve and this was because of the recognition of their ethical values and experience at work, thank you.

MR MBABAZI: Mr Speaker, I have repeatedly explained this point about tyranny. I am surprised that some Members like hon. Nkuuhe could even repeat it in this House.  For someone to suggest that tyranny comes about because you do not have term limitation in your Constitution is a very serious flaw in the knowledge of history – (Interruption)

DR NKUUHE: Order, Order –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Member, I see that we are wasting a lot of time, because you will not agree –(Interruption)

DR NKUUHE: But he is telling lies, I never spoke those words –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Please sit down.  Honourable Member, all this information and clarifications are coming up on only one issue of personalising Article 105 and you are not going to agree whether you make 100 clarifications it all zeros to this.  Please take your stand, listen to each other and express yourself so that others can contribute too.  I have ruled.

MR MBABAZI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  Tyranny does not need a third, fourth or fifth term to manifest itself; it is obvious.  In Uganda, when the Constitution was overthrown in 1966, what term was it? Did we have term limits for that to happen? It was in the first term, and this has happened many times in Uganda and elsewhere.  

So, really for anyone to say that tyranny will come about because of term limitation is a total misunderstanding of –(Interruption)

DR NKUUHE: Order, Mr Speaker, I never said those words –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: I refuse; there is no point of order you are raising.

DR NKUUHE: But he is putting words in my mouth –(Interruption) 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Minister, it is time. 

MR MBABAZI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Finally, I want to say that this question of term limit is a matter, which I opposed from the beginning and I invite my colleagues to oppose because it does not make sense in Uganda or in Africa.  Thank you.

MR MUZOORA KABAREEBE (Rwampara County, Mbarara): I thank you very much, Mr Speaker and hon. Members.  I will talk about eight items and each will take about a minute –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: You have seven minutes, please.  

MR KABAREEBE MUZOORA: Yes, each one will take one minute.  Mr Speaker, I will talk about the removal of presidential term limits, the presidential elections and parliamentary elections taking place at the same time, which I support.  I will also talk about Kampala City getting special status –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: You just make your points without first listing them.

MR KABAREEBE MUZOORA: This is my summary; when I get caught up by time, I will have made my point.

THE SPEAKER: No. You do not have to list them.

MR KABAREEBE MUZOORA: Okay, let me talk about term limit removal. The American Constitutional Convention in 1787 looked at the term limits and the delegates rejected it.  Elections for getting rid of politicians who do not perform – if I quote – a delegate who said that, “elections are for getting rid of politicians who do not perform, term limits on the other hand are for eliminating performing politicians”.  This was by James Madison who was a delegate in the American Constitution in 1787 and for 200 years, there were no term limits in America.  

As hon. Mbabazi said, Article 1 says that power belongs to the people who will determine their destiny through regular elections or referenda. so I do not see any reason why we should limit our people by limiting the terms to deprive them of good leadership.

Western democracies have no term limits except, maybe, USA.  USA had it in 1950, when Roosevelt clocked the third term. –(Interjection)– Mr Speaker let me be protected. 

Mr Speaker, the term limit is mediocrity, a move to turn the incumbent into mediocrity; to cease being the central figure in the governance of the State during the second term; because nobody would be focusing on the incumbent President, who is about to leave. Instead, they would focus on the forthcoming.  In other words, the second term becomes useless and virtually untenable.  

For hon. Members who are talking about manipulation, if manipulation is to be done by presidents who are incumbent, then it can be done immediately in the first or second term. How then does manipulation come in during the third term? Manipulation begins immediately.  

I am wondering why the hon. Members, who are opposed to the opening up of the presidential terms do not trust the people fully- the people from whom power emanates!  You trusted their integrity as electors in the first term, why do you imagine that their integrity has disappeared when it comes to the other terms?  That is the question, which is disturbing my head.

Term limit is a disguise for personal ambition. The un-stated objective is not the defence of democracy, but it is a desire to get into Government and share the so-called spoils of office.  

So, when you see somebody, especially the one next to me, so annoyed, you know that there is a very big problem.  Somebody wants to enter the office and enjoy the spoils of it and yet we have a person there who is doing a good job. So how could you run, my neighbour?  

Mr Speaker, the Republican controlled America from 1947 to 1951. They were not different from the Ugandan agitating for term limits today.  They wanted power in order to control the resources of Government and of course wanting to take some of them. But that control does not guarantee good governance as their outcome.  

Roger Sherman was a delegate who opposed term limit in the Constitutional Convention. He  said that frequent elections are very healthy and necessary to preserve the good behaviour of rulers.  They also tend to give permanence to the Government by preserving that good behaviour because it ensures their re-election.

Mr Speaker, careful groundwork has been done in Uganda and elsewhere, to mould and manipulate public opinion into belief that the only way to dislodge entrenched politicians is to be mandated with term limits and our opposition does this.  But I will give you an example; the Constitution of America is slightly over 250 years. For 200 years, there were no term limits. The term limits were introduced recently when the opposition wanted power and Franklin Roosevelt was becoming popular.  So after the unprecedented three terms, and Roosevelt made a small mistake. He become so popular but unfortunately forgot to empower his Party. So, instead of having more Members in Parliament for his Party, the opposition had more, so they took advantage of Roosevelt because he did not have enough members in Parliament to defend this title.  That is how they put term limits –(Interruption)

MR NANDALA: Point of order –(Interruption) 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Member, it is time.  But I give you more time to make the record correct.

MR MUZOORA: As I conclude –(Interjections)– Mr Speaker, can you protect me from these yelling Members. Ever since the 22nd amendment to the American Constitution, it was evaluated that whoever became a president thereafter was never good, or performed well. They always complained about him simply because he was in the second term. So he could not leave America with a record of good performance. And you remember that it was because of that problem that America experienced the first onslaughts of terrorism. 

Because there is no other exit, there must be term limits; so a term is a continuation from where the previous leader hands over obligation, yet he had a programme to accomplish, which he could not simply because of term limits.

Finally, two terms mean that the government shall be operating under bureaucrats. When a new President enters office, he has to depend on bureaucrats for the first term; and on the second term, he has to go away.  So, another President comes in for the first term, again at the mercy of the bureaucrats. And for a young bureaucracy like Uganda, which is seriously red-taped -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER:  Hon Member, it is time. You have elapsed the 8 points. You have - (Interruption)

MR MUZOORA:  Thank you very much. 

MS GRACE TUBWITA (Woman Representative, Nakasongola): Thank you, Mr Speaker.  I stand to support the amendments as proposed in the Bill.  

I would like to comment on article 72, which says that a person is free to stand for elections as an individual, independent of any political party. I feel that this article is very vital in this transition period because some people still have the movement ideology and may not feel like joining any party at this moment; they feel they can stand on their own during this transitional period.  

So, I do not agree with the committees proposal of putting this article aside for future reference by the next Parliament. I think, that this article should be looked at critically in this Parliament and during this period when we make vital amendments so that we can cater for the people with a desire to stand as independent candidates.  

When we are in party politics, elections always start from the party itself. A party might have electoral colleges, which elect their candidate. A person might be sidelined in the small electoral colleges in the party; and yet this candidate is really loved by the people. This might push some people to stand as independent candidates. So I stand to support this amendment so that we can cater for them.

I would also like to comment about article 96, which talks about resolution of disputes by a referendum.  This article is very good, because where there is disagreement between the President and Parliament, this can be the best way to solve such a problem. Because the people are the ones who elect Parliament and the President- if there is any disagreement, such an issue should be put before the Electoral Commission to organise for a referendum for the people to decide. Whatever we discuss here goes back to the people and when it is implemented, it is implemented within the people.  So, I support the amendment of this article.

Now, I would like to support the amendment of Article 105.2 of lifting the Presidential term limit.  I feel that there is nothing wrong with this article being amended because when someone is a bad leader, he cannot even finish his first term. People can decide to vote you out even if you are already voted in.  They can call you back. I would like to tell you, Mr Speaker and hon. Members, that dictators are not made but born.  If someone is a dictator, he becomes so from day one.  The moment he comes to power, he can decide to show his behaviour immediately. 

This talk that someone becomes a dictator simply because he has delayed in power is wrong. There are many people being elected time and again. I can give an example of Members of Parliament who have come to Parliament several times.  If they were really not serving their people well, they would be voted out immediately.   You cannot manipulate; if people decide to vote you out, you cannot change it.  

So, I think this issue should be left to the people to decide; if they feel that they still want that person to lead them, they will vote him into power again.  If they feel that they are tired of that person, they will vote him out. I do not see any problem with this article. Let this be left to the people to decide since power belongs to the people. Hon. Members should not worry about this article, and let us not personalise it because it is not opening for only one person, or party.  It is opening for all people and parties. Any party, the moment you are in power, you have a right to stand time and again until people vote you out.

Mr Speaker, I would also like to comment about article 188- about the Chief Administrative Officers. I support this amendment so that CAOs can be appointed from the Public Service Commission; because of the fact that, the CAOs always work under pressure in local government.  There is too much intimidation from the chairman and councillors. When he tries to play his role, without considering the desire of the chairman, they threaten them and remind them about the restructuring; I think this is too much intimidation.  

Let these CAOs be monitored from the head office. Maybe then they will be able to exercise their duties better than when they are working within the appointing authorities.  This will also give them opportunity to be in a position to be transferred.   

As you know, the moment you work in one area for a long time, at times people may get fed up of you, or you may get fed up of them. So you may not execute your duties well.  But if there were some transfers, this can help in changing someone’s mind and motivate him or her for promotion. This avoids having an individual as CAO forever.  Mr Speaker, I would like to end here because of time. Thank you very much.

MR JAMES KUBEKETERYA (Bunya County East, Mayuge): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  I would like to touch on Article 105(2). Let me remind honourable Members that the reason why the Constituent Assembly Delegates instituted two term limits was that they were just from a period of dictatorship and were so suspicious.  But because we have had the rule of law for over 20 years, we no longer find a reason to fear that lifting Article 105(2) will breed dictators.  

Mr Speaker, a two-term limit, is as good as a weak or a weakened presidency.  In a way, it will mean that the president in question is likely to shift from policies and legislative programmes to mere campaign pledges.  For instance, as we talk of building institutions, if a president is supposed to serve only two terms, he will only concentrate on the manifesto.  

I remember well, that we have always urged other ministries in this House, about the President’s manifesto, because his term is likely to be over soon and yet the manifesto has not been implemented.  Yet if a president reigned for unlimited terms, he will be in position to consolidate and serve the institutions other than serving his manifesto.  I would like to urge honourable Members that we are likely to have no problems if somebody stayed longer in power, provided that there are frequent elections.

Mr Speaker, frequent elections provide and impute mechanism in order for us to do away with dictators.  This is not to say that we are lifting terms and allowing somebody to stay on until God calls him; we suggest that we lift the terms and leave to a sequence of elections.  We are not saying that somebody should stay for life.  Our argument is that when term limits are lifted, we are not going to have problems of dictatorship, because somebody is either going to be voted in or out.  

Mr Speaker, on the issue of manipulation by dictators, as somebody has said, it does not require a third or fourth term for a dictator to manifest.  We had dictator Idi Amin for only one or two years, but there was already dictatorship in the country.  We had doctor Apollo Milton Obote in the 80s. And when he came for the second term, it was something that he started right away.  There was no rule of law. Using a pistol to intimidate was the order of the day. 

So if you think that lifting term limits will cause dictators, you can have dictators within a day and the examples are written on the wall, as far as Uganda’s history is concerned.

Mr Speaker, the other matter is that if we lifted the presidential term limits, we would guard against the domination of power by unpatriotic bureaucrats.  Supposing a president has reigned for two terms and he has got unpatriotic civil servants, the permanent secretaries, and so on; it will mean that these unpatriotic servants are going to manipulate the new leaders who come to power.  

Yet if you had somebody reigning for so long, with unlimited terms, he would have again the experience and would not easily be manipulated by the civil servants.  We have always talked about corruption, but simply because we have had leaders or civil servants who are unpatriotic -and supposing you bring somebody who is staying only for two terms, such workers would derail our institution in as far as government is concerned.

Mr Speaker, it is not only in Uganda where people want to lift term limits, even in the United States of America: in the States of Ohio and California. They have had such debate and referenda held.  So let us not look at Uganda as the only country pushing for the unlimited terms It is all over the world.  

One time, Clinton was regretting why he had only reigned for two terms  He imagined they could not lift the terms  So lets not look at this issue, as though it was only in Uganda; it has been tried in other countries. And this should teach us that society is dynamic; whatever used to happen in France changed in the French Revolution.

So we are simply experiencing an evolution of government.  And whoever thinks that as we are breaking the Constitution or being unconstitutional to lift the term limits is wrong. 

I think that if we do not use this Constitution to lift the terms, then we shall be breaking it.  So the Ugandans who have been urging certain presidents in this country, that they would sue them if they did not stand are right because we are not doing any harm. We are using the Constitution to lift the terms in as far as this matter is concerned.

Lastly, I would like to concur with the committee on the issue of the CAOs. Let them be brought to the centre: First, because we need professionalism, personality building, promotion and all that. Because if we have somebody appointed by the local leaders, he will have to dance to the tune of the local leaders; the councillors without any independence.  But if you are not dancing to the tune of the councillors, and you do your job very well, then we shall have colossal sums of money spared.   

Most districts fear that when a CAO swindles money, they should leave him around because they do not have the money to compensate him in case he takes them to court.

In conclusion, I would like to thank the Committee for the good report done.  Thank you very much.

MR SULAIMAN MADADA (Bbale County, Kayunga): Mr Speaker, I would like to begin my contribution by looking at Article 71 of the 1995 Constitution, which spells out how a political party shall conform to the following principles:  I think this is a very important innovation by the framers of this Constitution.  But I would also like to go ahead because I went through this Constitutional Amendment Bill and I missed out a point that I think the Attorney General should be able to consider; and it was in the original Omnibus Bill No.2- that is the issue of regulating a Code of Conduct for the Political Parties.  I have looked through this bill and it seems to leave something out.  And I think this is a very important issue that should not be left out.  

It also mentions the issue of putting a national consultative forum for the political parties.  This is also another important issue that we should amend, regarding how different parties should interact.  If we have a National Consultative Forum, the party in power has room to consult with the other parties that are not in power to minimise conflict.  It is very important that we include it as we amend Article 71.  

The other Article that I would like to talk about is 105(2).  Of course, somebody said that it is obvious. I do not want to repeat what has been said, but I want to use the Constitution to assure the people who have been arguing that once you open term limits, you would be creating life presidency. I think people should be informed that within our Constitution, Article 102 contains the qualifications for a President, which includes age limit.  Therefore, to say that opening term limits is synonymous to life presidency depicts ignorance of the Constitution. It is clearly stated in the Constitution that a President will be between the age of 35 and 75. So it is clear that we are not creating life presidency.  Let this be clear to all Members.

The other point I wanted to make clear –(Interjection)- I do not have time, I have very limited time please.  The other point I wanted to put across is that this Constitution has an in-built system, of even impeaching a president.  All we need to do is strengthen the parliamentary democracy that we may be able to impeach a president.  This is possible. If you went where we have hybrid democracy, like the system we are borrowing from the French, where the President distributes the power of the Parliament, when you read the French Constitution, the President has power, even to dissolve Parliament; here we have rejected it.  

Instead we are instituting an arrangement where Parliament has the right, if it is strongly built, to check the powers of the President.  So, I find no problem in opening the terms  It is cowardice for people to say that when you open the term limits, you are doing it for President Museveni.

That it is also possible, but I think that is not the argument.  When we go for group politics, we are talking about well-organised groups.  Where you think that a certain group is dealing with wrong people, you just go and join another group and beat them.  If you are really sure that your fear is about a person who is hated, you go and organise your group and compete with the team, which has players.  

Therefore, I feel we should open the term limits and have people compete for power.  
I would not like to continue any more, because a lot has been said, but I call upon Members of Parliament who are here not to have selfish tendencies, not to have hidden agendas. But admit that it is fine for us to have more players within this limited pocket of leadership; that we have many people to enable Ugandans choose what they want and when they want him or her.  Thank you.

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Dr Nduhuura Richard): Thank you, Mr Speaker; I will begin by commenting on the appointment of Chief Administration Officers (CAOs).  Hon. Capt. Byaruhanga, in his submission opposed the appointment of CAOs –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, this matter has come up several times, I request you to read what happened in the Constituent Assembly, because I have heard many people contributing on this issue.  The same reasons were considered in the Constituent Assembly, and you have to address this issue.  If you address the issue, the purpose of decentralisation and control of governments- because district governments are district governments, the control of their executive and so on were considered.  Issues of transfer, that you cannot be transferred if you are appointed by a district- that too was addressed.  But it seems as though this matter is new.  

People are talking about corruption as if corruption is only in districts and not in any other places.  As a person who was in the Constituent Assembly and participated on this issue, I think you would take some time to consider the arguments that were given on this matter and why they wanted to give power to the districts to which powers have been decentralised and the control given to their chief executives. 

Otherwise, you would run amok and you would not be able to control him.  These are some of the issues.  I am not arguing this and the other, but I thought I would draw your attention to the fact that the issues are not new.  But anyway, address them and show why you have to revisit them.

DR NDUHUURA: Thank you Mr Speaker. Why I wanted to make a comment on hon. Byaruhanga’s submission was that he proposed strengthening the District Service Commissions, and I wanted to submit that the District Service Commissions already have enough powers.  In fact the law says that they are independent and are not under the direction of any authority in the performance of their duties, so this is enough.  Since you have guided me on the matter of the CAOs –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: No, I am not guiding you. I am just giving you a point of reference so that people do not think that the arguments are fresh; they are here and have always been here.  But you are free to take your position.

DR NDUHUURA: Most obliged, Mr Speaker. I will make a small comment because I am handling the Ministry, which supervises CAOs.  The District Service Commissions, with their powers, big as they are, have really been a very big problem and I can cite two examples where a District Service Commission in one of our districts took it upon itself to violate the laws and appoint a CAO who was only five years old in service and yet the law says that you cannot become a CAO unless you have served for at least 10 years.  

Now, it has become very difficult for the Central Government- Public Service Commission to do anything about this district just because the District Service Commissions are independent.  We have tried to guide the district. But the district leaders seem to be interested in that very person and they cannot do anything –(Mr Mwandha rose_)- I wish to be protected from hon. Mwandha. I am not taking any clarification because my time is limited.

I will go to Article 105(2), Mr Speaker. I have listened to colleagues contributing on this matter. Some colleagues have said that opening up term limits will lead to life presidency, tyranny, and dictatorship.  I do not understand this kind of reasoning because Article 105(1) is very clear about the length of a President’s term. Our Constitution is very clear. It says, “There will be elections for the Office of the President every five years.”  So the fairest thing to do, is to open the term limits, so that any Ugandan who qualifies and is interested in becoming President may offers his candidacy. Then the Ugandans, who vote, will be given the opportunity to elect a president of their choice.

I want to use the analogy of a buffet. When you organise a party and you are going to serve a buffet, you put all the possible dishes on the table and let the invited guests choose dishes that they please.  You cannot say that, “Since I know my guests and they always take matooke for breakfast, lunch and supper, I will, therefore, not offer a particular dish.”  You should put everything on the table and give the people an opportunity to choose a dish of their liking. That is when actually they will enjoy the party as guests. 

To sum up, I would like to urge honourable members to support the lifting of the term limits so that Ugandans who are interested in becoming presidents are free to offer their candidacy and we the voters can also have a choice of our liking. I thank you, Mr speaker.

THE SPEAKER:  Thank you, very much honourable minister.  Honourable Members, I thank you, I have got some members who have requisitioned for time tomorrow and I think I will start with them. 

I have got a problem concerning our decision to sit on Wednesdays. I have been told that Cabinet is sitting. Therefore, we shall try to sit at half past two, but I will try to offer you 7 minutes, we will be able to - you have been covered honourable members. Today, although we started late, we have been able to cover over 22 members because we had a motion. But, please continue to deal with merits and demerits rather than personalising these proceedings.

With this we come to the end of today’s proceedings. The House is adjourned until tomorrow at 2.30 p.m.

(The House rose at 5.52 p.m. and adjourned to Wednesday, 22nd June 2005 at 2.30.)

