
THE REPUBLIC OF UGANDA

IN THE PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA

Official Report of The Proceedings of Parliament

FIFTH SESSION - 6TH SITTING - FIRST MEETING

________________________

Monday, 20 June 2005

Parliament met at 2.42 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, 
in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you back from the weekend. I take this opportunity to welcome our visitors in the public gallery this afternoon. They are members of the debating club from Kansanga Hill, Day and Boarding Primary School. They are here to listen to your proceedings. You are most welcome to your Parliament.

We constituted the Public Service and Local Government Committee after which the committee set up its administration. Hon. Ignatius Besisira is the Chairperson and hon. Lydia Balemezi the Vice-Chairperson.  

I also told you on Thursday that our colleague, hon. Ssekikubo, was getting married on Sunday and I encouraged you to go to give him support. I am happy to inform you that I was able to go and a number of honourable members who could have constituted a quorum attended this wedding. It was also graced by the presence of His Excellency the President. It was a good meeting. We congratulate hon. Ssekikubo upon having attained that status.

Over the weekend Uganda was happy to learn the news of the appointment of Dr John Tucker Mugabi Ssentamu as Archbishop of York in the Anglican Church. I am particularly happy because Dr Ssentamu was my student on a Bar course and when he was going to England I knew about it. I am happy that he has been elevated to this status in the Anglican Church. 

Honourable members, we are embarking on a very busy programme, which we started on before we went on recess. We have the Constitution amendment process, the Budget, and many others. The Business Committee last week sat and made some decisions to facilitate expeditious handling of this business. 

We shall be sitting in the afternoon on Mondays, in the morning on Fridays and in the morning and afternoon on Tuesdays, Wednesdays and Thursdays. This will of course affect the work of the committees, which normally sit in the mornings, unless it cannot be helped, as in the case of this Local Governments (Amendment) Act establishing contracts committees. I appeal to the committee in charge to deal with this expeditiously because we have to pass it before the end of the month. There is a time factor and we do have to ascertain that funds meant to support this project will be received. Otherwise, we may not really have the committee going to the field since we have to concentrate on this work. We need to finish it on time.

I also want to take this opportunity to thank you for the way you handled the first business in the Constitution amendment process. It was emotionally charged but you handled it adequately; the results are good.  We should maintain this practice. Even when His Excellency the President was here, he urged us to be calm and sober-minded, which will enable us to meaningfully and efficiently handle the work ahead of us. I thank you for listening to me. (Mr Nabwiso rose_) Yes, hon. Nabwiso, but you did not inform us about what you want prior to this sitting.

DR FRANK NABWISO: No, I am not raising a different issue. I am just adding my voice to what you said about Rt Rev. John Ssentamu’s appointment as Archbishop of York. I am wondering whether it will be prudent to move a motion in this House to recognise this achievement? It is not just an achievement for him as an individual but for Uganda as a country. Shall we just send a message from this House to congratulate him or should we move a motion to honour him?

THE SPEAKER: We have done this kind of thing before. If there is a properly drafted motion, definitely we can handle it. It is an honour to us and we are happy, we wish him well –(Interruption)

MR OKUPA: Mr Speaker, we drafted a motion and submitted it to your office this morning. We had in fact sought audience with you but before we could see you we were called to come down here. Otherwise, we had prepared a motion. I thought you had seen it.

THE SPEAKER: If you are preparing it, let me give you time. When you are ready we can handle it. 

MR OKUPA: We really wanted to move it now, if you grant it.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, it is without notice. Read it then. Have you got enough copies for all the members?

MR OKUPA: It is okay. We can have it tomorrow.

DR OKULO EPAK: Mr Speaker, I do not know whether anybody in this House is in position to respond. What citizenship is Ssentamu now, is he a Ugandan or a British citizen?

THE SPEAKER: Certainly, what I know is that the Rt Rev. Dr Ssentamu belongs to the Mbogo clan whose head is the Kayiira of Mugulu and I happen to belong to that clan, including my sisters Loyce Bwambale, Rebecca Kadaga and many others. I know that he belongs to a clan, which is here, the other one I cannot say. But the last time I knew him he was a Ugandan because as I have told you he was my student at the bar course. I prepared him to become a lawyer, so I know him.

DR OKULO EPAK: He also belongs to one of the tribes of this country. (Laughter and Applause)

THE SPEAKER: We shall handle this tomorrow. Whether he is a Ugandan or not, at least we know his origin is in Uganda and he has done well.

2.55
MS ALICE ALASO (Woman Representative, Soroti): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have learnt that today is World Refugee Day. I thought we could take this opportunity to remind ourselves that before this House is a pending Refugee Bill. It has been before us for a long time. I am just wondering if we could commit ourselves to speeding up the disposal of that Bill? I know that the Office of the Prime Minister urgently needs that Bill but most of all, the refugees out there need that Bill. 

THE SPEAKER: Well, I think that is a well-made point. I am appealing to the committee chairperson, and Foreign Affairs to handle this Bill expeditiously so that we find out how to deal with it.

MR MAFABI: Mr Speaker, mine is a procedural problem. I do not know if this is the right time to raise it. I saw the communication of business before the House and one of the items, which struck me most was that the President’s State of the Nation Address and the Budget will be addressed in August after all the Constitution amendments have been done. What then will be the effect of those speeches to be discussed at that time when in fact to me it will be out of context? Why don’t we say we shall not discuss them so that the world is aware of it?

THE SPEAKER: In the first place, hon. Mafabi you are a Member of the Business Committee, which made this decision. Maybe you should have apologised for not attending the meeting but this is a decision of the Business Committee and postponing debate does not take away the importance of the issue. 

First of all the State of the Nation Address is a pointer to what the Budget will come to support and we have said that we shall postpone the Budget and State of the Nation Address but when we clear what we think has to be cleared now, we shall first of all deal with the State of Nation Address and then we shall go to the Budget. In any case it is important to pass the Budget and to know why you are passing it. The policies are in the State of the Nation Address and Budget Speech. Therefore, if you wanted me to answer, I say yes, it will serve the purpose.

MR MAFABI: Mr Speaker, I want to apologise for not attending because I never got the invitation -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: You are saying you never got the invitation? I informed the Members of the Business Committee that there would be a meeting at 10.00 a.m. at the venue I mentioned. That was an invitation. Let us not follow that because we have very little time. Your apology is accepted.

MR MAFABI: Sir, thank you very much for accepting my apology. I want to inform hon. Kibirige that I am aware he has a problem with me because he is fond of making silly comments about me. 

Having said that, there are some other businesses we left pending at that time and I do not know to what category they belong. One of them is the report on the Committee on National Economy. That report was overdue. It has been on the Order Paper for a long time. Is it not necessary for us to debate it? 

THE SPEAKER: While I realise you put a lot of effort into producing the report, you must appreciate that we have many things that we have to handle. That report was scheduled to be debated but for one reason or another it did not come. I assure you it was saved by the prorogation and we shall handle it as soon as we have time to deal with it.  But it is very important and we shall deal with it if time allows, please.

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE CONSTITUTION
(AMENDMENT NO. 3) BILL, 2005

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion was moved and the report of the committee was given. It is now open for you to debate the Bill using the report and any other information you may have.  

3.00
MAJ. (RTD) JOHN KAZOORA (Kashari County, Mbarara): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The Constitution (Amendment No.3) Bill, 2005 in its introduction says the object of the Bill is to make various amendments to the Constitution, but I am interested in (d) on page 1, namely the Government White Paper on the report of the Commission of Inquiry of the Constitutional Review issued in September 2004. You gave me a chance to speak on the White Paper and I talked mainly on the independence of Parliament and I said I was not going to deal with the now much talked about issue of amending Article 105(2). I also said, “When you give me a chance in future I will talk about it,” this is the time and it is the issue I will concentrate on.

Last night I returned from one of the countries in the Great Lakes region and I had the rare opportunity of meeting the President of that country. We had a long discussion and he underscored a statement, which I knew, namely that Parliamentarians must make themselves relevant and ask important questions of the day to prepare for the future. I will start my debate from there because I have heard a lot of debate on this issue. I want to say that it is only fair that Parliament seriously debates the merits and demerits of presidential term limits irrespective of the incumbent because there is a lot of confusion about that. 

I want to right away appeal to my colleagues that this is what Parliament owes the people of Uganda in all fairness and justice. The way some people talk even outside Parliament you may easily get the impression that some people want to ride –(Interruption)

DR KHIDDU MAKUBUYA: I hate to interrupt hon. Maj. Kazoora but subject to your guidance I think that it is in order that when we are quoting a head of state on this Floor, it is fair to Parliament and to that head of state that we name him, subject to your guidance, Mr Speaker.

MAJ. KAZOORA: I can help you. On Friday I met His Excellency the President, Paul Kagame, of the Republic of Rwanda and he told me I could even quote him on a number of issues –(Interruptions)

THE SPEAKER: Do you have to, really?

MAJ. KAZOORA: Oh! Yes, because I asked him and he said there is nothing wrong with that. He is a leader, Integrated External Region, and I asked him and he said, “Yes, you can quote me”, so I will. 

DR KIBIRIGE SEBUNYA: Mr Speaker, I have always respected my friend hon. Kazoora. May I find out in what capacity hon. Kazoora met the President of the Republic of Rwanda?

MAJ. KAZOORA: I am sure the honourable minister is not tired and he should know that I am a Member of Parliament of the Republic of Uganda, but also I was mandated under delegation of the AMANI FORUM of which Uganda is a chapter. I hope the honourable minister understands what AMANI is. Therefore, I met him. I was not alone –(Interruptions) 

THE SPEAKER: But honourable members, can’t we utilise this time to deal with the matter? Hon. Kazoora was a member in UPDF and hon. Kagame also served here. I appeal to you to maximumly utilise the time we have. 

MAJ. KAZOORA: Mr Speaker, the time I have spent in this Parliament, I am never a coward of debates and I am appealing to the honourable ministers that when they start debating, they should also allow to be informed and accept points of clarification because it enriches debate. I have nothing to hide. I will continue. 

I wanted to say that constitutions are for the long time benefit to society and not short-term goals of the ruler, before the Attorney-General interrupted me. The kind of issue we are debating seems to imply that we shall write the name “Yoweri Kaguta Museveni” in the Constitution, and to me this is very unfortunate. 

The argument that people will get rid of a leader that they no longer want by vote is to me simply shallow and simplistic. It is not true in our situation because of the problems we have on the ground. What problems do we have on the ground? We all know that there is intimidation of voters and, therefore, cannot exercise their free will independently.

THE SPEAKER: I want to guide you on time. You will be allowed five minutes to make your contribution.  

MR WAGONDA MUGULI: I would like to inform my colleague that an office of Movement mobilisers in Kayunga was closed yesterday because of its links with Kalangala Action Plan and that the office was being used particularly to mobilize people to intimidate members of the opposition. So intimidation is real, alive and kicking.  

MAJ. KAZOORA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. If you had given me that impression at the beginning of my speech I would have contained my speech in five minutes.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, I am going to give you more time because I did not and I should have done so. I will give you two extra minutes.

MR MWANDHA: Mr Speaker, I want to appeal to you that in view of the importance of this debate we increase the time to ten minutes because in five minutes you can hardly discuss anything in depth and yet this is a very important debate. Therefore, ten minutes will be more reasonable and I appeal to you.

THE SPEAKER: Seven minutes.

DR OKULO EPAK: Mr Speaker, I am really supporting the view that we are given more time. I would suggest ten minutes; seven minutes are not enough. We are debating a very important subject and we should be able to draw sufficient consensus from the contribution of members.

THE SPEAKER: Well, I have heard you but because the programme was approved by the Business Committee, I have to consult my colleagues in the committee and see whether we can adjust. However, if we do then we may also have to increase the days in which we are going to handle this matter. I will not unilaterally take that decision now because we made it in a committee. I will consult them –(Interruptions)

MR SEBULIBA MUTUMBA: Mr Speaker, I just wanted to be guided. When we are submitting on the Floor of Parliament colleagues give points of Clarification and order. Will that also be counted? There are going to be some interruptions of clarifications, order and many others.

THE SPEAKER: If there are interruptions, our rules are very clear. These interruptions, except for points of order, points of information and clarification are entirely in the powers of the person holding the Floor. If he takes them into account that is going to take away his time. That is entirely up to you, the member holding the Floor.

MAJ. KAZOORA: I take it, Mr Speaker that I am now beginning my contribution. (Laughter)

I was saying that it would be okay if voters were not intimidated and allowed to make their own choice. I will give an example. Currently the supporters of the Movement are registering people in my constituency and they are telling them that, “The moment you register as a Movement supporter you will vote for a Movement candidate. If you do not, there are special machines that will identify you and you will be arrested thereafter”.

MR WACHA: Mr Speaker, I want to give hon. Kazoora information following what he has just stated. Yesterday I was in my constituency in one of the gombololas where there are six camps. The people who are registering people to join the Movement are telling them that if they do not have the Movement card; one, they will not be given food in the camps and two; they will be chased away from the camps. I do not know whether that information or that directive came from the Movement Secretariat or from the NRM/O Secretariat.  

MR SABIITI: In Kabale District the matter of registering people in NRM/O is taking a completely different direction. The LC V Chairman, Mr Edison Kakuru, appeared on the Voice of Kigezi radio station and told the population of Kabale District that the NRM/O card or receipt or whatever you call it, is going to be the official identity card of Ugandans. I hope to lay the tape on the Table possibly tomorrow because it will have come then. They are telling people, “If you want to get a job, if you want to live in this country comfortably, if you do not want to be interrupted on the roadblocks, the official identity card is the NRM/O card.” This is derailing the whole process and it may cause more problems. I am giving this information so that Members of Parliament understand what is happening in Kabale District.

MAJ. KAZOORA: Mr Speaker, this is just the tip of the iceberg. If members could give examples, I am sure you could get as many examples as are members in this House.  

THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): Mr Speaker, I thank hon. Kazoora for giving way. I would like to get hard evidence concerning what hon. Ben Wacha said because it is a very serious matter. We have an IDP policy, we have to feed and protect those people. So if I get the details at any time, we shall ensure that those people are properly dealt with because that is a very grave matter. 

MR WACHA: I will give you all the evidence, Sir, but I do not know what you call hard evidence. But I will give you whatever evidence you need.

MAJ. KAZOORA: Mr Speaker, I was talking about manipulation at the grassroots. But when you come to our level for instance you find a Member of Parliament reasoning that, “If I do not support this political system I will not have projects funded in my constituency”. Facts on the ground show that elections are sometimes rigged, that there is lack of genuine and massive civic education. 

We are talking of a referendum next month. Where is the civic education for these peasants today compared to the 20 years of the political school education in Kyankwanzi against political parties? It is hardly a month left and we are talking of civic education for people to understand matters concerning a referendum?  

There is lack of genuine political space. Examples are many. You have been hearing reports of Members of Parliament being stopped from addressing people in their constituencies using a lot of state machinery, especially against those with different political views. You know very well that there is unfair influencing of some Members of Parliament in terms of facilitation - I do not want to use big words. This is coupled with poverty, which benefits from manipulation. I was taught by Prof. Nsibambi that in political science this is called a low political cognitive map, the level of understanding politics, I hope you have not forgotten. (Laughter)

Democratic institutions are not built overnight. People argue and I hear serious parliamentarians, senior ministers talk that if President Museveni goes, for instance, with this peace that we have achieved, what will happen? That is true, but democratic institutions are not built overnight. As long as a good foundation has been laid, others can continue and finish that job. 

You know very well that Mzee Nelson Mandela spent 27 years on Robben Island prison. When he finished his first term the entire population of South Africa wanted him to go back and he said, “No. There are cadres who can continue this process”. He is still respected, he was recently in Germany and he got the World Cup to be in South Africa. That is the respect we are talking about!

I am about to conclude, Sir. I am now in my extra time, which you allocated me. A leading member of Chama Cha Mapinduzi in Tanzania was asked, “What would happen if word went around that President Benjamin Mkapa wanted to stay in power after completing the allowed constitutional two terms?” He replied, “His family would get worried about his mental health.” (Laughter) Since then Chama Cha Mapinduzi as you know has got a cadre, Chikwete. President Mkapa is actually leaving State House for it to be renovated for a new President to take over and there is no crisis in Chama Cha Mapinduzi and no crisis in Tanzania.

Let us not look at the amending of the Constitution for political convenience of individuals. Let us look at our society, let us bear in mind our turbulent history, and build peace and long-lasting institutions for our children, grandchildren and societies thereafter.

Lastly, I want to associate myself with President Museveni. I know a bit about the Movement, hon. Otafiire can bear me out. When we were talking about the interim period of NRM in 1986 in Lubiri, people suggested eight years and President Museveni looked around and said, “Have I wasted my time to develop cadres? This bankruptcy of Africans wanting to overstay in power; what are eight years for?” He said four years would be enough, in his words! Now I do not know why people want to keep on pushing President Museveni. 

Nine times in this manifesto, which I am sure leading Movement cadres participated in making, makes it clear, including his concluding paragraph to the extent that during NEC last week they were all shouting and telling him, “Mr President we shall take you to court if you do not stand again.” That included Members of Parliament! He did not comment. Why are we as senior Movement cadres pushing the person of Mr Museveni? Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: As you rightly said, let us not personalise these issues. Why don’t we, when addressing this issue, talk about the merits and demerits of amending the provision? It will help in one way or the other. 

MR AWORI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. In passing my honourable colleague mentioned the word “referendum”. All of us know that today a petition is being heard in the Constitutional Court. Under the rule of subjudice, are we free to talk about it? Can we talk about the referendum freely or will the Constitutional Court inhibit us?

THE SPEAKER: In the not far distant future I will give you the literature on what subjudice means. Subjudice only comes about when you debate the facts that will prejudice the findings, not the law. How do you avoid talking about a referendum simply because it is a process, which is going on in court? He says there are intimidations. Do you want him to keep quiet about this intimidation? Will that prejudice the court coming to a right decision on the law? I will give you the literature on subjudice.

DR FRANK NABWISO (Kagoma County, Jinja): Mr Speaker, I have seven reasons why I am opposed to changing the Constitution, particularly Article 105(2). Fortunately, I have written the paper and at an appropriate time I will circulate it to members, but I will just give the summary of what is contained in that paper. 

I represent Kagoma County. I travelled to 17 parishes out of 24 in my County. I held meetings for all kinds of opinion leaders and we discussed the issues concerning change of Constitution. I asked the people who were the pro-deletion to tell me their reasons and I even asked even those who were against the deletion to tell me their reasons. Those who were interested in changing the Constitution had only one major reason. They said that the Movement System has given them security and for that reason they want President Museveni to continue to be in power. 

Those who were against the change of the Constitution - and you know these peasants are quite wise people I appreciate their wisdom - quoted a Lusoga proverb for me: “Nomukini omulungi ava mw’idiiro” (even if one is a good dancer, time comes for one to stop dancing and sit down). They said, “Much as the President has achieved a lot for this country, it is time for him to leave.”  

On that basis I want to say that I have no other reason why I should support a system, which leaves one person to rule this country for many years. I had the opportunity to research into the history of Parliament from 1921 to 2003 and you allowed me to circulate that paper, Mr Speaker. It was circulated to all Members of Parliament. I quoted an incident when in 1966 Members of Parliament sat here and decided to abandon the more liberal Constitution of 1962. They adopted a more dictatorial one. President Obote was rejoicing and thinking that he had overcome every obstacle when on one occasion while coming out of his own UPC conference at Lugogo he encountered a gunman, whom he survived narrowly. 

In 1971 the Obote Government was overthrown. Personally I believe that since history repeats itself it is possible for this country to go through such similar experiences and I would not be party to endorsing that kind of situation.

I discovered that the life presidency syndrome is still with us. President Obote spent nine years in government without conducting any election and I think he was heading towards life presidency. His Excellency, Field Marshal Amin declared himself life president on many occasions. Now I find it strange that even when we have gone through this experience some people are still talking about creating another life presidency project. Mr Speaker, I cannot be party to that kind of situation.

The countries that neighbour us: Kenya, Tanzania, Zambia, Malawi, Botswana, Namibia, Mozambique, South Africa, have all entrenched their term limits in their constitutions. There is a tendency of us Ugandans to believe that we are very special people and we do not have to learn from others. 

I would like to appeal to my fellow Members of Parliament to take heed. What is happening elsewhere concerns us. Uganda is not going to be a political island on its own. If other Africans have seen it necessary to put presidential term limits in their constitutions, I find it strange that Uganda should continue to entertain it. Let me finish with two more reasons.

The President himself in his book Sowing the Mustard Seed, page 250 said - that was in 1997 - that there were already people in Uganda with presidential calibre to run this country. I do not know whether those people have disappeared into thin air.

My last point is that in 1981 I joined the NRM voluntarily, as a nationalist. I was convinced that the Movement was not going to perpetuate a dictatorial system. That is why I joined it voluntarily and worked for it. When I see that the system has changed, that the Movement System can even afford to spend Shs 30 billion to allow the Chairman of NRM/O, who happens to be President Museveni, to fight the Chairman of the Movement System, it is a very strange –(Interjection)- the Chairman of the Movement System is President Museveni. Therefore, we shall be having a debate where the President of this country under NRM/O will be fighting the President of this country in the Movement System.

MR OCHIENG: Mr Speaker, the clarification I am seeking from the honourable member is where he is getting the Shs 30 billion. I have been here and I am always here but I have never heard about the Shs 30 billion the honourable member is talking about. Can I know where he is getting it from?

DR NABWISO: We were told in this Parliament that we are going to spend Shs 30 billion on the referendum. Therefore, I am quoting figures that I was told about. I am just finishing this point. I have found out that corruption, sectarianism and commercialisation of politics are on the increase. 

I have also found out that when I brought a document here, which stated that there were some people who sat in Mbarara District in 1992 and said they would rule this country for 50 years, Parliament asked the Ministry of Internal Affairs to investigate the case but the Minister of Internal Affairs has never come back to Parliament. It is now a year! It is very difficult for me as a nationalist who is fighting against corruption, nepotism, sectarianism, commercialisation of politics and other vices to support a system, which I know will rule Uganda for 50 years. Thank you. 

3.38
MR MAURICE KAGIMU (Bukomansimbi County, Masaka): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. My contribution will be on something different to avoid boring the House with the same thing. 

I want to talk most specifically about Article 93, which was rejected by the committee. The chairman was very happy when it was rejected. I wanted Article 93 to be amended because our hands are tied. We cannot bring motions, which are very important because they say we are not allowed to bring a motion, which forces government to touch the Consolidated Fund. When members bring any motion, they do not just bring –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: To guide you, if you took your amendment to the committee and the committee rejected it under our rules, you are free to bring that amendment here for our consideration. 

MR KAGIMU: Yes, thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am very much aware of that but I wanted to at least brainstorm over it with the members so that when it comes to the committee stage they are aware of my reasons. I do not think I will have time to do that since the committee stage will be for a short time.

I was after the amendment of Article 93 because there are several motions, which we would like to bring here. For example, there is something like the heart machine. Every time you read the papers, the heart machine – there are many patients who are suffering from heart diseases and you find that every time they are appealing for help. I did my research, I went to Mulago, and found out that the heart machine and equipping the laboratory costs only US $4 million! I cannot bring a motion to force government to bring that machine to equip the lab.  

Every time we come up the Prime Minister also comes up, “Article 93, Article 93”. Now we are helpless. People are dying. You now have to contribute about Shs 14 million to take somebody to India yet they can be operated here. We have a professor who can do the work but the machines are not there.  

Because of time I cannot go into all the details but what pains is that if a member brings a Motion and touches the Consolidated Fund, people will not pass it anyhow. People consider the merits and demerits -(Interruption)- –(Mr Musumba rose)- No, you sit down; you do not need to contribute. (Laughter)  

THE SPEAKER: Can you accept the information from the minister?

MR MUSUMBA: Sir, I rise on a point of order. I am a minister in this government and I cannot help giving information to an honourable member. If he does not want to get information, there is decorum in Parliament, a procedure by which you decline to receive information. I do not think that an honourable member can simply dismiss another member of this House and he directs that he sits down and nothing is done.  

Therefore, Sir, is the honourable member in order to behave in a manner that is un-parliamentary and undignified towards another hon. Member of Parliament?  

THE SPEAKER: I think it is a problem of communication in the sense that when you decline, you just say, “I decline the information”, and obviously the member will sit down. I hope you have taken the point.

MR KAGIMU: Thank you very much. The Speaker has ruled very wisely.

THE SPEAKER: And honourable minister, you do not also -(Laughter)– but he has taken the point.

MR KAGIMU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. It is only that I knew what he was going to say. 

The Government should not be afraid that a member would rise and bring any motion. For example the committee said on page 12 that Parliament should determine its emoluments in order to preserve its independence. The fear that Parliament may just wake up and increase its salaries is unfounded. They said the proposal for amendment is redundant and, therefore, unnecessary as Parliament cannot set its pay oblivious to what -(Interruption)- it has never happened and it can never happen. So, government should not be afraid.  

I appeal to members to amend Article 93 so that we are allowed to bring our motions. If it is nonsense, the House can throw it out. For example, we are lucky that the President accepted the Constituency Development Fund, but how many times have we cried for that development fund? But every time you want to bring a motion here they say, “No, Article 93”. Where shall we end with Article 93?  

I remember before I came to Parliament, during my campaigns the cry of the people was agricultural produce. Our people depend on agriculture. But coffee prices are very low. You cannot liberalise prices of agricultural products because if you liberalise so much, their prices always fall. They cannot determine their prices unlike manufactured products. So, government must come in to cushion these prices. I fought for that. I brought a question here, the minister’s answer was one and very simple: government has no money.  

During the colonial days and even a short while after government had what was called the Stabilisation Fund, that fund was very important in that the prices would be cushioned. They could for example fix the price of coffee at Shs 1,000 and if the price at the international market increased to Shs 1,500, the Government would retain the Shs 500 and give the farmer Shs 1,000. And if the prices fell to Shs 500, government would bring the retained Shs 500 to top it up. So the poor farmer could predict prices and plan what to do. You will never fight poverty if you do not touch the agricultural prices.  

MR MAFABI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and my colleague for giving way. I want to give you information. In 1993 there was a coffee boom and there was no Stabilisation Fund, then a fund was established. The Government of Uganda collected Shs 56 billion but when there was recess they never distributed that money. So, even if you talk of a coffee stabilisation fund, unless government is pro-people, it will never give out that fund.

MR KAGIMU: Mr Speaker, if this had been the policy of government, the motion would be tendered – (Interruption)

MR MUSUMBA: I thank the honourable member for decently giving way. This House is being misinformed and I want to take this opportunity to correctly inform the House. The hon. Mafabi has just informed this House that there was a Coffee Stabilisation Fund and that they collected money, Shs 56 billion, and that when there was a recess that money was never used to stabilise the coffee prices.

One, there was never a Coffee Stabilisation Fund. No. What government did was, it put in place a tax, coffee stabilisation tax. This tax was supposed to reduce - because at that time the dollar was overvalued – the price of coffee was so high in the international market. We were getting more dollars than the economy could absorb at the time in the management of our monetary policy. So the Central Bank and the Government decided to reduce on the amount of dollars that were flowing into the economy by imposing that tax. 

At the time the price of coffee was very high. It was never meant to stabilise the price of coffee. No. Therefore, the clarification I want to give is that the money was never meant to be re-applied to either stabilise the price or anything like that. The price of coffee was liberalised and that has been the position. There has never been a reversal of that policy.  

Having said so, I want to turn to hon. Kagimu. The information I want to give him is that he can make his case to Article 93 for as long as he wishes. I say this because I and a few other people were in the Constituent Assembly and had a long debate over this Article. The rationale for having Article 93 is to avoid exactly what hon. Kagimu is marketing to this House. That is, if hon. Kagimu successfully moved today and passed a resolution in this House for US $4 million and tomorrow, hon. Kazoora moves and passes through another resolution of US $3 million, and so on and so forth, we will never be able to manage the budget of the Government of the day. 

We realized that a long time ago, hon. Kagimu, and that is why the Sixth Parliament put in place a mechanism for placing proposals such as those ones established by the Budget Act. You can compel government to be able to include the item that you think is important in time in the Budget process so that it can be properly catered for. Simply passing motions on the Floor would negate the orderly budgeting and financial discipline that the Government wants to put in place. So, those arguments will be put. When you bring your amendment we will be able to oppose them along those lines. I thank you.

MS ALASO: I am at a loss; maybe I did not just understand your guidance? I request that you guide me again on matters that have not been included in this Bill. How do we finally resolve anything that was left out at the Committee Stage, it is not in the report, it is not in the Bill and we are now debating it. Would it be prudent to have it come as an independent motion later on? The way my little brain is working is on what is in the Bill but now we are discussing finance and other things. How do you expect to resolve such matters, Mr Speaker, guide me?

THE SPEAKER: Well, what a Bill is, was dealt with by the Constitutional Court and there is a decision on that. The Constitutional Court ruled that a Bill is a working document in as far as Parliament is concerned. It can use it to add to or reduce something. So, even if the memorandum did not include a special provision you can move and then at the end of the day you amend the memorandum. It is possible. That is the constitutional ruling by the court. It is possible to use that tool to bring in another thing that would be able to go through using that particular Bill. I hope I am clear.

MS ALASO: In the light of what you have just said -(Interruption)

MR SPEAKER: In the light of what I have said, if he is interested - I do not know why it was rejected. Maybe it was rejected because it was not covered by the Bill in which he wanted to bring it and I think they said, “Well, this is not covered in the memo so you cannot bring in now”. However, I am telling you the Constitutional Court has given us guidance on that issue.

MR KAGIMU: Oh, thank you very much. I appeal to members who come back in the next Parliament to give you a kisanja.

THE SPEAKER: You can amend it. There can be amendments that you bring in during the Committee Stage because then when you succeed you may have to look at the memorandum so that you amend it accordingly. All rules are clear on that.

MR KAGIMU: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. You are very wise. I wish you another kisanja in the next Parliament. 

Perhaps my colleague came late. I was bringing this issue because of course the Speaker guided the House that I would bring Article 93 during the reconsideration stage but I want to bring my argument to the members now because at that time I will not be allowed to debate. So I have to try and convince them now. If I do not convince them it may not go through. I am trying to convince them on the importance of Article 93. 

The minister has gone unfortunately. You can see that money, which was taxed, the coffee tax, it was very unfortunate. It should have gone into the stabilization fund. I remember as I was explaining before being interrupted I came here and put a question to the minister about why they are not bringing back the stabilization fund. There is no way you are going to fight poverty among the people if you do not bring that fund. The minister answered, “There is no money”. Now after some years Dr Suruma was appointed the Minister of Finance, exactly what I brought is the Suruma model, which he presented and now he was praised by Cabinet, “You go ahead, that is very wonderful”.  That is exactly what I had brought. Of course –(Interruption)

MR KITYO: Thank you my colleague for allowing me to give information to the Minister of Finance who has just given us information. In 1957 and 1958 there was a coffee and cotton boom and the money collected in that boom, the colonialists found it necessary to construct for Uganda this Parliament, and the Farmers House. What I want to know: what did the Minister of Finance do with the 15 percent stabilization tax, which came to Shs 56 billion, for Ugandans? They did that in 1993 and we do not see what has been done out of the tax collected, the 15 percent.

THE SPEAKER: But honourable members are we debating the Coffee Stabilization Fund? I thought it was a mere example or showing that sometimes you can find it necessary for a back bencher to bring a motion that would impose the Consolidated Fund but now it is as if we are dealing with the coffee stabilization Fund. Therefore, please, go on.

MR KAGIMU: Okay, thank you very much. Let me conclude that point. There is a lot I could give you not only that which the British did, but also the Coffee House in London was bought, it became the –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: No, we have said we are not dealing with that subject of the Coffee Stabilization Fund.

MR KAGIMU: Okay, I leave that. 

I support this amendment whereby the presidential, parliamentary and the local government elections are going to be held on the same day. That is very good because there is voting fatigue and sometimes even facilitating the campaigns, if you do it together, it becomes simple. But once you are alone, you are strained. When you are conducting the campaigns you find that the chairman is also conducting his, and the President, so you can team up. The eating base is widened and then you find that – I do not want to go very far into that. 

There is this Article whereby they said to recall a Member of Parliament you need two-thirds, they want to amend it and say you need only half of the members. I think that is very dangerous. It should remain two-thirds because sometimes you can win an election with a small margin and so those people can team up against you. So, we should leave it with two-thirds. We should not amend that.  

There is this question of the academic qualifications of Members of Parliament. Somebody suggested a degree and I think that would be better because when they say it should be a high school certificate and its equivalent as Parliament may determine - even in the White Paper they talked of special exams for Members of Parliament. If you give an examination to somebody and you see that he can comprehend the Bills, therefore, we should not joke with these things. You should go to study. We do not study as a joke. 

If you did not study, that is your business, you go and leave the Floor for people who went to school. We cannot soften up on this. In fact I support the degree. It should not be less than that because to comprehend these things the brain must be really trained to concentrate for long hours. That is part of exam.

And there is that amendment that the Army should be brought into elections to keep peace. Unless it is a war zone like in the North, but here why do you bring in the Army? It is a peaceful area, so where there is peace you leave the Police, you do not bring in the Army because it can be abused. Of course they can abuse it, that one I do not need to explain. So, the Army should remain in war zones, here the Police will be enough.

I will end with this. They have said that if somebody wants to stand as a Member of Parliament, he will leave a public office, that he would resign. This was even included for local councils but for local councils, I think it should not be so because you find that in the villages the elite are the ones who are in the public offices. When you tell these elites that they should resign, they fear to resign to go to LC councils. 

So you will find that most local councils do not have qualified people because those people who are public servants in the villages in the rural areas, they have to resign their offices, which they are not willing to do. As a result you may find that the people who are on local councils are not very competent. So, that one should apply for Members of Parliament but it should not apply for people in the villages.  You can imagine telling civil servants in Karamoja not to stand for local council elections? You can imagine what we will remain with. Thank you, very much.

4.01
MR PETER MUTULUUZA (Mawokota County North, Mpigi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am going to talk on behalf of the people of Mawokota North on the issue of Constitution amendment.  

When the White Paper came out I endeavoured to consult the people of Mawokota North and there were three main issues we addressed that time. One of them was the amendment of Article 105(2). Another one was Article 108(a), the creation of the Office of the Prime Minister, and the third was Article 188, the appointment of the chief administrative officers.

I have this to say before I say what the people said. I want to remind Members of Parliament of what His Excellency the ex-President of Kenya said when he was bidding farewell to the Parliament of Uganda. I do not remember the date but that gallant Son of Africa reminded us that when we are leaders, we should always remember to put the people we represent in front; we should put their views forward.

On the amendment of Article 105(2), the people of Mawokota North, whom I consulted and especially the leaders had this to say. This Article should be amended to allow a President rule for more than two terms. And it is not only for Museveni that they should open up the term limits but that anybody who is able to lead the country should not be limited to terms. However, elections must be free and fair, transparent and the ground must be level.

The reason they gave was that in my constituency nobody believed that the ex-MP would be out of this Parliament but because elections were free and fair, I managed to win elections and that MP is not here now. Therefore, they say that the moment there are free and fair elections and people are given chance to express their will, then there is nobody who can ever impose himself on Uganda.

I want to correct the impression –(Interruption)

MR MWANDHA: Thank you very much honourable member for giving way. Did your people propose how we can guarantee the conducting of free and fair elections in Uganda?

MR MUTULUUZA: I thank the honourable member for the clarification he has sought for –(Interruption)

MAJ. KAZOORA: Further clarification –(Interruption) 

MR MUTULUUZA: Let me first clear that one. The laws of elections are there and I would refer the honourable member to the electoral laws. Interference in the electoral process is one of the reasons I am giving that in case there is interference in the electoral process that is automatically not a free and fair election. I appeal to government or to whoever will be leading this country to make sure that especially the military’s involvement in the election process – (Maj. Kazoora rose_)– I take hon. Kazoora’s clarification. 

MAJ. KAZOORA: Thank you, hon. Mutuluuza. I have followed your debate. You say that your people are those from Mawokota North. You as their leader; what is your position? Because you keep saying, “My people, my people”, as if there is a conflict of interest between your view and the views of your people; what was your guidance honourable?

MR MUTULUUZA: I have pointed out that if there are free and fair elections, if there is a level ground then there is no problem with that and I also share with them the fact that if there is a level ground there is no problem. A leader can always be removed or retained -(Interruption)

DR MALLINGA: Mr Speaker, I think the honourable member has tried to tell us that in this nation now the elections are free and fair. If anyone is disgruntled there is a process of going to court and it will be resolved that way. The honourable member represents a people, the voice of the people. Therefore, he is right to come here say, “My people say this and that”. He is not a dictator.

MR MUTULUUZA: Thank you hon. Dr Mallinga for that information. I want to comment on the issue of abolition of the 1962 Constitution. Abolishing the 1962 Constitution did not involve people. Leaders decided by themselves to abolish that Constitution, so the people were not involved. 

I want to say this: if I am making a mistake to support the removal of clause 2 of Article 105 of the Constitution, let me make it with the people of Mawokota North. And if there is a problem in future, I do not think I will be blamed alone. I, therefore, say that let us involve the people in everything. 

As you are aware, on this issue of amending this Article, there was the Ssempebwa Constitutional Review Commission and all the views of the people were sought unlike the 1962 Constitution, which was abolished and the 1967 Constitution, which was imposed on the people. Therefore, I support the amending of clause (2) of Article 105. 

Secondly, the issue of creation of the Office of the Prime Minister, I think this is a problem. The Constituent Assembly made a mistake to omit this important office. You can see the role played by the Rt hon. Prime Minister.

MR OGWEL LOOTE: Mr Speaker, I would like to thank my colleague for giving way. I would like to inform him that the Constituent Assembly delegates did not make a mistake. They had to consult on each and every issue of controversy. So, at that time it was a consensus even when the debate on the principle and foundations of the Constitution, it was consensus and it was agreed upon on that basis. 

The Constituent Assembly did not make a mistake. And if you say there is a change of mind then I think we will agree on that, but we never made a mistake. The people of Uganda have changed their minds, then we go for that change.

MR MUTULUUZA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, and the honourable member for giving that information. That was an oversight and that is why this amendment is being brought in the Constitution. Therefore, I support the creation of the Office of the Prime Minister.

Lastly, the appointment of the chief administrative officers by the Public Service Commission. This is what I have been fighting for all along. Those people are appointed by the District Service Commission, which controls them and in the process they connive with the district administration to misuse or to rob districts’ money, which is sent from the centre. I, therefore, support the amendment that the district chief administrative officers be appointed from the centre so that at least the centre has control over these people since even the money, almost 99 percent of the expenditure in the districts, is from the centre. Let them appoint the chief administrative officers. I thank you, Mr Speaker.   

THE SPEAKER: Is it the appointment that causes the problem or whoever appoints that causes the problem you are talking about? Okay that is your point anyway.

MR MUTULUUZA: Mr Speaker, we complain but because the centre has no appointing authority, when there is a problem of corruption, it is very hard for the centre to come in because the officer is accountable to the District Service Commission -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: You mean in the centre there is no corruption? Anyway, hon. Kikungwe.

4.15
MR ISSA KIKUNGWE (Kyadondo County South, Wakiso): Mr Speaker, thank you. I feel I should bring this out before the debate is too hot. I had an opportunity to present a minority report the other time and I was denied the chance to read out certain sections. Allow me take this opportunity to add this for members’ consideration. 

In 2001 while the President was campaigning for re-election he produced a manifesto and on page 2 of this manifesto -(Interruption)

MR MUSUMBA: I first of all must apologize to my colleague. I hate to interrupt him but I seek to be guided on a point of procedure. The hon. Issa Kikungwe, to the best of my recollection, is a member of the committee and he signed the report. He wrote a minority report and we are waiting to hear him present his minority report and we pronounce ourselves on it. Therefore, on a point of procedure, is it in order for the honourable member to come here and say he wants to bring us Members of Parliament certain points upon which we have pronounced ourselves in the reports both the main and the minority report? Can we be guided?

THE SPEAKER: It did not occur to me that hon. Kikungwe is a member of the committee, which made the report. I rather suggest that you be given an opportunity because you will be defending your report, which will also be a subject of debate. Why do you not wait? I will give you an opportunity.

MR KIKUNGWE: Much obliged, Mr Speaker, but I was of the view that I would have done a disservice this House if I did not air out these views before.

THE SPEAKER: No, I will give you the opportunity hon. Kikungwe. Bear with me. Let the other people who are not members of committee make their contribution.

MR KIKUNGWE: Thank you.

4.17
THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I was intending to listen first and contribute later because I have to be a good listener. However, I will confine myself to the issue of lifting term limits. It is Government’s position and I support it that we should amend Article 105 (2) so that we remove term limits.  

Let me deal with a number of issues. The first one is that we are transiting from a Movement to a Multi-party system. In fact during the referendum we are going to encourage people to vote for opening the space. When we adopt a multi-party system, political parties should be free to choose their leaders and choose them unfettered by constitutional limitations. That is extremely important because that transition is extremely critical. We want someone who will deliver, a leader who will eventually become the head of state. Why should we be encumbered by Article 105(2)?

The second point to note is that when we have constitutional fetters, they do not prevent a dictator from emerging –(Interruptions)

DR OKULO EPAK: I hope I heard the Rt hon. Prime Minister correctly when he says we are going to campaign for opening up political space and there will be parties that should be allowed to anoint their candidates. I thought in our rules we are not supposed to anticipate? Is the Rt hon. Prime Minister not anticipating something, which is not yet on the table?  

PROF. NSIBAMBI: Mr Speaker, it is not clear whether this is an order or not. But I do not think there is nothing wrong with stating what is our position and we have been stating it and it is important for people to know how we are moving. Otherwise, there will be a lot of confusion and it will require a lot of civic education, unless we make it clear where we stand.  

MR WACHA: I am sorry to have to take you back. In your first point I seem to have understood you to say that since we are transiting, moving from the Movement political system to Multi-party political system, it is only proper that we open up in order to allow parties to choose their leaders. Did I get you right? Are you suggesting that the provisions under 105(2) can only apply in respect of the Movement political system and they cannot apply to the rest of the political party systems?

PROF. NSIBAMBI: The conditions of choosing a leader under a Movement system, we use individual merit but in the Multi-party system we use group merit. Therein lies the difference and, therefore, we are saying that this is particularly important when we are using group merit to ensure that when we are now choosing a leader who will eventually become our head of state, we should not be encumbered by Article 105(2).

I now move on to the second point, namely -(Interruptions)

MAJ. KAZOORA: Thank you, Rt hon. Prime Minister. Do I get you correctly that this is a trade off, to open for multi-parties, to allow multi-parties to operate then allow the removing of the presidential term limits? Do I get you correctly, Sir?

MS AMONGI: Thank you, Prof. Prime Minister. I would like to benefit from your education on the issue of systems. Try to educate me, if your argument would hold, why is it that other systems or other countries that are currently practising multi-party system have term limits? To sustain your argument, Professor?

PROF. NSIBAMBI: As you know some do have term limits, others do not. For example, in Britain they do not have term limits. That is my answer to your question. And of course the choice as to whether I should have term limits or not is contextual. Every polity has its history; it has problems it has gone through. For example this country died for all practical purposes and we are resurrecting it politically. There was administrative and political atrophy. Therefore, when we are conserving our situation we must relate it to our history. We should not necessarily copy what is happening elsewhere. We must take into account the context.

MR SABIITI: Thank you for giving way, hon. Prime Minister. If you look at Article 98 of our Constitution, it states, “There shall be a President of Uganda who shall be the Head of State, Head of Government, Commander-in-Chief of the Uganda People’s Defence Forces and the Fountain Honour”. You seem to want to talk about a President as a party leader and, therefore, the amendment of this Article should enable parties to operate properly. 

If you really understand Article 98, do you not think that your argument actually destroys what you are trying to put across because a President is separate from party X and Y? A President is for the whole country. Therefore, when we are amending this Constitution to enable the President to rule for whatever period, we should not be looking at parties. We should look at him as a head of state.  

MR ANANG-ODUR: Thank you, Mr Speaker. If I got the Rt hon. Prime Minister right, he outlined the fact that Uganda died and it is being resurrected. I take it that the current President is the chief surgeon resurrecting the country without whom the country will elapse to death again. 

May I request the hon. Prime Minister, as he said at the beginning the country wishes to know and should know what is happening, to let us know the current status of the health of Uganda being resurrected and how long we shall need the chief surgeon at the steering wheel? How long will he be there before we can elect somebody else to continue when we are sure we are out of the danger zone? Thank you.

DR MALLINGA: Mr Speaker, I think some of us are misunderstanding the situation. Politics is peculiar to a certain period and we always have to take that into account. This country is going through a very critical period of transiting from the Movement system to a Multi-party system. Therefore, Article 105(2) becomes relevant in that this is a difficult period. It becomes relevant for us to see who is experienced, egaali ekozeeko, who can lead this country through this difficult period properly. Therefore –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, there is a language you have used, which we do not follow.

DR MALLINGA: Egaali ekozeeko means somebody with experience who can lead this country through a difficult period of transition. Article 105 becomes relevant in that it prevents the country –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: But you need not agree with the Rt hon. Prime Minister’s submission. Just listen to him. If you agree you agree, if you do not, you will be given an opportunity.

MR WACHA: Mr Speaker, it is important that in making our contributions we also know what the other side is saying. For example, at the beginning you told us not to personalize this debate.  Hon. Mallinga is now telling us that there is only one person who can - somebody who has experience - who is egaali ekozeeko. (Laughter) For me to respond to this sort of argument, may I find out who this particular experienced person is?

THE SPEAKER: Again you are personalizing this debate on the amendment. The issue of the President standing again depends on whether there is an opportunity for him to stand. That can only come about if you amend the provisions of the Constitution. So, why do you not deal with the merits or demerits of amending the Constitution rather than tying it to an individual?

DR MALLINGA: I did not personalize. I only said Article 105 for this period becomes irrelevant because it takes away from the country the ability to transit the country through a difficult period. Therefore, Article 105 should be removed and give the choice to the people to see who can best –(Interruption)

MR ANANG-ODUR: Mr Speaker, I understand the enthusiasm of my colleague, hon. Dr Mallinga Steven Oscar, self-promoted Lt Colonel. He stood up to give information. I wish to get guidance from you as to whether he is still giving information, or debating.

THE SPEAKER: I have always told you to let information be information not an opinion, but these are facts. Many times people stand to give information when actually they are just expressing their opinion on a matter. That is not information. Information should be factual.

DR MALLINGA: I will wind up this way –(Interjections)- yes, I am giving information, do you have a problem with that? I am giving information to the hon. Prime Minister and emphasizing the point that through this period of transition we have to remove Article 105, which limits ability and knowledge in operating transition.

PROF. NSIBAMBI: Mr Speaker, I have been allowing people to interrupt me and to seek for clarification but I would also like my logic to flow spontaneously. Therefore, I am going to limit interruptions especially as I am articulating not only to hon. Members of Parliament but to the population at large.  

The second point I was making is that constitutional fetters cannot and do not prevent a dictator from scrapping the Constitution. Many times we have thought that when we have term limit then probably this will prevent dictators from emerging, certainly not! In fact a dictator can emerge during the first term. That is a very important point.
 
Thirdly - and I could give a lecture on this for 30 hours - is the issue of the incumbency. People have been saying that an incumbent is difficult to defeat, but I would like to point out that incumbency has two sides. First of all, an incumbent will have a record to attack, appraise and may have also exhausted the – I am not going to say the tricks, but methods he or she uses to solve problems. Therefore, an incumbent can also be a liability. It is not always an asset and, therefore, incumbency need not necessarily be an advantage and therefore prevent other people from winning elections. 

My other point, which I must also emphasize is that, as long as the president renews his or her mandate at regular intervals and elections are fair, then term limits need not arise. People have asked a very good question, “How do we ensure that elections are fair?” That is a very good question. You must increase the civic competence of the people through, for example, universal primary education –(Interjections)- yes, education is important because when people –(Interjection)- please, listen. When people have education, their capacity to understand what is happening is enhanced and that is extremely important. 

I am surprised that people are underestimating the role of education –(An. hon. member rose_)- let me finish I will allow you.  You cannot be a member of parliament if you do not have A’ Level, so how can you underestimate the role of education?  Of course, as we have said, courts of law are available in case you are aggrieved. Many of you have been acknowledging that our judiciary is becoming stronger and more independent.  

There is also the question of political legitimacy. If you cheat during elections, you cannot enjoy political legitimacy. This is extremely important. Legitimacy is the title and the right to lead; without this you lose moral legitimacy. Therefore, it is extremely important for the system and also the incumbents to enjoy political legitimacy. If they do not enjoy this, there will be instability. Externally when you are relating to others you are weak.  

Therefore, it is also in our interest to ensure that we have a system where elections are fair and regular. When you have term limits however, you take away the power of the people to choose the person they would like to lead the country. The Prime Minister of Britain, Tony Blair, is now having a third term –(Interruption)

MR MAFABI: Thank you, Mr Speaker and the Prime Minister for giving way. It is true Tony Blair is having a third term of four times three (4x3) for which you get 12. 20 divide by four is five. So, those would already be five terms. If we intend to increase it, Mr Prime Minister, that would be the tenth term.

PROF. NSIBAMBI: That is not the issue. The issue is that if there were no term limits, one would lead every five years for as long as their mandate is renewed. (Interjections) So, honourable Members of Parliament, it is our view that Article 105(2) should be amended. Many other articles are being amended and they are not a taboo. We wonder why it is a taboo to amend this article. Maybe some people are worried that when we amend Article 105(2) they may not compete very well with us. 

4.42
MR GAGAWALA WAMBUZI (Bulamogi County, Kamuli): I thank you Mr Speaker. I am glad to speak this afternoon after we have decided that the issue of the referendum should go on. I expected Maj. Kazoora and a few other people to start by saying that at last they were seeing power in sight, in that the parties are eventually being given a free hand. I am glad that the Attorney General and his colleagues separated the two bills for the convenience. 

When I read through the bill and the report of the chairman to the committee in charge of this sector, I was looking forward to finding an article guiding the Parliament that we must change this Constitution, but for the last time.  As Parliament, we must change laws but the fundamental, basic, building blocks of the constitution should not be changed from time to time. The area we are handling, however, has got to be changed. 

We have experimented with the Constitution for several years. Therefore, we must sit back and reflect so that at the end of the day all members of the 7th Parliament can say they really they did a good job, because the MPs on either side will have decided unanimously that the Constitution has got to be changed and the parties have got to be opened. This is common sense and not subject for debate. 

The issue is to assist the executive go through a transition without panic or fear of the future and without stampeding the country so that the world can again consolidate the respect of Ugandans. Ugandans used to be greatly respected in the world and their passports were not questionable anywhere. They were number 2 to the British passport and number 3 to the American passports. 

It is a pity that we have degraded to this level but we are fighting to get back up although we are not quite there yet. It is this 7th Parliament which must forget individuality and debate so we can put forward an amendment which is going to stabilize the country. I think what I expected from the chairman of the committee was simply that –(Interruption) 

DR MALLINGA: Thank you very much, honourable member, for giving way. Honourable Speaker, the honourable member holding the Floor has emphasized one point which needs re-emphasis. Once upon a time, this was a very respected country and then there came a period when there was decay and destruction of this country. When we are amending the constitution that is what we have to keep in mind. Let us avoid poor leadership. Article 105 does exactly that. It protects us from poor leadership.

MR WAMBUZI: Thank you. I think that is the essence of the matter. When we are debating, we should debate in reality and in practical terms, not in theory or wishful thinking. This is the situation in Uganda at this point of time; how we intend to move from this situation to a better situation tomorrow, 10 or 20 years from today. 

What Tanzania did was done methodically. It was done with the agreement of, first of all the elites, so that you could not just wish Nyerere away and throw him away. CCM could not just be changed. Everybody including the elites, those who wanted communism and so on, sat down and said, “look this is the vantage point for us to act now and persuade each other to consolidate the revolution which has come out so that everybody wins.” 

A win - win situation is always good. But if in such a situation somebody starts saying I am going to war, that person is stupid and ignorant. That sort of language at this time is not good for a transition, Mr Speaker. 

What I expected the chairman to say was that we are amending this constitution to build structures, rigid or flexible ones so that it will not be possible for people to suffer any difficulties in the future. What do I mean? I am sure the hon. chairman was in America and he read that after a certain time they amended their constitution. But when they amended it, they said that for that time they were going to allow the amendment. But the amendment was not enjoyed by the next government. You can make the amendment. But if you are not going to enjoy it, you will not be excited about it. You will debate it more soberly. I think this is an issue which I expected the chairman to have highlighted. 

We have decided we are going to lift the terms whether people want it or not, but then what is going to be the benefit at the end of the day? How are we helping the executive to become more stable and more confident? The people of Bulamogi have decided –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, I think you have forgotten what the committee said. What is your position?

MR WAMBUZI: My position is very clear. We should lift the presidential terms. 

Secondly, how are we going to guard against dictators? We can guard against dictators by building a principle that when this Parliament changes the law, the next Parliament should not be allowed to change it and then enjoy what it has passed. 

THE SPEAKER: Which article is this provision about and what  article do you want to change?

MR WAMBUZI: What I am saying ,Mr Speaker, is that it will have what they call a stabilizing effect.

DR EPETAIT: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, and thank you colleague for giving way. In his submission, hon. Gagawala said that he would have expected the chairman to say that this amendment is aimed at building rigid structures such that in the future people will not be subjected to suffering. Those were his words. Now he is saying his position is to lift term limits. Is he therefore implying that Article 105(2) as it stands now has caused a lot of suffering to the people?

MR WAMBUZI: No, I am telling you what my constituency has requested me to inform you (Laughter) We have debated it so much that if I retrace it, Mr Speaker, I will be taking a lot of time. I will go to the next point. I accept what the committee is proposing that parliamentary elections should be held on the same day as the presidential and LC.V elections. 

However, this Parliament signed a contract up to 2006 July. I would like the committee to clarify to me as to whether we are not changing a legal contract, because this is something which is still a grey area. 

I think I will vote for the issue of city council automatically. 

The impasse between Members of Parliament and the executive is an area, which my constituents have decided not to yield to. I did not agree with what the chairperson of the committee recommended to us. Perhaps he could clarify this matter to me again. Otherwise, I would not advise any member of parliament in this Seventh Parliament, to yield much of his flexibility and freedom to a cause where he would become weaker. I thank you.

 4.58
MR PETER OCHIENG (Bukooli County South, Bugiri): Thank you very much Mr Speaker.  I rise to thank the committee for the job they did. I will be very brief. My issues are as follows:
There is the issue of citizenship.  I come from the border and I have seen a lot of problems with this issue. It is high time Ugandans and this parliament in particular came up with a clear system of handling  citizens and people who would like to become citizens of Uganda, especially when they are coming from abroad. Mr Speaker, my people say they have no problem with citizenship but dual citizenship must be allowed only after a very thorough check.  

I also thank the committee for proposing to retain the powers of the Committee of Parliament as it was before.  This will help us, because this parliament has an oversight duty regarding a number of things.  We need this power and removing it would not help us at all. We need to take responsibility and show people that we are doing something. They should not only hear but see that things are being done.  

Mr Speaker, I agree with the committee on the issue of Parliament determining its own emoluments. However, as we try to make these laws better, I find that Commissioners of parliament, as they stand today are not favourable to Members of Parliament. Commissioners have to run for a period of five years. I propose that we start a system where commissioners do not carry on for this entire period but possibly for a shorter time and then they can have their contract renewed. I propose two and half years and then if they are not capable, they are democratically removed. Mr Speaker-

THE SPEAKER: Is a commissioner a constitutional matter?  

MR OCHIENG: Mr Speaker, I thank you. When we talk about Commissioners and Commissioners of Parliament, I regard them as any other Commissioners of this country but –(interjection)- fine. I would like to leave it at that because that is what I see as per now.  We can always get advice on how best we can handle it.  

There was an issue of recalling of Members of Parliament.  Mr Speaker, recalling a member of Parliament should not be easy because we know how difficult it is to get to this House. Sometimes you may be seven contestants as somebody has mentioned. You cannot guarantee that you will have more than half of the votes. 

Mr Speaker, I have seen a situation where people simply come in with their wishes and force their way with the aim of destabilizing the constituency. I beg the members and anybody who is responsible for this amendment to take serious consideration and make sure that if there is any amendment, it is unanimously agreed to by a large majority of society.  

Mr Speaker, when trying to recall Members of Parliament, there is provision for a loser to lodge a petition but there is also a provision for any registered voter. This issue of registered voters has given leeway for people to escape responsibilities for the damage they inflict on the public, especially if they have been voted out.  

Sometimes they get a person of their own choice, a family member or anybody who cannot foot their bills and they use them to escape. At the end of the day, a petition takes one to three years, and the person has lost a lot of money. This person is told to pay and yet he cannot.I hope that this parliament will put stringent measures on this issue and in addition make sure that whoever raises an issue, especially one that is not substantial, puts an amount of money aside to cater for the process.

Mr Speaker, as we speak, the Auditor General’s office appears under Ministry of Finance. I would like to thank the committee and agree with them that the office of the Auditor General should lie squarely with Parliament. This country is losing a lot of money. When the Ministry of Finance gives money, this money is followed up at the district level where there is some form of internal audit. 

What I learnt, from the day I came to this Parliament, is that the Auditor General’s office is going to do very little to help curb this corruption if they still –(Interjection)– if it is not going to take much of my time –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: But you have already run out of your time. Conclude.

MR OCHIENG: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to agree with them on the issues of the CAO.  I had mentioned before, in this House, that my constituents would like to see that these CAOs are appointed from the center. In any district, when a chairman is voted out, most times the chairman has not been on good terms with his CAO. But if you are on good terms with them, they even pluck off government vehicle registration number plates to simply allow the incumbent or those whom they favor to go through the elections. They give them everything, including motorcycles and money.

Mr Speaker, it is high time these people became transferable.  I have known a CAO of a certain district who has been there ever since that district was created and that man has become a monster. He takes things for granted and openly declares that whoever is not going to work with him should find somewhere else for as long as he is still there. It is high time the people of this country get to know situations which can be determined by them and feel their country at heart.

Finally, Mr Speaker, there has been the issue of presidential term limit. I would like to appeal to this country and particularly to those who are listening and to this parliament, not to allow this presidential term limit to become a big issue to the extent of diverting us from the prosperity we have been in. I assure you, Mr Speaker, and everybody including my electorate that it is more prudent to have these term limits taken out of our Constitution for the time being because they are not going to serve us any better. 

We have a strong person. This person has demonstrated this and it will be very unfair of us to kick him out of office if people still wish for him to be in office.  I will say this again and maintain it. I know everybody stands to gain out of this amendment.  

Mr Speaker, many people have been talking about vote rigging. I can assure these people from my own experience that you cannot win an election if you are not really wanted, unless those who want you out are not serious. I want to assure everybody not worry about what we can or cannot do. Whoever is not good must leave if people are determined to have them do so. Mr Speaker, there were some few issues – (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: It is time, please.

MR OCHIENG: I thank you. I request for just five seconds so I can wind up. The issue of an RDC getting out of hand. I concur with the committee that many RDCs have disappointed the public. They are appointed with a lot of hope and yet many of them have even gone below the normal councils. I thank you, Mr Speaker, and I thank the honourable members.  

5.06
MR AVITUS TIBARIMBASA (Ndorwa county East, Kabale): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me this time to comment about this constitutional amendment, most importantly Article 105(2). Some time back, when I returned from my constituency, I gave my views about what the people of Ndorwa County, East said when I consulted them about this article. From what the members have said today, I have four points to comment on.

If, say, hon. Avitus Tibarimbasa has been a President in the Movement Government for 15 years, then in the Multi Party system he is elected a chairman of his party and his party feels that he is capable of leading this country again as a president, without lifting this term, it will not give him political satisfaction since he will automatically be dropped. This argument should be taken into account when we are considering opening up term limits. 

Secondly, there should be a clear explanation. When you talk of opening up term limits, opponents of the NRM turn it into third term debate. They say the people of Uganda will be giving Museveni a third term when they cast their vote. When you open up term limits, it does not automatically mean you have given Museveni a third term. But the opponents of the NRM have used opening up of term limits to confuse the masses. The clarification I am giving is, opening up term limits allows fair play and third term will be determined when we cast our votes. So, this confusion should not be there.

Thirdly, there is the dictatorship issue. My Brother Kazoora and the MP from Kagoma are talking of dictators. When does a leader become a dictator? Is it in the first term of five years, in the second term after ten years or in the third term after another five years? As the Prime Minister has stated, as long as the elections are held regularly, there is no need to fear. The Movement Government has trained enough policemen - there are now almost 17,000 constables - to man elections. The question of involving the Army this time may not be necessary. (Interruption)

MAJ. KAZOORA: Mr Speaker, when I made my contribution, you were in that Chair. I did not at any point mention the word “dictator” anywhere even if we referred to the Hansard. Hon. Tibarimbasa should follow our rules and know how to address a Member of Parliament when he is debating. Is the honourable member in order to address me as if I am a street boy?  Secondly Sir, to put words in my mouth unless it was his mind he was referring to; not mine.  Is he in order, Mr Speaker?

THE SPEAKER: I think that by what you said, you have corrected him. As for addressing an honourable member, you have to say hon. Maj. Kazoora, Member for Kashari County. That should be the way to address your colleagues.

MR MWANDHA: The information I wanted to give my good friend, hon. Avitus Tibarimbasa, is that, if a leader became dictatorial in his first term, rigged elections and continued to be dictatorial in his second term, then he has no chance of rigging elections to go for a third term because the Constitution would have barred him to stand for election again.  That is the information I want to give.

MR TIBARIMBASA: Thank you, Mr Speaker for your wise ruling.  I referred to hon. Kazoora as my old friend and a man who actually inducted me into the movement. I refer to him as hon. Kazoora, thank you very much. As for the information given by hon. Mwandha, Ugandans have matured politically. When you rig elections in the first term, you will not go through another election for the second term. If you do, as history has taught us, people will fight you. 

I do not see what you are fearing. People will rise and fight and we do not want to enter that situation again. So, Mr Speaker, the question of dictatorship in the third term by somebody who has been ruling this country does not arise. Therefore we should be confident when we are discussing these issues and fears should not be entertained so that the Constitution is properly amended. Thank you very much. 

5.15
MRS MARGARET ZZIWA (Woman Representative, Kampala): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the committee for the good report and congratulate them upon being able to make this report expeditiously, despite the enormous input by citizens and honourable members of this August House.  

As a member of the Parliamentary Commission, there is one very important amendment I would have wished this report to have carried but I think it was missed by the committee. I wish to take this opportunity to air it on the Floor of the House.  

Mr Speaker, last week but one, you assigned me to go to the Commonwealth Parliamentary Association seminar which discussed the enhancement of the autonomy of parliaments.  One of the issues which was raised was that if we want to enhance good governance and democracy in all our Commonwealth Parliaments, there has to be autonomy. Notably, that separation of power should be envisaged and enhanced and in the separation of power the chief executive of Parliament was seen as one of the most fundamental persons to be appointed by Parliament. 

Considering that Parliament now is autonomous by the Administration of Parliament Act, it would have been prudent for us to amend Article 87, which designates the appointment of the Clerk and to have that appointment made by the Parliamentary Commission. I hope that at an appropriate time we shall make an amendment to this effect so that we can observe this very fundamental principle of separation of powers.  

My second point is about Article 78. I want to say that I made a submission to the committee and I appreciate the fact that the committee has proposed a complete deletion of that article. This is the article which prescribes the composition of Parliament. I hope that, in the amendment of the electoral laws, this concern will be raised and taken care of because as of now it is outside the Constitution. 

My third point is about Kampala City. I want to applaud the fact that it has been recognized that there is an article to establish Kampala City Council. I want to suggest that we should have a law which would establish all cities. Tomorrow or the following day, we may have other cities emerging, meaning that other municipalities may fulfil the set up standards of being a city. That not withstanding, to date in our Constitution, we do not have any provision of that nature. What I want to call for is the establishment of a clause, which would establish cities within our jurisdiction and another, which would establish the governance of those cities. Perhaps this would remove the management of cities from the Local Governments Act, which is currently a menace, and even give them more autonomy to, for instance, levy some taxes among other things.

Mr Speaker, having interacted with the foreign officers in Ministry of Foreign Affairs, I think I should have had the opportunity to submit another amendment, on the issue of foreign policy. In the Constitution, Foreign policy arrangements in this country are reflected on No. 28 in the Fundamental Objectives and Principles. I think we should have had arrangements within the Constitution, to handle how our foreign policy should be derived and how it should be operated. Where they are right now is not justifiable and where there are omissions, we may not be able to follow it up. So I have made my mind on this. At an appropriate time, I may make an amendment.

As regards Article 105(2), which is also included in the report, I want to salute the committee because they put a lot of thought into this article. Mr Speaker, I want to say that I was one of the people who were privileged to be in the Constituent Assembly. There, we were confronted with about four issues when it came to the chapter on the executive. One was the system of government, which would be adopted by this country. At that juncture, there was a lot of desire to abandon the Westminster system, which I think was equivalent to the parliamentary system such that we go for the presidential system. However, we were told that a presidential system would thrive very well if it was in a multi-party set up.  

We were however told that we could adopt a presidential system in a no party state, and that was exactly what was adopted. However, we were to handle controlling the excesses of leaders namely, what kind of leader should strive for leadership, what age, what academic qualifications, what should his character be, among others. That is why you find that in our Constitution, we put things like the leader should be of upright moral character, age and education qualification was handled, because we envisaged that we were going to adopt a presidential system but in a no party state.

Today we are talking about opening up. Opening up will mean that multi-partyism is coming. It will mean that parties will be responsible for their leaders and that they will dictate what kind of candidates they present for leadership. I think they will go further away from Article 105(2) as regards these characteristics of a president –(Interruptions)

MR MAFABI: Thank you very much, honourable Speaker and hon. Zziwa.  It is good you were in the Constituent Assembly. Was Article 105(2) contentious at that time?  

Secondly, South Africa, Kenya, and Tanzania are multi-party countries and they have two term limits. What is the significance for us who are moving to multi-party and want to shift and have no term limits?

MR MWANDHA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Hon. Zziwa is saying that leaders will be controlled, disciplined and regulated by the constitutions of their parties. In other words, there is no need for the constitution to put any limitation because the parties will control the leaders. Suppose the parties do not? Because there is nothing in the constitution that requires parties to regulate the conduct of their leaders. Honourable is well aware that the situation in Uganda today is such that some of these leaders have perpetuated themselves in party leadership for years and years. So what is the safety catch for the country if you have a situation where parties are not in a position to control their leaders?

MS AMONGI: Thank you, hon. Zziwa. You talked about the Constituent Assembly and how you thought about term limit. If I got you right, it was prudent that term limits be put into operation under a no party system. I presuppose that you are referring to the Movement system which is in the constitution. There were two systems that the Constituent Assembly recognized; the Movement system of governance and the Multi-party system of governance, which was recognized in Article 74, if I am not mistaken, of the Constitution of Uganda. Now the Constituent Assembly forgot to put in Article 105 (2)a) or 2(b) that this particular provision would only apply under the Movement system of governance.  Did they only forget? 

MR SABIITI: I am still concerned about Article 98. I still recall that when we were discussing this matter in the Constituent Assembly, the issue of presidential system or parliamentary system, were not related to Article 105.  If your argument is to gain ground, can you suggest how we can amend Article 98 in order to bring this in line with multi-party system so that it can accommodate a president from any party?  As far as I am concerned, we are talking about a person not talking about parties. You seem to be confusing systems, parties and a person who is a president.

MRS ZZIWA: Mr Speaker, I do not want hon. Sabiiti, among others also, to behave as if he has forgotten the background and the situation under which we handled the constitution then.  We were both there, and he knows very well what Justice Odoki’s report carried. That was the basis on which some of these clauses were derived. 

The people of Uganda had said they were tired of this Westminster system of government, which elects members of parliament who are in party and when they come, they bring a president who has not been voted for. That was the very reason why they adopted the presidential system, where a Ugandan worth his name would go out and gain support by Ugandans. So right from the on-set we moved from a system which was pertaining in the 1967 Constitution and got a new arrangement –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: About this issue which hon. Sabiiti raised, I think when dealing with the multi-party system, you will have to consider whether you want to change Article 103, 2(b). I do not know whether under the multi-party system, a candidate nominated by the parties will have to go through the constituencies to get these signatures. But these are some of the articles I think you will have to consider when you come to that point. We might have to change some of these articles.

MRS ZZIWA: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for supporting –(Interruptions)

THE SPEAKER: No, I am not supporting; I am only answering his query, what do we with Article 98? We will have to consider Article 103 because that is when the matter comes in.

MRS ZZIWA: Mr Speaker, thank you very much for the guidance, I am sorry for the error.  I wanted to bring these issues out because that was a fundamental change in the constitutional set-up of this country.  We moved from a parliamentary system to a presidential system.  We also moved from a seemingly multiparty set-up to no-party or a Movement system. 

We were also able to realise that under the circumstances where there is no party arrangement; party codes and party constitutions to guide, we needed to capture the characteristics of the behaviour of a leader in the Constitution.  That is why under the fear of people thinking that a leader can become a dictator; all these issues were brought in the Constitution.  

Actually I think this whole chapter, particularly Articles 102, 103, 104 may need to be recast considering that we are going to move from a Movement Political System to a Multiparty Political System.  Also what honourable –(Interruption)

MR WACHA: Madam, can I seek clarification?  I am sorry; I normally wouldn’t want to interrupt you. My problem is: Article 69 spells out the different political systems that the Constitution recognises, and then Article 105(2) spells out the term limits - the tenure.  Now, you seem to be saying that Article 105(2) is tied to a particular political system under Article 69. Could you help me, Madam, and tell me which particular article of the Constitution ties Article 69 to Article 105(2)?  I think that is what we want to know.

MRS ZZIWA: Mr Speaker, I think I am not going to answer hon. Wacha directly, because hon. Wacha knows very well; he was in that committee, committee number –(Interruption)

MR WACHA: Let me help you, I was actually in committee (b), which dealt with the Executive, the Legislature and the Judiciary.  I don’t want to blow my trumpet, but I think I know slightly more about the background to this thing than you do.

MRS ZZIWA: Thank you very much.  Of course I have to also mention that the issues I am listing, were issues in the Constituent Assembly, I am drawing them outside; and they are facts on the books of our country.  We were in the 1967 Constitution in the Westminster system of government, and in the Constitution of 1995 we moved to a presidential system; that is the fact of the matter.  

Some of the issues of the hybrid which we brought in, all these kinds of arrangements which we are talking about; and it is the very reason why I am pointing out that when we are putting in some of these issues we were considering our historical background, namely, what happens if we get a dictatorial leader among others.  This is why some of these issues were brought in; which kind of leader should we have as a leader of Uganda?  That is why these things were ushered in here.  

I am not really in objection to what hon. Wacha is saying, but what I am simply saying is that this in itself brought in all these – and I remember very well others were arguing, do we need to have all these things put in this Constitution; and the other argument was that, since we do not have any other law at the time to have these kind of characteristics defined, let us have them in the Constitution.  

So, it is for that reason, Mr Speaker, that I am saying that the move from a Movement Political System to a Multiparty Political System will have to mean a lot on the way we are going to re-define the kind of leader we are going to have. I want also to add –(Interruption)

DR OKULO EPAK:  Hon. Zziwa, it would appear as if you are suggesting that we are even going to proceed to amend Article 69, not to specify the three political systems; and we are also going to amend the Article, which proposes the method of changing political systems; the way you are arguing.  I don’t think these are anywhere on the table.

MRS ZZIWA: Mr Speaker, I think it is true that one of the areas, which have come under contention or under change, is how we change the political system. Before, in this House we argued and argued until we said let us maintain the Article as it was in the Constitution and move to have the amendments or the change of the Constitution as laid out. I think this is fundamentally true.

Article 69 was very broad, meaning that it envisaged that Uganda might have any one of the three at one political time.  But it was so precise that a lot of the Articles, which were related, were really envisaged on the first Movement political system.  So that is why some of these ones, we may need to come back here and look at what can be retained in the Constitution and what can be taken in the parties.  

Hon. Nandala Mafabi has quoted examples but at that time one of the examples, which was brought on Table, was of Great Britain and we were told that they don’t even have an operating Constitution.  Statutes and the particular parties define their system of governance, and that is what we went by at that time.  

So, I do not want to say that the arguments that are coming in are not in perspective. But, I wanted to pull out the fact that we may not necessarily have to carry; you must be a citizen of Uganda, be 35 years of age, not be exceeding 75, must have this academic – other people have petitioned academic qualifications!  I don’t want to talk about petitions from Kampala District for known reasons, but they think that academic qualifications should not be a constitutional affair; maybe, if a party can deal with that, let it deal with that.  So, I wanted to come in from that perspective to say that I support the removal of Article 105(2) from that perspective; and two, my constituents say let 105(2) be removed.  I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Well, it seems that is what we –(Interruption)

MRS SALAAMU MUSUMBA (Bugabula County South, Kamuli):  I thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  There seems to be a shortage of people who want to contribute and I plead for their time.  Mr Speaker, I am glad the debate on the Constitution Amendment has finally come and it will soon come to an end, whichever way it goes.  

Mr Speaker, I find it difficult and I want you to allow me to talk about the President as an interested party.  In any civilised society, for a proposal to be made by Cabinet to which a Chief Executive would be a likely beneficiary, it would be prudent for that leader, or that democrat, or the revolutionary leader, visionary leader to disqualify themselves first and foremost as decent gentlemen. Our President has not done that, therefore, it leaves me with no opportunity whatsoever, not to bring his name into play.  The issue at hand on Article 105(2) affects him as a person and affects the system and the country to which we are debating today. 

My suspicion is that the removal of term limits is about President Museveni. It is for President Museveni and by President Museveni; yes. Let me remind this House that the leader of the Executive is President Museveni and the Executive has proposed these amendments to this House and to this country.  Therefore, when I say by him; I am sure that he is the guy who is supposed to chair the Cabinet.

Mr Speaker, there have been many pilgrimages to Rwakitura, some of which are so belittling as we have read in the papers.  But, I am only left with only one statement to make: “God is great.” God is great because when he makes people look so big, when you see what they do, they only prove that they are so small because I wonder how a man can go and kneel before another man and plead and cry, “please, stand for us, please, do this for us!” I used to think men were men! I really used to –(Interjections)- does this country really –(Interruption)

MR MUTULUUZA: Thank you honourable for giving way and I thank honourable Speaker.  The clarification I want to get from the honourable member holding the Floor; we heard about a week or two weeks ago that you travelled to South Africa to meet retired Col. Besigye, to consult and maybe, kneeling, I do not know –(Applause). I think you went there because he is a leader of your party and those people who go to Rwakitura also go to meet the leader of their party.  Honourable Salaamu Musumba, can you clarify to me whether you also went to kneel before Col. Dr. Kiiza Besigye. Thank you.

MRS MUSUMBA: Thank you very much for that question.  Mr Speaker, I want to thank the honourable member for asking because it gives me opportunity to tell him and to tell the House and Uganda at large an opportunity that I would not have got otherwise. 

The leader of Forum for Democratic Change lives out of this country because of the circumstances that are not democratic to allow him live here. It is because of that that it became necessary that I lead 35 leaders of Forum For Democratic Change to South Africa for that meeting. So, it is not a pilgrimage if anybody understood English. That is not called a pilgrimage –(Laughter)- when I am talking about pilgrimages, this is a trend, a pattern in our leadership that has gone on for the last so many years. 

For your information, we were holding the first meeting with our Chairman, the retired Col. Dr. Kiiza Besigye. I thought you would find it in your heart to applaud us for making it possible to meet the constitutional requirement to meet our leader. 

Mr Speaker, before hon. Mutuluuza sought that information, I was saying that for me as a woman in a patriarchal society, in which we are depending on men as leaders - that is why we have even put in our constitution affirmative action to ensure that the likes of my sisters and me can come here. I find it very abominable that the men of this country, the majority of them have resigned their ability and their manhood –(Laughter)- to one person.  

Mr. Speaker, it is on record that everybody has stood up here and said that they are not competent enough to lead this country; there is only one man competent.  I can start from hon. Mallinga to the hon. Prime Minister; to the hon. Vice President - all these are people we have been training to take over leadership in this country.

DR NSABA BUTURO: Is it in order that hon. Salaamu Musumba, whom we know led a delegation to South Africa to see her leader and we are now told she is the leader of FDC, is she in order, Mr Speaker, that she should invent a new language that disqualifies us, all of us men who are here in this House? Mr Speaker, is it in order Sir, that hon. Salaamu Musumba should doubt our integrity? (Laughter) 

Is it in order, Mr Speaker, that hon. Salaamu Musumba should have the audacity of questioning our manhood? (Laughter)  As part of seeking your guidance, is it Parliamentary language that hon. Salaamu Musumba whom we respect so much should not be respecting the rest of us? Mr Speaker, is it in order?

THE SPEAKER: Well, hon. Members, I think Rule 53 deals with the contents of speeches and in Rule 53(2), it is out of order to use offensive, abusive, insulting, blasphemous or unbecoming words or to impute improper motives to any member or to make personal allusions. 

What I would say, when you say, hon. member, the men members have lost their manhood –(Laughter)- definitely this is too much and I think it offends this particular rule. Whereas you are free to assess situations, let us use sober and decent language to our colleagues. Because you see when you say one has lost manhood, he may ask, “how was I tested that I have lost my manhood” –(Laughter) So, these are the problems you are causing.  

MAJ. KAZOORA: Mr Speaker, in your communication, you talked about the wedding of our colleague yesterday, the hon. member for Lwemiyaga, hon. Ssekikubo. During the introduction of hon. members who attended the function, an enthusiastic master of ceremony introduced the hon. Isaac Musumba as the hon. Salaamu Musumba. (Laughter) I am wondering if the hon. Salaamu Musumba now would like to qualify herself in the circumstances –(Laughter)  

MRS MUSUMBA: Mr Speaker, I want to thank you for the guidance. I take it that members are not taking kindly my use of the word “manhood”, but let me qualify it and say “political manhood”.
 
Mr Speaker, we as Ugandans hate the truth and it is this truth, that will set us free, that will deliver our country. And I have been very, very categorical about the people from whom I expect leadership of this country but who have refused and consistently said they are not capable. They have consistently told this country that they are not capable today, they will not be capable tomorrow and they will not be capable any time of the year near or far in the future; and so they must change the Constitution to make it possible for the only one they know about to continue ruling until some other provision is made. 

Mr Speaker, this does not look like presidential. To me, it looks like “emperorish”. Because if we have told Ugandans that we are not looking for a President but for an emperor, this would be tenable because it is only in the practice of emperors, of kings, the term limits would not arise. 

The Rt. hon. Prime Minister said that Prime Minister Tony Blair is going for a third term. I thought he would be fair enough as a disciplinarian to tell us that he amended the Constitution to achieve this. Because he did not. So, you are comparing things that are not comparable, Sir. And so for me, I would like us to be ever reminded that the men, the potential people to lead us have failed and have denied and have disowned this country and the leadership. 

MR MWONDHA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. To the best of my recollection, we have never discussed with hon. Salaamu Musumba whether I have abandoned and abdicated my responsibility to lead this country. Therefore I would rather be informed more specifically by hon. Salaamu Musumba about my own status.

THE SPEAKER: But you see hon. members, hon. Salaamu Musumba has taken 15 minutes, but I want her to conclude.

MRS MUSUMBA: Mr Speaker, there have been talk that dictators can be made in day 1. I want to share with this House the executive summary of a report by the World Bank on the political economy of Uganda, a draft of 6th July 2004 in which it is stated in (iii), that most fundamentally- this is talking about how we have performed on the 1995 Constitution. It says: “Museveni regime is used purposely because the fundamental characteristic of Uganda’s political system was and remains that President Museveni is the Movement and the Movement is Museveni. 

Political and administrative institutions established for the purpose of achieving horizontal and vertical accountability are weak except for the judiciary and to a lesser extent Parliament. Most fundamentally, the Government of Uganda is a regime of personal or neo-patrimonial rule, a political system dominated by one individual who maintains his authority through a combination of patronage and a selected use of intimidation and force. 

Once treated as the new leader of Africa, the President over the last 8 years has increasingly resembled the old. During the same period, the Movement which in theory includes all Ugandans has increasingly resembled the single party system that governed Africa from the late 1960s to the early 1990s.

The principle future of the old one party State and the Museveni regime is that it depends increasingly on the distribution of patronage and freebies to operate and survive.” It goes on and on. So, when we worry, we can collaborate our worry. That what we are putting as term limits is good for President Museveni. It is good for President Museveni, because he is the sole beneficiary of this amendment; unless he disqualifies himself, which he hasn’t done to-date.  Therefore, we have no choice but to pull his name, a name that was so much related to liberation and to freedom. We must pull it now into a fear of the old.

Mr. Speaker, for me, a stitch in time saves nine; it is in the interest of all of us if we love our President and we love this country to know that what some of us believe should remain the limit in which our President operates is good for him.  I thank you.

THE SPEAKER:  Let us have Minister for Luweero, and then we come to you.

MRS BEATRICE MAGOOLA ZIRABAMUZALE (Woman Representative, Iganga):  Thank you hon. Speaker.  I would like thank the Committee for having written that Paper and I am standing here for one or two reasons.  I want to support the idea of having the executive officers in the districts being nominated and appointed from the center.  I want this to be done, because of what we have heard from many districts and probably from mine.  Those officers have so much pressure from their leaders that they are forced to do this and the other; they sign cheques, which they would otherwise have not signed.  But my biggest point is that, I want them to be appointed from the center so that the center will have control over them, because, as it is now, the center cannot put a hand on to them and remove them.  No; the law does not allow that.  So, I would like those CAOs as we call them to be appointed by the center for better control and monitoring.  

My other point is on Article 105 (2).  I want to support that the term limit be lifted.  This is something, which should excite all of us, the opposition and the Movement people, because lifting of the Presidential term limit is not only for Movement.  As we go into political parties, I can see chances for those who want to lead, like Museveni has led, also to lead.  

If we open the term limit, it means that whoever will become our leader, will be from that party which has organised itself to mobilise the wanainchi and get into power.  It is not written anywhere, where I have seen people saying “President Museveni, President Museveni”.  You are just dragging the man into this.  Yes, because he has not said and neither have we said it.  All we are saying, that let us have the term limit lifted.  It will be good for any of you who will head –(Interruption) 

DR NKUUHE:  Thank you very much, Sister, for giving way.  I want you to clarify to me, because my mind seems to be hazy; that if you want to change term limits, you have ten years in which you can do it. If Museveni is not the factor, since the only person who is affected by change of the term limit is Museveni.  So, why can’t you wait for the ten years, 2016 and then you change the term limits if you say Museveni is not a beneficiary?  

So, can you clear my mind that you are not doing this for the sole benefit of one and only one person who has served twenty years and who in my view is very tired and should take a well deserved break?

MRS MAGOOLA:  Thank you, hon. member, but what I want to insist on is that, he has not indicated to you that he is coming again.  When the time comes and it is right and proper, then he will come in, but as for now, we are pleading for everyone of us, because my constituents, having seen this White Paper, said; let us open it, since we are going to be in multi- party, so that whoever wants, be it DP or any other political party and we go to the polls. Whichever party wins, its leader will lead the country.  Now, I do not understand why people are coming, dragging in one man, why don’t you drag in yourselves so that we can say, DP has won and the leader will go!  Yes.

MR SABIITI: Thank you for giving way.  The information I want to give you is; the executive authority is vested in the President - that is Article 99.  The President is the head of the Executive; the President chairs Cabinet.  The proposals to change this very article came from the executive.  Now, how would you disassociate Museveni from bringing this issue in to benefit?

MRS MAGOOLA: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  The hon. Member of Parliament knows that in Cabinet while the President is the leader, other people have got their brains; they can think and they have got areas, which they represent.  If their constituents want this to happen, then it is not Museveni, but maybe the executive. If you want to put this matter to anybody and blame anybody, then you have many people to blame, not the President, not the executive only but even the constituents.  

DR BUTURO: Mr. Speaker, I just want to help my colleague. I remind her and honourable members, that for most of this time when we have been discussing this matter, His Excellency the President was not in the chair at all. And if I may add, cabinet had every right, like this august House has, to come up with a view and those views will be subjected to the scrutiny of this House. Therefore, for the cabinet to have come up with that idea in itself cannot be a strange situation.

DR NABWISO: The 22 terms of reference that were given to Prof. Ssempebwa’s Commission did not include anything about lifting that Article 105, Clause 2.  How did Cabinet come out with the view that this was necessary in the country, including those who do not represent any constituencies or sit in the Cabinet?

MR NANDALA: The information to the Minister of information is this; it is right that the President may not have attended Cabinet but he delegated somebody and that somebody has to go back and report. So the information I want to give the Minister who attends Cabinet and does not realise this is that as much as the President is in the background, he is directing the Cabinet decisions.

MR MWANDHA:  Considering that the Constitutional Review Commission chaired by Prof. Edward Ssempebwa was set up by Cabinet, why was it necessary for Cabinet to testify to the commission which was going to report to them in any case, of a matter which they never considered important enough to include in the 22 terms of reference? 

Mrs Magoola: Mr Speaker, I will answer what I will manage but I know that the idea of lifting the Presidential term limit did not come from the executive, but came from the National Executive Committee Council which has a number of people coming from around the nation, name it, Members of Parliament, Chairpersons of District Councils, LCIII Chairpersons; so those represent the whole nation. 

What they brought to us, we have carried out and we are saying let us lift the term limit, in that, what they submitted to us and which we have submitted here does not say, lift the term for the incumbent, but we are saying, let us lift the term because it is necessary now that we have very many parties whose leaders want to come to power. 

Let us weigh it that way, let us go back to our people and canvass for the votes and any political party that emerges, lead. It may not be Movement, but it would be good if Movement leads because they know the way. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR LOKERIS PETER (Chekwii County, Moroto): Thank you Mr Speaker and members of the august House. Ugandans are very clever people, very independent and are capable of taking a decision and especially so when we believe in our past history. There are facts, which guide us when we are making this constitution; we are giving safeguards to whoever can be incumbent and also giving safeguards to the Constitution so that frequent elections are held; and empowering people to vote out those whom they think are no longer required in that office.  Therefore, when we are talking about either retaining or removal of term limits, we must bear in mind that Ugandans are conscious of what is happening around them, especially during this time.  

I would like to state, Mr Speaker, that when we are talking about lifting term limits; we are not talking about President Yoweri Museveni, in my view.  I have heard so many people saying no, I think it is Museveni, to me we are only looking at what are the attributes of lifting term limits for the sake of the country and our citizenry.  

The advantages of lifting term limits are to enable visionary leaders among you to stay longer in order to direct the economy of a less developed country.  These countries which are still staggering in streamlining their economies require lifting of leaders who are visionary. Those who are not visionary can be removed as I have already informed. So we need to have a leader, like even when you are talking about the Asian tigers, they left their people to continue for sometime, that is why you are talking about going to visit Malaysia all the time.  So we think, if there can be a Ugandan who can benefit from this term lifting and he is a visionary leader, he should be allowed to organise the economy.  

Now that we are introducing the multi-parties, I think we are trying to get the best of the citizens of this country to lead this country, including one from Forum for Democratic Change in future. When that person emerges, we should all wait for that person to do his or her best for the benefit of this country. But what happens if we are all the time benefitters, when we are all the time changing these people in this fragile economy?  

Look at what goes with the benefits of the Presidents now, five years, that one is removed with his package; 10 years, five years. In fact, if it becomes so easy to become a president, everybody would wish to become a president every after five years. In 50 years, when all of them are still alive, we shall have about 10, all of them benefiting from a fleet of vehicles and becoming actually dependants on the tax payers money. Too many people looking for this money, which money you would use for something else. If we had one very visionary leader, he would be paid his benefits after 20 or so years, but others falling out of the way if they do not lead well.   

MR MWANDHA: Mr Speaker, you guided the House that when we are dealing with the issue of third term we should not bring in personalities.  Indeed the hon. Minister started his debate by reiterating what you advised but at the end of the day, he is contradicting himself and bringing in issues of a visionary leader. 

I just don’t understand, Mr. Speaker, the hon. Minister told us that the Constitution makers took into account our history.  I believe there must have been a historic matter that caused them to introduce the concept of limiting third term.  Now, if he is saying that this was based on our history and yet we know that this clause 105(2) has never been tested, what argument does he have for now lifting it when it hasn’t been tested yet it was put there on the basis of our history?  

THE SPEAKER: I do not know whether it is it a procedure or what, but the point is, yes, I made my position clear and when you are considering this issue, be it 105 or any other provision, you should not tie it to an individual.  But people have refused to take this, I see a lot of suspicion especially form those who think it shouldn’t be amended.  

I think what we can do now is to listen to each other and at the end of the day make our best judgment on the issue.  However much clarification, I see no headway, let us consider this matter. It is true the executive started the Bill but now it is entirely in your hands; it is for you to make the best judgment and decide one way or the other.  Because you see, when you ask whether the President will come in, he is going to say it is now open for the President to stand for third term.  He is going to ask you, is it compulsory that when you pass this one somebody must take two or more terms? All these questions are going to come.  

So, the best we can do, hon. members, let us listen to each other, think about what one has said and what they have not said, and then at the end of the day decide. Otherwise, I do not see a breakthrough in this.  Indeed hon. Mwandha as you have said, personally, I think you deal with the merits or demerits of amending or not amending, and then what happens. Who takes benefit of it will come only after you have decided the best way; because of merits or demerits, you amend or we don’t amend.  

MR LOKERIS: Thank you for your wise ruling, Mr Speaker.  I was still giving advantages of the removal of term limits, I talked about the economy, I talked about the dependency of so many people who turn out all the time.  When you have a congregation of ex-presidents in a place and they become very many, they are human beings, they begin to associate and talk about how they used to perform. There is a danger of criticising the incumbent and each one of them who leads the Government has followers in all spheres, in all sectors; Army and in all of them and if they are too many and they sit and they think the incumbent, is bad then the country is even prone to coups and this is serious.  You know we do not look at these things at the face of it – (Interruption)

MR MAFABI: Thank you very much, my Minister Lokeris.  It is about coups but I want to seek just a simple clarification, this Constitution was put in place and the date was promulgated on 8th of October, I recall my President saying one statement that anybody who tampers with this Constitution will go eight feet down; now, you want to tamper with it with the issue of saying that if he retires now he will be a problem. Supposing he dies, what happens, will Uganda stop to move?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, amending the Constitution was provided for in the Constitution, there was no time set when to amend the Constitution, these are very clear things.  So, when somebody says we amend and properly moved, you just consider those amendments, accept them or reject them.  But it is not tampering with the Constitution if you exercise the mandate given to you to amend the Constitution.  I think these are very clear; this is what I can say about the ability to amend the Constitution.  

MR LOKERIS: Thank you again for your wise ruling.  I know when we are amending the Constitution we are doing the right thing and only you can go six feet deep if you violate the Constitution without amending it.  So, we are not doing anything to violate this Constitution.  

Mr Speaker, I have been following the debate at times you look at where - of course we are obliged - where everybody thinks that by maintaining the term limits we shall all qualify to become presidents, there is that anxiety evident.  For sure, if this is what we are trying to aspire to say all of us become then it defeats the vision that we should put the country on the right course. We should just be patient and give whoever is there time to do his best and is removed when time comes.

Second, I go to CAOs.  These CAOs were given powers wholesale; we made policies, then we told them to implement, we also told them to monitor and control themselves.  In these ones, in planning, once you give to one body, it is likely to be abused.  What we are all asking is to bring one aspect or two rather because they have a lot of money there. Some people must be monitoring them, there should be those people who can redirect the action. That is control; they can remove the CAO if he is already colluding with anybody.  

Because what happens these days, these things are double edged, one for the safety of the district through hemorrhage where there is collusion between district leaders, then there likely chances for loss of money.  Because everybody talks and says we can take this action after all they will not see us. Money goes; that is why you hear of rampant corruption in districts. So we must bring them back for control to save the money going there.  

The other one is to their advantage; how do we create local leaders and not national leaders?  We send people to the village and tell them to die there. When will they become Permanent Secretaries, when will they become Ambassadors; it is better they come to the Ministry, they are transferred to another district so that they are national leaders.  

As I end, supposing I were born here, and I became a chief administrative officer from here, would I know Karamoja, or Kigezi. What type of a leader would I be? Would I be a local leader? I request you, hon. Colleagues, to bring these people here, for their own benefit.  Thank you Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, hon Member, but without contributing, I have heard this issue on CAOs; what you are saying is on record in the Constituent Assembly; there is nothing new.  There is nothing new, that the people did not consider; everything you have said here is on record. If you check with the Hansard of the CA, there will be such arguments.  So there is nothing really new. I would rather you study what was said in the Constituent Assembly and see whether there was need for this or the other.  With this, we have come to the end of today’s business. 

(The House rose at 6.24 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 21 June 2005 at 10.00 a.m.)


