
PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA

Wednesday 8 June 2016

Parliament met at 2.00 p.m. in Serena Conference Hall, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

PROCLAMATION BY THE SPEAKER

THE SPEAKER: “WHEREAS under Article 95(2) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, ‘A session of Parliament shall be held at such place within Uganda and shall commence at such  time as the Speaker may, by proclamation appoint’;

AND WHEREAS the President of the Republic of Uganda has indicated to the Speaker his wish to address Parliament and the nation on the National Budget for the Financial Year 2016/2017, under  Article 101(2) of the Constitution and Rule 10(4)(a) of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament of Uganda;

COGNISANT of the fact that the Financial Year 2015/2016 will end on the 30th day of June 2016; 

AWARE that it is expedient that the President addresses Parliament and the nation about the budget for the Financial Year 2016/2017 at the Kampala Serena Conference Centre;

NOW, THEREFORE, in exercise of the powers conferred upon the Speaker by Article 95(2) of the Constitution, I hereby proclaim that Parliament shall sit at the Kampala Serena Conference Centre on the 8 June 2016 at 14:00 hours, to receive the presidential address on the budget for the Financial Year 2016/2017; 

AND FURTHER in the exercise of powers conferred upon the Speaker by the Constitution, the Parliament Powers and Privileges Act CAP 258, and the Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of Uganda, it is hereby proclaimed and declared that the said Kampala Serena Conference Centre, including its forecourts, the yard and the gardens, be precincts of Parliament for the aforementioned purpose.

Given under my hand at Parliament House Kampala on 6 of June 2016.

Rebecca Kadaga, MP, 
Speaker of Parliament.”

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Your Excellency, President Yoweri Museveni, President of the Republic of Uganda,  Mrs Janet Museveni, the first lady; the hon. Edward Kiwanuka Ssekandi, who this morning, I am delighted, was vetted and approved by the House as the Vice-President of Uganda; hon. Daniel Kidega, Speaker of the East African Legislative Assembly; My Lord, the Chief Justice, hon. Bart Katureebe; the Vice-Chairman of the NRM, hon. Al Hajji Moses Kigongo; the Leader of the Opposition in Parliament, hon. Winfred Kiiza; the Judges of the Courts of Judicature; honourable Members of Parliament; Members of the diplomatic corps; the Chief of Defence Forces; the Inspector General of Police; the Commissioner General of Prisons; the Governor Bank of Uganda; leaders of political parties; religious leaders; the business community and the distinguished invited guests; ladies and gentlemen. I welcome you all to this afternoon sitting. (Applause)

Article 155(1) of the Constitution enjoins the President to cause to be prepared and laid before Parliament in each financial year, but in any case not later than the fifteenth day before the commencement of the financial year, estimates of revenues and expenditure of Government for the next financial year.

In that regard, he has informed me of his desire to address the House as provided for under Article 101(2) of the Constitution on the National Budget.

The occasion of presenting the budget to Parliament is commonly known as the “reading of the budget”. But today’s occasion of reading the budget is different from the previous ones. This is as a result of the enactment of the Public Finance Management Act, 2015.

Before that Act, the President would cause the tabling of the estimates of revenues and expenditure of Government for the next financial year on a date not later than the fifteenth day before the commencement of the financial year. The date has always been between 11th and 15th of June of every financial year.

However, the timing of this budget activity has changed. Under Section 13(1) of the Public Finance Management Act, it is provided thus, “The President shall cause to be prepared and laid before Parliament the proposed annual budget of Government for a financial year.”

Under Section 13(3), it is provided thus, “The Minister of Finance shall, on behalf of the President, present the proposed annual budget of a financial year to Parliament by the 1st day of April of the preceding year.”

Accordingly, the annual budget for the Financial Year 2016/2017 was presented to Parliament on 10 March 2016 by the Minister of Finance, on behalf of the President. Parliament scrutinised the proposals in the budget and passed the necessary revenue mobilisation Bills by the 14 April 2016. The said Bills were the following:

    1. The Stamp Duty (Amendment) Bill, 2016; 
    2. The Finance Bill, 2016; 
    3. The Income Tax (Amendment) Bill, 2016; 
    4. The Excise Duty (Amendment) Bill, 2016 and 
    5. The Value Added Tax (Amendment) Bill, 2016.

Parliament also discussed the ministerial policy statements for Financial Year 2016/2017 and scrutinised the expenditure proposals of ministries, departments and agencies of Government.

On 3 May 2016, Parliament passed the Appropriation Bill, 2016, thereby marking the passage of the budget for the Financial Year 2016/2017. This means that the National Budget for Financial Year 2016/2017 was considered and passed by the Ninth Parliament. The Tenth Parliament is going to monitor the implementation of the budget that was passed on 3 May 2016.

In addition, the Tenth Parliament is going to inform the formulation of the budget for the Financial Year 2017/2018. So, in December this year, this Parliament shall be receiving the National Budget Framework Paper for financial years 2017/2018-2021/2022, which will kick-start the involvement of Parliament in the formulation of the 2017/2018 National Budget. 

Therefore, today the President will present to Parliament and the country a statement of what Parliament passed on 3 May 2016. Unlike in the past, the Budget Speech by the President is not a motion for the House to debate. This is because the House already debated the budget, informed, approved and passed it.

Consequently, in accordance with Rule 10(4)(a) of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament, Members shall receive the Presidential statement on the National Budget in silence and not followed by any comment or question.

Let me now invite His Excellency, the President, to address the House. (Applause)

3.21
THE PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF UGANDA (Gen. (Rtd) Yoweri Kaguta Museveni): His Excellency the Vice-President, who was approved this morning by the Appointments Committee of Parliament – (Interjection) - the whole House? Oh! Good!

The Rt Hon. Speaker of Parliament; His Lordship, the Chief Justice; the Rt Hon. Prime Minister – who is not yet fully Prime Minister –(Laughter)– the hon. Al-Hajji Kigongo, the Vice-Chairman of the NRM; the Rt hon. Leader of the Opposition – I have heard a rumour that she is now a Leader of the Opposition -(Laughter)- the Speaker said so and Omukulu kyakoba zenha kyenkoba; the honourable ministers, the honourable Members of Parliament, your excellencies, the ambassadors; distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen. 

As I have been repeatedly informing Ugandans, the NRM has had a mission – Madam Speaker, I need protection. (Laughter) 

(Whereupon some members from the Opposition stood up holding placards demanding release of Dr Kiiza Besigye.)

GEN. (RTD) MUSEVENI: I have no powers to release anybody; it is the court which releases people. (Applause) Therefore, Madam Speaker, I seek  for your protection.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I draw your attention to Rule 10(4) – the President shall be heard in silence. 

GEN. (RTD) MUSEVENI: I am very grateful for the protection from the Speaker. I am also glad that the honourable members are law-abiding –(Laughter)– just as I am.
 
As I have been repeatedly informing Ugandans, the NRM has been a mission-oriented organisation from the very start in the 1960s as a students’ movement coalescing out of the old political parties – the Democratic Party, the Uganda People’s Congress and the Kabaka Yekka. 

I have re-read the book “Sowing the Mustard Seed” to ensure that there is no mistake of facts or punctuations. I am very happy that at last there is an accurate record on the events of the recent history of Uganda. All the major events we have come through and the underlying currents are captured. Those who are interested can read those facts for themselves. 

What is clear is that at every stage, we have been identifying the “what” “how” and the “who,” those three questions –(Interjections)– the “when” is also important but I did not put it here. (Laughter) Thank you very much for amending my speech. 

It is still the four principles of patriotism, Pan-Africanism, socio-economic transformation and democracy. We identified the method of struggle, which at that time was the protracted people’s war. When we won the victory, we were able to identify the ten strategic bottlenecks, including the lack of infrastructure and the low level of development of the human resource, meaning low education and poor health.

On account of handling the relevant issues correctly, the economy was able to recover and we were able to reasonably expand the tax base. As a consequence of that, we have been able to handle the infrastructure, the roads, electricity, the ICT backbone, some aspects of piped water, education and health facilities. We have also been able to ensure peace in the country by handling the defence, law and order in the country. 

The roads are improving. And as I told you last time, when I addressed this Parliament, we are beginning to have a surplus of electricity and we are working on the mordernisation of the railway. 

By 2020, we shall start pumping our oil. This is because we have finished all the major issues. The issue of the refinery was finally agreed upon by the oil companies. The issue of the pipeline, where it would pass, has also now been resolved. Therefore, we are set. The rest are just the preparations.

Even at the low price of petroleum today, of $50 per barrel, if we shall be pumping 30,000 barrels per day for the refinery and 170,000 barrels per day for the pipeline, with a total of 200,000 barrels per day, it will give us an additional income of $3 billion per year. The Government portion of that money will be $2.1 billion, which is 70 per cent of the total. 

With that additional money, we shall be able to easily deal with the issue of funding innovation by our scientists; remember that one has been troubling us very much. These people have got all sorts of patents simply waiting to be funded. The money we have been pushing into the innovation fund has been reasonable but not enough. With this oil money, it will be much easier to fund the innovations of our scientists. 

Capitalising the Uganda Development Bank so as to support the manufacturing activities, as well as some aspects of agriculture - when I addressed this Parliament last time, I said that it is difficult to industrialise a country using the commercial banks. Commercial banks require 23 per cent of interest rate. This is a joke. We cannot do that; we cannot support manufacturing and even agriculture with an interest rate of 23 per cent. That is why I told you last time that the answer – yes, for trading you can use those commercial banks. If you are getting perfumes, wines and others from somewhere, and then if you come and sell them - you can do that but for manufacturing, we need low interest loans. Those will be provided by UDB –(Interjections)– yes, we are putting in money now but we need to put in more money. 

We also need to capitalise the National Housing and Finance Bank to enable them fund low-cost housing for the people -(Applause)– especially people in the urban areas. This issue of housing we have not dealt with it; not that we do not know that there is a shortage of housing but you remember our principle kamukamu, ... akwata empola yakolaki? Acel, mot –(Interjection)– since you want the European language and you do not know our own languages, which I am very sorry about - in English they say “one by one makes a bundle.” That is what I was saying in our local languages including Luo. But many of our people do not know these languages.

Therefore, it is not that we do not know about the problem of housing. We know but we cannot handle all these issues at a go. It is correct to handle batches by batches of these problems. If we try to be everywhere, as I said last time, we shall end up being nowhere.

About funding the elements of infrastructure using the oil money - we are, however, not going to wait for the oil money to develop our country. Using our known oil revenues, we are doing commendable work. 

However, I am not satisfied with the 4.6 per cent rate of growth we achieved this financial year. In this financial year, the estimate had been 5.6 per cent then it was revised down to five percent  but it ended up being 4.6 per cent rate of growth for the reasons which the honourable member –(Interjection)- I do not even fall in traps - the honourable member of Parliament whom I am going to ask will give those reasons. Even the rate of seven per cent is not satisfactory to me, if we are to meet our standards. We must go to double digit rates of growth in order to transform our society rapidly, now that we have got the base. 

Since 2006, we have been insisting on privatisation and the use of the budget resources.  The hon. Matia Kasaija, Member of Parliament for Buyanja County is going to read my detailed statement because he is familiar with the issues –(Laughter)– ever since being in the Cabinet some years back. 

In my statement, the MP for Buyanja will give the logic of the budget. You heard why the budget had to be dealt with by the old Parliament - and the Speaker gave that logic - the logic was the old method of reading the budget around the 15th of June and then Parliament starts debating it, ministry by ministry; by the time you finish, it is already September and the year is already finished. So, when will the budget be useful? That is why the MPs and the ministers of the old Parliament rightly - I was not involved in that, but when I heard about it, I supported it - decided that they deal with Parliament from - you heard the Speaker giving some timetable – (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Before the 1st of April, it is presented to the House and it is approved by end of May.

GEN. (RTD) MUSEVENI: Now, you have heard –(Laughter)– and so you already know. (Laughter) I am preaching to the choir in that case.

Therefore, because of that, the budget was debated and passed by the old Parliament and so what my statement will do today - by the Member of Parliament for Buyanja, who is quite knowledgeable in that subject - will be to –(Interjection)– I could have asked hon. Ogwal, but she has been keeping a distance from me. (Laughter) What he will do is to give the logic behind the budget; I mean the reasons why he did Kugabula - In Luo, kugabula would be to dish and distribute food. Okay, kugabula is poko in Luo. Why did we poko the way we poko? (Laughter) He will give you that logic.

To summarise, the logic of this budget is, on the one hand, to continue expanding the base of the modern economy, that is infrastructure, so as to lower costs of doing business in Uganda because that is very crucial - if you do not lower the cost of doing business in the country, the country cannot develop - and on the other hand, to attract more and more investors in manufacturing, services and ICT. 

These operators must be assisted to come in the economy easily and quickly. As I told you in the State of the Nation Address, the culture of buying without selling must be reversed. Uganda cannot be a country that buys without selling. We cannot have Uganda as a supermarket country for other countries, where we specialise in buying without selling or when we sell, we sell goods of low value or unprocessed raw materials. Kugula without okutunda - what is the Luo word for kugula –(Interjection)– it is not called kuhingira. (Laughter) You hear how that one is beating about the bush. (Laughter) Someone write me the Luo words for “to buy” and “to sell.” You cannot kugula or buy without kutunda or selling. That is a recipe for failure. I am seriously engaging KACITA, the Kampala City Traders’ Association on this. 

When I talk of selling and not buying - we should buy from others, but we should also sell to them. You should not think I am talking about imports substitution. We shall work for exports all over the globe and not just exporting unprocessed coffee and cotton, but exporting final products, for example, textiles, processed fish, processed milk and milk products, vegetable oils and other items as our capacity grows.

Some companies are already doing this. The Fine Spinners, for instance, have already exported 2.5 million pieces of T-shirts to Europe and East Africa. They are planning to double their export to 5 million pieces of T-shirts next year.

Nytil is exporting in the region. Milk factories are exporting milk and milk products to Kenya, South Sudan, Congo, Tanzania, Sudan, United Arab Emirates, Nigeria, Syria, the United States of America and other COMESA countries. 

Uganda’s processed fish has for long been exported to the European Union, Japan, United Arab Emirates, the USA and others such as Israel, Asia and the Middle East. Yes, I have got the meaning of the word “buy” in Luo. It is Wilo and Cato is to sell. (Laughter) Now, if we only wilo –(Interjection)- Am I speaking Chinese? No, the Constitution says every Ugandan has the right to enjoy their culture. (Applause) You cannot say I am excluding anybody by enjoying my local languages -(Interjection) - no, even in Parliament the culture of the people of Uganda must be there. The only thing you can raise is that I should translate and I have done that. (Applause) Well, I will obey, if the Speaker says it is unconstitutional for me to speak my language. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, please remember Rule 10(4) - the President shall be heard in silence. (Applause)

GEN. (RTD) MUSEVENI: The other countries to which we are exporting milk include Israel, some Asian countries and other countries in the Middle East. Therefore, our companies have started the process of Cato or selling outside. We need to encourage them to continue and intensify.
 
Anybody who obstructs investors in any way will be dispensed with; dispensed by sending him or her home to look after his or her chicken or goats. 

The budget also aims at modernising agriculture by continuing to vigorously convert the dormant 68 per cent of our homesteads, from subsistence to commercial farming. This is where Operation Wealth Creation comes in and the focusing I mentioned last time; of not trying to be everywhere and ending up nowhere. You will remember I quoted Mao Tse-tung’s statement that it is better to cut off one finger of the enemy completely than to just injure the ten. Therefore, the “what” and the “how” of today is recapitulated in developing infrastructure, industrialisation, developing the services sector and ICT. The honourable member of Parliament for Buyanja will give the details.

As for the “who,” the answer is simple and unambiguous. Those who are not corrupt and are fast movers – oh! was I cut off? However, I am sure you heard what I was saying. Did you hear? 

HONOURABLE MEMBERS: Yes.
 
GEN. (RTD) MUSEVENI: Our teachers in the primary schools in Ankole could write on a child’s report “nayekurura” meaning he/she is slow. That was very bad to be written on your report by the primary teacher. Those languages - we do not concentrate on them but they are very powerful. Like when they would write on your report that “nayekurura,” meaning he/she is a slow mover, it would be like a curse on you and – you want to say NRM “nayekurura?” I do not think so. (Applause) Hence, for the teacher to write on the child’s report that word in Runyankole - you can translate it in our other dialects - it was not good at all. 

I remember the children who would get such reports dropped out of the system along the way. The ones on the other hand who would get reports reading “aine omujinya” meaning he or she has got enthusiasm for study or for work, ended up going far. The ones who would get reports reading “timwesigwa” meaning they are not trustworthy, did not even complete the primary schools in most cases. That gives answers to the question of whom – the one who is going to implement this will be the trustworthy and those who are enthusiastic for the work, that is, “corruption free and fast moving”. 

We are competing for investment with other countries, how can we be otherwise? This mainly involves expanding the infrastructure and availing affordable finance for borrowing so that investors can access them. 

About infrastructure and affordable finance, there are also software issues. As I have said, corruption delays developing, duplication of roles, etcetera.  In this term or ekisanja, I will not tolerate any of these weaknesses. (Applause) 

Million abici is just sindaano for people’s problems. Giving million abici is just a small token. (Applause) 

Madam Speaker, in accordance with Article 99(4) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, which empowers the President to exercise functions conferred on him either directly or through officers subordinate to the President, now permit me to invite the honourable member of Parliament for Buyanja to read my statement for the Financial Year 2016/2017 estimates as required under Article 155(1) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda which provides thus: “The President shall cause to be prepared and laid before Parliament in each financial year, but in any case not later than the fifteenth day before the commencement of the financial year, estimates of revenues and expenditure of Government for the next financial year.” I thank you and I wish you good listening. (Applause) 

THE SPEAKER: May I now invite hon. Matia Kasaija, Member of Parliament for Buyanja, to come and present the President’s statement.

3.57
MR MATIA KASAIJA (NRM, Buyanja County, Kibale): Your Excellency, the President of Uganda, your Excellency, the Vice-President, the Rt Hon. Speaker of Parliament of Uganda, Right Hon. Speaker of EALA Parliament, your Lordship, the Chief Justice, your Lordship, the Deputy Chief Justice, the honourable vice-chairman of the mighty party, NRM – (Applause) – the Rt Hon. Deputy Speaker of Parliament, honourable members of Parliament, your excellencies, the Ambassadors and heads of diplomatic missions, distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen.

Madam Speaker, as we have already heard, in accordance with Article 155(1) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda and the Public Finance Management Act, 2015, as amended, and in exercise of the powers delegated to me by H.E. the President of the Republic of Uganda, I have the honour to present the budget statement for the Financial Year 2016/2017.
 
Section 14(1) of the Public Finance Management Act (2015) requires that Parliament shall, by 31st May of each year, consider and approve the budget for the next financial year. This being a year when general elections were held, the budget for Financial Year 2016/17 was approved by the Ninth Parliament on 3 May 2016, as you have heard from His Excellency the President. 

My presentation today is, therefore, a summary of the budget as approved by Parliament. I thank all the honourable members of the Ninth Parliament for the excellent cooperation in the preparation and the approval of the budget.

Madam Speaker, next year’s budget has been finalised and approved by Parliament when Ugandans have once again renewed the mandate of the NRM Government. I wish at this juncture to heartily congratulate H.E. the President, Yoweri Kaguta Museveni, upon his resounding victory and thank him for entrusting me with the responsibility to deliver this landmark budget statement. 

I also extend congratulations to you, Madam Speaker and your Deputy, on your re-election to the high offices of Speaker and Deputy Speaker of Parliament; and to you, honourable members, for your election to the Tenth Parliament. 

Madam Speaker, Government’s policy, priorities and programmes as well as resource allocations are all aligned towards achieving the commitments in the Second National Development Plan and the 2016 NRM Manifesto. In addition, the 2014 National Population and Housing Census provided evidence that has formed a sound basis for the formulation of the strategic policies and priorities spelt out in next financial year’s budget. 

The overall national goal is to achieve a middle income status through commercialisation of agriculture, acceleration of industrialisation and increasing production and productivity in all sectors of the economy. Accordingly, the theme for the Financial Year 2016/17 Budget is “Enhanced Productivity for Job Creation.”

Madam Speaker, in my presentation today I will -

    i) report on the performance of the economy and the challenges faced in the financial year now ending, but also the future prospects;
    ii) update Parliament on the performance of the Financial Year 2015/2016 Budget and progress made in the key selected sectors; and the implementation of measures to address challenges and priorities for the next financial year; 
    iii) elaborate the medium-term strategy underpinning the Financial Year 2016/2017 budget, and;
    iv) highlight the financial year 2016/2017 revenue and expenditure framework and measures for enhancing domestic revenue mobilisation.

Economic Performance and Outlook

Economic Performance

Economic Growth 

Madam Speaker, Uganda’s economy has remained resilient amidst a volatile global environment. Total national economic output is estimated to have expanded by 4.6 per cent in the financial year ending, supported by robust growth in the services and construction activities. Although this is lower than the growth target of 5.0 per cent, it is significantly higher than the projected growth for sub-Saharan Africa of three per cent of the projected period. Why don’t you clap for yourselves?

Lower Growth of the Economy arose from Three Main Factors: 

1. 	The sharp fall in international commodity prices such as coffee, tea, minerals, which form the bulk of our exports. For example, tea prices have dropped from US$ cents 403.03 per kg in July 2015 to US$ cents 237.99 per kg in April 2016; and copper from US$5,456.75 per tonne to USD 4,872.74 per tonne. The shift to services in China’s economy has also contributed to the fall in global demand for minerals and other commodities.

2. 	The decline in private sector credit growth as a result of high interest rates, which have constrained domestic activity. 

3. 	The strengthening of the US Dollar as a result of the recovery in the US economy which led to depreciation of our shilling. This caused domestic inflation. The strong dollar also made imports more expensive, constraining business cash flows.

Madam Speaker, despite these challenges, services continued to grow strongly rising by 6.6 per cent from 4.5 per cent last financial year. Agriculture, which is the back-bone of our economy, expanded by 3.2 per cent in real terms compared to a growth rate of 2.3 per cent the previous year. Meanwhile industry grew by 3.0 per cent which is lower than the 7.8 per cent recorded a year before. 

Economic activity in sub-Saharan Africa, including Uganda, has been lower than anticipated, primarily as a result of the sharp decline in commodity prices, which negatively affected export earnings. Uganda, unlike other sub-Saharan African countries, was able to mitigate these external shocks through investments in infrastructure and a lower import bill resulting from the decline in international oil prices. Our Import bill for the 12 months ending March 2016 was US$ 4,618 million compared to US$ 5,095 million a year before.

Balance of Payments

Madam Speaker, Uganda’s earnings from exports are far less than what we spend on imports resulting in a large trade imbalance vis-à-vis our trading partners. In the 12 months to March 2016, Uganda’s imports were worth US$ 5,647 million compared to export receipts of just US$ 2,669 million, less than 50 per cent of our import bill. 

Madam Speaker, a combination of factors including the strong US Dollar, the stagnation in export receipts and speculative tendencies in the run up to the 2016 general elections led to rapid weakening of the Uganda Shilling. The shilling lost 39 per cent of its value vis-à-vis the US Dollar between September 2014 and September 2015. 

However, prudent fiscal and monetary policy as well as the successful completion of the general elections have, as we speak, restored confidence in the economy with the Shilling recovering its strength to Shs. 3,326 per US Dollar by April 2016. A 10 per-cent improvement compared to the position in September 2015. Government’s efforts to bolster exports will further strengthen the shilling. I will later elaborate specific actions to tackle this starting next financial year.

Madam Speaker, the country’s foreign exchange reserves remain adequate, estimated at US$ 2,925 billion representing 4.4 months of future imports of goods and services in April 2016. The target recommended in the East African Community is 4.5 months of imports. 

Domestic Prices

Madam Speaker, inflation has remained stable and in single digit as planned. Annual headline inflation was recorded at 5.4 per cent in May 2016. However, inflation peaked at 8.5 per cent in December 2015, due to the pass-through effects of the sharp weakening of the Uganda Shilling against the US Dollar. This also caused an increase in prices including electricity tariffs, which adversely affected both manufacturers and domestic consumers. However, Government implemented prudent fiscal and monetary policies that reduced inflation and, therefore, restored - as I speak, there is price stability in the economy.I should receive a clap for that -(Laughter)- Haven’t I worked? 

Interest Rates and Private Sector Credit 

Madam Speaker, commercial bank lending rates have remained high largely due to the limited availability of long-term capital, resulting in the mismatch between the commercial bank financing products and the nature of the investments being undertaken by the private sector. 

The growth of credit to the private sector has also declined to about eight per cent in March 2016 compared to about 17 per cent during the same period a year before. This is primarily on account of constraints in private sector cash-flows because of high debt service payments arising from the consequences of increased inflation. The risk of higher interest rates has now reduced as inflation is now around the policy target of five percent, following the Bank of Uganda’s implementation of appropriate monetary policy. 

Madam Speaker, while interest rates will continue to be determined by the market, Government will ensure fiscal and monetary policies that will prevent a significant rise in interest rates that crowd out the private sector. This will be complemented with strengthening consumer protection measures to address any misconduct by some financial institutions. 

Fiscal performance

Domestic Revenues

The provisional outturn for domestic revenue for the Financial Year 2015/2016 is Shs 11,598 billion equivalent to 13.2 per cent of our GDP. This is higher than the planned target of Shs 11,333 billion. The Shs 11,598 billion is accounted for as follows: provisional outturn for tax revenue is Shs 11,192 billion; non-tax revenue is Shs 282 billion and oil capital gains tax revenue is Shs 124 billion.

External and Domestic financing

The provisional outturn for total external financing during the year is Shs 5,602 billion, of which project loan disbursements is Shs 4,355.4 billion and grants Shs 1,247 billion. 

The provisional outturn for non-concessional loan disbursements is Shs 3,041 billion while concessional loan disbursements is Shs 1,315 billion. The non-concessional loans are financing major priority projects such as Karuma and Isimba hydropower plants and other projects in the transport and ICT areas. Budget support loans amounted to Shs 120 billion. 

Government domestic borrowing is projected to be below the amount planned of Shs 1,384 billion for the financial year coming ahead.  

Expenditures

Madam Speaker, provisional outturn for total government expenditure excluding domestic debt refinancing during the financial year will amount to Shs 18,666 billion, equivalent of 21.2 per cent of our GDP. The increase in total expenditure compared to last year reflects a deliberate commitment to improve our infrastructure in preparation for the take-off to the medium income status. 

The development budget is estimated to account for 53 per cent of total expenditure. This is because the recurrent budget share of the budget balance is 47 per cent. This reflects good business management by investing more in long-term assets than in consumption.

Budget Deficit

Madam Speaker, the fiscal deficit is estimated at 6.4 per cent of GDP in Financial Year 2015/2016. The deficit was largely financed by external borrowing and to a lesser extent by domestic borrowing. Given our financing requirements for infrastructure development coupled with limited availability of concessional loans, non-concessional borrowing has risen. Given that non-concessional borrowing is a little more expensive, efficiency and effectiveness in the utilisation of these loans is paramount. I will announce measures to deal with efficiency in resource allocation, use and monitoring later.

Public Debt

Madam Speaker, gross nominal public debt is estimated to be around Shs 29,984 billion by 30th June this year. Out of this, Shs 18,665.7 billion is external debt, equivalent to US$ 5,382.9 million and domestic debt Shs 11,319 billion - (Interjection)- yes, I have to borrow; you should question whether when I borrow this money is put to good use. 

In nominal terms, our total public debt is equivalent to 34 per cent of total economic output. The corresponding present value of our debt is 30.5 per cent of GDP, after discounting for time value of money. This ratio is far below the Public Debt Management Framework threshold for sustainability and the East African Community Monetary Union convergence criteria requirement of 50 per cent. These benchmarks show that our public debt remains sustainable over a long period in the future. 

Madam Speaker, this question has been asked of me and many times I speak to colleagues, especially Members of Parliament and they say, “You bring loans here; aren’t you over-borrowing?” I have given the answer; we are not over-borrowing. We are still safe and we look forward when we will also begin to borrow to build our standard gauge railway.

The increase in public debt financed priority infrastructure investments like the Karuma and Isimba hydro power projects, rehabilitation and expansion of Entebbe Airport and Phase III of the National Transmission Backbone Project is meant to enhance productivity in all sectors of the economy. Government will, therefore, borrow in future for highly productive fixed capital investments that can generate financial and economic returns to ensure debt sustainability.

I will now turn to the economic outlook; the picture is not as bad as some people have been thinking.

Madam Speaker, Uganda’s economy is projected to grow by 5.5 per cent next financial year. I am sure the President is not happy with this. Over the medium term, GDP growth is projected to  the average of 6.3 per cent per annum. This outlook is premised on the Government commitment to fast-track implementation of key public investments in infrastructure to facilitate private investment. 

Madam Speaker, in this regard, Government will continue to implement appropriate fiscal and monetary policies to ensure macroeconomic stability. In the medium term, we will prioritise the reduction of the trade deficit by increasing our revenue from exports by adding value to our primary commodities, harnessing the largely untapped tourism potential and continuing to attract foreign direct investment. I will explain the details a little bit later.

Sector Performance and Priorities

Madam Speaker, I now turn to the performance of selected key sectors during this financial year, and the planned interventions for next financial year. 

Enhanced Production and Productivity

Agriculture Production and Productivity

I wish to remind the august House that agriculture is the key to creating wealth and employment for our country. The 2014 Population and Housing Census indicates that household reliance on subsistence farming has risen to 69 per cent from 68 per cent between 2002 and 2014. This represents a higher number of households reporting agriculture as their main source of livelihood; even as agriculture’s contribution to the national output has declined to only 26 per cent. 

In addition, commercialisation in agriculture remains low, with only about 119,000 or 2.3 per cent of the 5.2 million farming households being engaged in commercial agriculture. Madam Speaker, declining productivity in this sector is, therefore, a major challenge. This low productivity is caused by limited access to appropriate technologies, declining soil fertility and poor farming methods. Farmers do not use high yield seed and animal inputs and there is limited use of fertilizer. 

Additionally, farmers also lack the requisite skills, training, apply ineffective land management practices and suffer from poor farm-to-market infrastructure. All these render agriculture highly vulnerable to exogenous shocks including low prices and climatic changes. 

Notwithstanding challenges of declining productivity, the agriculture sector achieved the following progress through Government’s concerted interventions during the financial year we are talking about and I wish to report. In the area of agricultural inputs, the following performance has been recorded: -

Under Operation Wealth Creation, planting materials distributed include 65 million coffee seedlings; 48 million tea seedlings in 16 districts, 4.4 million citrus seedlings in 76 districts; 2.7 million cocoa seedlings in 13 districts and 12 tonnes of rice seed to establish 480 acres in four local governments of Koboko, Maracha, Nebbi, Yumbe and 1,316 metric tonnes of graded cotton seeds in 29 districts: in eastern, western, West Nile, mid-west, and central regions of our country.

The Animal Genetics Resource Centre and Data Bank (NAGRC&DB) has installed a new hatchery with capacity of 13,000 chicks per week to support rearing poultry, including the resilient Kroiler Chicken. 

In the areas of pest and disease control, the following performance has been achieved: -

    i) There has been a significant reduction in the Banana Bacterial Wilt, now estimated at less than five per cent. Surveillance also reveals reduced incidence of coffee pests and diseases with the black coffee twig borer now standing at less than seven per cent in most parts of affected areas.

    ii) In the livestock sub-sector, the outbreak of Foot and Mouth Disease was contained in Apac, Kiryandongo, Nakasongola, Luwero, Nakaseke, Kyankwanzi, Wakiso, Mpigi, Mukono, Sembabule, Isingiro, Rakai, Kapchorwa, Kween, Bukwo, Kampala and Masaka.

In order to increase the provision of water for production, six valley dams were constructed in the Karamoja sub-region; and 46 valley tanks in Rakai. Isingiro is still complaining - I have been with the members of Parliament - Lyantonde, Mubende, Kiboga, Kamuli, Kumi, Apac and Kitgum. 

Madam Speaker, the agriculture sector requires total overhaul and re-organisation. This will involve reforming land ownership and use, farmer training, input delivery, extension service provision, irrigation financing and marketing. These reforms are absolutely necessary if we are to ultimately commercialise agriculture and I will show you how we are moving towards that.

Madam Speaker, Government will next financial year continue its thrust to transform the agriculture sector by facilitating mechanization, efficient access to inputs and appropriate technologies, increased storage and market access. Specifically, Government will continue to implement the following: -

    i) Provision of improved breeding and planting materials, and pesticides.
    ii) Intensification of regulation through increased disease surveillance, improved disease diagnostics and enforcement of animal laws and regulations at both central and local government levels.
    iii) Conducting agricultural research and development. 
    iv) Construction of irrigation infrastructure including on-farm valley tanks, valley dams and medium to large scale irrigation schemes for communities. The cumulative water storage will be increased from the current 29.1 million cubic metres to 55 million cubic meters. 
    v) Financing post-harvest handling facilities for commodity storage through the Agricultural Credit Facility. 
    vi) Developing and implementation of a comprehensive National Agriculture Finance Policy and Strategy to support private sector investment in agriculture.
    vii) Establishing an agriculture insurance scheme to reduce farm risks and attract investment in agriculture.

To this effect, Madam Speaker, I have increased the agriculture sector’s budget from Shs 343.6 billion to Shs 823.42 billion; an increase of 65 per cent compared to the Financial Year 2015/2016. (Applause) 

Together with funding to rural development interventions including rural electrification and feeder roads, funding to Agriculture and Rural Development is now Shs 1,985 billion, equivalent to 9.6 per cent of the non-debt, non-discretionary budget. Hon. Cecilia Ogwal, I have answered your question. 

Madam Speaker, the medium term goals in agriculture aim to ultimately increase production and productivity, improve household food security, increase farmers’ income and increase the value of exports. Consequently, coffee production is targeted to rise from 3.6 million bags today to 20 million bags by the year 2020, valued at approximately US$ 2.4 billion. For tea, 135,000 metric tonnes valued at approximately US$ 190 million; rice, 680,000 metric tonnes valued at approximately US$ 376 million; milk exports at US$ 300 million and fish at US$ 300 million.

Unlocking Uganda’s Tourism Potential 

Madam Speaker, as we all know, Uganda offers a highly compelling combination of wildlife safaris and primate tracking, combined with the continent’s highest mountain range, the source of the Nile and African great lakes. 

Tourism adds US$ 2.5 billion to our GDP and approximately US$ 1.5 billion in foreign exchange earnings annually. This translates to nine per cent of our national output and 26 per cent of export earnings. 

In the recent past, Uganda has hosted several tourism promoting events, including the visit of His Holiness Pope Francis last November, and the Barcelona Football Club legends, for those of you who are football fans, to Bwindi Impenetrable Forest and Murchison Falls National Parks. These events, among others, have for sure boosted Uganda’s international image. 

Despite these developments, the tourism sector still faces serious challenges. Uganda ranks low in terms of leisure and holiday visitors, as a result of weak targeted destination marketing. At a regional level, security threats and disease outbreaks such as Marburg, lead to negative media and adverse travel advisories. Other challenges include poor air transport and inadequate hospitality industry skills. Consequently, tourist visitors, key to tourism locations, have declined. For instance, despite the increase in visitations to national parks from about 203,000 visitors in 2014 to 216,000 visitors in 2015, there has been a 13 per cent decline in the number of foreign non-residents over the same period.

Madam Speaker, Government will continue to implement the 2015-2019 Tourism Development Plan. The plan aims to diversify tourism products, aggressive promotion, nature conservation, skills development, infrastructure development and the regulation of the sector. Key interventions next year will include the following:

    i) Participating in international tourism fairs and expos, and implementing a single East Africa Tourist visa.

    ii) Upgrading heritage sites such as the Namugongo Martyrs’ Shrines; promoting cultural theme events, and developing regional tourists circuits in Buganda, Bunyoro, Toro, Ankole and Kigezi, Busoga, West Nile, Acholi, Rwenzori, Ssese Islands, Teso and Karamoja.

    iii) Skilling tour operators, hoteliers and tourism industry workers to deliver world class hospitality services.

    iv) Grading of an additional 200 hotels and restaurants, and increasing inspection of tourism enterprises in Wakiso, Kabarole, Jinja, Mbale, Kabale, Mbarara, Masindi, Jinja, Gulu and Lira.

    v) Developing strategic tourism infrastructure with emphasis on tourism roads, to improve visitor experience, and attract private investment in tourism. 

I have allocated Shs 188.8 billion to the sector next financial year up from Shs 158.5 billion in Financial Year 2015/2016.

Development and maintenance of strategic infrastructure

Madam Speaker, funding strategic transport, energy and Information Communications Technology (ICT) infrastructure has been a key priority of Government. Infrastructure development contributes immensely to increased productivity by facilitating efficient connectivity; and eases the movement of goods and the provision of services. It ultimately leads to the creation of jobs. As a result of Government’s prioritisation of these sectors, their funding currently constitutes about 32.8 per cent of the total Government expenditure every year. For instance, in the Financial Year 2015/2016 alone, the total budget allocation to Works, Energy and ICT amounted to Shs 6,287.66 billion. With these resources, we have made significant progress towards improving the stock and quality of our physical infrastructure.

Transport Infrastructure

Roads and Bridges

Madam Speaker, to this end, Government has upgraded numerous gravel national roads to bitumen standard, rehabilitated, reconstructed and maintained roads throughout the country. Consequently, the proportion of national paved roads from fair to good condition increased from 64 per cent in 2011 to 70 per cent in 2015. The share of unpaved National Road Network in fair to good condition improved from 74 per cent in 2011 to 80 per cent in the same period.

Madam Speaker, during the year, the following road projects have been substantially completed: Atiak-Nimule (35 kms), Maracha and Koboko town roads (6.9Kms), Kamwenge-Fortportal (65 kms), Kafu-Kiryandongo (43  km), Bundibugyo Town roads (6 kms) – yes , you should clap, we are performing excellently well - Rwentobo-Kabala-Katuna road (65 kms), Ishaka-Kagamba (35Kms), Seeta-Namugongo (7.2 km), Kyaliwajala-Kira (3.5 kms), Naalya-Kyaliwajala (2.5 kms), Namugongo ring road(1.8 kms) and Shrine Access (1.8 kms). 

In addition, there has been good progress in completion of construction of the following roads: Kampala-Entebbe Expressway, with a spur to Munyonyo (51 kms) –68 per cent; Mpigi-Kanoni (65 kms) – 68 per cent; Kampala Northern By-pass (17 kms) - 37 per cent; Kanoni-Sembabule-Villa Maria (110 kms) – 33 per cent; Mukono-Kayunga-Njeru (94 kms) – 23 per cent; Pakwach-Nebbi (54 kms) – 68 per cent; Karuma-Kamudini Road– 93 per cent; Olwiyo (Anaka)-Gulu (70 kms) – 96 percent; Kiryandongo-Karuma – 93 per cent; Ntungamo-Mirama Hills (37 kms) – 60 per cent; Musita-Mayuge-Lumino-Busia/Majanji (104 kms) – 40 per cent; and Namunsi-Sironko-Muyembe (32 kms) – 27 per cent.

Madam Speaker, urban road infrastructure and traffic congestion has also been addressed, with the reconstruction of road networks in Kampala City which you have seen; Mbale, Arua, Jinja, Hoima, Masaka, Entebbe, Soroti and Kabale municipalities. Government appreciates the support of our development partners, especially the World Bank, for this programme. However, implementation of this programme has encountered a few challenges in contract management, leading to unnecessary delays.

Next financial year, Government has maintained financing of on-going road projects, with special focus on those that directly boost value addition and exports. The objective is to complete these projects in time and also provide sufficient resources for their proper maintenance. An additional, Shs 494 billion has been allocated, increasing the allocation to the works and transport sector to Shs 3,827.54 billion. Details of roads for which construction will commence next year are provided in the background to the budget, which you can obtain as you move out of this hall.

Madam Speaker, the road construction industry in Uganda is largely dominated by foreign owned companies, mainly on account of a weak domestic construction industry. This is because of capacity constraints, limited access to adequate financing and weak coordination, among the local contractors. Government will work closely with the private sector to support the development of local contractors, through capacity building and facilitate increased local content in the road construction industry. 

As regards bridges during the financial year now ending, the following were completed: Goli-Nyagak-3 (Nebbi), Apak Bridge on Lira-Moroto Road, Ntungwa Bridge on Ishasha-Katunguru Road (Kanungu), Mitano Bridge, Rukungiri-Kanungu Road. The construction of the New Nile Bridge at Jinja that commenced in the last year is now 21 per cent complete. Details on the additional bridges across the country that are either under design or procurement next financial year are contained in the background to the budget.

Railway Transport

Madam Speaker, in the financial year ending, Government proceeded with the development of the railway network, in order to reduce damage to our roads, lower cost of freight especially for bulky cargo and increase competitiveness of the economy. Construction of the Eastern Standard Gauge railway will commence during the coming financial year.

In addition, designs for the Kampala Light Rail Train (LRT) covering Eastern, Southern and North-east, as well as Northern Kampala Metropolitan areas will be completed, with a view to commence construction in 2019. If you were my age, some of you would be breaking down-(Laughter).

I have provided Shs 118 billion for acquiring land for the construction of the Malaba–Kampala Eastern Standard Gauge Railway. 

THE SPEAKER: No comment, proceed, honourable member.

MR MATIA KASAIJJA:  Thank you Madam Speaker, I love you for that –(Laughter)– we congratulate our brotherly Government of Kenya –(Interjection)– hon. Celia Ogwal, I love you because you are a great person and even hon. Winnie Kiiza, you are a great friend of mine. (Laughter)

Madam Speaker, we congratulate our brotherly Government of Kenya for the progress on construction of the Mombasa-Nairobi Standard Gauge Railway now at 75 per cent completion and welcome plans to start construction of the Narobi-Kisumu-Malaba section. Our desire is to synchronise the completion of Malaba–Kampala Standard Gauge Railway with the completion of the Kenya sections, in order to gain maximum benefits from these heavy investments. 

As a continuation of the Northern Corridor Standard Gauge Railway, the preparatory work for the development of the section up to Mirama Hills will also continue next financial year.  

Water Transport

Madam Speaker, in order to improve water transport, new ferries were commissioned to ply the Wanseko-Panyamur, Namasale-Lwampanga routes and Sigulu Islands in Bugiri district. Currently, the designing of landing sites at Buvuma, Bule and Gaba are underway. An investment plan for interconnectivity of islands in Lake Victoria has been formulated and is due for implementation.

Government will also improve existing marine infrastructure. Construction of the Bukasa Port will commence next year. New ferries will also be commissioned to serve Amuru-Rhino Camp, Lake Bisina, Lake Bunyonyi and Bukungu-Muntu. 

The previous ferry plying the Bukakata-Bugala route will be rehabilitated and redeployed on the Buvuma Island mainland route. In order to make water transport safe and environmentally friendly, there will be increased enforcement of regulations.

Air Transport

Madam Speaker, Government is developing air transportation infrastructure in order to enhance inter-modal transportation of people and goods. The upgrade of Entebbe International Airport has commenced. Works will include remodelling of the existing passenger terminal building and the construction of a new cargo centre complex. 

In addition, several regional aerodromes are being improved including construction of Watch Towers, the community access road and the perimeter fence at Kasese Airport. Works for improvement of Arua, Pakuba, Masindi, Kidepo, Moroto, Lira, Tororo, Jinja, Mbarara, Kisoro, Soroti and Gulu aerodromes were either completed or are on-going.

Other interventions include the construction of Kabale Airport in Hoima, which will support Oil Refinery development. Extensive maintenance works on Arua, Pakuba, Masindi, Kidepo, Moroto, Lira, Tororo, Jinja, Mbarara, Kisoro, Kasese, Soroti and Gulu aerodromes are programmed and in other cases on-going.

Electricity Infrastructure

Madam Speaker, the 2014 National Population Census reveals that access to electricity has more than doubled from 7.8 per cent to 20.4 per cent since 2002, and the use of local paraffin candles reduced by nearly 20 per cent. Government’s objective is to increase the availability of reliable and affordable electricity for both domestic and industrial use, in order for access to double to 40 per cent by 2040. 

Progress towards this goal includes the increase in hydropower generation capacity to 830 Mega Watts from 596 Mega Watts in 2010. The number of distribution connections increased by 143,000 to 790,000, an annual increase of 13 per cent. Energy losses have also been reduced from 21.3 per cent to 19.5 per cent. 

In addition, the Karuma HEP is 27 per cent complete with project completion scheduled for 2019. Construction works at the Isimba hydropower project are 25 per cent complete, scheduled for commissioning by August 2018. Institutional arrangements for supervision of these projects have also been streamlined. 

In the transmission and distribution segments, construction of about 1,900 Km of medium voltage lines and 1,600 Km of Low Voltage distribution lines were completed. A total of 108 out of the 112 district headquarters are now connected to the National Grid. An additional 150 rural electrification schemes are almost complete in 50 districts.

Madam Speaker, next financial year, works will commence for the connection to the national grid of Nwoya, Kaboong and Kotido districts.  The feasibility study to connect Buvuma District to the national grid is also underway, with support from the Islamic Development Bank (IDB). This will bring to 100 per cent coverage of district headquarters. 
	
Work will also continue on 2,000 Km of transmission lines; 8,000 Km of Medium Voltage and 4,000 Km of Low Voltage networks located in over 98 districts. In addition, works at four new substations will also commence at the Namanve South, Luzira, Mukono and Iganga Industrial parks. Details of power sector projects are underway and programmed to be implemented next financial year  and this is contained in the Background to the Budget.

Oil, Gas and Mineral Development

Madam Speaker, the commercialisation of oil and gas resources is one of the key objectives of Government. To this end, negotiations with the lead investor for the Oil Refinery project are expected to be concluded by September 2016. 

Land acquisition for the refinery development is 97 per cent complete and 533 acres of land have been acquired in Kyakaboga, Buseruka sub-county, Hoima District for the physical resettlement of the project affected persons who opted for resettlement. 
	
In addition, the Hoima-Tanga crude oil pipeline will be developed as a private investment, for transporting Uganda’s crude oil to the East African Coast.
	
Madam Speaker, I have allocated Shs 188.2 billion to implement programmes for oil and gas development, and institutional and skills development, including operationalising the National Petroleum Authority and establishment of the National Oil Company.
	
Madam Speaker, with respect to mineral development, the Sukulu Phosphate and Steel Project commenced, which will manufacture both fertilizer and steel when complete in 2020. In terms of developing other mineral prospects, exploration for Uranium was undertaken in Ndale, Fort Portal and Rusekere and for rare earth metals such as cobalt, nickel and chromium in Karamoja; Iron ore in Kabale and gold in Busia.
	
Information Communication Technology

Madam Speaker, Information and Communication Technology (ICT) supports development of the financial services sector, telecommunications, public financial management and scientific research and innovation, and e-Government. ICT contributed 2.5 per cent of GDP, employs approximately 1.3 million Ugandans and raised Shs 484.4 billion in tax revenue collection in 2015. 

Telephone subscribers have increased from 19.5 million in 2013 to 23 million in 2015, while internet users grew from 8.5 million to 13 million in the same period. In further support for ICT development, land for construction of the ICT Park at Namanve Industrial Park has been secured and the feasibility study completed. 

In addition, larger land space has been acquired in Entebbe where a mega ICT park will be set up starting next financial year. Madam Speaker, starting with next financial year, the sector will improve access to high speed broadband services from 512 Kilobytes per second to 4 Megabytes per second and 30Mbps for rural and urban households respectively. This will support business productivity and facilitate communication. 

The National Backbone Infrastructure (NBI) will be extended to cover West Nile and Karamoja Regions under the Regional Communication Infrastructure Project, with support from the World Bank. 

The Backbone will also be extended to neighbouring countries: Kenya via Malaba and Busia; Tanzania via Mutukula; Rwanda via Katuna; South Sudan via Nimule and Democratic Republic of Congo via Mpondwe to further improve regional interconnectivity. 

Human Capital and Skills Development 

Madam Speaker, as we all know, human capital development is core to any country’s socio-economic transformation, Uganda included. A healthy population, equipped with the relevant skills for innovation and entrepreneurship is necessary towards this end. 

Government’s approach to human capital development has been to ensure access to quality social services that improve the wellbeing, knowledge and skills of the population. Improving access to quality education and skills development, health, water and sanitation is central to this objective.

Education and Skills Development

Madam Speaker, the education sector seeks to increase access to quality primary, secondary and tertiary education, with better learning and skills outcomes. This will ensure proficiency in numeracy and literacy of the entire population and enhance productivity of the labour force. The 2014 census revealed that 72 per cent of the population were reported to be literate.

During the year now ending, access to basic and secondary education increased with enrolment rising from 8.5 million to 8.8 million pupils at primary school level and from 1.36 million to 1.39 million students at secondary school level. Primary school level pass rates were recorded at 88.3 per cent, and pass rates at secondary at 91 per cent in 2015. 

From a gender equity perspective, the ratio of girls to boys at the primary school level reached 100 per cent.  However, at the secondary and tertiary levels, there is still some work to be done, as the ratio of girls to boys stands at 88.3 per cent and 79.1 per cent respectively.

In order to enhance tertiary level education, salaries of teaching staff in public universities have been increased with Shs 50 billion allocation during the financial year now ending, in line with His Excellency’s pledge to increase wages in a phased manner. 

I have provided a further Shs 78 billion in next year’s budget for this purpose, including increases for salaries of non-teaching staff in public universities. (Applause) Thank you, very much for clapping.

Madam Speaker, the education sector still faces challenges in delivering quality education in an efficient manner. At primary level, proficiency in numeracy has declined from 45.2 per cent to 40.8 per cent between 2012 and 2013. Proficiency in literacy also slightly declined from 39.4 per cent to 38.3 per cent in the same period. 

The survival rate from Primary 1 to Primary 5 declined marginally from 60.6 per cent to 59.9 per cent between 2014 and 2015, and that from Primary 5 to Primary 7 declined from 32.9 per cent to 30 per cent in the same period. 

At secondary level, the proficiency level of Senior 2 student in mathematics has declined from 46.9 per cent in 2013 to 41.5 per cent in 2014. This calls for concerted action if improved learning outcomes have to be realised.

Madam Speaker, during next year, priorities for implementation in the formal education sector will include the following:

    1. Recruitment of tutors for the 20 technical institutes started this financial year. I have provided Shs 6.672 billion for this purpose;

    2. Operationalising three public universities in Soroti, Kabale and Lira which are to offer science related programmes, critical to the economic development of the country. For this, a total of Shs 14.09 billion has been allocated; 

    3. Expand the Student Loan Scheme to cater for the Second Cohort of 1,000 University students and 200 students of Diploma courses to improve access to higher education. An additional Shs 6 billion has been provided for this purpose;

    4. Increase of salaries of primary teachers by 15 per cent which will be the last instalment in Government’s commitment to increase teachers’ salaries by 50 per cent in a phased manner. (Applause) For this, an additional Shs 122 billion has been provided.

Madam Speaker, in order to justify these salary increases -(Interruption)- school teachers, including head teachers must forthwith desist from absenteeism, late reporting and early departure from work - the inspectors must do their job. However, we the Members of Parliament also need to do our job.

Skills Development

Madam Speaker, improving the employability of graduates from the education system is a key aspect for Government. Business, Technical, Vocational and Education Training (BTVET) institutions play a critical role in the development of employable skills and competencies in the labour market.

The following interventions were undertaken during the financial year now ending to improve access to vocational skills training and education:

    1. Construction, equipping and operationalising of 12 new technical institutes in Amuria, Hoima, Kamuli, Masaka-Lwengo, Mukono, Nakasongola, Namutumba, Pader, Yumbe, Kyenjojo, Lyantonde and Kiboga districts have been completed. Nakaseke Technical Institute was also completed, but is awaiting  handover to the district officially;

    2. The rehabilitation, expansion and equipping of Uganda technical colleges at Lira and Elgon, and the National Teachers College at Unyama in Gulu District, have been completed. Civil works are still ongoing at the Uganda technical colleges at Bushenyi, Kichwamba and Kyema. Civil works also commenced at four technical institutes that is: Ahmed Seguya in Kayunga, Tororo, Kalongo and Kibatsi in Ntungamo.

Madam Speaker, Government will continue to strengthen institutional capacity of BTVET institutions to narrow the gap between formal education and the labour market. This will enable skills development to be streamlined towards private sector labour market requirements. Government will also increase awareness of BTVET career opportunities. 

In the forthcoming year, Government will undertake the following interventions:

    1. Finalise the update of the national curriculum for business, technical vocational education and training courses; 
    2. Complete six technical and vocational national certificate assessment guides;  
    3. Complete orientation manuals for 6 technical and vocational programmes; and  
    4. Train 237 instructors on the six technical and vocational national certificate programmes. 

Health

Madam Speaker, access to inclusive quality healthcare services is key to ensuring the wellbeing of Ugandans. During the financial year now ending, Government has sought to improve quality access to health by constructing and equipping hospitals and health centres. Consequently, health outcomes have improved resulting in a decrease in the disease burden. 

Reported cases of malaria have reduced from 460 per 1,000 persons in 2013 to 367 per 1,000 persons in 2015.  There has been a decline in the risk of a mother dying in the health facilities while giving birth. Facility-based maternal mortality has reduced from 168 per 100,000 live births in 2013 to 146 per 100,000 live births in 2015. Similarly, infant mortality declined from 87 deaths per 1,000 live births in 2002 to 53 deaths per 1,000 live births in 2014. 

The proportion of deliveries in health facilities stood at 44.4 per cent in 2014 and is expected to reach 56 per cent in 2017. New HIV infections have also reduced from 137,000 in 2014 to 87,000 in 2015.

Madam Speaker, key achievements in the financial year now ending in terms of health infrastructure, include commencement of the rehabilitation and expansion of Mulago Hospital; completion of which is scheduled for December 2016. Its construction will include a specialised maternal, neonatal and women’s hospital scheduled for completion in June 2017. 

The reconstruction and equipping of nine regional referral hospitals was also completed in Moroto, Mityana, Nakaseke, Kiryandongo, Nebbi, Anaka, Entebbe, Iganga and Mubende –(Interjection)- Abim is also on the way. The expansion of Hoima and Kabale hospitals and construction of Kawempe and Kiruddu hospitals in Kampala will be completed by the end June 2016. 

Madam Speaker, Government has also prioritised development of centres of excellence in order to increase local access to specialised medical treatment, reduce the cost of travels abroad for healthcare and enhance medical tourism. The Aga Khan Development Network will complete the establishment of a teaching hospital by 2020 at Nakawa and construction of an international specialised hospital at Lubowa by Italian developers will be operational by 2018. 

To enhance national capacity to handle specialised ailments, the Uganda Heart Institute (UHI) installed a cardiac catheterisation facility that can handle at least 1,000 operations per year when fully operational. The capacity of Uganda Virus Research Institute (UVRI) at Entebbe has also been enhanced to enable detection of new viruses that cause endemic outbreaks of diseases such as Ebola and Marburg.

Madam Speaker, in the next financial year, focus will be placed on accelerating interventions to improve availability of healthcare workers at health centres and enhancing maternal, new born and child health in order to reduce the high number of deaths. 

Government will also continue to prioritise implementation of the National Prevention Strategy of HIV/AIDS and also expand anti-retroviral treatment (ART) coverage to 80 per cent, with an emphasis on testing and treatment of the most-at-risk population and elimination of mother-to-child transmission.

Madam Speaker, adequate financing healthcare provision is an important facet to achieving our ultimate goal of a healthy population. The National Health Insurance Bill, 2016 which aims to improve financing of healthcare through mandatory contributions of monthly salary deductions by both employers and employees, is awaiting consideration of Parliament. 

This morning I signed the certificate of financial implications –(Interjection)- the Permanent Secretary (Laughter). I ordered the PS to sign -(Interjection)- You can check. My permanent secretary is the one who signed.

Water, Sanitation and Environment

I have talked about water and the Sergeant-at-Arms reminded me that I should drink some. I am still fine; do not worry. 

Madam Speaker, access to safe water and sanitation is critical for maintaining hygiene at the household level and impacts on health and ultimately labour productivity. Adequate safe water and sanitation is, therefore, a major determinant of the health status of the entire population. 

To improve access to safe water and sanitation, Government’s priority has been to improve key water and sanitation infrastructure by expanding piped water schemes, urban sanitation facilities and facilities to improve rural water access facilities including boreholes, protected wells and gravity flow. 

The 2014 National Population and Housing Census indicated that 71 per cent of the population has access to an improved water source. A total of 85 per cent of the urban population has that access while this is true for 67 per cent in rural areas. 

During the year, six solar mini-powered piped water supply systems and six toilet facilities were constructed in six Rural Growth Centres (RGCs). Piped water systems in 19 towns were also constructed to improve urban water supply. Details can be found in the Background to the Budget.

Madam Speaker, in the next financial year, the target is to increase access to safe water to 79 per cent in rural areas and reach 100 per cent coverage in urban areas. Construction of 33 town water supply schemes and 147 sewerage and sanitation facilities (public and household) in various towns will also be started. This will increase functionality of water supply systems and raise sanitation and hygiene levels in both rural and urban areas to 30 per cent.   
     
Madam Speaker, declining environment and climatic conditions require special focus to protect, restore and maintain the integrity of the increasingly fragile ecosystem. Government shall protect 20 kilometres of the banks of the River Nile, restore 50 hectares of the degraded section of River Nile protection zone and complete the demarcation of 150 kilometres of wetland boundaries of five districts in eastern, western and southern Uganda. 

Government will also strengthen compliance with environmental standards and improve enforcement. We shall strengthen overall coordination of climate change-related activities across the country.

Improving Good Governance

Promoting good governance in all aspects, including peace, stability and national security, the rule of law, improving the efficiency and accountability of the public institutions, and tackling corruption, are essential for national building. Government has made progress on all these fronts over several years of reform and concerted action. 

Peace and National Security 

Madam Speaker, peace, stability and national security are the bed-rock for socio-economic transformation. The achievements Uganda has witnessed over the last 30 years are due to the NRM Government’s understanding and effort to strengthen national defence and security and re-establishment of the rule of law. 

Madam Speaker, during the previous financial year, there was continued modernisation of defence and security forces to maintain peace and security. Interventions include the procurement of modern equipment, the recruitment and training of armed and other security forces and the improvement in the welfare of the armed forces. The Uganda Peoples Defence Forces (UPDF) participated and is still participating in community service programmes and national development projects such as Operation Wealth Creation (OWC).

Madam Speaker, Ugandans continually appreciate the sacrifices made by our gallant sons and daughters to safeguard national and territorial integrity. (Applause) The forces have and continue to protect us from insecurity and acts of terrorism. How many times have the terrorists come and - that will be for another subject. 

Madam Speaker, in the forthcoming year and the medium term, Government will continue to build the capacity of the security forces to enable maintenance of security, both national and across the region. I have accordingly allocated Shs 1,588,023 billion in the next financial year to the sector to continue with this task. 

Law and Order

Madam Speaker, the Justice, Law and Order sector (JLOS) plays a critical role in the rule of law. Over the year, there was increased access to justice. Today 75 per cent of people traverse shorter distances to access Justice Law and Order services. Institutional coverage has improved with 84 districts out of 112 each having a complete chain of service points. 

Recruitment in the Uganda Police Force, Uganda Prisons Service, and the Directorate of Public Prosecution and other major institutions, resulted in improved investigations and growth in conviction rates that now stand at 64 per cent; you recently saw that. Police human rights desks were also established in 16 of the 26 Police regions, a coverage of 62 per cent. In addition, functional complaints handling mechanisms have been established. The sector recorded a 13.7 per cent reduction in the rate of adult reoffending as a result of strong rehabilitation and correctional programs, as opposed to a punitive prison approach.

Madam Speaker, in the forthcoming year and over the medium term, the Government will continue to strengthen the legal reforms, and ensure harmonisation of justice delivery standards. In support for productivity the judiciary will enhance efficiency to reduce commercial case backlog by introducing new technology. Prior bargaining makes legal progress procedures faster, including instituting small claims procedures. The sector will also reduce regulatory requirements for starting a business, including expediting of business licensing reform. I have accordingly allocated Shs 1,159,77 billion to the sector to carry out its mandate.

Improving Government Effectiveness in Service Delivery

Madam Speaker, the effectiveness of the public sector in delivery of public services depends on the efficacy of the systems and processes of public institutions. In addition, public servants are supposed to facilitate private sector entrepreneurship and deliver quality services to the public. The Government has over the years implemented legal, institutional and administrative reforms to increase efficiency in Government operations. These include, among others, fiscal decentralisation to bring services nearer to the people. Strengthening public financial management, budget transparency and accountability to fight corruption, performance contracting of accounting officers and salary enhancement of frontline service delivery workers are now being entrenched into the system. 

Over the last three financial years, public financial management reforms have been implemented including the introduction of a single treasury account that has eliminated over 3,000 bank accounts and allowed savings to be made from unnecessary borrowing when some accounts had balances. In the fight to eliminate graft, the Auditor-General reports have shown a remarkable improvement with a remarkable decrease in qualified audits. The decentralisation of payroll and pensions management has enabled salaries, pensions and gratuities to be paid on time. Civil servants by 28th of the month, the money should be on your account –(Interjections)- Members of Parliament, by 18th of the month, your emoluments should be on your accounts. 

The decentralisation of payroll and pensions management has enabled salaries, pensions and gratuities to be paid on time. This reform has led to an estimated Shs 300 billion saving on the Government wage and pensions bill annually. I would like to commend all the ministers of state including myself, the Secretary to the Treasury and staff at the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development for this tremendous achievement. (Applause) We should give credit where it is deserved. I will not hide it when things have been done properly, nor will I hide when we have performed poorly. 

Madam Speaker, in order to enhance efficiency E-Government has progressed with the completion of the second phase of the National Backbone Infrastructure (NBI) and an additional 14 Ministries, Departments and Agencies (MDAs) connected, bringing the total number of agencies connected to 72. The integration of the National Identity Card System, the Integrated Financial Management System, the Integrated Personnel and Payroll System and the Computerised Education Management System (CEMAS) also commenced and a comprehensive national database will be ready by September 2016. The National Identity Card Project was also used to update the Voters Register in the recently concluded General Elections.

Madam Speaker, however, further effort is still required in order to improve the efficiency of Government operations. The ability, capacity and work ethics and attitudes of public officials must also be seriously addressed. The following measures will be implemented next financial year:

    1. Government will restructure ministries, departments and local governments to enhance the efficiency and effectiveness of their systems and processes;
    2. Further consolidation of the decentralised payroll and pensions’ management system by integrating the payroll system with the budgeting system and strengthening the human resource management function; 
    3. Deepen fiscal decentralisation by devolving more financial decisions closer to the frontline service delivery units including consolidating the decentralised budgeting and payment of salaries, pension and gratuity;
    4. Cross payment of allowances between ministries, departments, agencies and local governments will not be permitted forthwith, with the exception of local government officials required to attend Central Government workshops.
 
In an effort to save public funds on workshops and seminars, these must be held in Government facilities, unless it is absolutely unavoidable. In addition, benchmarking trips abroad should be limited and conducted under respective Votes. Any Accounting Officer funding benchmarking trips outside their institutions will be held responsible for mischarging expenditure.

Madam Speaker, in order to improve the entire Government project cycle, the processes including identification, designing, appraisal, and approval of Government projects will be revamped with special focus on major projects in sectors like transport, energy, water and agriculture. Continued poor absorption of funds, particularly borrowed resources, which lead to suspension or cancellation of loans will not be entertained. 

Accounting Officers will forthwith be penalised for unsatisfactory performance of externally funded projects under their charge. The most affected sectors in terms of poor absorption have been education and water sectors where the proportion of projects with unsatisfactory performance was at 100 per cent, followed by the Energy Sector at 92 per cent, Health Sector at 86 per cent; Agriculture at 80 per cent and Public Sector Management at 77 per cent.

For expeditious Parliamentary approval of externally funded projects, I appeal to you, Madam Speaker, under your new mandate, to have Parliamentary approvals of projects within 45 days. Cabinet will do its job and we shall cause the technocrats to do theirs; but let us, politicians show the way.  

Madam Speaker, enhanced supervision and monitoring of Government programmes is necessary to strengthen accountability for public service delivery. The strategic result matrix will be used to monitor the implementation of the strategic interventions presented in the budget. The matrix will be used to hold accounting officers responsible for the achievement of results under their mandates. 

Across Government, enhanced political and technical inspection, especially for key service delivery sectors, including education and health facilities will also be undertaken in order to address challenges such as shoddy work, staff absenteeism and late coming. Parish and sub-county chiefs and Chief Administrative Officers will be required to show what actions they have taken for poor service delivery in their areas. Increased accountability for service delivery will also be achieved by implementing mechanisms that use citizens’ feedback to report poor service delivery and corruption.  

Domestic Arrears

Madam Speaker, domestic arrears comprise pensions and gratuity liabilities, unpaid sundry suppliers’ bills for water and electricity and telephone utilities that remain outstanding at the end of a financial year. Domestic arrears owed by Government agencies to private sector entrepreneurs are causing financial distress and increased indebtedness of several companies to their financier. 

In order to eliminate outstanding salary and pension arrears and in accordance with His Excellency’s directive in the State of the Nation Address, verified domestic arrears owed to suppliers of goods and services will have the first call on the resources starting with the first quarter of the coming financial year. You can also clap for this; we do not have entrepreneurs here?

In addition, accounting officers should transfer all energy and telephone utilities from the post-paid to the prepaid systems by 30th June 2016. Thereafter, no funds will be released to non-compliant ministries and agencies and accounting officers will face disciplinary action including termination of their appointments. You have heard this from His Excellency. 

Anti-Corruption Measures

Madam Speaker, corruption is multifaceted and appears in both grand and petty forms, impacting our people and country differently.  Government is committed to combating corruption in all its forms. Government’s approach to anti-corruption has been to put in place institutional, administrative and legal measures to enhance its prevention, detection, investigation and deterrence. In order to improve service delivery, Government will in the next financial year adopt the following measures to fight corruption:

    1. Strengthen the capacity for prevention and detection of corruption through implementing risk management and enhancing internal controls across Government in accordance with the PFM Act, 2015. All accounting officers are required to implement effective systems of internal controls, risk management and internal audit.

    2. Enhance Multi-Sectoral collaboration consisting of the Inspectorate of Government, PPDA, Office of the Auditor-General, Internal Auditor-General’s Office (Under Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development), DPP, CID, Financial Intelligence Authority (FIA), Anti-Corruption Court, OPM, Public Service Commission (PSC) and the Ministry of Public Service have been put in place to strengthen anti-corruption measures. This will enhance capacity to detect, investigate and successfully prosecute cases of corruption.

    3. Accounting Officers who do not account in full and in time for funds provided under their respective ministries, agencies and Local Governments will be recommended for removal in public interest. 

    4. Deterrence of corruption will be enhanced through increased support to the judiciary and other similar organisations for custodial sentences, plea bargain and asset recovery of ill-gotten wealth.

Medium Term Economic Strategy 

The priority interventions I have enumerated are anchored on a medium term strategy that is built on three pillars: 

    1. A sound macroeconomic policy framework; 

    2. Productivity enhancement programme and employment;

    3. Employment and job creation interventions. 

These will enable the attainment of a middle income status for Ugandans by 2020. 

Madam Speaker, the Macroeconomic Policy Framework seeks to deliver sustained average GDP growth rate of at least 6 per cent per annum. The framework will also maintain single digit inflation, a stable and competitive exchange rate, adequate foreign exchange reserves and prudent debt levels. These objectives are consistent with the requirements of the East African Monetary Union Protocol.

As highlighted in the President’s State of the Nation address, Government is committed to increasing Uganda’s export earnings through increasing export volumes, industrial production and value addition in agriculture and minerals. 

Government is also developing energy infrastructure to reduce the cost of electricity in the medium term to facilitate manufacturing and value addition. In addition, Government will implement the local content policy and strengthen institutions responsible for promotion and quality standards of our export products. 

Productivity Enhancement Programme

Madam Speaker, consistent with next year’s budget theme, Government will enhance productivity in primary growth sectors of the economy. Primary growth sectors include agriculture, tourism, manufacturing and the mining sectors. Enhancing productivity will be achieved through the following three broad strategies: 

    1. Increased commercialization; 

    2. Through enhanced private sector capacity; 

    3. By improving public institutional response to private sector needs.

Enhancing commercialization of primary growth sectors will be achieved by addressing constraints in the entire value chain. This will involve conduct of research and development, providing business advice including industrial incubation and provision of extension services. In addition, improving product quality by enforcing standards, building storage and marketing infrastructure will be supported.  Private Sector capacity will be achieved by increasing access to affordable long-term capital financing, provision of work space and building industrial parks and operationalization of free trade zones. 

Finally, an improved public sector institutional response to private sector entrepreneurs will be undertaken by re-orienting public sector agencies, including investment and export promotion agencies, such as Uganda Investment Authority, Export Promotion Board, Uganda Registration Services Bureau and missions abroad, among others.

Employment and Job Creation Strategy 

Madam Speaker, evidence from the 2014 Population and Housing Census revealed that households relying on employment income as the main source of livelihood have declined from 22 per cent in 2002 to 16 per cent. In addition, only 10 per cent of households reported that commercial activities such as business, commercial farming and cottage industry are their main source of livelihood. 

Madam Speaker, increased employment and jobs will be achieved by creating opportunities for self-employment, skills development and promotion of value addition. This will not be achieved overnight. The employment strategy will involve skills development, including apprenticeship, together with the promotion of value addition to projects that ultimately absorb excess labour. 

Madam Speaker, I now turn to the revenue and expenditure framework that will finance the budget priorities for Financial Year 2016/2017. As we all should be aware, demands on the Budget remain much higher than our revenue effort, which calls for careful prioritisation of Government interventions before new initiatives are taken on. It is, therefore, critical that a coordinated approach is undertaken in the implementation of the Budget priorities.

Madam Speaker, the total approved budget for the Financial Year 2016/2017 is Shs 26,361 billion. Out of this, Shs 18,407.7 billion is allocated for spending by ministries, departments, agencies and local governments. Shs 4,977.7 billion is domestic debt refinancing for maturing domestic debt, Shs 169.18 billion for external debt repayments, Shs 2,022.9 billion for interest payments; Shs 111 billion for settlement of domestic arrears, and Shs 672 billion is Appropriation-in-Aid which is the amount of funds generated by MDAs and authorised to be spent by the same institutions at source.

Revenues

Madam Speaker, domestic revenues are projected to increase to Shs 12,914.3 billion, up from this fiscal year’s projected outturn of Shs 11,598 billion. This will be achieved by improving efficiency in tax administration, including enforcement of collections, increasing the tax base by reducing the size of the informal sector and increasing investment in tax collection infrastructure.

Domestic Resource Mobilisation 

Madam Speaker, the strategy for domestic revenue mobilisation in the Financial Year 2016/2017 is to expand the tax base by gradually formalising the large informal sector and improving efficiency in tax collection and compliance. Government will aggressively mobilise additional sources of revenue by raising the revenue effort from the current ratio of 13 per cent of GDP to 16 per cent by Financial Year 2019/2020. It is still a shame upon us as a country that our GDP ratio to tax ratio is still so low.

Madam Speaker, this will be done through implementing tax policy reforms that align the tax regime with best practice, both in the regional and global context in order to generate necessary resources to finance the Budget and also promote private sector investment. In the forthcoming year, Government will continue to simplify the tax regime, enhance compliance and eliminate tax avoidance and evasion.  

Madam Speaker, the Financial Year 2016/2017, tax measures approved by the Ninth Parliament will facilitate investment including emerging industries, particularly in the petroleum, mining and construction sectors. These measures include the following:- 

    1. Taxpayers who merge or acquire loss-making businesses and continue to operate this same business after this transaction will be allowed tax relief for such losses in order to promote Uganda’s investment climate and facilitate mergers and acquisitions. 
    2. VAT relief will be granted in respect of supplies procured from the domestic market for aid-funded projects in order to cure the imbalance suffered by domestic suppliers and producers. 
    3. Producers of solar, wind and geothermal energy will be allowed relief on VAT incurred on their business inputs in order to reduce the cost of production of alternative sources of energy. 
    4. VAT imposed on imported services used by Business Process Outsourcing companies will be refunded at the time of export or offset if the services are consumed in Uganda.

Madam Speaker, additional tax measures approved by the Ninth Parliament include the following: 

    i. Increase in Excise Duty on diesel and petrol by Shs 100, soft cup cigarettes to Shs 50,000 per 1000 sticks and Hinge Lid cigarettes to Shs 80,000 per 1000 sticks, sweets and confectionaries to 20 per cent.

    ii. Increase from one per cent to 1.5 per cent in Stamp duty on transfer of property.

    iii. Increase from Shs 5 million to Shs 20 million registration fees for personalised number plates. Details of the new tax measures can be found in the respective amendment Acts that will become effective on 1 July 2016.

Madam Speaker, the performance of non-tax revenue remains low, accounting for only one per cent to two per cent of total revenue collection. All accounting officers with the responsibility for collecting levies and fees will be held accountable for collection and accountability of Non-Tax Revenue in accordance with the Public Finance Management Act, 2015. 

Madam Speaker, furthermore measures to enhance capacity for tax administration will be implemented. These include the completion of the establishment of the One-Stop Border Posts at Malaba, Mutukula, Busia and Mirama hills border points to facilitate faster and simplified clearance of goods at border posts. 

Next year, the Uganda National Single Window, which allows lodging standardised documents at a single point to fulfil all import, export and transit related regulated requirements, will be fully operationalised. This will reduce the cost of doing business, create transparency in the supply chain and increase Government revenue. Electronic Fiscal Devices, which record business transactions and share this information with the tax authority will also be rolled out in a phased manner.

Madam Speaker and colleagues, I have provided Shs 8 billion to implement the Taxpayer Registration Expansion Project to enhance coordination between institutions such as the Uganda Revenue Authority, Uganda Registration Services Bureau, Kampala Capital City Authority and other local authorities. 

The programme will help businesses to formalise their operations through business licensing and registration. I have also increased the budget of the Uganda Revenue Authority by Shs 40 billion to roll out taxpayer education programs to increase tax awareness, compliance and remedial mechanisms, as well as cover other operational activities. The scope for revenue improvements are detailed in the Background to the Budget.

Madam Speaker, pre-Budget consultations of the East African Community Ministers of Finance were held on 7 May, 2016. Among the issues considered at the consultations was implementation of the East African Community Summit directive on industrialisation with a focus on the development of motor vehicles, textiles and leather industries in the community. 

The consultations also agreed to adjustments in Common External Tariff rates, details of which will be gazetted by the East African Community Secretariat. 

Madam Speaker, Government has also developed a new policy to guide Double Taxation agreements. We will, forthwith, be commencing the process of re-negotiating Double Taxation agreements that do not comply with this policy.

In conclusion, Madam Speaker and honourable members, I wish to commend this Budget to all Ugandans in our quest for the country to attain middle income status. The strategic choices we have made in the Budget for next year concretise the foundation for the prosperity of future generations. Uganda’s Vision 2040 aspires for, “A transformed Ugandan society from a peasant to a modern and prosperous country by 2040”. This Budget represents yet another milestone towards this goal. 

For Ugandan households, next year’s Budget seeks to make all of you healthy and wealthy. 

To school teachers and university staff together with health workers, His Excellency the President has fulfilled his pledge and the Ugandan people now demand a quid pro quo in service delivery.

To the youth, I implore you to engage in production as activities like sports betting have no future for you and the country. 

To private sector entrepreneurs, seize the vast opportunities that abound in agriculture, agro-processing, tourism, mining and other sectors in Uganda. Please invest, make profits, expand your businesses, become millionaires, multi-millionaires and multi-billionaires while creating jobs and ultimately making a significant contribution to the growth of our economy. Madam Speaker, I beg to submit.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable member for Buyanja for reading the statement. Let me now invite the substantive Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, His Excellency the President, to make his concluding remarks.

GEN. (RTD) MUSEVENI: Madam Speaker, these old men; grand-fathers still have stamina. In a long speech like this one, sometimes people may not pick what is crucial. They may be lost in so many things and forget the crucial points.

There are two parts here; part one is to build a modern economy, you need a foundation first. As honourable members of Parliament, you should audit the foundation. What has been achieved in the foundation?

Number one is peace and security. This is there and it will stay here. Nobody can disturb Uganda. If people want to disturb the country, they should look for other addresses but not here.

Number two is electricity. You have heard what the minister has said and I told you, when I was here last, that for the first time in many years, we have a bit of surplus of electricity and we are going to maintain that. We shall not relax so that electricity is available and our struggle now is to make it cheaper, especially for the manufacturers.

Number three is the roads. You have been seeing the roads that are being worked on and they are listed in the minister’s speech. (Interjections) Oh, very sorry. In the speech of the honourable Member of Parliament who was speaking on my behalf. If there was shoddy work on the roads, those who did it will pay. The Judicial Commission of Inquiry has reported and you will hear of the casualties who will come from that inquiry. 

Working with our partners in the region, we have already created a regional market. These matters are not just talk. We must have the stimuli to stimulate and sustain production. If you produce so much, where do you sell what you produce? You must have heard of our struggles working with our sisters and brothers in East Africa to revive the East African Common Market. That market is now there. 

When MPs visit the embassies of our partners from outside, you can talk about other issues but also talk about market access in their markets. That is the real support. Those who are our friends should open their markets to us because when somebody buys what you produce, he is supporting you. 

I was in Germany recently and I told them that since 1963 when Uganda got independence, we started supporting Germany prosperity by buying their vehicles. The good thing is that I have been here for quite a long time so what you call history, I call current affairs. 

Before Uganda’s independence, the only cars I used to see here were British-made cars: Humber, Morris Minor, the Anglia. However, immediately after independence, the first person to buy a German car was our headmaster Mr Crayton who bought a Mercedes Benz. Soon after, there were Volkswagens, Volkswagen Combis, BMWs and Audis. These were all German cars. By buying those cars, we are supporting Germany prosperity. We are supporting German companies. We are helping the Germans to employ their people. 

Soon after, the Japanese came in. Their cars that time were weak. These Toyotas would break down but we kept buying them and by the time I came back from where we were, Japanese cars had flooded the whole market.

When we came from the bush in 1979, we saw, for the first time, vehicles called TATA. I had not seen those vehicles before. I asked, “Where are these vehicles coming from?” I learnt that they were from India.

As such, we have been supporting the prosperity of our partners; the Europeans, the Japanese – Recently, when I was opening a hospital in Hoima built by Japanese aid, I said, “Thank you very much for the aid but this is (d). (a) should be market access, (b) should be investment, (c) should be tourism. (d) can be solidarity; what they call aid. That can be there as (d) but (a), (b) and (c) must be there. If you are really my good friend, give me the market. Two, invest in my country because you have more money and I have less money. Come and invest. Three, send me tourists so that they enjoy this good weather.” Of course we do not welcome poor tourists but rich ones.

Therefore, when we are discussing all these, we already have a regional market but we have also worked with our partners for the international markets, for example AGOA and that is why I saluted President Bill Clinton. Those markets are there; the regional and international ones and they are in place.

As for the railway, we are working on it. In some towns, we are also working on piped water. Some of them already have it because piped water is crucial for many of these industries.

What is remaining to be worked on, which the minister touched on a little in his speech, is cheaper money for borrowing. Money from commercial banks cannot modernise the country, it is for traders. (Applause) For manufacturing, we need cheaper money from UDB and we are working on that.

What we have already achieved is the ICT backbone and what is remaining is for us to improve on the foundation, which is funding of UDB so as to have cheaper money for industries and maybe for agriculture and a little bit for ICT and services. Once we have cheaper money, which is the one, which is not yet tackled because for the railway, we are tackling it. We have not finished but we have started.

What remains is for us, as a country and the leadership, to attract more investments so that they can produce more goods and services and also create jobs for our people. However, you cannot do this if you do not have a corruption-free atmosphere. (Applause) Secondly, we must be fast-movers. Therefore, okwekurura is no longer acceptable; anybody who delays the programme will not be tolerated.

In the minister’s speech –(Interjection)– Oh, I am very sorry and I beg your pardon. (Laughter) I apologise to the utmost. The honourable member whom I delegated - If you look at page 4, you will see the decline in commodity prices; they are all there. Tea prices went down, gold and copper also went down. Why did that happen? It is because the Chinese were previously building a lot of things like new buildings, airports, dams and so forth. As such, they were buying a lot of steel and cement for building and a lot of copper for the wires. Now the Chinese are building less so the global demand for copper, steel and cement has gone down. That is why the prices of our commodities have also gone down.

That means that it is not wise for us to continue depending on these commodities only. We must add value and that is one point that I wanted to highlight in what the minister was saying because he was saying many things.

Another point he raised is the issue of public debt. We have now borrowed a bit of money from the Chinese. We have borrowed for Karuma but we co-funded by putting in our own money as well. We borrowed for Isimba and we are borrowing for the railway. He told you on page 10 that although we are borrowing, we are very much within the accepted borrowing parameters because our borrowing now has gone to 30 per cent. The danger point is if you go to 50 per cent. We had included Ayago – there is a very big site called Ayago in Nwoya where we are going to generate 850MW of electricity. That would be four times the amount of power that we are getting from the old dam in Jinja. That is a lot of power.

However, I saw that we had Karuma, Isimba and the railway and if we added Ayago, the debt portion would go up. As such, we removed Ayago and only borrowed for Karuma, Isimba and the railway. The minister did not highlight that but we are very strict and conscious on that. 

People are now going to work on Ayago as an investment but not as a loan. There are groups, which are coming: recently, the presidents of Turkey and South Korea were here and some Chinese groups are also coming. We are telling them that we shall not borrow for Ayago. “If you have the money, invest and we shall discuss with you on how to handle that.”

Therefore, we are very conscious of not over borrowing. I am very grateful to the Chinese because they are serious and we are doing serious business with them. (Interjections)– I talk about my home, I do not talk about other people’s homes. (Laughter)

In paragraph 26 of the speech, we talk about soil fertility going down and all the stories to do with agriculture. However honourable members, the real problem we have is attitude change. We must work on a change in the attitude of our people. We must help our people to change their attitude because we cannot talk about soil fertility when Israel, which is in the desert, is productive and here we are talking about some little things. 

Empowerment is not a problem, the problem is attitude. If you really want to change anything in your people, and I am telling you this from experience not just bringing words in a box, it is attitude change.

In paragraphs 29 and 30, the minister talked about –(Laughter)– my delegate, who read the speech, pointed out how we have enhanced the budget of agriculture from Shs 500 billion to Shs 800 billion. We have not yet hit my target in the campaign. I was talking of Shs 1000 billion but we must finish these roads that we have already started; we cannot abandon them. Therefore, moving it up by Shs 300 billion or Shs 400 billion is not bad. 

Therefore, when you are explaining to our people, tell them that I am very cautious and I intend to put more money in agriculture but we must finish what we started with the roads and electricity. In paragraph 37, they are again talking of roads and they are all mentioned; the ones, which have been finished as well as those still being constructed all through to paragraph 39. 

Rural development in Uganda is the best in the world. We shall get time and talk about that when you invite me. 

In paragraph 52, there are two important figures and one is that people using electricity in Uganda need to be at 87 per cent. They are now at 20 per cent. They have gone up in these few years since we have put a little bit of emphasis. As far as the districts are concerned, only four remaining districts do not have electricity and these include Nwoya, Kotido, Kaabong and Buvuma.  

In paragraph 53, we show how those areas are going to get electricity. Therefore, we are going to have 100 per cent electricity supplied to all districts, at least the district headquarters. (Applause) That is what we call progress. 

In paragraph 57, and this is where I need your support, there is still tax evasion among the telephone companies. They make three million calls from abroad but declare only half a million calls and all the money is hidden. We have now made an arrangement to buy high capacity equipment to trace all the calls, which come in. (Applause) 

When this matter came to the Ninth Parliament, I think somebody did not explain it well. This is going to be an investment. It will be a Public-Private Partnership based (PPP) where somebody brings in equipment at his own cost and then he helps us to trace all the money, which was being hidden for all the calls. When he does that, instead of us paying him for the equipment bought, he takes from what he has traced to pay himself back. That is why we call it a PPP.

It was not well explained to the last Parliament and I think there was also lobbying by the telephone companies. While they can lobby the NRMs also, because remember that satan was an angel of God - They say that he was a high ranking type before he was chased and became the worst person. Therefore, some of these elements; the NRM angels can also be part of the problem. 

Honourable Members of Parliament, we are definitely losing about $400 million in tax per year. That is about Shs 1.2 trillion. Please, when this matter comes again, help me to sort it out because there is a lot of money there, which the telecom companies are hiding. 

As Ssabalwanyi, I fight well when I am in the bush. Here in the town, I need the support of my young friends. Therefore, these are the few comments that I wanted to make and I thank the honourable Member of Buyanja who helped me to read this very long speech. (Applause) I thank you and wish you success. Lubanga okonyi, with the help of God. Afoyo matek, thank you very much. (Applause)  

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Mr President. You will be happy to hear that in May we reviewed those tax amendments. 

Honourable members, I also thank you for your attendance today. You are invited to the parliamentary gardens for further discussions that are pending. 

The House is adjourned to Tuesday, 14 June 2016 at 9.30 a.m. and we will convene on Tuesday, Wednesday and Thursday next week. 

National Anthem.

East African Community Anthem.

(The House rose at 6.08 p.m. and adjourned to Tuesday, 14 June 2016 at 9.30 a.m.) 

