
PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA

Thursday, 10 June 2021

Parliament met at 11.27 a.m. at the Kololo Independence Grounds, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

PROCLAMATION BY THE RT HON. SPEAKER OF THE PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA

THE SPEAKER: WHEREAS the President of the Republic of Uganda has under Article 101(2) of the Constitution indicated to the Speaker of Parliament his wish to address Parliament and the nation on the National Budget for the Financial Year 2021/2022;

AWARE that the Financial Year 2020/2021 will end on 30 June 2021;

COGNISANT of the fact that it is expedient that the President addresses Parliament and the nation on the National Budget for the Financial Year 2021/2022;

NOW, THEREFORE, in exercise of the powers conferred upon the Speaker by Clause 4(a) of Article 94 of the Constitution, rules 17 and 25(1) of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament, I hereby proclaim that the Parliament shall sit at Kololo Independence Grounds on Thursday, the 10th day of June 2021 at 10.00 a.m. in the morning, to receive the address of His Excellency the President on the National Budget for the Financial Year 2021/2022; and further consider motions related to the appointment of Cabinet as mandated by articles 108(a), 113, 114 of the Constitution and constitution of the Appointments Committee of Parliament.

FURTHER, in exercise of the powers conferred upon the Speaker by the Constitution, the Parliament powers and privileges Act Cap 258 and the Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of Uganda, it is hereby proclaimed and declared that the said Kololo Independence Ground be the precincts of Parliament for the aforementioned purposes.

Given under my hand at Parliament House, Kampala, this 27th day of May 2021.

Jacob L. Oulanyah
Speaker of Parliament. 

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this Third Sitting of the First Session of the Eleventh Parliament. You will recall that during the Second sitting on 4 June 2021 where we received the State of the Nation Address by His Excellency the President, I informed you that whereas this House would be adjourned to 10 June 2021 for the Budget speech, in the likely event that the urgency to convene a sitting arose, you would be notified accordingly. Indeed, the urgency has arisen hence this morning’s sitting. 

I received communication from the President on 08 June 2021 on the appointment of members of the Cabinet. Articles 113(1) and 114(1) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda (1995) mandate this House to approve presidential appointees to the Cabinet. The appointees for the positions of Vice-President and Prime Minister will be approved by this Parliament, through a simple majority, pursuant to Article 108(2) and 108(a)(1) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda.

The Appointments Committee will approve the rest of the appointees to Cabinet. This implies the urgency of this House to duly constitute the Appointments Committee in line with Rule 161 and 168 of the Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of Uganda.

The purpose of this sitting, therefore, is to constitute the Appointments Committee and deal with the motion varying the number of other ministers in accordance with Article 114(3) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda.

Honourable members, I am also in receipt of a formal communication from the National Unity Platform (NUP) designating the following members for these following positions: 

    1. Hon. Mathias Mpuuga, Member of Parliament for Nyendo-Mukungwe Constituency as the Leader of the Opposition in Parliament.
    2. Hon. John Baptism Nambeshe, Member of Parliament for Manjiya County, as the Chief Opposition Whip.

Please join me in congratulating the Members. (Applause)

I urge you to diligently play your roles as prescribed in the relevant laws and Rules of Procedure. Congratulations, honourable members.

Maybe at this stage, the hon. Mathias Mpuuga would like to say something, by way of acceptance. If he does not accept, then they will have to look for another person.

11.35
MR MATHIAS MPUUGA (NUP, Nyendo-Mukungwe, Masaka): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Mr Speaker, I have not had the occasion to congratulate you and the Deputy Speaker on your election to the helm of this august House, as presiding officers. I take this honour to extend my congratulations, and to support your office to fulfil the mandate for which the members of Parliament elected you to their service and that of the country.

Mr Speaker, I am here to accept the appointment by my party and humbly appreciate the encouragement by the House to my appointment.  

Mr Speaker, it is a new day for us. Of course, a fresh start awaits us and the same old problems - let us call them challenges - await us. I am here to promise the country and colleagues, Members of Parliament, of my presence to deal with the frictions in our society in a manner that is bipartisan. 

An old friend called me, after my appointment, to offer his congratulations. He told me, “You are not the Leader of the Opposition. You are the leader of our position.” Then I asked, what that position is. He said, “You offered in your appointment that the theme of your leadership will be accountability and service.” 

Mr Speaker, that is my position and it should be the position of this House, to which I will be the LOP.  

Friends and comrades here in Parliament, I promise that I will offer leadership thus far to ensure that our mandate to work on the challenges and the opportunities of our common people are fulfilled without fear, favour or contradiction. 

The team on your left is that zealous to do just that job, Mr Speaker. We look forward to harmonious working relations with comrades on the right side of the House because at the end of the day, we are the House of Parliament; the House of the people’s consensus. We are here to legislate the people’s concerns. I will be at the service of the House. I thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Mr Nambeshe, the Leader of the Opposition has spoken and as the Chief Opposition Whip, you do not have much to say, except to accept. Please, proceed. 

11.39
THE CHIEF OPPOSITION WHIP (Mr John Baptist Nambeshe): Thank you, Mr Speaker. In equal measure, allow me to send my congratulatory message to you. Mine is also to appreciate my party, the National Unity Platform (NUP) and consent to this appointment to the office of the Chief Opposition Whip.

I also pledge total commitment to work collaboratively with other whips of the parties that form the Opposition of the 11th Parliament, to discharge my roles and functions as stipulated in the laws and Rules of Procedure. I thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. As we embark on this morning sitting, please note that later this afternoon, the House will receive the Budget Speech for the Financial Year 2021/2022. 

Honourable members, the records should be corrected in my communication. The statement that I received communication from H.E the President on 8 June 2021 on the appointment of members of the Cabinet – this particular paragraph has not been improved upon. It was drafted in anticipation. I have not yet received any letter from the President and so, let the records correct that. 

Secondly, on the Appointments Committee composition, we have worked out the matrix and we find that the number exceeds the required number for this committee by five. Therefore, there is need for the NRM, as a party, to withdraw six names, which they had earlier submitted so that they can now be approved in accordance with the numbers given for this committee. 

The matrix shows that the NRM will present 16 members, the 17th being the Chairperson of the Appointments Committee. The NUP will present three, FDC - one, DP - one, UPC – one, JEEMA – one, PPP – one, UPDF – one and Independents – three. 

Therefore, I urge the NRM party to do this quickly and resubmit so that by the time I come to this particular motion, the six names have been withdrawn. Given that that was going to be the first item on the agenda, I might have to adjust the Order Paper to give time to the NRM party to make this alteration.

I will alter the Order Paper as follows: 
Item No.7 shall become item one. I have received communication from the President, given that this matter has financial implications, since there is no Cabinet yet; no Prime Minister, Vice President yet - the President has given the authority to move this motion to hon. Fox Odoi Oywelowo and the person to second the motion will be hon. Cecilia Ogwal from Dokolo District. The Order Paper is accordingly altered for item No.7 to become item No.4 and we will proceed accordingly. 

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO VARY THE NUMBER OF CABINET MINISTERS AND OTHER MINISTERS IN ACCORDANCE WITH ARTICLE 113 AND 114 OF THE CONSTITUTION OF THE REPUBLIC OF UGANDA

11.44
MR FOX ODOI-OYWELOWO (NRM, West Budama North East County, Tororo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise to move a motion for a resolution of Parliament to vary the total number of Cabinet ministers and other ministers under Articles 113 -

DR BATUWA: Mr Speaker, I rise on a matter of privilege that has suddenly occurred, which I would like to bring to your attention – 

THE SPEAKER: Please, proceed. 

DR BATUWA: Mr Speaker, I seek leave to interrupt the motion on a matter of privilege that has suddenly occurred, which I would like to address under Rule 112, on leave of absence. 

This rule dictates to us that every Member shall attend the sittings of the House, unless leave of absence has been granted to him or her by the Speaker. As I speak right now, a very good number of us, especially from the Opposition side are being held at the gate knowing that you have just proclaimed that where we are is actually Parliament. 

I, therefore, see no reason as to why the SFC has decided to use their eyes to know who has COVID-19 and who does not have COVID-19 to deny honourable Members of Parliament, who are at the gate, to get in here and join us. When I look at the back, I see so many seats, which convinces me that you rightfully expected all of us to come in big numbers. I, therefore, rise with the presumption that the Rt Hon. Speaker could be blind and I should bring it to his attention so that he makes a ruling to that effect and those Members come and join us. 

Mr Speaker, it is very important for those Members to come and join us because today is historical. Whereas Article 111 of the Constitution grants the President powers to appoint ministers, Article 113 of the Constitution limits that number to 21 Cabinet ministers. The information I have is that the number is going to exceed that; therefore, he will need our approval. 

Mr Speaker, it is therefore very important that you make a ruling for the Members who are held outside there so that they come and make a contribution on what is going to take place here. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: First of all, the man you see seating here as the Speaker of Parliament is not blind. (Laughter)

Secondly, if you had eyes, you would have seen that I was also held at the gate for about 15 minutes - and this is the Speaker - but you did not see that. I needed to produce my COVID-19 results, which were on the phone, which I had shut down and put somewhere else. I had to turn it on and show the officer my test results, which were done yesterday. 

The times are bad. There are very many rules we can bend but not this one. If it is because their test results are not there, then my ruling would be that they should not come in. However, if the test results are there and they are being held for other reasons, then my ruling would be different. The officers involved check the valid results and allow all Members with valid results to come in. 

I have just stated that this House is under attack from COVID-19, both Members and staff. We have cases. Please, let us not take this as a light matter but a serious matter.

Thirdly, we have quorum and we can transact business.

MR SSEWUNGU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also congratulate you and the Deputy Speaker for getting into that office. 

I would like to raise a procedural matter. Definitely, Members were tested but results are not out. Therefore, would it be procedurally right to stop Members from accessing Parliament whereas the failure of producing results is not on them?

We do not know the results of those testing and checking Members and we have never seen them. The SFC must also display their results before they check me because I gave in my body to be tested at Parliament. Therefore, would it be procedurally right to stop Members who were tested by people who have not displayed their results to them? 

Mr Speaker, we are not ordinary people; we are Members of Parliament elected by our people. The cost of testing us is high. Schools have been closed but no child has been tested, not even in our rural areas. Therefore, would it be procedurally right, Mr Speaker, to stop us yet we do not know the results of those who are stopping us and they are touching us? They might be more dangerous than us. 

Mr Speaker, you have to protect your people. Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: On what matter do you rise, honourable member?

MS OGWAL: On the same matter, Mr Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: On procedure?

MS OGWAL: Yes, please. Mr Speaker, I beg to stand on a procedural matter. I know a precedent has already been created before that the reason a COVID-19 test is required as one of the preconditions for accessing Parliament is because of the presence of His Excellency the President. Otherwise, all of us here can confirm that we all converged at Parliament and we all came in the same buses; so, we are all related to one another.

Mr Speaker, when I look at where you are sitting and where Members of Parliament are sitting, it is very far away - almost 1,000 times away from where the President is going to sit. In other words, the President is the one who requires that we must have COVID-19 tests. 

Mr Speaker, I remember when you and I attended a function in Atiak, there was a special tent for those who had not got their COVID-19 results. Since these are Members of Parliament, I would want to vary because it is not in our rules - you know, this COVID-19 pandemic has brought a lot of stress on us and we may have to find a way. Mr Speaker, I know you are capable of finding a way. If we say, unless you have a certificate you cannot access, it becomes very difficult. People may think Parliament is being discriminative whereas it is not. 

As for the observance of the Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs), the distance between you and us and the distance between His Excellency the President and us is so huge and even the open air – The Minister of Health designate can confirm that the open air is an added advantage.

Mr Speaker, this is the moment; we want to start with the spirit of cooperation. We want to start on the basis that COVID-19 will force us to change certain behaviours. However painful it may be, we need to assure the President that those who have not received their certificates can sit aside and make sure they do not relate with the rest. Those who have got their certificates confirmed, like you and I, can relate with each other. This is a moment of test and I think COVID-19 is going to test the strength of our leadership.

As an elder, I am pleading for those people who have been cut off from sitting because of mere absence of results. My results came just a few minutes ago, which means we need to reconsider so that we all move in one spirit. I beg to present.

DR ACENG: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise on a point of order. First, allow me to appreciate my senior and mother, hon. Cecilia Ogwal. I also want to thank her for putting on her mask but putting it on the wrong way and exposing her nose in a place of congregation. I want to appeal to the honourable Members who are coming to use this microphone to keep their masks on. 

Mr Speaker, when we congregate here - 520 plus Members - it is already a place of gathering. In a place of gathering, there are many risks and the risks are not limited to His Excellency the President. We do not test because we are coming in the presence of His Excellency the President; we test to protect one another. 

I must correct hon. Cecilia Ogwal that we are all at risk of getting COVID-19. Is hon. Cecilia Ogwal in order to state that we only test when we are coming in the presence of the President because we risk the President’s life and not ours and calling it a mere test? I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: These tests are very important because when we congregate, there are high possibilities that one of us is infected and then will carry to their families and all the other people around them. We do not want this to happen. We want Parliament to be part of this. Honourable members, these are difficult times; we must hold on to whatever keeps us safe.

We can never politicise a pandemic of this nature. The rule is stay safe and if there is any indication that something might go wrong as a result of people gathering, whose status is not known, that creates the problem that we are trying to avoid.

The challenge that I have also noticed is that because of the numbers, results now take a little longer than usual to come and sometimes by the time the results come, you are due for another test.

The managers of this process should make sure they pull up their socks and make this happen. Last week I announced that members of Parliament would be tested on the days that I announced that day, and the testing people knew that Parliament would be sitting today for purposes that we have already stated - receiving the budget speech of the President.

For results of these particular Members not to have been segregated and brought forward so that they can have access to this place, is irregular.

However, that irregularity cannot now make us say that because they did not act on it, let us now put our lives at risk. It might not make sense. I have stated to you my own case as Speaker; they did not allow me until I produced the results.
They were firm; the guy did not even salute me before I showed my thing. After that, he saluted me and I understood what he was doing.

So, please, let us come together on this and find a way that will not make us anxious. Hon. Cecilia Ogwal has proposed that I create a tent for those who do not have results; where do I create it at this moment?

Do I order some people to come in front, others who have no results at the back, would that be reasonable? Can somebody check this up and see if it is feasible. 

The place is fairly congested already and the distances are not even what is required - (Interruption)

MR OKUPA: Mr Speaker, this is possible, on the way we were required to vote here, there were Members whose results were not ready but there were also Members who had been denied - I do not want to give names but they were identified and were taken somewhere there. So, the same approach can also apply for this case. It is something that we are inventing. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Another tent outside this one? If that is possible, please create a tent outside.

MS ALUM: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Allow me to also add my voice in congratulating you and your Deputy, for assuming that Chair. We have Members, more especially from the Opposition side, who even last time during the State of the Nation Address did not receive their results.

Again, they presented themselves for the test and today, they are not here because they have not received their results. This is a very serious humiliation on the part of the members of Parliament who come here not on their own but as representatives of the people who elected them to this Parliament. The Members did their due diligence to present themselves for testing and the responsible people, who are supposed to do the testing and provide the results, have not done their work.

Mr Speaker, you are the head of this institution of Parliament; Members have already complied, they have done their tests. I would like to know whether it will not be procedurally right for you to use your office to demand that Members who tested ever since last week during the State of the Nation Address and now, that their results be given to them so that they access this Chamber.

Allow me also to add my voice that during the First Sitting when we were electing the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker, we had a separate tent for Members who had cases. It is very bad for a Member of Parliament to do his or her part and then be stopped at the gate.

I move a motion that you provide for these Members who are out a separate tent so that they are part of this very historical moment that we are having as the Parliament of Uganda because it is not their fault. I beg to submit.

THE SPEAKER: You are now raising a motion for the Speaker to create a tent. Is that motion seconded?

MR TUMWEBAZE: Mr Speaker, you rightly guided the House that we are not in normal times, I am sure everybody knows this. The situation we are facing has nothing to do with which political party; every human being is under attack. The concerns of Members affect both sides of the House. I am sure there are colleagues from the Opposition who are affected by the delay of results as well as the Government side.

You have guided that if people are being denied access as a result of no results, it is clear, everybody must have the results. If they are being denied as a result of the inefficiency in processing the results, you have also given your ruling.

Is it procedurally right to continue this filibustering and delaying the House’s business? I pray that your ruling stands and the business of the House proceeds. I beg to submit.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I had asked for a tent to be created to accommodate this category of our Members but also as you stand here, your results might be coming in at any time. I got mine on phone when I was coming this way; I left home without them.

So, it does not just affect Members; it had even affected the Speaker. I would not be sitting here, going by what happened to me at the gate but my results came just before I reached the gate. Honourable members, as I said, it should not be politicised because the people who are there, you do not know which parties they belong to. It must be a whole mix of people there.

I do not know whether SFC will know that this is NRM, DP - I do not know whether that is possible for 529 members. 

However, please, arrange the holding tent and put some chairs there, although they will also be on the wrong side given the wind. If there is anybody affected, the distance is good enough but they will not be able to contribute because the microphones are all this side – Yes. How does one move from there and come here, when we are afraid to mix? Anyway, can we, please, proceed with the business while this is being done?

MS OGWAL: Mr Speaker, allow me to record my appreciation for the decision you have taken just now.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much.

MS OGWAL: I also believe that with the technicians here, we can arrange a similar unit to be put there for them. Thank you so much, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: You are welcome. Please, proceed.

DR BATUWA: Mr Speaker, allow me to withdraw the statement that I made, that the Speaker is blind or the Speaker was blind. Allow me to bring it to your attention that actually –

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, please, please, please. I know I am not blind; so, I cannot be offended by a statement like that.

DR BATUWA: No, there is another aspect to this matter of privilege. When I was at Parliament, the fact is –

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, you raised your matter. We have governed on it; a decision has been taken. Please, resume business.

DR BATUWA: Thank you, Mr Speaker – Initially 

THE SPEAKER: You see, you have just violated one of the principles as well, speaking with your nose in the microphone. (Laughter) Please, resume your seat. Yes, hon. Odoi?

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise to move a motion for a resolution of Parliament to vary the total number of Cabinet ministers and other ministers, under Articles 113(2) and 114(3) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda.

Mr Speaker, this motion is also moved under Rule 56 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament and on the express instructions of the President.

“WHEREAS Article 111 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda provides that Cabinet shall consist of the President, the Vice-President, the Prime Minister and such number of ministers as may appear to the President to be reasonably necessary for the efficient running of the State;

AND WHEREAS under Article 111(2) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, Cabinet is mandated to determine, formulate and implement the policy of the Government and to perform such other functions conferred by the Constitution or any other law;

AWARE that under Articles 113(1) and 114(3) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, Cabinet ministers and other ministers are appointed by the President, with the approval of Parliament;

NOTING that under Articles 113(2) and 114(3) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, the number of Cabinet ministers and other ministers shall not exceed 21, except with the approval of Parliament;

FURTHER NOTING that on the 14th day of August 2020, a motion was moved and supported by, among others, hon. Atim Ogwal Cecilia Barbara, which was overwhelmingly supported and approved by the Parliament to include elders as a special interest group;

REALISING that for the efficient running of the State, His Excellency the President has determined that there is need to increase the total number of Cabinet ministers and the total number of other ministers;

NOW, THEREFORE, be resolved by Parliament as follows:

    1. The total number of Cabinet ministers, provided for under Article 113 (2), be increased from 21 to 30; and 
    2. The total number of other ministers, provided for under Article 114 (3), be increased from 21 to 50.”

Mr Speaker, this motion is moved by Fox Odoi-Oywelowo, Member of Parliament, West Budama North East and seconded by hon. Atim Ogwal Cecilia Barbara.

I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Is the motion seconded? Can I deal with the secondment? Who is seconding the motion? 

12.12
MS CECILIA OGWAL (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Mr Speaker, the changes here make the situation a bit strange. So, I do not know where to speak from.

I would like to clarify, from the presentation made by the mover, that although the mover says in this motion that the increase is from 21 to 30, under Article 113 (2) and from 21 to 50, under Article 114 (3), I would like to inform the House from the onset that the variations have been done in the subsequent Parliaments.

Today, we only need one variation. In other words, over the years, from the 1995 Constitution, we have been increasing, increasing and increasing. However, right now, we need only one. We now have 79 but we need one variation to make 80. That is the first clarification I would like to make.

Mr Speaker, I am standing here to second this motion –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Order. (Laughter) Negotiations on point of order are not required. (Laughter)

MR OKUPA: Mr Speaker, we are not negotiating on the point of order. I was asking hon. Ogwal to keep a distance.

Mr Speaker, I appreciate the mover and seconder and I am not here to oppose the motion. However, hon. Ogwal has stated that we only need a variation for one. Assuming it was a different President, that would not be the case.

Each Parliament must approve the variation, as read by the mover of the motion, not that it is only one. I hope she is listening.

THE SPEAKER: I am listening. It is directed to me.

MR OKUPA: That is my first concern, So, Mr Speaker. The second is that the mover has put a case of increasing. Which one should come first? Is it the chicken or the egg or the egg and then the chicken?

The list of the Cabinet ministers was released before we approved it. Was it assumed that Parliament will automatically approve it? I thought the list would have come after the motion has been approved by Parliament. That makes us look like we are a rubberstamp. That is an indication that it is pre-determined that Parliament will approve whatever comes here.

Mr Speaker, is hon. Ogwal in order to say we are only approving the increment by one person yet this is the 11th Parliament and she knows that each Parliament always approves the variations from 21 to the number required by His Excellency? Is hon. Ogwal in order?

THE SPEAKER: I think the honourable member was just trying to restate the history; that in the past, we had already gone up to 79. This time, they are asking for 80, which is one addition. So, it is not a very huge variation that the President is seeking on the numbers. That is the point that she was making. If she made it any other way, she would be wrong. I suspect she meant what I have just stated - giving a historical perspective and saying, “Okay, we have done up to 79 before; now, they are requesting us for 80.” I think that is the point she was trying to make.

Secondly, the list coming before the numbers are increased would be improper because, as I told you, I have actually not yet received the formal communication from the President. So, I cannot vouch for the rest of the things you have been seeing until I see a letter under the hand of the President presenting the names. That is when I can say something about it. I have not, however, received the letter yet. Probably, he is waiting for this motion as well to communicate officially to the Speaker. 

Honourable members, the first communication on these matters comes to the Speaker. I do not know where the list that came from the press was got. The list should first come to the Speaker.  

MR OKUPA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. We shall take that as hearsay, which appeared in the press and wait to hear those names from you. 

I want us to be clear on whether what I raised as a point of order against hon. Cecilia Ogwal is the correct thing, that each Parliament must approve the variation and not just because it is a historical thing and we just assume. So, I need clarity so that in future, when we are in the 12th Parliament, we do not make the same mistake. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: The extension that was given by the Tenth Parliament lapsed on 12 May 2021. It is not there anymore. This is a new approval being sought for to vary the numbers. 

MS OGWAL: Mr Speaker, I made that clarification because I knew that there are many Members like hon. Okupa, who probably have not been following. 

What I am saying now is that we only need just one addition to the 79 ministers who have thus far been approved. This is why I stand here to second the motion. I will be able to justify after the mover has already made his justification. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: There was a procedural matter from the Member of Parliament for Kilak South County. You know procedure takes precedence.

MR OLANYA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The procedural matter I wanted to raise has already been alluded to by hon. Okupa. 

His Excellency the President came up with the list of Members of Cabinet, and you clarified this. I wanted to find out if it was procedurally right for Members of Parliament to verify and do the approval after the President has already given the list. That is the procedural matter. I am grateful that you did the clarification.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Let me take the point of order and then we proceed, Members. 

MR OKUPA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. You made a ruling in affirmation of what I had raised. Is hon. Cecilia Ogwal in order to say I was not following the debate yet you have made a ruling in confirmation of what I said here? (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: I think, hon. Okupa, on this particular one, go and find a moment with hon. Cecilia Ogwal and settle it because the matter is resolved as far as the House is concerned. (Laughter) Has the seconder finished? 

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Mr Speaker, the motion was seconded. 

THE SPEAKER: The motion was seconded, but the way you have proceeded does not require any more presentation. When I asked for secondment, the seconders spoke to the motion instead. 

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Mr Speaker, we shall seek your guidance if – 

THE SPEAKER: I think the motion is moved, seconded and it is duly before the House. Can I proceed to propose the question for debate? Is that okay? I think it is clear enough. 

MR SSEWUNGU: Mr Speaker, there are some of us who are dissenting to the motion and we would like to give our position against it. 

THE SPEAKER: You will debate. That is what I am saying. 

MR SSEWUNGU: Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: I am not going to put the question. I am going to propose a motion for debate. That is what I am going to do and that is how we proceed always. Is that okay? Let us now proceed. Now that I have noted that you have a dissenting opinion, you will speak. 

Can we proceed? Should I first open the motion for debate and then you wind up your presentation, if you would like? 

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Most obliged, Mr Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Do you want to justify it? 

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Mr Speaker, it would add value if you permitted me to speak to the motion. 

THE SPEAKER: Proceed. 

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Thank you. The number of Cabinet ministers, by Constitution, is a prerogative of the President. Article 111 of the Constitution of Uganda provides thus, “There shall be a Cabinet which shall consist of the President, the Vice-President, the Prime Minister and such number of ministers as may appear to the President to be reasonably necessary for the efficient running of the State.” 

The operative and cardinal words are “may appear to the President” and “reasonably necessary for the efficient running of the State”. So, the Constitution confers the prerogative to only one person to determine the numbers that are reasonably necessary and what amounts to efficient running of the state informed by those numbers.

Mr Speaker, you may be aware – 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, please let the Member finish.

DR BATUWA: I am rising on a procedural matter. 

THE SPEAKER: I know where you are coming from but let the Member first finish his presentation and then we will deal with the procedural matter. He is finishing his debate. 

DR BATUWA: What would be the essence –

THE SPEAKER: Let us follow the sequencing of his argument.

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Mr Speaker, the Constitution also confers upon Parliament the mandate to permit the President to appoint any numbers, over and above 21. 

The history of this House has shown that right from the Sixth Parliament that was elected immediately after the promulgation of the 1995 Constitution, Parliament permitted the President to appoint numbers that were much higher than the 21, both for ministers and ministers of state. This has been the practice. 

It was done by the Seventh Parliament, the Eighth Parliament, the Ninth Parliament and lastly the 10th Parliament. In the 10th Parliament, the threshold had increased from 21 ministers to 30 and for ministers of state, the number had increased from 21 to 49, making a total of 79 ministers. 

The President proposes to appoint one more minister of state in charge of the elderly and I am going to give a justification for this. 

You may be aware that we have just come out of the presidential and general elections, where President Yoweri Kaguta Museveni was elected overwhelmingly by the people of Uganda. The President presented his manifesto to the people of Uganda. He made commitments as he traversed the country. 

Mr Speaker, the President noted that Uganda still faces many challenges including the increase of elderly persons. The life expectancy in Uganda now stands at 62. This was achieved in part and a great one, due to the good policies of the National Resistance Movement (NRM) that improved the standards of living across the country. 

These elderly persons face challenges. During the Constitution making process, the delegates were confronted by many proposals and they did not consider the elderly persons as a special interest group, necessary for representation at parliamentary level. The view of the NRM Government is that this is a unique group that requires representation in Parliament and the 10th Parliament passed a resolution to include the elderly as a special interest group.

By the time of the promulgation of the 1995 Constitution, Articles 113(2) and 114(3) restricted the number available to the President to appoint for both ministers and ministers of state to 21. The framers of the Constitution were alive to the fact that it would be necessary to vary this number. They included the provision that I referred to in Article 111. By 1995, the population of Uganda was 20 million. The current population is over and above 45 million.

In 1995, Uganda had only 39 districts. We have had a multiplicity of districts, municipalities, counties and sub-counties ever since then. The view of the President is that there must be a per capita increase in the number of Cabinet ministers to service effectively and efficiently the growth in our population.

Mr Speaker, this motion seeks to request this House to invest in more numbers in Cabinet for the effective and efficient service of the country.

I beg to move that you do support this motion. I submit.

THE SPEAKER: Any addition from the seconder or should I propose the question for debate now?

12.33
MS CECILIA OGWAL (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Mr Speaker, I have seconded this motion - not because of the platform or policy package that was presented by the NRM that led to the election of the President and members of Parliament present here - but because of specific reasons that we are all aware of.

Mr Speaker, when you look around the House and in documents that have recorded members of the Eleventh Parliament, it is very hard to find remnants of the Constituent Assembly. It looks as if I am the only remnant. 

I stand here to apologise that at the time when we were debating the 1995 Constitution, we had not focused seriously on the unique needs of the elderly. Whereas we catered for the needs of other interest groups, we did not cater for the elderly.

Mr Speaker, I would like to remind the Member of Parliament that right now we are five parties represented in this House. By order of existence, we have the Uganda People’s Congress (UPC), the Democratic Party (DP), the People’s Progressive Party (PPP), JEEMA and National Unity Platform (NUP). The latter right now leads the Opposition in the House. That is how democracy works. 

Therefore, the Opposition has practical democracy where you see tangible change. The country is yet to see regular elections leading us to peaceful change of regime and that of Government. That is what the country is praying for.

As for now, it is important that we have a legal framework and policies that take care of the elderly who are suffering. You are all representatives of the people of Uganda in your various areas. You know that there are many people who have reached the age of 65 and are dying of high blood pressure or diabetes because there is no legal requirement that takes care of their unique needs. It is important that we begin to focus on that.

I am appreciative of the fact that the Government has come up with the Social Assistance Grant for Empowerment (SAGE) programme but it is not adequate. It still lacks the legal requirements and policies. 

So, Mr Speaker, I stand here to request that we should not only allow the five members of Parliament to enter Parliament and not provide adequately for that particular sector; much as we have allowed the five to come as per the motion I moved on 4th August last year. I am very grateful to Parliament. Nobody opposed that motion except one or two people. They did not oppose it because they were against it but it was for other issues, which were resolved. However, it was popularly approved. Today, we have five Members representing the elderly.

It would, therefore, be fair that we follow up that motion with a ministry set up to ensure that we come up with a legal framework,  policies and programmes, that will uniquely take care of the elderly.

I beg to request the appointing authority that while making the appointment, we also need to know how the deployment is being done and whether it actually takes care of all the areas that the members of Parliament are concerned with.

Mr Speaker, I beg to move that this motion be approved. I would like to assure my fellow members of the Opposition that in your area, particularly in Dokolo, people are complaining that the age of 80 is not favourable for them because of the suffering they have been subjected to for many years. Many of our old people die at the age of 60 or 70. You rarely find old men and women aged 80.

The elderly, therefore, request that the age be lowered to 60 years so that they can benefit from SAGE. This is the voice of all people across the country.

Mr Speaker, I beg for popular support of this motion so that the elderly can be taken care of. I beg to submit.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, the question that I propose to you now for debate is for a resolution of Parliament to vary the number of Cabinet ministers and other ministers, in accordance with Article 113 and 114 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda. The specific request is to vary by 30 in the case of Cabinet ministers and 50 in the case of other ministers.

That is the motion for your debate and the debate starts now. You have to be visible because it is difficult to see you in this kind of light. Let us try to keep our comments sharp and short. 

12.36
MR JOSEPH SSEWUNGU (NUP, Kalungu West County, Kalungu): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the mover of the motion, hon. Fox Odoi, who is actually not a petitioner of this motion. 

I am against the motion. I am disputing what the honourable member has said. We do not determine ministers by the fact of having a big population. When you go to Kenya, you will notice that it has over 70 million people and they have 23 ministers. Tanzania has about 100 million people with 19 ministers. Even Burundi, which recently gained democracy, has less than 20 ministers. 

I have been in this Parliament for a while but ministers are never here. We are appointing ministers for nothing. When shall we ever respect our Constitution? When shall we ever give breathing space to this Constitution?  

I was in the 10th Parliament and we had a minister who was appointed by the President and was an ex-officio from Bunyoro to become a minister for the elderly. We vetted that minister but she never had qualifications and we spent five years without a minister in that ministry. 

Hon. Kabafunzaki was a minister and had to step down because of the problems he had at that time and the ministry remained vacant for all that time; there was no effect against it. 

We are putting a lot of money for nothing. As I conclude, having 80 ministers is a cost on Ugandans. We want to improve schools and deal with COVID-19 but ministers do not attend Parliament Sittings. Some of them come and dose throughout the Sittings. Even when you make an analysis of all those ministers, some of them have not attended. 

I recently attended a function where a minister came and even the NRM supporters did not know the minister. They asked me who it was and I told them to look at the flag on the car because it could have been someone just looking like a minister. We cannot just continue rubber stamping everything for the sake of impressing others. 

Mr Speaker, let us look at this country. Where are we putting all these ministers who do not appear? We are going to pass the Prime Minister but they do not appear in Parliament. Some of them have never even laid a statement on the Table. Why do we want these ministers at the cost of suffering Ugandans? Why are we giving them cars and airtime? 

Honourable members, revisit your constituencies, your homes and those people who voted you and determine whether you need 80 ministers. Kenya and Tanzania are moving faster with a low number of ministers but Uganda has 80 ministers with RDCs. Those are posts I cannot support. Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

I beseech you not to support this motion. Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

12.39 
MR JOHN MUSILA (Independent, Bubulo East County, Namisindwa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to support the motion. I may not go to all allusions of the procedures and the Constitution but the mover of the motion, hon. Odoi and the seconder touched my side, especially those of us that represent rural constituencies with elderly people. 

I did not expect hon. Ssewungu to talk about this, especially when he knows that this country has a very large aging population. 

Mr Speaker, you, yourself, are almost moving towards that age of the elderly. I rise, therefore, to fully support the motion that has been proposed and seconded by those Members. In any case, you have been in this Parliament – this is my first time. You did it the other time. Why can’t we do it today? Who knows, in future we could possibly have some Rasta man appointed towards that same thing? 

12.41
THE OPPOSITION CHIEF WHIP (Mr John Baptist Nambeshe): Thank you, Mr Speaker. As you recall, I had already rushed to the microphone here to raise a procedural matter in the course of submission or when the mover of the motion was still submitting. 

In his submission, he made justification for the motion by saying that the President, through his prerogative, has all the latitude to determine the number of ministers, oblivious of Article 1(1) (3) Clause (2) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda of 1995. 

Clause 2 gives immense powers to Parliament. If the President had the prerogative to decide, then this provision should not have said, “…shall not exceed 21 except with the approval of Parliament.” That is why the motion is in this House. 

Mr Speaker, we would like to make a correlation with the bloated Cabinet with improved service delivery. I implore Members to see whether there is a correlation between the very many ministers in Cabinet and improved service delivery in the country. Instead, it increases the public spending of this country. 

Mr Speaker, you realise that the economy at this time - in fact it should only be this Parliament that is discussing increasing the numbers of ministers flaunting Cabinet; having a bloated Parliament and numerous administrative units, which are administrative costs to the economy. 

Most Parliaments in this pandemic of COVID-19 are discussing or rather changing strategies of how to avert a recession. 

Mr Speaker, we are discussing bloating the Cabinet for improved service delivery, when the experience and facts on the ground show that increasing these numbers will only increase the cost and put the burden on the shoulders of the taxpayer. 

We should borrow a leaf from our neighbourhood. If you go to Tanzania – and may God give eternal rest to the former President of the Republic of Tanzania, the late John Pombe Joseph Magufuli. This is a man who, in just one single Presidential term, moved the economy of the country to middle-income status. How did he do this? He used one measure. With all due respect, we should discuss austerity economies. He ensured that the size of Cabinet was reduced; almost to half of that of his predecessor, former President Jakaya Kikwete. He decreased the Cabinet to 19; with those 19, he was able to deliver the economy of Tanzania to middle-income status. 

Here we are, with a President obsessed with numbers. He would like to increase the numbers of Cabinet as if that will be directly proportional to the services that will be delivered to the local populace. 

To conclude, before I take information, these ministerial appointments are only a tool of patronage and political capital because it virtually has little to do with service delivery to the wanainchi – (Interruption) 

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the Member holding the Floor. I rise on a point of order. When the Constitution was drafted, the drafters gave a provision that Parliament can give authority to have the number varied and the President has been requesting this of Parliament for every term. 

There is statistical and scientific evidence to prove that the number of ministers and political supervisors in the country has led to improvement of impact indicators when it comes to socio-economic transformation and service delivery. For instance, life expectancy at birth has improved from 43 years to 63 years, mortality rates have declined, people below the poverty line have dropped from 56 per cent about 20 years ago to 21 per cent, and there is demonstration that political leadership, including numbers of political leaders, has led to this improvement.

Therefore, is it in order for my friend, hon. Nambeshe, to speak as if there is no science, which can prove this?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, I think that is a matter of differences of opinion. I could not rule the Member out of order; that is his opinion and that is yours. Please, wind up.

MR NAMBESHE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The Leadership Code stipulates very clearly that someone with self-interest, like hon. Baryomunsi, should not have participated in deliberations on this matter.

As I conclude –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, please, this is a very simple debate. Let him finish; you will speak.

MR NAMBESHE: As I conclude, Mr Speaker, I would like to take Members of this 11th Parliament down memory lane, so that you do not allow to be used as rubber stamps to approve Executive decisions for the wrong reasons. The attrition rate of the 10th Parliament was extremely high - above 75 per cent - not only of Members of Parliament but also ministers. 

THE SPEAKER: Are you suggesting that because the ministers were many so the attrition rates were high?

MR NAMBESHE: No, I am not prophesying doom. What I am saying is that – 

THE SPEAKER: I think you should wind up.

MR NAMBESHE: Mr Speaker, I am saying that Members ought to be very cautious in their minds and hearts while approving this list. In fact, I expected the President to revise it downwards - to vary the numbers like his friend who passed away. However, he is varying the total number upwards. Mr Speaker, this 11th Parliament should not be authors of their own misfortune. I beg to submit.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, it is about that time for our friends from the Muslim faith - We would like to inform you that provision has been made for you to do your prayers. When the time comes, there is a small tent behind the big one where you can go and have your prayers.

Honourable members, the following Members will speak and please limit the time before I limit it myself - Listen to the order first and you will speak in that order. I will take hon. Anthony Akol, hon. Ssewanyana, hon. Batwala, hon. Santa Alum, hon. Judith Alyek, hon. Aogon, hon. Jesca Ababiku, hon. Gilbert Olanya, hon. Kaaya and hon. Tony Ayoo. Please, use little time; these are simple matters.

12.51
MR ANTHONY AKOL (FDC, Kilak North County, Amuru): Mr Speaker –(Interruption) 

DR MORIKU: Mr Speaker, during the 10th Parliament, this Floor passed a statutory instrument on COVID-19, taking the safety of our people into consideration. Just a few minutes ago, we have been discussing the issue of safety and social distancing. 

Are we proceeding well when Members of Parliament who are supposed to be exemplary congregate together and line up without social distancing? 

THE SPEAKER: That is part of the solution, which I have just announced. I list your name so you do not have to stand together waiting to be picked. I have picked the Members to take care of that situation. I was deeply concerned myself. Please, let us use little time.

MR AKOL: Mr Speaker, first of all, I have a lot of respect for hon. Fox Odoi-Oywelowo and hon. Cecilia Ogwal. It is very rare for me to disagree with hon. Cecilia Ogwal because she is elderly and senior. However, today, every word that came from them did not convince me. 

I expected that they would have come out very clearly to inform the House that when we had only 21 ministers in Cabinet, this was their performance. Now, when we added the numbers to these, the performance increased to this level. This detail did not come out completely. 

The issue that we need the elderly people to be in this Parliament was sorted out and they are Members of Parliament here. It is not obvious that without creating that office, there is no elder in this House that can be in position to be in any ministry in this country. We are aware that the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development also takes care of the elderly in this country. I, therefore, do not see reason as to why we are insisting that we should increase the number of the ministers, especially given the fact that the Constitution talks about only 21 ministers.

If we are supposed to make a difference as the 11th Parliament, it should start now. We have the authority and it comes from the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda. Those who are saying that it is up to the President to decide how many people he should work with should ask yourselves; first of all - I know some of us are beneficiaries and they are here in the House. I am sorry for my friends who are not happy about what I am saying. 

Ask yourself, “How can we help the President to do things differently?” We cannot go and do the same thing year in, year out and expect some difference in what comes out from our performance. When we are talking about the COVID-19 situation now, we should be asking ourselves - if we are faced with these challenges of COVID-19, what are we reducing in terms of the cost in the country? What is important, always, when you are faced with this kind of challenge, is to look at how you can reduce the cost or how you can increase the revenue. How are you going to increase the revenue to accommodate the additional ministers you are putting in place? That should have come out.

Now, if this is the problem we are faced with, we should work to reduce the costs in the country and it must start now and it should be today, so that the rest of the country and people who are watching us should know that this 11th Parliament is doing something different from what used to be done. The issue should not be that it is a ritual that every time a new Parliament begins, we should increase the number of ministers that come to serve this nation. 

Mr Speaker, I know you have been on record when you were chairing this House and sometimes you adjourned the House when the ministers were not in the House and business could not continue. That will tell you clearly that the number of ministers does not actually translate to the performance of the people.

In my language, they say that many rats cannot do good work in building houses. Therefore, we have to look into this and sort it now. It should start today so that the rest of the country sees that the 11th Parliament is serious and we are doing business differently; it is not business as usual. Thank you very much.

12.55
MR ALLAN SSEWANYANA (NUP, Makindye Division West, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also add my voice to those voices before to congratulate you upon that office as well as your deputy. 

I am against the motion of increasing the number of ministers to 80 in this country. As we can see, everyone here is alluding to the fact that there is need to cost cut and especially on the administration of this country. We are in the pandemic times; the country does not have enough money as it has been sung by the President of this country.

The country is geared towards another lockdown but only to hear that Parliament has again increased the number of ministers to 80. Mr Speaker, you promised that this will be another Parliament that will be doing things very differently. 

We want to start to do things very differently today by not allowing such to happen under your chairmanship. We have always heard the President introduce ministries that are a duplication of some, without roles different to the existing ministries. We have had ministers without portfolio, Minister of General Duties - we do not know which kind of duties are general but those are some of the ministries that we would want to create today.

There are some positions that the President has rendered useless in the roles to this country - especially if I am to go by the saying of your predecessor, hon. Rebecca Kadaga, who said that the Vice-President post is useless to this country; it does not perform the right roles. Such ministries should be removed and we scale down to the rightful number, which will benefit this country. Again, as hon. Fox Odoi was proposing that increase, he gave an example and related it to regional balance, the population service per capita. 

As we see, the President proposed some names - if we are to go with that - but the region with most people - the central region according to the numbers, if we are to pass these 80 ministers, they only have 10 and the top positions are not in the central region, which I represent here.

That means there is that discriminative nature of appointment by the President and we do not know why it is the region in the centre that the President this time is saying has no position in the top 10 positions of this country. For some of us who came here to represent our people, we think that it is useless to have these 80 ministers. Let us have the 20 or 30 that can give us service without considering so many reasons but the nature, economy of this country.

The way the President behaves in appointing his ministers is not based on what the people need but based on what he needs as the fountain of honour. I beg to move.

12.59
DR TIMOTHY BATUWA (FDC, Jinja South Division West, Jinja City): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I oppose the motion but most importantly, I congratulate all those who were appointed for the various offices. I rise not to draw enmity or envy but to advise the nation. 

I am one of those parliamentarians who take this as an important privilege and opportunity to get into this House and debate, as a way of building our nation.

Mr Speaker, if at all the State of the Nation Address was very important as it is and as I do believe it is because the law requires us to listen to the President in silence, if there is anything that I should not forget is when he talked about the economy of this country.

He particularly stated that the GDP of this country was to grow at 6 per cent but because of COVID-19, it reduced to 3 per cent; it was halved. It is not a surprise; so many things have gone by half due to COVID-19 in this country.

The progress of education has reduced by half; a student who would take a year to complete a class is taking 2 years. Working time has been reduced, boda-bodas only work up to 6.00 p.m. yet they would want to work overnight.

We are making our arguments against the evidence of COVID-19, which is not a simple matter. It is, therefore, here that I want to proceed under rule No.61 - amendments to motion sub-rule 1; when a motion is under consideration in the House or in the committee of the Whole House, an amendment may be proposed to the motion if it is relevant to the motion.

Mr Speaker, I propose that we at the moment permit 21 Cabinet ministers as it is in Article 112 of the Constitution and 21 State ministers for such a period as to when the cabinet minister in charge of health will ably inform us; that the country is greatly relieved of the constraints that are bestowed on us by COVID-19. And it is at that moment that we will gather and consider whether we stretch the Cabinet further or not.

It is today that the country is going to be half locked, meaning they will not even be able to execute work. People are not going to be allowed to cross from one district to another but this is not permanent and it is at the discretion of the Minister of Health with the medical opinion that we shall know when to handle this.

Under sub-rule No. 4, an amendment shall not be permitted if in the opinion of the Speaker, it substantially alters the principle of the question proposed.

I am overwhelmingly convinced that this amendment is not altering the question you put to the House because I agree that yes, we should today pass the Cabinet but my amendment is on the number; 21 should pass, the rest should await the statement of the Minster of Health on COVID-19. I beg to move. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Member, your motion, just like you have stated, alters the fundamentals of this motion. It is not acceptable for now.

1.04
MS SANTA ALUM (UPC, Woman Representative, Oyam): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to support the motion about increasing the number of the ministers and more especially of the elderly. 

The elders have given their energy to this country and by the facts on the ground, I was the General Secretary for the SAGE Forum in the last Parliament of Uganda and we had been moving throughout the country, seeing the suffering of elders who did all that they could for us to see a beautiful country like this.

Allow me to note that the Constitution gives Parliament the mandate to permit the President to increase the number of ministers, which he feels is reasonably necessary for the efficient and effective running of the State.

Mr Speaker, the population of Uganda is increasing and for that reason, to only increase the number by one, from what we had in the last Government, is not demanding too much, I think. 

I also want to note that much as this is the 11th Parliament and it should be unique, we cannot completely close our eyes to what the previous parliaments did. There are lessons to pick, which can help us perform extremely well.

For that reason, the 10th Parliament moved the motion that the elders should form part of this 11th Parliament. It is only prudent and good enough that we follow it up by also having an elder to sit in the Cabinet of this country.

As I have noted, there are a lot of issues concerning the elderly of this country. For example, while we represent the people of Uganda, many elders are complaining about the age cup of 80 years for one to qualify to represent them. This is premised on the argument that there are very few people who have reached that age.

Therefore, we need a minister who will be specifically focused. He or she should focus his or her mind on the issues that affect the elderly in this country. How best can we do that? The starting point is permitting the President to increase his Cabinet by one more position.

Uganda is unique in addressing the issue of the disadvantaged and inequality worldwide. We have been recognised for doing this. As I have noted, the elders have a lot of disadvantages. They have a lot of unique problems. 

If we allow or permit the President to increase the number of ministers by one - considering what we heard in the last Government – I think we shall help in addressing the issue that the Constitution demands us to address, to address the problems faced by the elderly in this country.

Mr Speaker, on the problems that the elders have –(Interjections)– on the problems faced by the elders, I would like to request all my colleagues, who really respect the elders and see these variations as coming forward, to address those challenges by allowing one person to sit in Cabinet to follow up on the issues of the elderly in this country.

I want to thank you very much, Mr Speaker - and I invite my colleagues to support this motion. 

1.09
MS JUDITH ALYEK (NRM, Woman Representative, Kole): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity to speak to the motion that has just been moved. However, before I proceed, it has been a common practice that we have sanitisers around here so that as we come to speak from here, we sanitise ourselves. I do not see the staff of Parliament sanitising the microphones that we are using. Are we safe, Mr Speaker?

Anyhow, I would like to thank the mover of this motion, hon. Fox Odoi and the seconder, hon. Cecilia Ogwal. If you are in this Parliament discussing this motion and have never had an elderly wherever you come from, Mr Speaker, you cannot fail to support this motion.

We have moved and lived with the elders in the various communities where we come from. We have seen the situations in which our elders live. This is something that we should take at heart because from what we have seen and experienced at our ages and now that we are aware that we are moving towards becoming elders in the near future, then we have to support this motion.

There should sincerely be a docket for the elderly in this country. The Minister of State for the Elderly should be in position to advise on how to handle the elderly and should sit in Cabinet to address issues related to the elderly in this country.

Older people in Uganda have been forgotten for long. When you look at the budgets – even in our local governments – very little is allocated for our elderly. 

Now that we have, in this Parliament, representatives of the older persons from our communities, we need that docket. We have other dockets like for the youth. We have for women. What about the elders? They should have a voice in this country to improve their life expectancy, which I also wish to enjoy by making, for example, 80 years or even more. The life expectancy in Uganda stands at 64 years. So, anyone of us here would not wish to end there. 

However, how does one reach there? How do we increase the life expectancy of the people of Uganda, if we do not support the elders? I support the argument that hon. Cecilia Ogwal has made on this Floor; that even for the case of SAGE that the Government has been supporting our people with - we have been debating in this Parliament and the age has been increased to 80 years. 

Sincerely, where will you get these people of 80 years? Count them in your respective constituencies. How many are there? How many can enroll on SAGE, other than going back to the age of 65, so that we enroll our people? From that age, we can now increase their life expectancy by supporting them.

Therefore, Mr Speaker, we better support the elderly before they become too old or before we reach a point where we cannot see them alive.

I ask this Parliament, Mr Speaker, that you put the question to approve the motion as brought by hon. Fox Odoi so that we find a way of helping our elders in this country. I beg to submit. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you.

1.14
(Laughter) MR SILAS AOGON (Independent, Kumi Municipality, Kumi): Mr Speaker, you will allow me to first take time to congratulate you and your Deputy upon your success in the elections.

Before the elections, I had appetite to contest for speakership but when I realised the kind of people I was going to race against, I decided to quietly back down.

Mr Speaker, our economy is in a lockdown. Our pockets are equally in a lockdown. The workshops have been put on lockdown. Travels abroad are now limited. Sports games have been halted. Places of worship have been asked to close. The President has advised us to pray at home because God is omnipresent. 

Mr Speaker, why do we need, at this particular time, to increase the number of ministers? We are only trying to increase the number of sirens on the roads yet our roads are still narrow. I have seen ministers – maybe some of their drivers are not well trained because they do not give an opportunity to other road users. They push them to the bush. Is that what we want to see more of? No!

Therefore, it is very important that since we are in a lockdown, we should also lockdown this decision of trying to increase the number of ministers. Let us give it five years - a full term of Parliament - and then we can come back, reconsider it and see whether it is necessary for us to increase the number. 

I say so with pain. I speak as though I am a bishop because the Holy Spirit is speaking in me. Let us halt this decision of trying to increase the number of ministers. It should not be for a ritual. This Parliament should not be turned into a rubberstamp of another kind. We are not here to rubberstamp; we should speak for the people. 

If you went for a referendum right now and asked the people of Uganda whether they wanted more ministers or to reduce the number of ministers, I am very sure they will ask us to reduce the numbers. 

The schools are in a state of quagmire. Students have been sent back home because of COVID-19, after parents paying fees. After just one week in school, the Government is saying, “You are going back home.” Next time when the students go back, the schools will say, “Pay again.” That is the situation we are in. Do we need to increase the number of ministers? Do we need all these numbers? Is it for a ceremony? 

I am pledging to commit myself to work with the few lucky ministers. Even if there are 21 ministers, they will deliver. If I was given the opportunity to pick a few of the 80 ministers - I already know my 21 ministers based on what they do. (Laughter) However, because it is the President, I do not want to talk about it. 

I would like to say that I reject the motion. I do not support that wrong idea. I support the sentiments of this country that we have a lean Cabinet. Also in future, there might be need to consider downsizing the Parliament. Look at the number of Members - from wall to wall and front to back. We are too many. The economy is dozing but we are over pumping it with responsibilities. What are we doing? I reject this motion. Thank you. 

TEH SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable members. If you look at your watches now, the Budget Speech is supposed to begin at 2 p.m. It is now after 1 O’clock. Can we limit the debate now and close with the names I stated before? Hon. Ababiku, hon. Olanya, hon. Kaaya, hon. Tonny Ayoo, hon. Tinkasiimire and hon. Abdu Katuntu. Can we do it quickly? Please, limit the time. 

1.19
MS JESCA ABABIKU (NRM, Woman Representative, Adjumani): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for this opportunity. I want to thank the mover of this motion. I am here to second it.

I appreciate the framers of our Constitution. They provided for the unseen. From 1995 to 2021 – that is a time difference of 26 years. There are a lot of changes in terms of the population, increasing demands and an increasing number of Members of Parliament, and we have to work with Cabinet members. We have many ministries. 

If we want to adjust things, we have to start from the primary level. Without adjusting the number of ministries, at this point it would not be fair to talk about reducing the number of Cabinet members. Therefore, I really thank the framers of the Constitution. 

Secondly, I thank His Excellency the President of the Republic of Uganda and those who are participating in the good governance. Our people are very happy because of the inclusive governance of this country. The inclusivity has brought on board all special interest groups. You can name them. That also includes our elders.

I come from Adjumani District. The first assignment my elders gave me was, “Go to Parliament, present our challenges and discuss with those in the structures to provide solutions to our problems.”  As a result, we need that provision where we shall have a person designated to whom we can present our issues from our constituencies.

Mr Speaker, I want to thank all Members. We are here determining numbers not determining individuals for positions. Therefore, to me, it will not be fair for us to refer to poor performance as an attachment in determination of this motion. I pray that we support this motion and we add this one position. 

This, to me, is a response to our cry as persons with disabilities. We met His Excellency the President of the Republic of Uganda and made a request that based on our uniqueness as persons with disabilities, merging us with elders would disadvantage us. As we debate this proposal, I know persons with disabilities and elders are receiving their response. Therefore, I highly support this motion.

Debating and handling things differently does not mean you should always dissent. We are providing justifications as to why this number should go up by one. People are stating the reasons as to why this number has to be added. I strongly believe that this shift is positive. It is not just a change that people are opting for. I thank His Excellency the President and my colleagues for supporting this motion. 

1.24
MR GILBERT OLANYA (FDC, Kilak South County, Amuru): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Allow me to join my colleagues to congratulate you for having been elected democratically as the Speaker of the 11th Parliament. 

Looking at the matter in question, we need to ask ourselves as a country, at this particular time and given the situation, if it is relevant for Parliament to be discussing the increase of the number of ministers. We are not in a normal situation, as many have stated. Right now, the economy is down and the private sector is down. Right now, if you look at what is happening in the hospitals around the country, there are no oxygen cylinders; people are suffering and dying. However, as Members of Parliament, we are discussing varying the number of ministers - the Cabinet ministers from 21 to 30 and the state ministers. 

Let us look at this situation and be serious, as Members of Parliament. Somebody is talking about age. If you look at the appointed ministers and those that served in the 10th Parliament, age has already been catered for. Let me give you an example; look at Gen. Moses Ali who has been in the Cabinet for a long time. Look at the Head of State, His Excellency the President - he is there. Look at hon. Tom Butime, among others. 

If we talk about age, I can confirm that 30 per cent of our Cabinet ministers, including the Head of State, are elderly. Therefore, when we are reasoning, we should not think that the President may appoint someone who is elderly in that particular position. Elders have already been catered for. 

Mr Speaker, all those ministries that we have come with a budget –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Let us have the point of order.

MS OGWAL: Mr Speaker, I feel very uncomfortable to call a colleague to order but it is very unfair and selfish for the Member to say that because the Rt Hon. Deputy Prime Minister, Moses Ali, is elderly and the President is elderly, among others, therefore, they should take care of the elderly people’s programme. 

Mr Speaker, we are here on a motion, which has been proposed and framed based on the law. We are saying that we need a docket for the elderly people that can design a legal framework, the policies and programmes that take care of the elderly; that can monitor and evaluate the work done for the elderly. If the President is not given that specific assignment, or Gen. Moses Ali, how do you expect him to come up with the frame work -

THE SPEAKER: What is the point of order?

MS OGWAL: Mr Speaker, I am on a point of order against the previous speaker. Is it, therefore in order, to expect ministers who are appointed for other assignments to deal with the elderly when that is not part of their assignment in their docket?

Is hon. Gilbert Olanya in order to expect that hon. Gen. Moses Ali and the President should be coming up with the framework to deal with the elderly?

THE SPEAKER: I think each time a minister is appointed, they are given their schedule of duties. I do not know which particular one was handling the elderly. It was generally under the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development. There was no specific one taking care of this. However, we had the minister for workers, the youth - all those were there. Please wind up.

MR OLANYA: Mr Speaker, thank you for your wise ruling. I thank hon. Cecilia Ogwal but she should note that we are discussing Motion No. 7 that states, “Motion for a resolution of Parliament to vary the number of Cabinet ministers and other ministers in accordance with Article 113.” 
We are not ceiling ourselves only to the ministry for the elderly that you are talking about. Honourable members should understand that.

As I wind up, right now we have so many ministries. All those –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Let us have the point of order.

DR MORIKU: Mr Speaker, I wish to put the record right. My honourable colleague mentioned and is misleading this Parliament that there is no oxygen cylinder in the entire country. There is a difference between oxygen cylinder and oxygen in the cylinder for the patients. 

The Government of Uganda has put in place oxygen plants in all the regional hospitals to provide oxygen, which is to be put into the cylinder for the patients. For that matter, I would wish to put the records right that yes, the Government has got cylinders with oxygen in the referral and district hospitals. 

However, due to the high demand - owing to the COVID-19 situation, some facilities have inadequate oxygen supplies. Therefore, is my honourable colleague in order to mislead this House by saying that there are no oxygen cylinders in the entire country?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Olanya, I think you have been educated on this matter now. (Laughter)

MR OLANYA: Mr Speaker, I made mention that –

THE SPEAKER: Proceed and wind up.

MR OLANYA: Thank you. I was saying that all these ministries have more than three or four ministers. How effective are they? For example, in the education ministry, we have four ministers, three in the health ministry and seven under the Office of the Prime Minister. How effective are they?

These ministers cannot take decisions by themselves. They have to wait for His Excellency the President. For example, every month we see His Excellency coming on the television to tell people how to wear facemasks and wash hands, as if we do not have the minister in charge of Health. What are the functions of those ministers?
 
Right now, there are very many youths who are arrested and are in prisons. They are being tried under court martial. The Minister for Internal Affairs cannot come back and say, “Release those youth who are arrested from Kampala.”

We need practical ministers. We have more than 70 ministers. What are they for? If you cannot make a decision and stand up for the country –

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, your time is up. Please bear with me, time is running out. I have four Members to speak. Please take a short time to make your presentation.

1.33
MS CHRISTINE KAAYA (NUP, Woman Representative, Kiboga): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also congratulate you and your deputy on the success of acquiring the seats you are holding right now.

Honourable Members, we are not in good times. Based on the budget analysts, they tell us to focus on items that mobilise domestic revenue. When we look at an additional minister, those are additional expenses that do not add any revenue to us. We see different sectors foregoing very many things. Teachers are foregoing salaries and parents forego school fees. Everybody is foregoing something. What are we showing the public? What are we foregoing, Parliament and Cabinet?

We are also looking at the representation role as members of Parliament. Being gender sensitive requires you to consider a number of special interest groups, one of whom are the elderly. You are requested to keep shifting goals based on the vulnerabilities. If we see that the elderly are more vulnerable than people living with HIV, children or the youth, then we shift our goals to focus on the elderly.

I have been consulting with the people of Kiboga. The elderly who want support are requesting for other things rather than a minister. They are requesting for other things other than a minister; they are requesting for additional money in health, SAGE and increasing the amount that is given to them every month. They have not requested for a minister. I, therefore, oppose the motion of creating more ministerial posts. I beg to move. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. It is not the people asking but the President. 

1.35
MR TONNY AYOO (NRM, Kwania County, Kwania): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I wish to congratulate you upon the confidence that this Parliament placed upon you and your deputy. We only pledge cooperation and working together to support you during your work. 

Pursuant to Articles 111(1), 113(2) and 114(3), I support the motion presented by hon. Odoi requesting Parliament to vary the number of ministers provided for in the Constitution. 

I support this motion majorly because, among other things, in the previous Government, the number of ministers was up to 79. In the 11th Parliament, the President made a request to add one additional minister of state to make the number 80. The ministry that the President is requesting for is to have a minister of state in charge of the elderly. 

This is why I totally support this motion. I have been a member of the Parliamentary Forum on SAGE. I moved around during my campaigns and met the elders who made appealing statements to me; they told me that when I get to Parliament, I should think about their plight because they toil a lot to produce children, send them to school, pay taxes and do a lot of things but when they get old, they feel neglected. When we come to Parliament, they do not see many coming to support their cause in terms of how they survive. 

Even the SAGE money is little and from time to time, they hear that Parliament is fighting some groups of people that want it scrapped. Other people say that it should be there and they are not providing opportunities to put enough money to support the elderly. 

This is one of the reasons I feel that the President providing a state minister in charge of the elderly is a good intention. First of all, it is a good debate we are doing now. The minister is supposed to provide policies to make engagements, influence issues in Cabinet and Government, to look for support and put in resources and programmes and laws that will look at the welfare of the elderly, not only today but even us, the young ones now, will benefit in future. 

Let us support this position. The question of ministers not performing is a different one; that is for us to put the ministers to task - to urge the Government to put the ministers to task to perform because performance and attaining support are two different things. 

To discuss someone’s failure in performance and mix it with their being in a position, would be missing the point. The biggest issue in this country is that we should be able to discuss and debate matters and take them seriously. We should also ask the President to commit himself and take the issue seriously; despite the corruption. A lot of the money that we put in gets wasted and lost in corruption, other than getting to pay one minister. 

We are setting up a Government and putting systems in place. Let us allow the President to update Cabinet and work. When they fail, that will be the responsibility of those who have been put in place to work. 

Mr Speaker, I would like to thank Members who have supported the motion and I ask the Members that when the time comes, let us vote to support the motion and give the President the tools of work so that we are not blamed for their failures. We will blame them for having all the tools and then, they fail to work. 

Because of the elders who produced us and looked after us, we must give back something; this is not asking too much. I ask Members to support the motion. Thank you. 

1.41 
MR ABDU KATUNTU (Independent, Bugweri County, Bugweri): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Like my colleagues have said before, I congratulate you and your deputy upon assuming the highest offices in this institution. 

I have been a little bit uneasy with the general trend of the debate because we have been debating generally and this arises out of the mover of the motion because he just sought a blanket approval, without going into the details. That is quite unfortunate. 

I think, next time, if we have a motion like that, we need to look at what the law provides and what has been happening and why the President should need specific ministries, other than those provided for by the Constitution. 

I will give you an example, Mr Speaker. The Constitution, under Articles 113 and 114 provides for a specific number of ministries, which is 21 Cabinet ministers and 21 other ministers. This means every ministry should have one minister and any other minister. 

At the time of enacting the 1995 Constitution, we did not have ministers of state. We instead had deputy ministers so what the Constitution envisaged at that time was that you will have one minister, for example, of education and a deputy minister of education. The situation has since changed. 

I will give you an example because I am speaking for the motion. Let us look at the ministries; for example, the Ministry of Education: there is one senior minister and three other ministers; there is a minister in charge of sports, primary education and higher education. Do you think that is unnecessary? You have a senior minister of education and then three other ministers to handle the sectors within that ministry. Would it be a huge load for this minister to handle both primary and secondary education? If you think it will be a huge load, then there is nothing you can do other than revising or seeking permission to approve the variation of the minister from number 21 to another number.  

Let us look at the Ministry of Defence, for example. You have two deputy ministers of state; the Minister in charge of Veterans and then the Minister in charge of Defence. Is it a wastage of resources to have these two political leaders to oversee the sector? Or is that what it should be? 

Mr Speaker, let us look at agriculture. You have the senior minister and three other ministers of state in charge of animal husbandry, fisheries and agriculture. Is it necessary to have a specific minister in charge of fisheries? Colleagues, some of you come from fishing communities. Don’t you think it is okay to have a minister in charge of fisheries? For you who come from the cattle corridor, don’t you think it is okay to have a minister in charge of animal husbandry? I thought this should have been the debate. 

Hon. Fox Odoi should have taken us through that and said, “In this ministry, we need these ministers and if we need them, can they fall within the 21 ministers? Absolutely impossible.”

Yes, it is good to raise the worries that the Cabinet is becoming too big such that next time, we do not have the President coming again to seek for more positions. As of now, Mr Speaker, if you look at the structure as it has been, you will need those ministries. I am yet to see somebody come and say, “In this ministry, you do not need these ones”. 

Let us look at the Ministry of Health - I saw Dr Aceng here. Do you need a minister in charge of primary healthcare or not? Do you need another state minister in that ministry to do general duties to assist the senior minister or not? I think this is what the debate should have been about.

Mr Speaker, from the structure I have seen - because I participated in the debate when we were increasing these number of ministries then - I do not have any problem with the request of hon. Fox Odoi-Oywelowo. However, hon. Odoi-Oywelowo should have gone further and informed us of the portfolios the President is coming up with such that we are aware. Many colleagues here were not in the last Parliament; they do not know how we arrived at these numbers. Now, we are having this debate again without the mover of the motion going into those details. 

I speak for the motion, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Does the Leader of the Opposition have any word on this? Briefly, sir. Let the Leader of the Opposition speak and we close.

1.47
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Mathias Mpuuga): Much obliged. Thank you, Mr Speaker. I missed hon. Fox Odoi-Oywelowo in the Tenth Parliament; he was known for moving earth moving motions. This particular one was a bit limited. I do not know whether it was brought in haste and I am not sure whether another day, he could bring it in the same way. I share the sentiments of hon. Abdu Katuntu, my senior, that probably the mover could have done better.

First of all, the debate is various. I think Members have been speaking to the fact that couldn’t the President cater for the elderly within the 79 ministers? There is no one against the elders of this land. The debate is about the numbers that Members are describing as bloated, and this is where the mover and the seconders would have helped this House to appreciate the concerns of the Members.

To the mover, yes, we accept and appreciate that the President has the prerogative to appoint but that cannot, in any way, make us abdicate the duty that is both cautionary and advisory to the appointing authority. This is where I would expect the House to rise and caution and even advise the President. Probably, his efforts for the elderly are dispirited and him being a hammer, every problem really requires a nail. He could probably say the problems of the elderly are not ministers; like a Member previously moved, they need more money from SAGE and medical care.

I expect, for example, in these hard times, the Minister of Health to immediately move and ask for resources to fund our hospitals that are in dire state, but not have public expenditure growing very fast.

Mr Speaker, we appreciate that the elders of this land need special care. I do not think that they need political mainstreaming. They need planning within what is available. Political mainstreaming is a huge ask on our already strained public expenditure. I need to put the House on notice that going forward, in a month to come, somebody or I from this side will move a motion that speaks to looking at the Constitution to reconsider special interest groups in Parliament because we all come from these communities where they are and their needs are not really political representation but service. 

I want to join Members who believe that we could do better to facilitate these special interest groups by making provision for their needs other than political mainstreaming, which can easily make them believe that they have been catered for politically, yet their needs are beyond politics.

I want to restate, Mr Speaker, that our duty as Parliament is not casual; it is not a premonitory norm that we sit here and approve because it was done from the Sixth Parliament. We owe a duty of caution and advice to the appointing authority when we believe that the objective may not be met by simply rubber-stamping. Of course, I do appreciate when Members cautiously do approve, especially from my right side, because probably the presumption is that it could be me or the other. So, the desire to be the ones can be understood.

Hon. Cecilia Ogwal, we sit on the same side of the House and I want to assure you that this side is for the elderly and we only want to help them better. We should undertake measures that will really help them and not simply political mainstream them as a way of saying, “We catered for you and you even have a minister”. 

We have had a minister for the youth for several years. I do not think the youth in this country even know that this minister actually caters for their interests. Their interests are different. We could do better, Mr Speaker.

For today, the House should be reminded that they owe a duty of caution and advice to the appointing authority. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable members, for this debate. The time is over. The President is ready to join us for the afternoon session on the Budget proceedings.

Honourable members, my recollection may not help me much but let me state it nevertheless. At about midday on the 12th of May 2021, there were 79 ministers and that is less than a month ago. Today, less than a month thereafter, they are asking that from the 79 ministers, we approve 80. I do not think that there is much that has changed between the 12th and today, the 10th, to make us change our entire minds about the structure of either 79 or 80 ministers. 

However, the debates have been concluded. I now put the question that the motion for a resolution of Parliament to vary the number of new Cabinet ministers and other ministers in accordance with Articles 113 and 114 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MOTION SEEKING CONSTITUTION OF THE APPOINTMENTS COMMITTEE IN ACCORDANCE WITH RULE NO. 161 AND 168 OF THE RULES OF PROCEDURE OF PARLIAMENT

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the law requires us to have an Appointments Committee that will handle the appointments that will be coming from the President. 

I now present to you the list of Members from the parties in Parliament, from the UPDF and from the Independent Members of Parliament.

                1. Hon. Mbadi Mbasu Wilson – UPDF Representative
                2. Hon. Nambeshe John Baptist – NUP
                3. Hon. Ssewungu Joseph Gonzaga – NUP
                4. Hon. Nalule Aisha Kabanda – NUP 
                5. Hon. Aol Betty Ocan – FDC
                6. Hon. Ssasaga Isaias Johnny – FDC  
                7. Hon. Santa Alum Ogwang – UPC
                8. Hon. Okot Peter – DP
                9. Hon. Basalirwa Asuman – JEEMA 
                10. Hon. Okot Santa – PPP
                11. Hon. Okabe Patrick – Independent 
                12. Hon. Lamwaka Margaret – Independent
                13. Hon. Rwabushaija Margaret, Independent.
                14. Dr Okullo Aabuka – NRM
                15. Hon. Awor Betty Engola – NRM 
                16. Hon. Mugumya Clare – NRM 
                17. Dr Asiimwe Florence Akiiki – NRM 
                18. Hon. Arinaitwe Rwakajara – NRM 
                19. Hon. Kambale Ferigo – NRM 
                20. Hon. Najjuma Sarah – NRM 
                21. Hon. Kabanda David – NRM
                22. Hon. Robinah Rwakoojo – NRM 
                23. Hon. Kubeketerya James – NRM
                24. Hon. Orone Derrick – NRM 
                25. Hon. Aeku Patrick – NRM
                26. Hon. Irene Muloni Nafuna – NRM 
                27. Hon. Twala Fadil – NRM 
                28. Hon. Ndeezi Alex – NRM 
                29. Hon. Odoi Bernard – NRM and 
                30. Hon. Catherine Mavenjina Akumu – NRM

Those are the names that have been proposed by the different parties and groups in Parliament. I now put the question for the approval of these names.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I have just been notified by the UPDF that there is a change. It is not hon. Mbadi Mbasu Wilson but it is hon. Elwelu Peter that is approved by the UPDF. 

I put the question to that amendment that hon. Elwelu now be a Member of the Appointments Committee.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, this House is suspended for a few minutes. If you can have a bite, the President is arriving.

(House suspended at 1.59 p.m.) 

(On resumption at 2.10 p.m., the Speaker presiding_)

The National Anthem

The East African Community Anthem

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Your Excellency, the President, the Rt Hon. Deputy Speaker, the Leader of the Opposition, the Chief Opposition Whip, Secretary-General of the National Resistance Movement, Members of Parliament, the Dean of the Diplomatic Corps, ministers designate, distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen. I welcome you to today’s sitting.

You will recall that last week, on 4 June 2021, this House was graced by the presence of His Excellency, the President at the state opening of the First Session of the 11th Parliament and he delivered the State-of-the-Nation Address. I take this opportunity to thank him for playing his constitutional role. 

Today, we are here, once again, honoured by His Excellency, the President as he delivers the annual Budget Speech for the Financial Year 2021/2022. 

Honourable members, the delivery of the Budget Speech is a constitutional obligation stipulated by Article 155 (1) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, which states as follows: 

“The President shall cause to be prepared and laid before Parliament in each financial year but in any case not later than the fifteenth day before the commencement of the financial year, estimates of revenues and expenditure of Government for the next financial year.” 

The Budget Speech is a culmination of an elaborate consultative process involving various stakeholders. These consultative processes are vital for the deliberations on challenges affecting budget preparations and implementation, survey delivery and agreeing on strategic programme interventions and priorities for the given financial year. 

To appreciate the budget process, I draw your attention to four critical stages – I beg your pardon; I have been notified that the Chief Justice is here. If the Chief Justice is here, he is recognised.

To appreciate the budget process, I draw your attention to the four critical stages of the budget, actually termed the budget cycle. The budget has four cycles. It starts with policy formulation, which is essentially the duty of the Executive arm of Government, where they ask the vital questions about what the problem is and what the possible solutions are. 

The second stage is budget approval or policy approval, which is the mandate of Parliament. It is about looking at it with different lenses, capturing the interests of the people and how the policy or budget will affect the interests of the people. Once they are satisfied that the improvements made to the proposals now make it acceptable to the people, they will approve it. 

Once it is approved, it will move back to the Executive for policy execution or implementation. They will implement this in accordance with frameworks that have been agreed upon between the Executive and Parliament, and finish it within the financial year. 

Once they have finished that execution of the budget, it comes back to Parliament for monitoring, and the normal term used is “oversight”. Parliament will ask the question, “We agreed on these frameworks, did you implement them according with what we agreed?” If not, the Auditor-General will raise queries, which again come back to Parliament for us to deal with. 

There are four stages of the budget cycle. I urge Members to acquaint themselves with the various stages and processes to enhance their capacity in playing their appropriation role and oversight function. 

So, it is simple - policy formulation, the Executive; policy approval, Parliament; policy execution, the Executive; and policy oversight, Parliament. That is how we are linked as institutions and arms of Government - the Legislature and the Executive. 

Honourable members, you will be going through the different aspects and timelines now provided by the Public Finance Management Act, as amended. You will get to know the details. The budget takes the whole year to execute. They start with the budget circular, then the Government comes up with the Budget Framework Paper, which is supposed to be in Parliament by 31st of December of that year, and we should receive the Budget Framework Paper, which we have discussed within the timelines agreed in the law.
 
Honourable members, these are processes we will be going through to handle the budget. You will be starting with the new budget for the next year, which has now been handled. Today, we receive the formal statement of the budget and we will proceed from there. Let me also inform you that I received notification from His Excellency the President, that hon. Amos Lugoloobi will be reading the budget speech today. Thank you very much.

PRESENTATION OF THE BUDGET SPEECH

THE SPEAKER: I now invite you, Your Excellency, to proceed with the presentation of the Budget Speech.

2.22
MR AMOS LUGOLOOBI (NRM, Ntenjeru County North, Kayunga): Your Excellency, the President of the Republic of Uganda, Your Excellency, the Vice-President, the Rt Hon. Speaker of Parliament, your Lordship the Chief Justice, the Rt Hon. Deputy Speaker of Parliament, the Rt Hon. Prime Minister, honourable ministers designate, honourable Members of Parliament, Your excellencies, heads of diplomatic missions and development partners, distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Lugoloobi, let me just correct an error, which I take responsibility for. I greeted the First Lady when she arrived but in my speech, I forgot to recognise her. Mama First Lady, you are welcome. Proceed. 

MR LUGOLOOBI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Before, I proceed with this presentation, let me begin by appreciating His Excellency the President, for availing me this opportunity to be the one presenting this budget on his behalf. Your Excellency, thank you very much, for according me that rare opportunity. 

I am presenting the budget speech for the Financial Year 2021/2022 whose theme is: “Industrialisation for Inclusive Growth, Employment and Wealth Creation.”

In accordance with Article 155(1) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda and the Public Finance Management Act, 2015; and in exercise of the power delegated to me by H.E the President of the Republic of Uganda, I have the honour to present the Budget Speech for the Financial Year 2021/2022.

The Public Finance Management Act, 2015 requires that the budget is approved by Parliament prior to the beginning of the financial year. This being a year when general elections were held, the budget for Financial Year 2021/2022 was approved by the Tenth Parliament on 7 May 2021. My statement today, is therefore, a summary of the budget as approved by that Parliament. 

I thank all the honourable Members of that Parliament, for the excellent cooperation in the preparation and approval of the budget. 

Mr Speaker, Ugandans have once again renewed the mandate of the NRM Government. I heartily congratulate His Excellency the President, upon his victory. I also extend congratulations to you, Mr Speaker and Madam Deputy Speaker, for your election to the high office of Speaker and Deputy Speaker, and to you my colleagues, the honourable Members of Parliament for your election to the 11th Parliament. 

Over the last year, the Coronavirus pandemic has severely impacted the health, economic and social status of Ugandans. Several aspects of life were adversely impacted, although evidence shows resilience and we should congratulate ourselves as a country. According to a study by the Economic Policy Research Centre (EPRC) and the International Growth Centre (IGC), only 10 per cent of micro, small and medium enterprises in Uganda remained open during the lockdown and 93 per cent of all micro, small and medium enterprises were back in operation by October 2020. 

In addition, 90 per cent of employees of private sector firms, who were laid off during the lockdown, were subsequently hired back after the lockdown and only 6.5 per cent suffered permanent layoffs. 

The economic shocks that we have faced, have interestingly, also presented us with several opportunities. We have improved efficiency in public spending by using digital solutions, thus reducing the absolute need to travel abroad and inland, and physically attend meetings and workshops. 

Secondly, in response to the global supply chain disruptions due to the COVID-19 pandemic, several firms switched production lines to the manufacture of items that were previously imported, such as masks and sanitisers, which are critical in containing the spread of the virus. 

In addition, several locally sourced e-Commerce applications have been developed to facilitate transactions during periods of restricted movements. These, among other innovative initiatives, are home-grown and can enhance self-sufficiency and advance our strategy for import substitution and export promotion. 

While Ugandans have withstood the consequences of the pandemic, its second wave is unfolding, with little certainty as to its severity and impact. This is a most serious threat to our existence today. I appeal to every single one of us to protect themselves from the virus, by strictly following Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs). I also urge people of Uganda to urgently get vaccinated. 

Mr Speaker, the overarching goal of the NRM Government over the new term of office, is to drive faster and inclusive socio-economic transformation, building on the progress we have attained over the years. The key to rapid socio-economic transformation in Uganda rests on industrialisation mainly based on agriculture, boosting private sector business, and ensuring the wellbeing of Ugandans together with the development of their skills for productive work. 

The budget for the next Financial Year 2021/2022 is, therefore, premised on the theme, “Industrialisation for inclusive growth, employment and wealth creation.”

Mr Speaker, in this Budget statement, I will do the following: 

i. 	Report on Uganda’s economic and social progress over the last five years.

ii. 	Present the economic growth strategy and priorities for Financial Year 2021/2022 and the medium-term; and

iii. 	Provide the financing framework for the Financial Year 2021/2022.

II. ECONOMIC AND SOCIAL PROGRESS

The NRM Government continues to build a strong foundation for economic and social transformation. Significant achievements have been registered, highlights of which I now want to provide. More details on performance can be found in the background to the Budget, which has been circulated.

National Output

Over the last year, the economy has remained resilient and is on a recovery path, amidst the ongoing pandemic and other shocks experienced over time. 

Economic growth for this financial year is projected at 3.3 per cent, rising from 3 per cent last financial year. The economy has grown significantly over the last five years. The size of the economy has grown from Shs 108.5 trillion in 2016/2017 to Shs 148.3 trillion in the current prices by June 2021, equivalent to $ 40 billion.

The industry’s sector contribution to the economy has increased slightly from 26 per cent in 2016/2017 to 27.4 per cent in 2020/2021. However, manufacturing has significantly diversified into many new products such as ethanol from sugar and casein and powdered milk from dairy. 

In addition, Uganda’s products now have a widespread regional presence. For instance, in the pharmaceutical industry, CIPLA Quality Chemical Industries Limited now has a footprint in West and Southern Africa. 

In the steel industry, Roofings Limited has become a premier source of steel and plastic in East and Central Africa. There are many other examples that could be sighted.

Scientific research and innovation is now transforming Uganda’s industrial base. For instance, the Kiira Automotive Industry that will produce 5,000 vehicles per year starting with buses and trucks is now 78 per cent complete.

Together with Luwero Industries, Kiira Motors has developed the Kayoola EVS, a premium zero-emissions City Bus with a range of 300 kilometres before the need to recharge its batteries. 

Two silk processing factories in Sheema and Mukono have acquired state-of-the-Art Silk Yarn processing equipment to produce high quality silk products. The silk industry is projected to earn Uganda $ 100 million annually and will create at least 150,000 jobs by 2030. 

The National Research and Innovation Programme has also supported the development of Makapads, a non-irritating herbal sanitary pad, a low-cost ventilator to assist breathing for patients with respiratory conditions including for COVID-19 and a highly efficient Coronavirus Antibody Test Kit, among others.

The mining industry continues to be a major contributor to Uganda’s economy. The contribution of the mining and quarrying industry to GDP increased from 1.1 per cent in 2016/2017 to 2.3 per cent in 2020/21. 

This development is a result of the use of online mineral licensing, the biometric registration and training of 13,000 artisanal miners and the construction of regional mineral beneficiation centers. 

More mineral beneficiation centres are under construction such as the one in Fort Portal, which is 65 per cent complete and Ntungamo, which is 90 per cent complete. The selection of an investor to revive the Kilembe Mines Project under a Public-Private Partnership (PPP) has also commenced.

The agricultural sector’s contribution to the economy has stagnated at around 23 per cent over the last five years, which requires increasing the pace of industrialisation. Nonetheless, there has been increased production of agricultural commodities, including for export. For instance, coffee production increased from 4.6 million 60 kg bags in Financial Year 2015/2016 to 8.1 million bags in the Financial Year 2020/21. 

Over the same period, fish catches increased from 449,000 to 600,000 tonnes. Milk production has also increased from 2.1 billion to 2.6 billion litres over the same period.

External Trade and Tourism

International trade continued to flourish despite the COVID-19 pandemic. Merchandise exports grew by 4.7 per cent increasing from $ 4.1 billion in 2019 to $ 4.3 billion in 2020. 

Agricultural export values grew by 19 per cent from $ 1.4 billion in 2018/2019 to $ 1.8 billion in 2019/2020. Happily, Uganda’s merchandise trade deficit has significantly narrowed from $ 2,866 million in 2018/2019 to $ 2,365 million in 2019/2020, a reduction of $ 500 million in one year.

Coffee remains the leading agricultural export earning $ 497.4 million in the Financial Year 2019/2020. Dairy exports fetched $ 204.5 million while tea exports earned $ 71 million in Financial Year 2019/2020. 

Fish exports earnings increased from $ 121 million to $ 227 million over the same period. Annual foreign exchange earnings from tourism increased from $ 1.35 million in 2015 to $ 1.6 billion in 2018. 

Annual tourist arrivals also increased from 1.3 million to 1.5 million during the same period. This is a result of the sustained investments in the development and rehabilitation of tourism infrastructure and product diversification. Unfortunately, the outbreak of COVID-19 has caused a huge setback to tourism, as we all know.

Foreign Direct Investment (FDI) flows to Uganda amounted to $ 1.3 billion in 2019 increasing by 20 per cent from $ 1.1 billion in 2018 and domestic investments also increased by 13 per cent from $ 385.3 million to $ 433.8 million in the same period.

Incomes, Poverty and Employment

Uganda’s per capita income is increasing steadily. In Financial Year 2015/2016, it was $808 and is projected to increase to US$932 in Financial Year 2020/2021. We expect to achieve middle-income of $1,039 within the third year of NDPIII implementation.

The key reasons why we did not attain a middle-income status by 2020 are:

    (i) Lower than expected productivity, especially in agriculture; 

    (ii) Inefficiencies in public investments, resulting in less than optimal returns; and 


    (iii) The shocks from natural disasters, especially in the last two years.

Mr Speaker, the recently concluded household survey reports that poverty has declined from 21.4 per cent in 2016/2017 to 20.3 per cent in 2019/2020. Poverty rates reduced in West Nile, Bunyoro and Elgon regions, among others. However, 39 per cent of Ugandan households are still in subsistence economy.

Mr Speaker, the household survey also found that 68 per cent of Ugandans work in agriculture and 74 per cent of Ugandans of working age are engaged in some form of employment. Formal employment has also expanded by 17 per cent between 2016/2017 and 2019/2020, with the PAYE register expanding from 1.3 to 1.5 million registered taxpayers, according to the Uganda Revenue Authority. 

In order to empower youth and women to increase self-employment and incomes, 247,700 youth have been financed with Shs 165 billion to implement 21,000 projects under the Youth Livelihood Programme. A further 166,300 women in 13,800 groups have received funding for projects. The externalisation of labour has enabled 16,750 persons to get employment in the Middle East over the last year and remit approximately $9 million per month.

Economic Infrastructure

Mr Speaker, infrastructure is an important facilitator of economic growth and socio-economic development. Significant progress has been recorded as follows:

Transport

Mr Speaker, in transport infrastructure development, the total national paved road network has increased by 41 per cent from 3,800 kilometres in 2016 to 5,400 kilometres today. Eleven inland water vessels are operational with the commissioning of the Buvuma and Sigulu ferry services. 

With respect to air transport, the upgrade of Entebbe International Airport is almost complete, with 96 per cent of works at the cargo complex done. Kabaale International Airport in Hoima now stands at 55.6 per cent complete. 

To revive railway transport, rehabilitation of the Tororo-Gulu Metre Gauge Railway (MGR) has commenced and 79 per cent of the land for the construction of the Standard Gauge Railway (SGR) has been acquired. In addition, locomotives are being procured to further support Uganda Railways.

Power

National electricity access today stands at 51 per cent, of which 24 per cent is on-grid and 27 per cent off-grid. With the implementation of the free Electricity Connections Policy, 152,500 households have been connected to the grid. 

Power generation capacity has increased by 38 per cent from 925 megawatts in 2016 to 1,274 megawatts in 2020. The completion of the Karuma hydropower plant - which is 98 per cent complete - and several mini hydropower plants such as Aswa, Nyagak and Muzizi will further increase this capacity.

Digitisation

Internet access now stands at 52 per cent, with 21 million people using the internet. Active mobile money subscriptions are 23 million, served by 235,800 mobile money agents. The high-speed optical fibre cable covers 3,900 kilometres. 

In addition, new industries have been established in the assembly of computers, mobile phones and accessories, and the development of knowledge-based ICT solutions. The ICT Innovation Fund, established in 2017, has funded the local development of 115 applications, many of which are in use in Government and the private sector. These include the Academic Information Management System and the e-Government procurement solutions.

Human Capital Development

Mr Speaker, the quality of life of Ugandans has improved over the last five years. Life expectancy has increased from the lowest level of 44 years in 1998 to 63 years currently. Literacy rates have improved to 76 per cent of the population. 

In addition, the following progress has been recorded:

    i. 5.4 million home study books were distributed to private and public primary and secondary schools to support continuity of learning during the COVID-19 pandemic;

    ii. 270 teachers were trained in Early Grade reading methods for pre-primary schooling as part of the Early Childhood Development (ECD) curriculum rollout this year, and 14,350 teachers were trained to provide psychosocial support arising from COVID-19;

    iii. Construction of 117 seed secondary schools was completed, and 64 community secondary schools at subcounties were grant-aided;

    iv. Safe water coverage in rural and urban areas is estimated at 68 per cent and 71 per cent respectively.  Consequently, 48,000 villages, representing 70 per cent of all villages, have at least a source of water. 

	In urban water supply, National Water and Sewerage Corporation has extended 954 kilometres of water mains and 49,000 new customers have been connected. In addition, 1,506 public stand posts have been installed, which serve an estimated 300,000 people; and

    v. Access to healthcare, as measured by the proportion of people within a five-kilometre radius of a health facility, now stands at 91 per cent. In terms of functionality, 81 per cent of health centres IV offer caesarean section, while 51 per cent offer both caesarean section and blood transfusion. 

	The state-of-the-art Entebbe Paediatric Surgery Hospital has been completed. All national and regional referral hospitals have been equipped with Intensive Care Unit (ICU) beds and oxygen plant.

COVID-19 Emergency Response

Mr Speaker, despite the adverse impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, the economy remains resilient, partly as a result of quick and strong Government response. To minimise the negative impact of COVID-19 on the social and economic welfare of the country, direct fiscal interventions, totalling Shs 2.6 trillion, were implemented. In addition, Shs 7.3 trillion private loans in commercial banks were restructured as part of the stimulus package. The economic stimulus supported: 

    i. Household economic welfare; 
    ii. Firms to survive the crisis; and 
    iii. Maintenance of financial stability to avoid the potential collapse of the economy.

During the COVID-19 pandemic, vulnerable groups in the Kampala Metropolitan Area were provided with relief food and masks were distributed countrywide. Shs 60 billion was spent to fund food distribution to 683,000 households covering 1.9 million persons. 

The mitigation of the adverse impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on health and education was a key element of Government response. Nine hundred sixty four thousand doses of for the COVID-19 vaccine were procured and mass vaccination has begun, following the priority accorded to most vulnerable categories of the population. Today, 733,923 persons have received their first dose of the vaccine and 40,895 have completed both doses. Clinical trials of a locally researched treatment is also underway. 

To ensure continuity of education during the COVID-19 pandemic, distance learning has been used based on electronic platforms including television and online classes. Digital platforms are also in use for inspection and supervision of schools.

To support recovery of business, private sector loans, totalling Shs 7.3 trillion, representing 43 per cent of all loans, had repayments postponed, a quarter of which were loans in tourism, trade, and commerce. 

Tax relief totalling Shs 2 trillion was provided to businesses disrupted by COVID-19. In addition, Government paid Shs 677 billion in arrears to private sector firms it owed in order to ease their liquidity. 

The Uganda Development Bank was allocated Shs 555 billion to finance manufacturing, agribusinesses and other private sector firms affected by the COVID-19 pandemic. 

Seed capital amounting to Shs 416 billion was provided to the youth, women entrepreneurs and the Emyooga Programme. A total of 6,394 Emyooga SACCOs in 349 constituencies have received Shs 200 billion.

Governance

With respect to law and order, crime reduced by 8.9 per cent from 215,000 cases in 2019 to 196,000 cases, in 2020. Interventions such as the Safe City Camera Project, enhanced motorised and foot patrols and community policing have contributed to this decline. 

In the Judiciary, the proportion of cases that are over two years old has reduced, from 24 per cent in 2017 to 17.5 per cent in 2021 as a result of the implementation of the case backlog reduction strategy and the use of Alternative Dispute Resolution alongside conventional court proceedings. 

To sum up, great strides have been achieved on both the economic and social fronts, as I have demonstrated. This progress is as a result of the sustained effort by the Government to remove barriers to production and human capital development, as well as peace and security, which have provided a solid basis for the economy to grow, despite the setbacks we all know. The socioeconomic transformation in Uganda is unstoppable.

I now turn to the economic growth strategy and the attendant priorities. The economic growth strategy for the medium term aims to achieve faster and inclusive growth and enhanced socio-economic development. 

The target is to raise growth rates from 4.3 per cent, estimated for Financial Year 2021/2022, to at least 7 per cent in the medium-term. The strategy that will achieve these medium-term objectives is three-fold: 

    i. Restoring the economy back to the medium-term growth path; 
    ii.  Improving the wellbeing of the population to ensure a healthy and skilled workforce; and
    iii. Providing peace, security and good governance. 

Restoring economic growth 

Restoring the economy to medium growth path requires the following:

    i. Boosting business of the private sector, especially Micro, Small and Medium (MSME) Enterprises by extending COVID-19 relief measures, increasing regional and continental market access, access to long term affordable capital and supporting entrepreneurial development; 
    ii.  Aggressively promoting agro-industrialisation to unlock the potential of primary production, together with standards development and enforcement including enhanced Market Access;
    iii.  Commercialising minerals, oil and gas endowments to obtain the greatest benefits from adding value to Uganda’s natural endowments; and
    iv. Develop and maintain infrastructure for economic growth and development and promote regionally balanced growth.

Regarding boosting business activities, the immediate requirement is to support the recovery of businesses that continue to be adversely affected by the COVID-19 pandemic. In financing the private sector growth, credit relief enables businesses to improve their liquidity and cash flow. 

The restructuring of the private sector bank loans has been further extended from 01 April 2021 for a further six months, allowing restructuring of loans for up to three times. This restructuring can be applied by any borrower at any time before 30 September 2021. 

Access to affordable medium-to-long term capital is key to boosting business. The Uganda Development Bank will be further capitalised with an additional Shs 103 billion in Financial Year 2021/2022, in addition to the Shs 555 billion disbursed the Financial Year 2020/2021 for lending to Small and Medium Enterprises affected by the COVID-19 pandemic, among others. 

The Agricultural Credit Facility (ACF) at the Bank of Uganda, the Emyooga Programme through the Micro Finance Support Centre (MSC) and the Uganda Women Entrepreneurship and Youth Funds will continue to provide targeted funding for agriculture, women and youth group projects respectively. 

Applied research in science, technology and innovation are key to industrialisation and socio-economic transformation. Significant gains in productivity and competitiveness can be achieved with product development. 

To further support the advancement in scientific research and innovation, the construction of the National Automotive Park will commence next year. Feasibility studies for Regional Science and Technology Parks and Technology and Business Incubators will also be carried out. 

Technology development for the manufacture of Personal Protective Equipment (PPE), diagnostics and bio-medical science, immunology, vaccines and digital applications will be further supported. 

Shs 358.5 billion has been allocated in next year’s budget for innovation and technological development.

Investment promotion 

In order to promote investment, foreign and domestic direct investment will be facilitated. This will increase value addition, as well as enable technology and knowledge transfer; and 350,000 direct jobs and 650,000 indirect jobs are expected to be generated. 

To this end, 23 regional industrial business parks to be spread across the country will be established among others. 

Promoting Agro-industrialisation 

Agriculture remains the mainstay of livelihoods for the vast majority of Ugandans in rural areas who engage in primary production and related non-farm activity. The key to rapid socio-economic transformation rests on unlocking the potential of Agriculture through aggressive industrialisation. This will enable the population engaged in farm and non-farm rural economic activity to earn higher incomes and employment. 

The Agro-industrialisation strategy will address low production and productivity of primary agriculture, poor post-harvest handling and storage, limited value addition and insufficient market access. 

It will also permit adherence to food safety requirements and standards in export markets. This will also partially address the reason provided to create Non-Tariff Barriers (NTBs) in regional markets, which constrains agribusiness. 

The Parish Development Model Approach 

The Parish Development Model is an approach to organising and delivering public and private sector interventions for wealth creation including investment planning, budgeting and service delivery at the parish level as the lowest planning unit. This approach seeks to create income generating opportunities at the 10,594 Parishes in the country.

The Parish Development Approach has seven pillars, namely: 

i. 	Production, processing, value addition and marketing;
ii. 	Infrastructure and other economic services including extension services, energy, roads, market structures, water for production and mind-set change for business orientation;
iii. 	Financial inclusion through cooperatives, SACCOs, Revolving Funds where Shs 30 million will be provided per Parish for a start;
iv. 	Social Services delivery including health, education, water and other social development services;
v.  	Re-establishment of the Community Information System;
vi. 	Parish Governance and Administration; and,
vii. 	Mind-set Change. 

Agro-industrialisation will be achieved through the following strategic actions:

i. Develop Commodity Value Chains linking national, regional, district and sub-county level commodity off-takers to private nucleus farmers. This will enable the production of the 14 key commodities under the Parish Development Model, including; maize, cassava, banana, beans, Irish potato, sweet potato, millet, sugar cane, cattle (beef), dairy, coffee, tea, cocoa and fish;

ii. Multiply fish, poultry and crop technologies developed by National Agricultural Research Organisation (NARO) and improved breeding stock by National Animal Resources Centre and Databank (NAGRC&DB) to be replicated across the country using the Parish Development Model;

iii. Build parish and sub-county centres and district and regional warehouse storage capacity with adequate equipment to address post-harvest losses and ensure standards are maintained. In this regard the Parish Development Model will go a long way to organise local production linked to processing centres and markets;

iv. Provide affordable long term Agricultural financing and insurance to de-risk entrepreneurs at all levels of the Commodity Value Chain;

v. 	Expedite the licensing of digitised commodity markets linked to the 750,000 metric tonne capacity of warehouse infrastructure country wide, where volumes of quality (aflatoxin free) graded grain will be guaranteed and traded; and

vi. 	Develop market infrastructure to enable the private sector to take advantage of the export market opportunities including the African Continental Free Trade Area (AfCFTA);

vii. 	Develop Agro-industries such as the Luwero Fruit Factory and the master-plan for the Zombo Fruit Factory, etc.;

viii. 	Complete construction of storage facilities of 42,000 metric tonnes capacity in Iganga, Isingiro, Amuru, Kalungu and Nebbi;

ix. 	Operationalise 20 Zonal Industrial hubs for skilling youth and women, wealth creation and value addition for carpentry, welding, tailoring, knitting, weaving, bakery, shoe making and stone cutting trades; and value addition facilities for commodities such as coffee and maize;

x. 	Construct two storage facilities in Bunyangabu and Katakwi; six milk collecting centres in Kyenjojo, Gomba, Nakaseke, Kumi and Kibuku; 12 food-processing plants and 18 value addition facilities across the country;

xi.  	Operationalise a 1,000 metric tonne grain processing plant and a 150 kilogramme per hour peanut butter plant in Soroti; a 3,000 metric tonne maize processing plant in Busia and a 500 metric tonne multigrain processing plant and feed mill in Arua; and

xii. 	Establish the Kabarole Agro-Industrial Park, two Regional Value Addition Incubation Centres (RVAICs) in Kasese and Gulu and two Regional Farm Service Centres (RFSCs) in Gulu and Kabarole.

Mr Speaker, Uganda’s agricultural exports are required to meet international Phytosanitary standards. These standards ensure that agricultural commodities for export are free of pests and diseases. Eight major border posts will be constructed and equipped to carry out inspection, testing, fumigation and packaging services for exports. They will be located at Mutukula, Katuna, Mpondwe, Malaba, Busia, Suam, Elegu and Lwakhakha and at the Entebbe and Kabale International Airports. 

This will address quality standards for commodity exports such as maize and poultry and dairy products. Seven billion shillings has been provided for this purpose. 

In total, Shs 1.67 trillion has been allocated to support agro-industrialisation initiatives in the next financial year. 

Commercialising Minerals, Oil and Gas Endowments

Exploitation of Uganda’s minerals, oil and gas endowments, is a major source of growth in the medium term. Mineral beneficiation adds economic value to naturally endowed minerals. The commercialisation of our oil and gas endowments will generate investments of between $15-20 billion over the next five years. The requirement to have these investments with substantial local content will enable the creation of jobs and allow local companies to benefit from supplying goods and services to the petroleum sector. 

Recently, the Governments of Uganda and Tanzania signed agreements that will facilitate the undertaking of the final investment decision by the oil companies. These agreements will accelerate the production of the first oil. Investment requirements in this sector will now present an opportunity for Foreign Direct Investment inflows, creation of both direct and indirect jobs, facilitate local enterprise growth, including forward and backward linkages to agriculture, tourism, and petrochemical industries. I thank the President for his foresighted leadership in guiding and spearheading the development of this sector. 

The priority interventions in the mining industry next financial year are as follows:

i. 	Establish the mineral reserves that are economically feasible for extraction in 80 per cent of the country and complete the airborne geophysical surveys of the remaining 20 per cent in the Karamoja sub-region;
ii. 	Finalise the mining law and enhance Public Private Partnership (PPP) arrangements to develop minerals - starting with iron ore in western Uganda, restoration of the Katwe Salt Factory, and provision of an attractive taxation regime - that protect and support local steel production. 

iii. 	Explore all the geothermal resources to quantify the geothermal potential of the country and promote the development of Kibiro, Katwe, Buranga and Panyimur geothermal prospects.

Mr Speaker, Shs 49 billion has been allocated in the budget for Financial Year 2021/2022, to support the mineral development interventions. 

In the oil and gas industry, critical actions that have now paved way for investment and commercialisation include the signature of agreements between Uganda, Tanzania and the International Oil Companies (IOCs) for the East African Crude Oil Pipeline (EACOP). The enabling legislation for the EACOP (EACOP Bill) will soon be brought to Parliament for consideration. 

Mr Speaker, the signature of these key agreements signals the commencement of the development and production phase of petroleum. Construction of Tilenga and Kingfisher facilities, as well as the East African Crude Oil Pipeline, will commence this year and the first oil is expected in early 2025. This development will create significant benefits to our economy and to all Ugandans, especially those who will participate in provision of services and goods to the industry. 

In addition, the following interventions will be undertaken:  

    i. The second licensing round of exploration areas will commence in order to enable discovery for additional petroleum reserves; 

    ii. The construction of oil roads will continue; 


    iii. The National Content Policy that provides priority to Ugandans to supply the oil and gas industry and provide employment will be implemented; 

    iv. Construction of facilities for production and transportation of the crude oil and the development of the required regulations, including those related to tariffs, metering, and decommissioning. 

Infrastructure for Economic Growth and Development 

Uganda has invested heavily in addressing key infrastructure gaps, but there are still gaps that will be addressed in the medium term to enhance growth and socioeconomic transformation, for which the following interventions will be implemented: 

Transport Infrastructure
 
Mr Speaker, to further improve transport infrastructure, the following interventions will be prioritised next financial year:  

    i. The upgrade of 400 kilometres equivalent of national roads from gravel to tarmac, including the construction of 37 new bridges on national roads; 

    ii. Rehabilitation of 200km equivalent of national roads and 400km of community access roads, and the maintenance of national and the District Urban and Community Access (DUCAR) road network; 

    iii. Rehabilitation and procurement of ferries, and construction of selected landing sites, including the Laropi, Obongi and Kyoga ferries, and the Bukuungu-Kagwara-Kaberamaido landing sites; 


    iv. Continue support for the revival of the national airline and the maintenance of upcountry aerodromes; 

    v. Acquire right-of-way for the Standard Gauge Railway (SGR); rehabilitate the Tororo-Gulu Metre Gauge Railway and the Kampala-Malaba Metre Gauge railway line; and complete the Gulu Logistics Hub. 

Mr Speaker, Shs 5.1 trillion has been allocated in the budget for the development of integrated transport infrastructure and related services. Out of this, Shs 487.4 billion is for road maintenance and Shs 135.9 billion is for community roads improvement. 

Power Infrastructure 

Regarding the promotion of renewable energy, the Government will commission solar mini-grid plants in Rubirizi and Kasese districts. These include Kasenyi 37 kilowatts, Kashaka 28 kilowatts, Kazinga 26 kilowatts, Kihuramu 18 kilowatts, Kisebere 16 kilowatts, and Kisenyi 32 kilowatts. These solar mini grids were constructed by Worldwide Fund for Nature Uganda. The mini grids will provide power to isolated community clusters. 

Mr Speaker, building capacity to meet the energy needs of Uganda’s population in an environmentally sustainable manner is a major national priority. Key interventions include:  

    i. Further development of generation, transmission and distribution capacity; 
    ii. Increasing electricity access, including implementing the free Electricity Connections Policy; 
    iii. Reducing energy losses and curbing vandalism of electricity infrastructure; 
    iv. Provide affordable electricity tariffs, including the power subsidy of 5 US cents for manufacturers who qualify as extra-large industrial consumers;
    v. Promote renewable energy, energy efficiency and conservation.

Mr Speaker, Shs 1.1 trillion has been allocated in the budget for Financial Year 2021/2022 for the development of energy infrastructure and services. Out of this, Shs 646.2 billion is earmarked for rural electrification. 

Digital Transformation 

Mr Speaker, ICT is key to enhancing socioeconomic transformation and for improving efficiency and productivity. The COVID-19 pandemic has presented the opportunity for digital transformation of the economy. Therefore, the major priorities for Financial Year 2021/2022 will include the extension of broadband ICT infrastructure up to the subcounty level; expanding the digital terrestrial television and radio broadcasting network to facilitate tele-education for learners; and facilitating the development of software solutions to support eGovernment, eCommerce and ePayment, among others. 

Mr Speaker, Shs 134.9 billion has been allocated in the budget for Financial Year 2021/2022 to enhance digitisation of the economy. 

Pursuing Regionally Balanced Growth

Greater linkage between production and processing facilities at a local level can be established through a regionally balanced growth approach. Regional balanced growth entails the development of value chain enterprises beyond the central corridor of Malaba-Greater Kampala Metropolitan Area-Mbarara. Developing additional corridors of growth will diversify the economic development

In this respect, two additional corridors have been identified, namely the north-to-east corridor (Malaba-Soroti-Gulu-Arua) and the north-to-west corridor (Kasese-Hoima-Gulu-Kitgum). These corridors all together form a growth triangle across Uganda where production, value addition and agro-industrialisation can holistically take place. Industrial and business parks will link production areas to national, regional and international markets. This approach is consistent with the Local Economic Development Model that has been developed for the Rwenzori region. 

Mr Speaker, the Growth Triangle approach leverages urbanisation as a force for socioeconomic transformation. Recently established cities, namely Arua, Mbarara, Gulu, Jinja, Fort Portal, Mbale, Masaka, Lira, Soroti and Hoima, are located in the corridors of the Growth Triangle. These cities would be centres for industrial and business parks, trade, and serve as centres of excellence in healthcare, education and hospitality. This will make urban areas more productive and also develop a revenue base for the cities. Strengthening physical planning and addressing urban crime, pollution and traffic congestion are key aspects in developing the Growth Triangle.

Improving the quality of life of Ugandans is central to our growth strategy. A healthy population and skilled workforce is a fundamental requirement for socio-economic transformation. Key interventions in education, health, water and sanitation are necessary to ensure effective human capital development. 

Regarding health, the immediate health need we are faced with is ensuring containment of the COVID-19 pandemic. Widespread vaccination and the enforcement of Standard Operating Procedures are the only preventive measures that guarantee protection against COVID-19. The initial target is to vaccinate at least 6 million most vulnerable persons comprising teachers, health workers, the elderly and persons with chronic ailments. A total of Shs 560 billion has been provided for the procurement of vaccines.

To enhance the commendable job by the health sector, in dealing with the COVID-19 pandemic, interventions to improve health workers’ skills and work environment will be prioritised. In addition, health infrastructure will be maintained and systems strengthened to ensure increased efficiency and effectiveness in healthcare delivery. 

The use of digital technology will play a key part in not only delivering health skills training but also in improving systems for greater efficiency. 

Mr Speaker, other priorities of the health sector next year, include the following: 

    i. Upgrade 43 health facilities and construct new Health Centre IIIs in 60 sub-counties. To ensure functionality, the recruitment of additional staff for each of the upgraded health facility has been arranged;

    ii. Construction and equipping of the Uganda Heart Institute at Mulago will be completed and the Regional Oncology and Diagnostic Centre in Gulu by the Uganda Cancer Institute will be established;
 
    iii. Ensure adequate supply and delivery of essential medicines and health supplies. The National Medical Stores budget has been increased from Shs 420.3 billion this fiscal year to Shs 600.3 billion next financial year. 

Regarding education, transforming education delivery is of paramount importance in improving learning outcomes, especially with the recent experience with the COVID-19 pandemic. Adopting e-learning methods and digitising inspection and supervision to address absenteeism of learners and teachers will improve learning outcomes. We shall also build on the gains of the universalisation of education and skilling programmes by upgrading more of the country’s education training facilities into effective institutions of learning and skills development. 

Mr Speaker, next financial year, priority will be placed on improving staffing and teacher quality at all levels; enhancing inspection and supervision of schools, rehabilitate primary and traditional secondary schools, and complete construction of selected vocational institutions.

To this end, 4,200 primary school teachers will be recruited to raise the national staffing level to 70 per cent. In addition, 1,055 secondary teachers will be recruited in local governments with staffing level below 50 per cent of the establishment. To improve supervision, 440 inspectors will be recruited across all local governments. To address learner, teacher, and school management absenteeism, the integrated inspection system (electronic inspection) will be rolled out throughout the country. The rehabilitation of 74 primary and 13 traditional secondary schools, for example, Nabisunsa Girls School, will also be undertaken. Construction of 36 partially completed schools, for example, Morungatunyi Secondary School, will be completed. Construction of seven skills development institutions like the Arua School of Nursing will also be completed. 

Regarding water and sanitation facilities, Mr Speaker, access to safe water and sanitation is important in improving the wellbeing of the population. The target is to increase the coverage of safe water supply in rural areas to 81 per cent and 100 per cent in urban areas by 2025. At a minimum, we will ensure that every village in underserved districts has at least one safe water source, as well as promote improved sanitation. To this end, Shs 124.9 billion has been provided for rural water and Shs 523.4 billion for urban water. Mr Speaker, in summary, to enhance human capital development, Shs 7.7 trillion has been allocated next financial year. 

Regarding peace, security and good governance, Mr Speaker, peace and security, the rule of law and good governance, are key to providing a conducive environment to facilitate socio-economic development. Our long-term objective is to maintain peace and security at the community and national level; increase access to justice and enhance effectiveness in public service delivery. 

Concerning peace and security, next fiscal year, the following interventions will be prioritised to create a peaceful and secure environment for economic growth and development: 

    i. Acquire, refurbish and maintain military equipment;

    ii. Complete the construction of the Military Referral Hospital in Mbuya and train military medical personnel and procure medical equipment;

    iii. Commence construction of 30,000 housing units for the military, the construction of the military museum, as well as military barracks; and 

    iv. Improve urban security with implementation of phase III of the Safe City CCTV project. 

Mr Speaker, Shs 6.9 trillion has been provided in the budget for these interventions.

Access to justice 

Mr Speaker, to improve access to justice, the Judiciary and other law and order services will be deconcentrated to the regional and district level. In this regard, Shs 9.4 billion has been provided to kick-start the construction of the Courts of Appeal in Gulu and Mbarara, High Court circuits in Luwero and Soroti, Magistrate courts in Budaka, Alebtong and Lyantonde, Grade 1 Magistrate courts in Abim, Patongo, Karenga and Kyazanga. 

The budget of the Judiciary was substantially enhanced from Shs 199.1 billion to Shs 376.9 billion. Out of this, Shs 146.6 billion has been provided for the recruitment and facilitation of judicial staff. In addition, Shs 18.2 billion has been provided to implement the Electronic Court Case Management Information System, and the Prosecution Case Management Information System. 

Regarding improving budget efficiency, Mr Speaker, efficiency in public spending not only ensures public funds are well spent but also enables other priority needs to be funded. Next financial year, expenditure is projected to decline by 3.4 per cent of GDP to 21.1 per cent from 24.4 per cent this financial year. It is projected to average 19.3 per cent over the medium-term. 

The following interventions will improve efficiency in public spending:

    i. Rationalisation of Government institutions to eliminate mandate overlaps and duplication; 

    ii.   Improved asset management, including maintenance of public infrastructure and improving Government fleet and equipment management using leasing options;

iii. 	Strengthened procurement by sanctioning officials and other persons who unduly influence procurement processes;

iv. 	Elimination of the accumulation of domestic arrears by clearing existing stock of arrears and curtailing further accumulation. 

	Sanctions will be applied to Accounting Officers in accordance with the Public Finance Management Act 2015, if there is further arrears accumulation;

v.     Enhanced budget monitoring and evaluation by strengthening executive oversight for improving efficiency in public policy, programmes and projects implementation;

vi.     Digitisation of public financial management systems through automation and integration of ICT systems to ensure timely release and disbursement of funds. 

	Use of National Identification Numbers upgraded with enhanced biometric features will improve efficiency in Government transfers to beneficiaries using mobile money. This will be used in transfers under the Social Assistance Grant for the Elderly and the Emyooga seed capital;

vii. 	Further scale-down on spending on consumptive items such as travel abroad, just like we have done during the COVID-19 pandemic. Savings of Shs 800 billion have been identified.

The new programmatic approach to budgeting under NDP III will enable removal of the silo mentality in Government departments and align the Budget to the results we want.

FINANCIAL YEAR 2021/2022 FINANCING FRAMEWORK

The fiscal strategy for Financial Year 2021/2022 and the medium-term aim is to create resources to finance priority interventions while maintaining fiscal and debt sustainability. 

It is premised on mobilising a higher level of domestic revenue and enhancing returns from public investment. The Government will also undertake a review of public expenditure to improve efficiency.

Domestic revenue for next financial year is projected at Shs 22,425 billion, equivalent to 13.8 per cent of GDP compared to a projected outturn of Shs 19,432 billion, equivalent to 13.1 per cent of GDP in the Financial Year 2020/2021.

This targeted revenue is an increase of 0.7 per centage points of GDP. The increase in tax collections will be realised from an improvement in the level of economic activity, increased efficiency in tax collection by URA through strengthening compliance and enforcement, as well as new tax measures and administration reforms.
Tax policy interventions

Accordingly, I will highlight some tax policy interventions which will be implemented in Financial Year 2021/2022: 

i. 	Reform taxation of rental income to remove the incentive for non-individual rental taxpayers to claim unrestricted deductions, which significantly reduce their tax contribution.

ii. 	Reduce rates of depreciation for some classes of assets.

iii. 	Discontinue the concurrent deduction of initial allowances and depreciation in the first year of use of qualifying assets.

iv. 	Review the capital gains tax regime by allowing for the effect of inflation and providing tax relief for venture capital investments.

v. 	Broaden the scope of taxation of plastics to cover all plastics.

vi. 	Rationalise the Excise Duty regime on telecommunication services by scrapping the Excise Duty on Over the Top known as (OTT) and introduce a harmonised excise duty rate of 12 per cent on airtime, value-added services and internet data, excluding data for provision of medical services and the provision of education services.

vii. 	Introduce an export levy of 7 per cent on the value of fish maw exports.

viii. 	Impose an export levy of 5 per cent and 10 per cent on processed and unprocessed gold and other minerals respectively.

Uganda Revenue Authority will implement administrative interventions to boost revenue collection including the following:

i. 	Strengthen tax arrears management and recovery;

ii. 	Enhance data analysis through interfaces with other Government information systems to enhance taxpayer compliance;

iii. 	Enforce tax compliance using the Electronic Fiscal Receipting and Invoicing Solution (EFRIS) and Digital Tax Stamps;

iv. 	Enforce enhanced licensing requirements for clearing, tax agents and bond operators;

v. 	Improve detection of smugglers using non-intrusive inspection equipment, and

vi. 	Close all bonded warehouses for imported sugar for re-export to avoid undeclaration and misclassification. 

These administrative measures will generate about Shs 800 billion in revenue collections. The capacity of local governments to collect revenue will be enhanced through training and ICT infrastructure.

Mr Speaker, Uganda’s debt amounted to $ 17.96 billion as at 31st December 2020, equivalent to 49.8 per cent of GDP. Borrowed funds have been used to finance mainly infrastructure projects such as the Karuma and Isimba hydropower plants, oil roads, development of airports, industrial parks, transmission lines, water and irrigation projects.

Uganda public debt remains sustainable in the short, medium and long term. I reaffirm Government’s unwavering commitment that Uganda shall continue to honour its debt obligations as they fall due. 

Uganda will not default on repayment of its debt. All contractual debt obligations will be fully honoured. The Government will undertake the following key strategies, among others, to keep our debt within sustainable levels: 

i) 	Ensure that projects are well appraised to allow only those that are viable and aligned to the national development plan;
ii)  	Prioritise borrowing for only projects that enhance socio-economic transformation and enhance project implementation;
iii)  	Prioritise borrowing from concessional sources; and
iv)  	Increase the maturity profile of our domestic debt.

The resource envelope for Financial Year 2021/2022 amounts to Shs 44,778.8 billion and is comprised of both domestic and external resources as detailed below: 

i. 	Domestic Revenue amounts to Shs 22,425 billion of which Shs 20,837 billion will be tax revenue and Shs 1,588 billion will be Non-Tax Revenue.
ii. 	Domestic borrowing amounts to Shs 2,943 billion.
iii. 	The Petroleum Fund resource amounts to Shs 200 billion.
iv. 	Budget support accounts for Shs 3,583 billion.
v. 	External financing for projects amounts to Shs 6,868 billion of which Shs 5,519 billion is from loans and Shs 1,349.4 billion is from grants.
vi. 	Appropriation in Aid collected by local governments amounts to Shs 212.4 billion; and
vii. 	Domestic debt refinancing will amount to Shs 8,547 billion.

Mr Speaker, total expenditure will be Shs 44.778.8 billion. Excluding domestic debt refinancing and Appropriations in Aid (AIA), it amounts to Shs 36,019.4 billion, of which wages and salaries is Shs 5,528.6 billion, non-wage recurrent expenditure is Shs 15,625.4 billion, and development expenditure is Shs 14,865.3 billion. 

Conclusion

Your Excellency and honourable members, the economic growth strategy and budget priorities that I have presented today seek to speed up economic recovery and drive more inclusive growth by creating an environment for increased socioeconomic empowerment of the ordinary Ugandans.

Specific focus in the coming budget has been placed on implementing the Parish Development Model, which provides a unique opportunity for transforming the subsistence households through productivity enhancement, jobs and the empowerment of youth and women.

Investments in oil and gas will provide opportunities for both direct and indirect jobs, including local enterprises development. Market infrastructure development will guarantee export markets for our products. Addressing constraints in infrastructure and agriculture, as well as improving service delivery, will improve our competitiveness and accord Ugandans a better quality of life.

I, therefore, commend this budget to the people of Uganda, as we continue implementing actions to transform our economy from subsistence to a modern one.

For God and my country. (Applause)

REMARKS BY HIS EXCELLENCY THE PRESIDENT

THE SPEAKER: Your Excellency, it is your time to address the House.

3.42
THE PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF UGANDA (Gen. (Rtd) Yoweri Kaguta Museveni): Her Excellency the Vice-President designate –(Applause) - the Rt Hon. Speaker of Parliament, His Lordship the Chief Justice, the Rt Hon. Deputy Speaker, Rt Hon. Deputy Chief Justice, Rt Hon. Prime Minister designate –(Applause)- and all the big and small people –(Laughter)

I want to thank the hon. Lugoloobi Amos. You heard how he presented the budget very well. 

You heard the budget, so the comments I make are just to clarify a few points. The first point is an ideology and a strategic one, which I always fight to clarify whenever I get the opportunity. 

The issues I have seen in Uganda here, for the last 70 years, have been mainly – some people do not grasp them very well and that is why we waste quite a bit of time. It seems there is a struggle between the producers of wealth and the parasites. Fortunately, by a good historical accident, I belonged to the   producers of wealth. Ntungamo, where I was born and partially grew up, in the 1940s and 1950s, you had the following wealth creators – people who were creating wealth, not eating what they do not produce: 

We had cattle keepers, in which activity I was involved myself, directly. There is no work involving cattle, which I did not do myself, with my own hands. We then had crop farmers, for food - bananas, sweet potatoes, millet. Millet was very much used that time in those areas. These were wealth creators.

We had a few people who were catching eshonzi. Eshonzi are mud fish; I think they call them mud fish. We had some families which were doing that. We did not have proper fishermen because we were a bit far from the water but we had these people who were catching fish.

We had artisans – blacksmiths (abaheesi). There was a man called Manyoro. We had carpenters who were making wooden buckets, milk pots and all sorts of wooden products. 

In Ntungamo, we did not have any cash crop growers in the 1940s and 1950s; no. We were all abakolera ekidda kyoonka - working only for the stomach. However, in some of the neighbouring subcounties like Ndeija and also in Igara - Kyamuhunga, Kyeizooba - and a few areas of Sheema, they had started growing some cash crops. We were hearing about cash crops like coffee and in Kyamuhunga, tea growing was started in the 1950s.

Then we had a few service people who were doing servicing. We had a few Indians. I think they were like four plus two Arabs. Some of the Indians were Abdallah and Mamdalhi. One of the Arabs was called Bumbakale, which is the kinyankolerisation of Abubakar.

Then we had a Nubian in Kakuru, Kamisi whom the Banyankole called Kyarakitanaba because he was so black that the nails were equally black. They thought he did not wash them. They called him, “the one without washed nails” or Kyarakitanaba. But he was providing transport service. When we visited the national park, as a class in 1958, I think it was his Opel vehicle, which took us there. 

So, the majority of us were wealth creators in agriculture, artisanship or services. In these, we were assisted by partners. People used to come from Kampala here. A man called Walusimbi Mpanga would come and buy our cows and bring them to Kampala for slaughter; he was our partner. We had another man called Bukyenya in Mbarara. He was a fat Muslim. These are Baganda of Ankole. His real name was Bukenya, but because Banyankole cannot easily pronounce Bukenya, they called him Bukyenya. That one also used to buy cows to bring them to Mbarara. Then there was a European called O’Shea who was used to buy cows to Kilembe for slaughter. 

So, these were our partners and we were selling – I used to sell milk, sometimes to the Indians and to some other groups like some Banyarwanda who had migrated there. There was a Munyarwanda called Kanyandehu. I used to sell milk to him because he wanted it. 

Therefore, because we were wealth creators and we had our partners, we had no problem of sectarianism. You could not hear people talking about Indians; that Indians were the problem because they were bringing us what we did not have. All these groups, including the Baganda you hear - Walusimbi and the others - were the ones who used to buy our cows. At that time, the Banyankole were not so much in trade. Then we had the Banyarwanda buying some of our products.

So, ideologically, since our people were involved in wealth creation, we had no time for sectarianism because we needed one another. If I were anti-Baganda, who would buy my cows? If I were anti-Indians, who would bring me what I did not have? Who would bring us the salts, textiles and paraffin? That time, we were still using tadoobas (wick candles).

This ideology of sectarianism was part of the pseudo-ideology pushed by parasites. This is why I want us to focus on this difference of wealth versus parasites. The producers of wealth are wealth and job creators. You can imagine that even at that very lower level of economic activity, we were creating jobs. We would sell our cows to Walusimbi Mpanga, but there were no lorries that time to carry the cows. So, Walusimbi Mpanga would have to employ people to walk the cows. They called it tufunya. These people would walk the cows all the way from Ntungamo to Kampala. These were jobs. You can imagine that even at our lower level, we were already creating jobs. I look after cows, sell them to Walusimbi Mpanga, and Walusimbi Mpanga would employ people to walk the cows all the way to Kampala. 

So, how do the parasites, the opportunists and the sectarians come in to bring tribes and religions? It was because I think we – you cannot easily practice sectarianism where I am because I will tell you to go to hell because I am a producer of wealth. I owe nothing to anybody. In fact, I think if we were not busy with the school system, I do not think this sectarian politics would have taken root in a place like Ankole.

That is why when the NRM came, sectarian politics disappeared. Because what are you saying? I owe nothing to you. I am here looking after my cows and growing my crops. I am here as an artisan. So, what are you telling me? Are you asking me to be against the other person yet he is the one who is buying my products? You are a Satan then. Go away! So, that is how the NRM came and really scorched this nonsense. 

When the NRM won, two groups tried to fight us: the parasites and I think some of the confused people who did not know enough about us. They would go to the North and tell people in Acholi that, “these people are coming to kill you” to create fear. With time, however, as you have seen, the people in the North were able to know who the NRM are. 

Those groups who were fighting NRM tried to organise a rebellion. We, however, defeated the rebellion through three things: 

    i. Mobilising the people;
    ii. Using combined arms; and
    iii. Improving technology.

So, when the rebellion was defeated, what we have now is isolated crime like you have seen here in Kampala - the people who have been killed; the Muslim Sheikhs who were killed that time, Joan Kagezi, Kaweesi, Kirumira and the recent attempt on Gen. Katumba and killing of the daughter and his driver. This is definitely by parasites. 

We are busy producing wealth. Farmers, fishermen and people with small factories are busy. Who are you, instead of working, to attack people? You want to cause fear and stop the Ugandans - if it were not for Coronavirus; I am a bit lonely now. Otherwise, they dance the whole night and make noise and so on. Girls are okwemansula. That is what Ugandans like - nice life. 

These days, I just sleep and there is no noise because of Coronavirus. When it goes, I want my people to go back to leisure making.

Therefore, I am here to tell the parasites that we shall crash them. We crashed the rebellion, which was openly challenging us. This is like a jigger. In the primary school, for the few times, I had a problem of jiggers entering my feet. When the jigger enters your foot, the whole of it itches. If you are not clever, you would say, “Let me cut off the whole foot because the jigger has entered it.” You will have made a mistake. 

What you do is to carefully see where the jigger is - I was an expert in handling that one. The Banyankole say, the “eye” of the jigger. First all, you see where the jigger is. Even when you know where it is, you go for its eye. I think it breathes through that space. That is the one you start with. This is how we are handling this problem of the criminals. That is why we do not set up roadblocks. You can be provoked and you put roadblocks, so people do not move. I will not. Roadblocks stop the one who is guilty and the guiltless; Nnalumanya ne ssalumanya. We shall never use roadblocks. We must look for the eye of the jigger.

In order to do that, when I addressed the Parliament in 2018, I laid out the steps. Step number one is the human resources. People would tell you; the one who saw and one who heard. As hon. Lugoloobi was saying in the budget, we catered for technical means, which we have already started deploying; the cameras. You have seen how they have helped us to see what was happening. Once the police wakes up and uses them more effectively, you will see how they will help us to control crime.

Also, in my 2018 speech, I spoke about the digital monitors to be installed in every vehicle and pikipiki. That project has delayed - I do not know why. Gen. Tumwine was handling it. Gen. Katumba was also involved.

This morning, I was talking to the proposed new Minister of State for Internal Affairs, Gen. David Muhoozi. What happened to my project? Why hasn’t it been implemented? I do not want any more wasting of time in investigations. 

Every vehicle and pikipiki must have a digital monitor centrally monitored. If you try to remove it, we shall see and go for you. The moment you touch it, the system will show us that somebody is trying to remove it. The digital monitor will show us where you are at any one time if we are interested in you. 

We have no interest in your clandestine activities as long as you are not near the scene of crime. As soon as there is crime, we go for which vehicles were there instead of wasting time. It will be much easier. I demand it.

I have told Gen. Muhoozi, the Commander of Defence Forces and designate minister of state, to check what has happened to that plan. We would not be wasting time looking here and there. Which vehicle or pikipiki was here when this happened? 

It is not that difficult to stop these parasites. I call them by the name of the other four-legged animal. It is not me but Jesus who said in the Bible that, “Don’t put your valuable things before pigs.” “Temussa nga ebyomuwendo byamwe mumaso gembizi”. The pigs do not appreciate value. Therefore, if you put value before them, they will trample on them.

The third solution is forensic capacity. Criminals will never commit crime and not leave a trace. It is not possible. Even those who shot at Gen. Katumba were seen. One of them dropped a cloth. It is on the videos. I have not watched but Loketch told me. One of them dropped it but our people, the villagers, picked and took it away. They should not have touched that cloth because it has got the whole story about the thief. It has got DNA in your sweat. The moment you sweat a little bit, kiwedde. We shall take it to the laboratory and the DNA will tell us it is Museveni who was here. So, the forensic capacity of the police has now improved. You must respect the scene of crime. The person who took the cloth yatukola bubi. If you still have it, please bring it back; although you have added your own sweat, maybe there is still some chance. If you have not washed it, there may be a chance of helping us. 

One of the techniques we developed after 2018 – I actually got this from the police. I did know it; the police are the ones who told me. They call it, “finger printing the gun”. I did not know that each gun had its own fingerprint, but these policemen knew this and they told us in our security meetings that they can fingerprint guns. I told them to do it and they have fingerprinted either all or most of the guns in Uganda. What Lokech is telling me is that they already know the fingerprints of the guns which were used in the Katumba incident. 

We have also got other digital means, which I do not want to talk about because the criminals are also listening. I should not talk about everything; kandekere awo. 

However, when it becomes necessary, the alertness of the public – if the public is alert – Although I do not want you to be on tension; sagala kubatawanya. You can do your things – dancing, jumping. You would continue with your things if it was not for corona. However, when we need you to be alert, we shall mobilise you, like we did in Masaka. 

The other day, when I was giving the coronavirus speech, I brought one of my girls who helped us to kill Kidawalime - the one who was killing people in Masaka. That was because of the mobilisation of the public. 

We are working very hard. The new team of security, - the new Minister of Internal Affairs and the Minister of Security - I want them to solve the issue of digital monitoring. I do not want Uganda to be a land of bodyguards. We should not have bodyguards going with us all over the place. We should have collective eyes which can see what is happening; even if I do not have bodyguards with me, I will be guarded by the collective. This bodyguarding and the convoys is just temporary because we still have those gaps in the security infrastructure. 

Therefore, the schemers of insecurity are wasting their time. They only provoke us to wake up and create more capacity. Like in Karamoja, there are people who are making a mistake; they will see what will happen to them. I have got the reports. I want those fellows working with the Turkana to stop. I will also contact His Excellency Kenyatta. Those characters working with the Turkana to steal cows and hide them in Kenya – Kenyans are our brothers. We shall come for you jointly with H.E. Kenyatta to deal with those criminals in Karamoja. It will stop. 

We increased the army strength. We had brought down the army strength to 40,000 in the past because we did not want to have a – but now we have scaled up to a higher figure and we can scale up further if it becomes necessary. 

Now, the attack on Gen. Katumba was not an ordinary crime. It is not that it was a crime. This was a definite political motive and we shall know which pig was behind this, because there are different pigs. People who use assassination are not sure of themselves. The NRM never uses assassination because we are sure of ourselves. Why should I kill you because you are opposing me? Why? If I am right and you are wrong, why do I kill you? I should preserve you so that you continue making your mistakes and then the people see that I am the one who is right and you are the one who is wrong.

When you kill somebody, you actually save them. When somebody dies, people say, “that man would have done very good things if he had lived”. Maybe the man would have done nothing, but when you kill him, you make him a hero because you did not allow him to do what he wanted. Do what you want to do and let him also do what he wants, so that the people can see who is right and who is wrong. 

There are very many people I would have killed because they were annoying me. One of them is Cissy Ogwal. I used to call her “dhako marach” - the bad woman - because she had a bad tongue. If I had killed Cissy Ogwal, she would be a hero now. People would be saying, “if Cissy Ogwal had not died, great things would have happened.” Now, I am here with Cissy Ogwal. It is bankrupt to kill people.
 
If I had killed Besigye, he would be a hero in the memory of the people. They would say, “Besigye would have done a big thing if he had lived, but he was killed”. That is how Jesus became a hero. If those Romans had not killed Jesus, I do not know what would have happened. 

Bankrupt! If you see groups that use assassination, those are bankrupt groups. That means that they are not sure. Why should I kill you if I am sure of what I am saying? You may continue saying what you are saying, as long as you say it peacefully. Please do not disturb our peace, and then we shall see who is right. If you are right, I can leave what I am doing and join you. If I am right, you can join me. What is the problem? Why should I kill anybody just because we do not agree?

Now, I have brought to you a list of ministers, the Vice President, the Prime Minister, and the deputy prime ministers. I hear that many of you are Christians but many people do not understand Christianity very well, although they talk about it. 

When Jesus started his movement, there were intellectuals called Pharisees: highly educated people. There were other people called Sadducees and Levites. I will ask the Archbishop to help and describe to us those highly educated people.

However, Jesus went for the fishermen. Jesus did not recruit Pharisees; he did not recruit Levites; he did not recruit Sadducees, but went for Simon Peter and the others. Of course, he also had some intellectuals. I am told that Luke was a doctor. Please when you look at my list, know that I am in the path of Jesus Christ. (Applause)

Because I was underground and working alone, you know, these things are quite – when you are compiling the list, you are under a very big threat. Therefore, I was operating underground alone and this is one area where I do not need assistance. Of course this was a fantastic and pleasant job. So many of you are so good; and I do not know what to do. I would look at one and say, “This one - but now the tribe, religion and the balance.”

In 1952, I attended pre-primary in a girl’s school, where we were only four boys. To be in a girl’s school when you are boys; we really suffered. Those girls can be very bad. 

In 1953, I graduated from 1 (B) to 1 (A), and I went to P.1 proper, and that is where I learnt all the signs; multiplication, division, subtractions and additions. In forming the Cabinet, I really used those signs. I was adding, subtracting, dividing and the people are all so good. Really, the NRM has done a fantastic job. You MPs are a wonderful crop. 

When I am looking there, I would say, “This one is good, but I must gauge the limited number”. In my shortlist, I had got somebody - one of our people Kabbyanga, who was recently our Mayor in Kasese. He was on my shortlist but in the final list, when I came from underground and I called hon. Omona and one of my secretaries to type out the list for me - because I was hiding, I forgot Kabbyanga’s name.

Kasese must have somebody. Kabbyanga’s name was there but because of being underground, there are some disadvantages of being underground - but it also has some advantages because I surprised you with all my fishermen.

Amos Lugoloobi’s speech is wonderful, as you have heard and it is well delivered. On page 7, paragraph 20 that is where you have the Banyankole proverb – “A madman sets fire on a swamp” to and you know swamp grass does not burn easily, but kubarabaruka, which means burst. It does not burn properly but somehow – therefore, the NRM is like the madman. We have been struggling against social underdevelopment. 

In paragraph 20, there is some evidence that although the swamp is not fully burnt, it has at least kubarabaruka because hon. Lugoloobi read, “Mr Speaker, the recently concluded household survey reports that poverty has declined from 21.4 per cent in 2016/2017 to 20.3 per cent in 2019/2020.” That is interesting but not as important as the next one. Poverty rates reduced in West Nile, Bunyoro and Elgon regions, among others. However, 39 per cent of Ugandan households are still in subsistence economy. You may not understand the importance of this; this is not a negative statement. The way it is written sounds negative but actually, it is positive because you remember, in 2013, 68 per cent of the homesteads were in subsistence economy. Now, we are being told that according to the recent household census, only 39 per cent are still in the subsistence economy. This means that now, 61 per cent are in the money economy and it is the 39 per cent who are still in the subsistence economy. This is great news.

That means that we have done something because remember, we started in 2013 and people were saying, the things we are giving, where are they going? Operation Wealth Creation has been giving and giving. I was still using the old figures of 68 per cent in homestead incomes. Apparently, it is not that now.

What we have done has not been in vain; people have moved in the money economy. The households are at 61 per cent, it is the 39 per cent, which are still in the subsistence economy. It may not be clear if you were not as alert as I was when he was reading.

Finally, hon. Lugoloobi was talking about human capital and training but another very happy phenomenon - Recently, I met some young doctors led by a young Mukenyi doctor – Do you know Bakenyi? Many of you do not know our country but this young Mukenyi doctor and her colleagues who came with some elders including Professor Omaswa said, “now we have a new problem.” I asked, what was the new problem? “There are too many doctors and they cannot get jobs.” I said that cannot be true. We cannot have a problem of too many doctors that some of them are not absorbed. They stay floating on the streets. That will be cured immediately; I did not know. If we have got too many doctors, we are now going to have doctors at the sub-county. Remember health centres III. How can we say we have got too many doctors?

I asked Professor Omaswa, have you told these young people what World Health Organisation tells us? It says that we should be having one doctor for every 500 people. So, since Uganda now has 42 million people, it means we should be having 84,000 doctors but we are talking of something like 5,000 in the Government service.

So, the new Minister of Health and the new Prime Minister, I do not want to hear the issue of unemployed doctors. Every doctor who qualifies must be taken on by the Government and then, we scale them down to the sub-county.

Let us have a doctor at each subcounty not one because if the subcounties are 2,000, one doctor at the sub-county means we absorb 2,000. If we get more, we have two at the subcounty so that we do not have patients coming from the subcounty to the district.

The whole traffic of disease should be blocked there and only referral cases should come to the health centres IV because at that time, we had few doctors and we had gone up to the health centre IV. Since we have many doctors now, let us go down to health centre III. Have one, two, three and build up so that all the diseases are localised.

We do not have to have this traffic to Mulago. Let all the diseases be handled in Ntibeishatu; that is what they used to call Ntungamo subcounty where I was born.

Finally, in hon. Lugoloobi’s speech, there was one thing, which we may have to look at; the 8 per cent tax on the fish maw. I do not know how to pronounce it. They call it ennuni in Luganda; the fish bladder is apparently in very high demand in some places; China especially.

You remember the other time, in the State-of-the-Nation Address, I told you that Uganda can earn $ 156 billion each year from fish maw. One of the problems we have, which I want to write to the President of China about, is that China has put a tax on fish maw entering China. If we also put another tax here, we are undermining ourselves.

I want to write to the President of China and ask him to remove the import tax on fish maw. Now, here you are putting a tax. That is not correct.

We can create many jobs. The Minister of State for Fisheries, hon. Hellen Adoa, knows the story of how we can use this fish maw to create a lot of jobs.

With these few words, I congratulate hon. Amos Lugoloobi for reading the speech on my behalf. He has relieved me of the burden of having to read the speech myself and you can see how I am learning to exploit younger people. Let them do the work and we just watch from behind and see how they are doing the work. Some of these people I have nominated to you - I have been studying them for a long time and I know a lot about them.

Some of them have got very good qualities like loyalty. They do not have squinted eyes - you do not know whether he is looking at you or looking at – hardworking not corrupt.

So, I thank you. I congratulate hon. Amos Lugoloobi for his speech. Thank you very much. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Your Excellency, thank you very much for fulfilling your constitutional obligation. Now, this august House and the whole country have picked the main points of the policies and development plans that you have in place for this next year.

Honourable members, let me confirm one thing before I adjourn. On the issue of the list that the President has been talking about, I wish to confirm that he had made it very secretive, to the extent that even the Speaker did not know about it. 

Today, Your Excellency, when we started the debate on the motion for a resolution of Parliament to vary the number of Cabinet ministers and other ministers in accordance with the Constitution, an issue arose - “Why are we debating this, when the list is already out? Mr Speaker, you must be in possession of this list and now you are presiding over a Parliament that is going to be a mere rubberstamp because you have already taken a decision on this matter.”

By the grace of God, Your Excellency, I had not yet received the list, so that worked in my favour. I honestly told this House that I have not seen the list and truthfully, I have not seen the list. 

I think this now goes to the story of “the first shall be last”. I will be the last to receive the list. Everybody has the list. You can even see how he has cleverly dealt with the estimates. The letter I received said, “In exercise of the powers vested in the President by Article 99 (1) and (4) of the Constitution, I have directed hon. Amos Lugoloobi, the Member of Parliament for Ntenjeru North, Kayunga District, to lay before Parliament, on my behalf, these estimates.” There was no mention of any other thing and even when he is congratulating him, he is still very careful about calling him anybody else.

Mr President, give me that list so that we become comfortable. For all these Members, you are saying, “Vice President-designate” but you do not mention a name; “Prime Minister-designate”, you do not mention a name. People are still wary about what the situation really is. 

That being said, honourable members, you will recall that in the past, we used to have cocktails immediately after the Budget. We also used to have group photographs immediately after these great speeches – Budget Speech and State-of-the-Nation address.

However, due to the COVID-19 pandemic, this is not very possible now. However, I am going to seek the indulgence of the President to allow at least some photography to take place. 

I am requesting you to allow us to take a picture with yourself, Sir, the First Lady, the Speaker, the Chief Justice, the Deputy Speaker, hon. Lugoloobi the person who read the Budget Speech, the Clerk to Parliament and the Sergeant-at-Arms. Also, already brought before this House, designated - not just designated but approved – is the Leader of the Opposition and the Chief Opposition Whip. I am not sure - If I say Prime Minister-designate, I do not know who will come -(Laughter). The way the President has put it, he just said, “Prime Minister-designate”; there was no name. So, if you suspect that you are the one -(Laughter)- I am going to put you on the list. Government Chief Whip-designate, if you know you are the one or you suspect reasonably to be the one, you can show up. The Vice President-designate, please if you feel you are the one, march forward and take this picture with the President and the Prime Minister-designate.

Those are the people I am proposing to join you in the photograph. However, if you are not sure, please remain where you are.

Finally, Sir, the Appointments Committee was established this morning. We are trying to be very innovative in the way we handle business. You will recall that on the 4th of this month, we handled our Members of the Pan African Parliament within the State-of-the-Nation Address. That was part of the innovation we created. Today was just supposed to be the Budget Speech but on the Order Paper, we also added items like approval of the Appointments Committee and the motion on varying the number of Cabinet ministers and other ministers. This is part of the innovation we had. We now have an Appointments Committee in place, ready to process the list that you will submit to Parliament accordingly. So, we are essentially ready. 

I am hereby calling upon Members of the Appointments Committee that there will be a meeting on Monday. All of you should be there, whether we are going to start the approval processes or just prepare the ground rules on how we are going to proceed. Monday, 11 o’clock, please come. We will be meeting in the Conference Hall in Parliament.

Honourable members, the situation of COVID-19 has become really, really bad. As you aware, the second wave of COVID-19 has escalated in the country with several persons infected. The second wave is highly infectious and very deadly. Parliament, as an institution, has been affected, with some Members and some staff currently sick and on treatment for COVID-19. I, therefore, would like to remind the Members that Parliament has a medical insurance scheme that should be helpful to you. Kindly, seek immediate medical attention should you feel unwell.

You are advised to stay away from duty should you develop COVID-19 symptoms, until you are tested. Always keep the Parliament medical team and the Office of the Speaker or Deputy Speaker informed.

In the interim, access to Parliament shall be closed to the members staff and the public on Saturday, 12th and Sunday, 13 June 2021 to allow for fumigation of the precincts of Parliament to be done. 

Honourable members, once again, I want to thank you for the usual civility you have demonstrated in the course of this Budget Speech. I am thankful to you. When the President says that we have got a good breed this time, I agree with him that we will do work for the people of this country, focusing on the national interest and better service delivery for our people. Our job is cut out for us to cause socioeconomic transformation in this country to make our people better than they are at the moment. Thank you very much.

Your Excellency, we have to formally close this sitting but this sitting is not like the one we had in the morning. So, I now want to formally go to the process of adjourning the whole proceeding. 

At this moment, if you would like to leave, Sir, I would suspend the House and let you go while I prepare to close the House a little later. Let us first do the pictorial. 

(House suspended at 4.49 p.m.)

The East African Community Anthem

The National Anthem

(On resumption at 4.52 p.m., the Speaker presiding.)

the speaker: Honourable members, as I communicated earlier, the Appointments Committee will sit on Monday and this House will resume on Tuesday, 15th June 2021.

Mr Okupa: Thank you, Mr Speaker. In regard to your earlier communication regarding the medical insurance, we need your help. The medical insurance companies say, especially to the new Members of Parliament, that they have got instructions from the Office of the Clerk that their services become effective 01 July. This cannot be allowed. 

There are many new Members who are finding a challenge. This is a time of COVID-19. You need to help the Members such that this takes immediate effect. Thank you.
 
The Speaker: The Members took oath from 17th to 20th if my recollection is anything to go by. They became Members of Parliament with full benefits. Clerk, please, ensure that this is corrected immediately so the Members can begin accessing the facilities that are due to them.

The only request that I make of you is to finish with the paperwork. Fill all the required paperwork so that these processes can be concluded with the people providing the insurance.

Mr katuntu: Thank you, Mr Speaker. As you recall, all of us took the first jab of the COVID-19 vaccine. Unfortunately, many of us are due but we have not been able to take the second. May we be advised when the vaccine will be available for us to get the second jab?

The Speaker: Hon. Katuntu, that is a good point. I took mine on 20 March and my second was supposed to be on the 21 May. I went to the Ministry of Health and they gave me the second dose. I was also told by the then Minister of Health, who now also earns the title of “designate”, that the longer the space is the better for the vaccine to work very well and I believe her.

I do not know whether the former Minister of Health and designate could say something about this situation because you are the only one who can speak with some authority on this matter?

5.12
Dr JANE aceng (NRM, Woman Representative, Lira): Thank you, Mr Speaker. You will forgive me I do not recall the date but I am sure the Clerk to Parliament does. We set up in Parliament and gave Members their second dose. I do not know how many missed because we still have challenges of members coming at the same time. I will link up with the Clerk to Parliament and we organise for those who are due with the vaccines that we currently have. 

However, I would like to inform Members that next week, we are receiving more vaccines and so, if you are still within eight to 12 weeks, you are still on time and there is no need to worry. We will do that. Thank you. 

Mr ekanya: Mr Speaker, as you are aware, from 10th there is partial lockdown on movement beyond districts. Some of the new colleagues’ faces are not well known to security. I would like to know when they will have the work identity cards because some security personnel ask us to show work identity cards. This creates a difficult situation. Some of us are very lucky that while we are outside Parliament, our faces are known so they just clear us. Thank you.

The Speaker: Clerk, I request you to expedite the process of issuing identity cards for Members of Parliament that would help them in their movements.

Ms Cecilia ogwal: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to go back to the issue of insurance. As the chairperson of the Commission now, you are aware that I am still chairing that committee on behalf of the Commission. The problem we have is that the insurance providers are not catering for all the testing and vaccination. The testing should be covered by them as our insurance providers but they are not. 

Therefore, whenever Members want to do testing for an occasion like this, they have to pay unless you are able to catch up with the Parliamentary programme, which is not possible some times. I can quote my case; I had been out for burial. When I came back, I found Parliament was no longer testing. I had to go to a private medical insurance provider where I was supposed to pay.

Mr Speaker, can you guide us as to how the Clerk can negotiate with the providers? COVID-19 is with us and so, the providers will have to also vary their services to include regular testing of COVID-19. 

The Clerk could probably ask the Commission to increase some money on the medical insurance so that we can cater for all those services. Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: That can be handled. However, honourable members, in my experience, for meetings that involve His Excellency the President, there are only certain categories of people who can test. When those tests are done, the results are transmitted to everybody in State House and the like so that they get to know whether you are okay or not. The ones that might be coming from the private service providers might have difficulties in these kinds of situations. 

For our own sake, however, I do not know what we are going to adopt so that we have an agreed number of people who can give us valid tests. We have had situations where people have altered results; that is where the safety issues now come in. You need somebody reliable and trustworthy to do it. All this is work in progress but I am sure within a week, we will have come up with some concrete solutions on how to handle this matter.  

MS OGWAL: Mr Speaker, I am aware of that but there is a special doctor who is connected to the system. They always advise that since Parliament is no longer testing, you can get in contact with this particular doctor, who knows how to network with the centre. That facility is there. My problem is, when you go there, you have to pay. How can we be protected and helped? 

Secondly, when you are found positive, where do you go for all these food supplements? Insurance providers must cater for it in our package so that when you are found positive, the insurance providers can cater for us without asking for any extra pay. That is what I am trying to say. 

THE SPEAKER: Clerk, arrange a meeting with all the insurance providers; we sit with them and agree on some parameters that should be implemented. I was going to adjourn and now it has become a big debate. 
 
MR OGUZU: Mr Speaker, I thank you for the opportunity. I rise here on an issue of urgent public importance. 

As you know, when schools closed, students went home and transport was a big problem. In the taxi parks, we saw a lot of congestion. There are fears that there could have been an increased rate of infections, which has gone to the villages. 

As of now, there is no clear testing mechanism for students from Kampala. I do not know how this House can advise the country on how to manage cases of infection among students and mechanisms for providing testing for pupils and students who have emerged from the cities to the villages. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Dr Ruth Aceng -

DR ACENG: Thank you, Mr Speaker. It was, indeed, unfortunate that our students all gathered at the bus park and some spent the night there, providing an avenue for infection from one to another. 

I would like to state here that that issue was sorted and the students are now safely at home with their parents. However, allow me to inform this House that from the very beginning, when we had the first wave, all the District Health Officers (DHOs) have sample removers and samples can be transmitted and tested in over 25 designated labs all over the country. 

In addition, our hospitals have rapid diagnostic test kits, - the antigen tests - so they test for the virus directly. These can be accessed in the health facilities in the various districts. Therefore, there is no need to come back to Kampala to get a test. You can consult with the hospital nearest to you or your District Health Officer to get a sample and you get your PCR test done within 24 hours. I thank you, Mr Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Is that clear? 

MR MUSILA: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for granting the Rasta man   another second. Mine is quite simple. It is related to COVID-19, especially in regard to what my colleague, hon. Ekanya, talked about - the IDs. 

That is a long-term issue. Temporarily, Mr Speaker, I request that we get some stickers on our vehicles. The President was quite clear when he said that the legislators will keep around. We should get a form of identity so that we can pass through these districts. Some of the authorities, especially Resident District Commissioners (RDCs), are overzealous. They could simply want to embarrass you along the way. So, I request that in the meantime, we get stickers on our vehicles because it would do us better. I thank you.    

THE SPEAKER: Clerk, explore the possibilities of these proposals. 

MR TUMWEBAZE: Mr Speaker, the relevant issue I am raising, related to the concerns of the pandemic and how it affects the work of Parliament, is whether Parliament cannot take the challenge we have as an opportunity and invest or build our ICT capability, so that we are able to operationalise e-legislation. 

If we are not able to gather everyone in the tent here, which is also another risk in terms of the health challenge as well as the expense, if someone is in Entebbe or in a constituency and I cannot transact – Mr Speaker, the virtual space has no limits; you can as well proclaim that the entire virtual space is Parliament. 

I know you have not constituted the Parliamentary Commission and other administrative arms of Parliament but the leadership is there. Isn’t this the time for us to operationalise the e-function or the e-government function of Parliament to first of all reduce on the physical numbers and also strengthen the smooth running of Parliament without any disruption because of the pandemic? Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: I can see that the honourable member has already started work. I think even the last Parliament had those provisions where you could attend Parliament remotely but I do not know whether you could contribute remotely. You could only attend the proceedings remotely. This should now be improved to make it more functional. 

MR TIMUZIGU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The complaint on IDs is very important. Today is Thursday and we are supposed to go today or tomorrow to our constituencies. Remember, we are part of the district taskforce for COVID-19, so we are supposed to transact business from here and there. 

Mr Speaker, you noted when you came in that one of the UPDF officers who was here did not salute you. It also happens to us with the Local Defence Units (LDUs) and the way they handle business. If the regulation is not clear, the LDUs will make it clear because there is a way they handle things. 

It would, therefore, be prudent that at the moment, as Members of Parliament we get communication from the Government on how Members of Parliament will be moving. In any case, if there is no communication like that, Members of Parliament will be embarrassed because the LDUs are the ones who interpret whichever regulation is not clear. Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. I think this issue of the ID, Clerk, we need to expedite this. It should not take too long. In the meantime, I do not know whether we could issue some documents because the issue of the stickers is a matter for the National Task Force. 

Again, Parliament does not give those rules. Can we issue some document even if it is not an ID; a letter that would be given to a Member to go with, with an official seal of Parliament?

MR OPIO: My issue is just on the administrative arrangements. We have had a lot of challenges getting communication on the sittings and the programmes. Several times, we receive information from third parties. I would like to propose that we utilise our e-Systems. We have Parliamentary emails, we have SMS and we have WhatsApp communication platforms. I propose that we strengthen utilisation of these communication tools that we have at our disposal.

The second and last one is on the information provision. As you are aware that Members were sworn in between 17th May and 20th May, but members still do not even know the details about their welfare. I would like to request that the necessary offices address these matters. It is really a challenge; three weeks and the Members of Parliament do not have clear information on what their emoluments are to enable them plan accordingly. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Yes, hon. Bakkabulindi, you will be the last for now.

MR BAKKABULINDI: Mr Speaker, I would like to thank you for this opportunity. I need your guidance and I am getting a bit perturbed. We have been seated here since morning and following the programme. According to our programme – I can see many people moving and vacating the place. According to our programme, there are two very important items of clearing the Vice President and the Prime Minister. You are telling us that the Committee on Appointments will be sitting on Tuesday. According to our system, the clearance of the Vice President and the Prime Minister is for the entire House. Are you adjourning? The Members are going and we need some guidance. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, as I stated before, and even in my concluding remarks, I have not got the list. I cannot use the list that is on your WhatsApp, to carry out any approvals. Sir, I have not got the list yet but I hope I will get it today, then we will handle those matters the best way we can.

On the issue of getting to know what happens in Parliament, I think dates have been communicated. Let me announce them again. I communicated this earlier but let me say it again. A three-day in-house orientation has been organised from 14th to 16th June 2021 starting at 8.30 a.m. for all the Members to be acquainted with the services offered by the various offices in the Parliamentary Service.

This is extremely vital for you because the service is in place to support committees, the House and individual Members in the execution of their constitutional mandate. This was communicated and please take note of these dates and be there at those times, and receive information. You can also privately ask the relevant officers about that thing, which you have asked about; what your entitlements are.

Honourable members, can we stop here now? This House stands adjourned to Tuesday next week.

(House rose at 5.25 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 15 June 2021 at 2.00 p.m.) 
