PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES(HANSARD)OFFICIAL REPORTTHIRD SESSION - FIRST MEETINGWEDNESDAY , 7 JUNE 2023PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA9080ADDRESS ON THE STATE OF THE NATIONWednesday, 7 June 2023Grounds to be the precincts of Parliament for the above-mentioned purpose.Given under my hand at Parliament House, Kampala, this 7th Day of June 2023. Anita Annet AmongSpeaker of Parliament.”COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIRTHE SPEAKER:  Your Excellency, the President, the First Lady, who is also the Minister of Education and Sports, Maama Janet Kataaha Museveni, Her Excellency the Vice President of the Republic of Uganda, the Rt Hon. Deputy Speaker, Rt Hon. Thomas Tayebwa, the Principal Judge, Justice Flavian Zeija, representing the Chief Justice, His Lordship the Deputy Chief Justice, the Vice Chairperson of NRM Party, the visiting Speakers and heads of the national legislatures in the Eastern African countries, the Prime Minister of Uganda and Leader of Government Business, the Leader of the Opposition in Parliament, Cabinet ministers and ministers of state, the Justices of the Courts of Judicature, your excellences, the ambassadors and high commissioners, heads of diplomatic missions, my honourable colleagues, Members of Parliament and Members of Parliament of other parliaments like that of the Democratic Republic of Congo, the delegation from Buganda Kingdom, led my Ow’ekitiibwa Prof. Twaha Kaawaase, the traditional and cultural leaders, senior public servants, distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen. IN THE PARLIAMENT OF UGANDAOfficial Report of the Proceedings of ParliamentTHIRD SESSION - 1ST SITTING - FIRST MEETINGParliament met at 2.34 p.m., at the Kololo Independence Grounds, Kampala.The National AnthemThe East African Community AnthemPRAYERS(The Speaker, Ms Anita Annet Among, in the Chair.)The House was called to order.PROCLAMATIONTHE SPEAKER:  “WHEREAS Article 101(1) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, mandates His Excellency, the President, at the beginning of each session of Parliament, to deliver to Parliament an address on the state of the nation;AWARE that His Excellency the President of the Republic of Uganda, has in accordance with Article 101(1), indicated to the Speaker of Parliament his intention to address Parliament on the State-of-the-Nation Address on Wednesday, 7 June 2023;NOW, THEREFORE, in accordance with Rule 17 (1) of the Rules of Procedure, I hereby proclaim that the Parliament shall sit at Kololo Independence Grounds today Wednesday, the 7th Day of June 2023 at 14.00 hours to receive the address of His Excellency, the President on the state of the nation , and Kololo Ceremonial 9081THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 24 MAY 2023Before I say anything, I would like to introduce the traditional leaders here. We have the Emorimor of Teso, His Royal Highness Sunday Paul Emolot. Can you just wave to the President? We have the Prime Minister of the Obakyabazinza of Busoga, Dr Joseph Muvawala. You are most welcome. We also have the First Deputy Katikkiro of Buganda Kingdom, Al Hajj Twaha Kaawaase Kigongo and His Royal Highness Obara Robert, the King of Bugwe. Your Excellency, allow me to introduce my colleagues, the visiting Speakers. We have:1. Rt Hon. Joseph Ntakirutimana - Speaker of the East African Legislative Assembly;2. Hon. Emmanuel Bugingo - Chairman of the Committee on Foreign Affairs, Cooperation and Security in the Parliament of Rwanda; and3. Rt Hon. Sanguma Temononde Mossai, the Second Vice-President of the Senate of the Democratic Republic of Congo. You are all most welcome. Thank you for coming. (Applause)We also have a delegation of Members of Parliament from the Democratic Republic of Congo. Can you please stand up and wave? We have a big delegation from there; you are most welcome. (Applause)Honourable members, I welcome you to this special sitting of Parliament, which marks the official opening of the Third Session of the 11th Parliament. We are profoundly honoured and immensely privileged to host His Excellency, the President at today’s sitting, during which we will receive the address on the State of Nation. This is in furtherance to Article 101(1) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, 1995.Your Excellency and Maama Janet Museveni, you are most welcome to the Parliament of Uganda. (Applause)Honourable members and distinguished guests, we are happy to report that Parliament has continued to make significant milestones in promoting peace, order, development and good governance in the country, as it is envisaged in Article 79(1) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, through its performance in the mandate that is given to the legislature, of oversight, legislation, representation and appropriation. Your Excellency and honourable members, during the Second Session, we regrettably lost two Members of the 11th Parliament. We lost:1. Hon. Patrick Okabe, the former Member of Parliament for Serere County; and2. Hon. Charles Okello Engola, the former Member of Parliament for Oyam North County and former Minister of State for Labour and Employment Relations. In addition, the cruel hand of death also snatched other citizens and these are notably:1. The former Member of Parliament for Rubaga South Constituency in the 10th Parliament, Hon. Paul Kato Lubwama;2. The former Member of Parliament for Padyere County in the Seventh Parliament and former Minister of State for Public Service, Hon. Patrick Aloysius Okumu Ringa;3. Our gallant soldiers of the UPDF serving in the Peace Support Operation in Somalia;4. The victims of landslides in Eastern and Western Uganda; and5. The victims of road carnage and various accidents that are happening in the country. 9082ADDRESS ON THE STATE OF THE NATIONThe Parliament of Uganda conveys its heartfelt sympathies and condolences to you, Mr President, and to the people of Uganda at large for the loss of these gallant sons and daughters of Uganda. May we kindly rise and observe a moment of silence in their honour?(Members rose and observed a moment of silence.)THE SPEAKER: Your Excellency, I take this opportunity, on behalf of the Parliament of Uganda, to convey our sincere thanks to you and the Government of Uganda for the invaluable support and cooperation that you have rendered to us. This has enabled us to execute our mandate without any hindrances. We are sincerely grateful, Your Excellency.Thank you very much. (Applause)Your Excellency, as a people-centred Parliament, we reiterate our commitment to work for the people of Uganda in a coordinated manner with the other arms of Government, for the good of the people and generations to come. We will always work for the people outside there whom we represent.Your Excellency and honourable members, the State-of-the-Nation Address is an avenue of accountability by the Chief Executive to the nation on the Government’s plans, versus the achievements in the previous financial year.The last State-of-the-Nation Address for last year was delivered on 7 June 2022; we are again having it today, 7 June 2023 to give accountability to Uganda for what we have done in the previous year.Honourable members, the delivery of the address by His Excellency, the President of Uganda is pursuant to Article 101(1) of the Constitution of Uganda, and it marks the beginning of the Third Session of the 11th Parliament. It is an exposition of the future aspirations of the Government for its people in Uganda. I want again, to thank and congratulate the Members of Parliament for completing the second session. Congratulations! (Applause)Your Excellency, in the last State-of-the-Nation Address, you listed 62 items comprising the Government’s legislative agenda for the second session. Of these, 55 were Bills, while others were reports. I wish to report that only 17 Bills out of the planned 55 Bills, were actually introduced, representing barely 31 per cent. The Bills that were introduced include the following:1. The Anti-Terrorism (Amendment) Bill, 2022;2. The Insolvency (Amendment) Bill, 2022;3. The Companies (Amendment) Bill, 2022;4. The Museum and Monuments Bill, 2022,5. The Physical Activity and Sports Bill, 2022;6. The Microfinance Deposit-Taking Institu -tions (Amendment) Bill, 2022; 7. The Law Revision (Miscellaneous Amendment) Bill, 2022;8. The Income Tax (Amendment) Bill, 2023;9. The Value Added Tax (Amendment) Bill, 2023;10. The Excise Duty (Amendment) Bill, 2023;11. The Lotteries and Gaming (Amendment) Bill, 2023;12. The Tax Procedures Code (Amendment) Bill, 2023;13. The Traffic and Road Safety (Amendment) Bill, 2023;14. The Supplementary Appropriation Bill, 2023;[The Speaker] COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR9083THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 24 MAY 202315. The Appropriation Bill, 2023;16. The Employment (Amendment) (No.2) Bill, 2022; and 17. The Competitions Bill, 2022.In addition, the Government introduced eight Bills that were not in the Government Legislative Agenda and these included:1. The Public Health (Amendment) Bill, 2022;2. The Cooperative Societies (Amendment) Bill, 2022;3. The Anti-Money Laundering (Amend -ment) Bill, 2022;4. The Trustees Incorporation (Amendment) Bill, 2022;5. The Partnership (Amendment) Bill, 2022; 6. The Uganda Human Organ Donation and Transplant Bill, 2022;7. The Convention on Mutual Administra -tive Assistance in Tax Matters (Imple -mentation) Bill, 2023; and8. The Public Service Pension Fund Bill, 2023. Your Excellency, the realisation of the Parliament legislative mandate was duly complimented by the Private Members’ Bills notably: 1) the Anti-Homosexuality Bill, 2023; 2) The National Sports Council Bill, 2023; 3) The National Local Content Bill, 2022; 4) The Parliamentary Pension (Amendment) Bill, 2022; 5) The Markets Bill, 2022; and6) The Employment (Amendment) Bill, 2022. As you are aware, honourable members, Article 94 (4)(b) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda grants a private Member the right to initiate a Private Member’s Bill. I thank the Members who brought their Private Member’s Bills; it is your right. This Parliament is committed to ensuring that the Members exercise their rights to complement the Government in the legislative process without any hindrances and will always work in consultation with the Government whenever we have a Bill coming on the Floor.Your Excellency, the Government’s legislative agenda is usually aimed at aiding the attainment of specific policy and development targets of the Government. I, therefore, urge you, the Leader of Government Business and Government Chief Whip, to ensure that the Third Session witnesses a better achievement of the Government’s legislative agenda better than what we had in the second session. Your Excellency, as part of our accountability as a Legislature, I wish to report that during the second session of the 11th Parliament, we held 105 sittings. We enacted 38 Bills and we have passed 39 resolutions, of which, 10 were to grant leave to private Members to introduce Private Members’ Bills. We also adopted 67 reports, concluded three petitions and debated 73 ministerial statements. Further, we considered seven statements from Members and the Opposition, respectively. Your Excellency, the Bills passed in the second session exceed the 23 Bills that were passed in the first session by 15 Bills, meaning we had an improvement in terms of processing Bills. Congratulations! This is a testimony of the efficiency and effectiveness of you, the 11th Parliament.Distinguished guests and gentlemen, some of the critical pieces of legislation that have been passed in the Second Session of the 11th Parliament include:1) The Anti-Homosexuality Bill, 2023, which is now an Act;9084ADDRESS ON THE STATE OF THE NATION2) The Market Act, 2023;3) The Human Organ Donation and Transplant Act, 2023;4) The Law Revision (Miscellaneous Amendment) Act, 2022; and 5) The Competition Act, 2023.All these laws seek to address the needs of society in pursuit of better living, development and prosperity.Your Excellency, the Anti-Homosexuality Act has, by far, elicited the most attention and debate. I wish to reiterate that as representatives of the people, we legislate in the best interests of our people, whom we represent, as envisaged in Articles 1, 79 and 31 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, in protecting the sanctity of the family as the bedrock to our God-fearing country.Honourable members, I thank you for standing firm in defending our culture, values and traditions as per the aspirations of our people and as prescribed in Objectives 19 and 24 of our National Objectives and Direct Principles of State Policy. I, therefore, want to congratulate all those Members who supported this Bill, which is now an Act. Congratulations! In the same vein, and with humility, I want to thank the President of the Republic of Uganda who is none other than Gen. Yoweri Kaguta Museveni, for his steadfast action in safeguarding the interests of Ugandans and withstanding all the pressures in a bid to preserve our national interests and abiding by our national motto which says, “For God and My Country.” Thank you so much, Mr President.We also thank the First Lady and Minister of Education and Sports, Maama  Janet Kataha Museveni, for propagating Christian values and encouraging the President in executing his mandate as the Chief Executive of this country. Maama , we thank you so much because we know you believe in families. As representatives of the people, we sincerely thank the people of Uganda for their prayers and for entrusting us to legislate for them. I now encourage the duty bearers under the law to execute the mandate that is bestowed upon them in operationalising the Anti-Homosexuality Bill, 2023. It is now their duty to enforce the law in a fair, steadfast and firm manner without fear or favour for the good of Uganda, for the good of our cultures, and for the good of traditions.I want to, once more, thank the honourable members, for the work they have done during this session, for their constituents and the general public for the prayers. Colleagues, as we embark on the Third Session, which starts today when the President opens - we hope he opens it - we are duty-bound to effectively serve the electorates that we represent through regular attendance and participation both in the House and committees. Honourable members, as leaders and presiding officers, we realised there is a gap that should be fixed regarding attendance, both at the committee level and in the House. You are here to represent the people outside there; you are the voice of the voiceless and so, you must be in the House to speak for those people who cannot speak for themselves in this House. We owe it to those electorates. As a people-centred Parliament, we will play our role to ensure we do all it takes for our people.Honourable members, Rule 187(1) of the Rules of Procedure requires the designation of Members to sectoral committees at the beginning of every session. Therefore, pursuant to Rule 15(10)(c) of the Rules of Procedure, I urge the Whips to designate Members to the sectoral committees at the next sitting to enable us start the work immediately.Distinguished ladies and gentlemen, our expectation of the third session remains high and we urge all the Members and staff of Parliament to exercise diligence, dedication and work at all times in order for us to achieve our goal in the third session.Honourable members, I would like to remind you that Rule 10(4)(a) of our Rules of Procedure states: “The President, while occupying the [The Speaker] COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR9085THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 24 MAY 2023Chair of State, may make a presidential statement or address, which shall be heard in silence and not followed by any comment or question.” I, therefore, implore you to abide by the rules so that we all benefit from His Excellency’s address. As Members of Parliament, you will have ample time to debate the State-of-the-Nation Address by the President. Similarly, the Leader of the Opposition will have the opportunity to give a reply on the State-of-the-Nation Address. So, we will hear from the President; and we will listen to him in silence. I say all this, for God and my country. (Applause)INVITATION BY THE RT HON. SPEAKER TO HIS EXCELLENCY , THE PRESIDENT TO DELIVER TO PARLIAMENT AN ADDRESS ON THE STATE OF THE NATION IN ACCORDANCE WITH ARTICLE 101(1) OF THE CONSTITUTIONTHE SPEAKER:  Your Excellency, the President of the Republic of Uganda, it is your mandate under Article 101(1) of the 1995 Constitution of Uganda, to deliver to the country the State-of-the-Nation Address, the purpose for which this House has convened here today. I now take the singular honour and privilege to invite you, Your Excellency, to address the august House, and by extension, address the country. You are most welcome. (Applause)3.05THE PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF UGANDA (Gen. Yoweri Kaguta Museveni Tibuhaburwa):  The Rt Hon. Speaker of Parliament, His Lordship the Chief Justice, the Deputy Speaker, His Lordship the Deputy Chief Justice, the Prime Minister, Deputy Prime Ministers, honourable ministers, honourable Members of Parliament, members of the diplomatic corps, your highnesses, the traditional leaders, distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen.In fulfilment of the constitutional requirement under Article 101(1) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, I am here to deliver the State-of-the-Nation Address, 2023. Madam Speaker, since my last address, a number of Ugandans have departed from this earth, some of whom are: 1. The late Gen. Elly Tumwine, former Minister of Security and Senior Presidential Advisor on Security;2. The late Justice Rubby Opio Aweri, former Judge of the Supreme Court of Uganda;3. The late Dr Paul Kawanga Ssemogerere, former President of the Democratic Party;4. The late Hon. Charles Okello-Engola, former Minister of State for Labour;5. The late Hon. Bishop Patrick Okabe, former Member of Parliament for Serere County;6. The late Keith Muhakanizi, former Permanent Secretary, Office of the Prime Minister; and7. The people who have died in the landslides, floods and our soldiers who died in Somalia. I thank you, the Rt Hon. Speaker; she has already asked you to stand up and observe a moment of silence in honour of the departed souls. So, I will not repeat that; it has already been done.The performance of the economyYou know, I will start with the economy. As a result of the NRM Government’s deliberate efforts to expand the economic base of the country, a strong foundation has been built for the rapid economic growth and social-economic transformation. In 1986, when the NRM Government took over the administration of the country, the size 9086ADDRESS ON THE STATE OF THE NATIONof our economy was equivalent to US$ 1.5 billion. Today, our economy is about US$ 49.4 billion. In other words, the economy - if you use the exchange rate method, has expanded by more than 30 times since 1986. The economic growth rate for this year is projected at 5.5 per cent in real terms, compared to 4.7 per cent in the last Financial Year 2021/2022. Over the next five years, the economy is projected to grow at an average rate of 6.57 per cent per year. But these are the growth rates from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. I believe we can grow faster than this. You know, I do not always agree with the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, and I will tell you why, later in this very speech. This growth will arise from:1. Economic stability as a result of low inflation;2. The establishment of more manufacturing plants or factories. When Ugandans hear of plants, they sometimes think we are talking about crops. Plants in this “English of theirs” mean factories; I do not know why they call them plants (Amakolero);  The continued implementation of the Parish Development Model;3. The support to small and medium-scale enterprises through Emyooga  SACCOs, the youth and women funds and other initiatives;4. The increased oil and gas sector activities; and5. The growth in regional trade and the positive impact of the continued recovery of the economies in the Middle East, Asia, Europe and the USA, which provide markets for our exports. Therefore, by the end of the Financial Year 2023/2024, Uganda’s GDP is projected to grow up to Shs 207.22 trillion, which is equivalent to $55.2 billion. If you put it in Purchasing Power Parity (PPP) terms, this would mean an economy of $156.7 billion. This in turn is projected to grow our GDP per capita to $1,186, up from, $1,096 in Financial Year 2022/2023. InflationThe prices of domestic goods and services have come down compared to what they were one year ago. To take a few examples, the price of edible oil has reduced, from Shs 10,079 per litre, in March 2022, to Shs 9,556 per litre, in March 2023; petrol prices have reduced from a peak of Shs 6,563 per litre to Shs 5,138 a litre now; ordinary cement, from a peak of Shs 37,315 per bag of 50 kilogrammes, in May 2022, to now Shs 34,874. Therefore, we have defeated the rapid increase in prices for both consumer and production prices. However, food prices remain high due to climate change effects that caused a prolonged drought in many parts of the country. This, however, will be history because of the ongoing Government investments in small-scale solar-powered irrigation to address water shortages for crops.The Government resisted price controls and subsidies when prices went up sharply. You know, there are always those pressures for cheap populist actions, which are very dangerous to the stability of the economy. This is because these kinds of measures are not sustainable and they instead introduce distortions in the economy. They bring about the old habits of smuggling (magendo)  and can result in shortages of goods in the market. This happens when some rich business people hide consumer goods to cause artificial shortages in order to benefit from higher prices. Some countries gave subsidies or controlled prices of some essential commodities such as fuel, bread, wheat etc. We do not believe in subsidising consumption such as subsidising on petrol prices for people to drive to nightclubs. I cannot subsidise fuel prices so people drive more to the nightclubs. If they want to go to nightclubs, they should go at their own cost. [Gen. Museveni]9087THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 24 MAY 2023However, if prices are distorted by some non-economic factors such as the sanctions by the West on account of the war between Russia and Ukraine, for inputs in production such as fertilizers, it may be logical to look at subsidies. We are studying this. Our policy as, the Government, is to allow demand and supply forces to determine prices and incentivise production. However, on the issue of fertilizers, we shall either get a solution to stop the Western countries from interfering with our supply of fertilizers or look at subsidising on the prices for at least, the fertilizers.International tradeExport revenue of goods and services was worth $6 billion for the calendar year ending 2022, of which export of goods merchandise was worth $4.3 billion. For the twelve months to February 2023, we have exported 5.7 million bags each 50 kilogrammes, of coffee worth $ 858.7 million. Fish exports were worth $166 million, beans, $132 million, sugar, $146 million, maize, $ 131 million and industrial products worth $348.9 million. These were exported mainly to the regional markets. All this has been possible because of the NRM’s efforts to grow and diversify the economy. Export of services was worth $1,776 million or $1.8 billion, of which, tourism was worth $1.047 billion, an equivalent to 59 per cent of all the services export receipts. This shows the huge untapped potential in the tourism sector that the Government is working on, in partnership with the private sector, to harness.Regional integration efforts and promoting intra-African trade are taking root. Uganda now exports more to Africa than to the rest of the world, with 86 per cent of our exports going to Africa in the last 12 months to February 2023, and 57 per cent going to East African countries. What we need to intensify, as Africa, is to build regional infrastructure to improve connectivity within the region and reduce trade transaction costs. This way, we shall be able to pull our populations out of poverty much faster because we shall attract more investments. Foreign Direct Investments (FDIs)Uganda’s investment climate remains competitive in the region and globally. Because of this, the number of investors willing to bring their money and invest here has increased. This is partly due to the stable and sound economic policies and the prevailing peace and security in the country.Foreign Direct Investment inflows to Uganda continued to recover and reached $949 million during the first six months of this Financial Year 2022/2023. This is in part due to increased financing to the oil and gas as well as the mineral development sectors. Increase in Household IncomesAlthough the country has been faced with economic shocks, household businesses have responded positively to Government investments, especially in infrastructure and the various wealth creation initiatives. As a result, 60 per cent of households increased their incomes in the year ending December 2022, compared to 43 per cent whose incomes increased in the same period a year ago. This means that the Government’s effort to create wealth at the household level is taking root. This will be further enhanced by the Parish Development Model and the Emyooga  Government initiatives. As prices stabilised towards the end of 2022, and incomes increased, access and the affordability of essential goods and food products improved. The prices of fuel, sugar, maize flour, beans, cooking oil and eggs have all reduced since their peak between August and December 2022. 9088ADDRESS ON THE STATE OF THE NATIONWhen the NRM took over in 1986, the economy depended on a few cash crops, namely, coffee, cotton, tea and tobacco. Since then, the economy has become bigger and more diversified. Some of the agricultural products, which were only for consumption at home such as maize, beans, matooke  (bananas), fish, milk, etcetera, have become commercial, contributing to household incomes. Other crops that have joined the traditional cash crops include sunflower, from which we now make edible oil, palm oil trees, vanilla, avocado, oranges and mangoes, which are raw materials for the agro-processing factories.We now produce enough sugar - in fact, now, we have got surplus which is being exported to our neighbours – steel products, cement, other building materials such as tiles at Kapeeka Industrial Park, mineral extraction and beneficiation, etcetera. We shall soon produce oil and gas and the infrastructure development to enable - this is currently under construction, including the East African Crude Oil Pipeline, power and water infrastructure, and Kabale International Airport. Uganda has a vibrant economy and workforce that is transforming our economy into a digital one. There are many businesses and financial transactions taking place within the country, using the Internet and other online avenues. This is not only improving efficiency but also creating many jobs for the youth. The Fiscal Performance Domestic revenue, in Financial Year 2022/2023, is estimated at Shs 25.55 trillion. This is about 13.7 per cent of GDP. Next Financial Year 2023/2024, we plan to collect Shs 29.67 trillion as domestic revenue. Through our strategy to raise revenue, the Government is planning to raise at least 18 per cent of GDP in the next five years. When we achieve this target, we shall be able to reduce our reliance on borrowing to finance a larger share of our budget.We must avoid this problem of not being able to pay our debts, by increasing what we collect from taxes and other sources of domestic revenue such as the loyalties from our mineral development. Some countries are paying more than 50 per cent of their collection, in taxes, to service debts. We should avoid falling into this debt trap. Therefore, in addition to collecting more revenue domestically, we should also not spend what we do not have. To achieve this, the Government decided to rationalise Government departments to reduce duplication and wastage of taxpayers’ money. The Ministry of Public Service is finalising the implementation plan for this decision. IndustrialisationOur industrialisation drive is bearing fruit with many factories being set up. We have got eight Government-owned industrial parks that are currently operational. These include:1. Kampala Industrial Park and the Business Park at Namanve with 125 companies operational; 144 companies under the construction stage, and 106 companies at the planning stage, giving a total of 375 factories or companies;2. Luzira Industrial Park with 11 companies operational;3. Bweyogerere Industrial Park with eight companies;4. Soroti Industrial Park with two companies operational and five companies at the construction stage;5. Tian Shan Mobile Park with 16 companies that are operational while four are under construction stage;6. Jinja Industrial and Business Park with one company for assembling electric buses is operational; [Gen. Museveni]9089THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 24 MAY 20237. Mbarara Industrial Park for small-scale enterprises for which 35 workplaces are occupied; and,8. Kasese Industrial Park where one company is operational and five are at still construction stage. Both Karamoja and Koboko industrial Parks will soon start. In addition, we have three industrial parks, which are operated under a Public-Private Partnership (PPP) arrangement. These include Liao Shen Kapeeka with 17 factories, MMP Industrial Park, Buikwe, with six companies operational and Tian Tang in Mukono with four companies. The total capital investment within the industrial parks so far, is $2.93 billion and 98,263 direct jobs have been created with many more indirect jobs. In total, 226 factories are operating within the industrial parks while 303 are either under construction or at the planning stage. The development of industrial parks is one of the vehicles for socio-economic transformation with the projected creation of 2.5 million jobs in the next five years. The factories in the industrial parks do not include the standalone factories owned and operated by many different investors. These are factories that belong to Mukwano Group of Companies, Mulwana Group and so on. These are a total of 354 factories and employing an additional 100,000 people. The total number of factories in Uganda is 4,008, employing a total number of 150,000 people.The Parish Development ModelWe are committed to creating wealth and jobs by moving households from the non-money economy to the money economy. To achieve this goal, the Government launched the Parish Development Model to accelerate socio-economic transformation.Using this approach, 39 per cent of households, which are currently in the non-money economy - the majority of whom are in subsistence agriculture - will move into the money economy. The Parish Development Model will increase incomes, improve quality of life and eradicate poverty at household level through the modernisation of agriculture, industrialisation, improved service delivery and using modern communication technologies.Through the Parish Development Model, agriculture will be transformed from subsistence to commercial. This approach will organise and deliver public and private sector interventions for wealth creation, and employment generation using the parish as the economic unit for planning, budgeting and service delivery. Therefore, the 10,594 parishes in the country will be the growth and service delivery units in the Parish Development Model. Government has committed Shs 1,059 billion this financial year for its rollout countrywide. So far, parishes which established SACCOs have received Shs 50 million each, benefitting 906 SACCOs and more than 21,000 individual beneficiaries. Government will deepen the implementation of the Parish Development Model beyond the financial inclusion pillar by maintaining the disbursement of Shs 100 million to every parish next financial year and in the subsequent years.When I visited some parts of the country, I was told that some of the Parish Development Model money has given to people who were not eligible. This includes politicians and public servants. I was also informed about the delays in accessing the funds released by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to the target beneficiaries. In some cases, a few elite people come together and form SACCOs, and take all the funds released for the entire parish. The State House Anti-Corruption Unit has arrested a number of 9090ADDRESS ON THE STATE OF THE NATIONculprits in the Acholi Region, where I started my upcountry inspection trips. I am coming to all the other zones. So, to all the thieves, be alerted; I am coming. I have already been to West Nile and Masaka. Wherever I went, I found some candidates for Luzira Prisons. (Laughter)The Parish Development Model programme is a successor programme to the NAADS and Operation Wealth Creation programmes. The Operation Wealth Creation programme especially, starting in 2013, succeeded in bringing down the households outside the money economy from 68 per cent to the present figure of 39 per cent. We, therefore, salute Operation Wealth Creation; it did something. Operation Wealth Creation did not only convert 29 per cent of the households from abakolera ekidda kyonka (tic me ic keken),  to the money economy, but as an example, increased the production of coffee, from two million 60 kilogramme bags, to now nine million bags. It would have increased to 12 million bags, if it was not for the change to the new model of the Parish Development Model, which people are still acclimatising to. The change was, however, necessary, so that the programme is beneficiaries-owned and we eliminate the grumblings of begabira  booka  (the government officials only serve or favour themselves).The Parish Development Model is saying, “Do it yourself. Here is a grant from the Government to your parish SACCO of Shs 100 million per year. Besides, the parish is near your home, hence, no more excuses”. This is the strategy of the Parish Development Model. The money is there. It is cheap money given to you; it is yours. Government does not want to take back that money. When you pay back, it remains in your SACCO. The parish is near; it is not as far as the sub county or county or district can be. Therefore, no more excuses by people who want to remain in poverty.EmyoogaAbout three years ago, I launched a wealth-and-jobs-creation initiative for those who found it difficult to access financing through banks and other lenders for non-agricultural enterprises. This initiative has been successful in mobilising the youth and women in the informal sector into productive self-employment by increasing their skills, acquiring equipment and accessing affordable capital. As of the end of December 2022, seed capital amounting to Shs 258.24 billion had been disbursed and paid out, benefitting 6,714 Emyooga SACCOS and covering 1.9 million individual beneficiaries. Whatever mistakes that occur in this low interest, pro-poor people funding efforts are correctable and detectable, if you liaise with the public in your areas, like I have been doing with the public barazas  in my recent trips upcountry.AgricultureThe agriculture sector, as a whole, contributed 24.1 per cent of GDP. The sector grew by 4.4 per cent in the Financial Year 2021/2022 as compared to 4.3 per cent in the Financial Year 2020/2021. The value of agricultural exports registered a growth of 24 per cent from US$ 1,678 million in the Financial Year 2020/2021 to US$ 2,085 million in the Financial Year 2021/2022. This growth was attributed to the increased volumes and quality of coffee, dairy, fish and tea.Performance of selected enterprises Coffee:To take some examples, the volume of coffee produced increased by 5 per cent from 8.06 million (60 kilogramme) bags in the Financial Year 2020/2021 to 8.45 million (60 kilogramme) bags in the Financial Year 2021/2022. This is on account of Government interventions such [Gen. Museveni]9091THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 24 MAY 2023as the generation and distribution of improved coffee variety seedlings, increased use of water for irrigation and promotion of use of fertilisers. The volume of exports of coffee increased from 6.1 million (60 kilogramme) bags in the Financial Year 2020/2021 to 6.3 million (60 kilogramme) bags in the next financial year; that was an increase of 3 per cent. The value realised from coffee exports increased by 58 per cent from US$ 544 million in 2020/2021 to US$ 862 million in 2021/2022.DiaryThe production of milk increased by 193 per cent - ako mukawulire nyo banange  – (Applause) -  not 10 per cent like this one from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development; finance is normally 5 per cent or 6 per cent - Ezo per cent za Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development.  Here, milk grew by 193 per cent. With these economies which are so rich in natural resources, we should not continue talking about this 6 or 7 per cent. The speech I am reading is mainly from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. I tried to put in my views here and there, but it is their statement and I am their puppet. (Laughter) However, if you want to know my thoughts, you have it here. Unfortunately, this is a sector where I am involved directly. I do not need the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development nor do I need anybody. As long as there is peace in Uganda, we will grow the economy. So, the milk sector grew by 193 per cent – sibino ebya 6 per cent; you are coming from underground and you say, I have only come with 6 per cent, when will you get out of the ground? Tuli kulaba ddi ? Kubanga oli wansi eyo; when shall we see you? So, milk grew by 193 per cent from 2.81 billion litres in the Financial Year 2020/2021 to 5.4 billion litres in the Financial Year 2021/2022. In the same period, the export value of milk and milk products increased from US$ 98.8 million in 2021 to US$ 103 million in 2022. This is attributed to the compliance by the private sector to quality standards and regulations.Beef The production of beef increased from 228,243 in the Financial Year 2020/2021 to 230,746 in the Financial Year 2021/2022. In the year 2022, the amount of beef exported was 247,234 valued at Shs 2.944 trillion as compared to Shs 1.018 trillion fetched in the year 2021.Fish ( Ebyenyanja)The total fish catches from all the water bodies increased from 621,987 valued at US$ 1.875 billion - this figure here, my people said US$ 1.875 billion, but I do not think it is dollars; it must be shillings, in 2021 to 651,7192 valued at something - they will have to correct it; I do not think that that is correct, it must be shillings. The availability of raw materials (fish), sustained the operations of the 12 fish processing factories. The performance has been a result of the Government’s focus on gazetting fish breeding grounds, enforcement of fisheries laws and regulations, provision of quality fingerlings and fish feed and providing an enabling environment for the private sector to invest in aquaculture. The value of fish and fish products exported increased by 27.7 per cent from US$ 148.7 million in the Financial Year 2020/2021 to US$ 156.4 million in the Financial Year 2021/2022.Provision of quality agricultural inputsThe Government is currently implementing the Parish Development Model (PDM) to transform the livelihood of the 39 per cent of the households still in subsistence economy to modern commercial farming. The strategy under PDM is to transfer funds to parish-based SACCOs, where farmers can borrow and procure inputs such as seed and agrochemicals, for agreed and selected enterprises. The Government will continue to ensure that farmers across the country, access quality 9092ADDRESS ON THE STATE OF THE NATIONseeds, planting and stocking material, disease and pest control, research, extension and overall policy guidance.Pest, vectors and disease control The National Agricultural Research Organisation (NARO) is conducting research on an anti-tick vaccine development and has already launched trials. Efficacy evaluation trials have started at Kiburara Prison farms, Isimba Prison farms, Maruzi, Nabuin and Mbarara. The Government continues to facilitate the research in disease-resistant varieties and building capacity of farming households on the best agricultural practices on integrated pest and vector and disease management and other efforts. Mechanisation and farm powerMechanisation is critical to the commercialisation of agriculture. In the Financial Year 2021/2022, the Government procured additional 240 tractors and implements, bringing the total number of tractors procured by the Government to 655. The Government also procured 740 units, single axle low powered walking tractors with all accessories to support farmers to open more farmland for cultivation. These machines support value addition, irrigation and transportation of produce. Water and environmentThe availability of adequate water resources is critical to the sustainability of the well-being of society. Water for productionThe irrigation area has increased from 19,138 hectares to 22,797 hectares. The overall cumulative storage of water for production stands at 52 million cubic metres. These targets have been achieved on account of the following interventions:1. Solar powered-irrigation demonstration sitesGovernment has completed the construction of 121 solar-powered irrigation systems on individual farms creating a water storage capacity of 206 million litres serving 42,000 livestock. The Government’s strategy is to increase safe water supply coverage for both rural and urban areas. This is for human beings. The current safe water coverage in rural areas is estimated at 70 per cent while the urban water access is 72 per cent. Out of 70,512 villages, 49,102 villages have been served with at least one source of safe water. To achieve the planned target to restore wetland cover back to 13 per cent, the Government is implementing several interventions that include restoration of degraded wetlands, demarcation of wetland boundaries and strengthening awareness and sensitisation campaigns on the conservation of wetlands as well as providing alternative livelihoods for people that have been encroaching on wetlands.I talked to the MPs from Bukedi and Busoga when we were in Kyankwanzi. They told me our people have been in the wetlands for long, growing rice. Then I asked: how rich are they since they have been destroying the wetlands to grow rice? How well are they doing? The MP from Bukedi said Bukedi is the second poorest after Karamoja, and then Busoga was following.The question is: if being in the wetlands is good, why is poverty so serious? I will get time and come and discuss this issue with these people. You are destroying the wetland; the water of the country, yet you have remained poor. What do we do? Temulaba awo banange?  FloodsFloods have, over the last three weeks, been experienced in River Katonga and River Rwizi catchment areas resulting in the destruction of infrastructure and property such as roads, bridges, and people’s houses, disruptions of transportation and even death as reported around River Rwizi in Mbarara.[Gen. Museveni]9093THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 24 MAY 2023My people have mixed up my papers but I will manage them. They have put page 21 before 20. Let me read it the way it is. They will sort it out. Here, they are saying districts of Buhweju, Bushenyi, Ibanda, Isingiro, Kabarole, Kamwengye, and Kanungu. They are talking about irrigation and saying, as a result, 2,373 acres have been added to the area under irrigation enabling 14,961 farmers to produce cabbages, tomatoes, apples, onions, pineapples, watermelons, green pepper, etc. They are still talking about irrigation. The following medium-scale irrigation schemes have been completed: Ngenge 808 hectares - Honourable Members of Parliament, get to know these things. These people may say “completed” when it is not. So, this is an opportunity for you to help them. We have:1. Ngenge in Sebei  - 808 hectares irrigated;2. Rwengaju  - 116 hectares;3. Tochi -  500 hectares;4. Mubuku II  - 480 hectares;5. Doho II - 1,000 hectares;6. Olweny - 600 hectares and so on. Communal Valley TanksThe Government has constructed 44 communal valley tanks in Nabilatuk, Kotido, Amudat, Kaabong, Karenga, Soroti, Butebo etc. This has created a storage capacity of 6.6 billion litres serving 89,000 livestock. This is where they have mixed up. They put page 20 after page 21 but this is not the end of the world. (Laughter)Ekitatta muyima- ffe abaganda, tulina eddagala ly’ebizibu bino. Awo wengambila nti kasita obeera n’obulamu, ensobi zingenda kutelera. These people put page 21 before page 20. Somehow you can combine them. There has been a major disruption to transportation arising from the damage of Katonga Bridge which was washed away by floods. The floods also led to the eroding of wetland vegetation and gardens in the upstream parts of the catchment. This flooding was caused by a dam breach along the four-kilometer stretch of the Kalungu- Gomba Road in Bugomola Village, Lwabenge Subcounty in Kalungu District. The water had progressively built up on one side of the road due to blocked culverts, creating a damming effect. This created a massive force beyond the capacity of the road, creating a dam breach, which led to a sudden release of a large volume of water that moved downstream the Katonga River. As the flood wave moved downstream with a lot of papyrus and gardens causing significant damage to infrastructure. The interventions to address the problem of floods involve the protection of water catchments and the general environment so that they perform their function of storing and releasing water safely, even when there is increased rainfall.Regular maintenance of water bodies and rivers so that they perform their water storage and conveyance function.Demarcation and protection of lake shores, riverbanks and wetlands.To limit encroachment by settlements, construction of water storage facilities, agricultural activities and other developments.Strengthening of the early warning systems and enforcement of the water and environmental laws at all levels. People who damage the environment, do so at their own risk. Have we not seen enough examples? Nantabulirwa yasabala bwa bbumba . That is what we say in our language here. “The one who does not listen to advice insisted on using a clay boat on the lake and drowned in the lake”. Somebody made a boat from clay and people told him that clay cannot make a boat, do not do it but he could not listen. He made a clay boat, put it in the lake and drowned there. And that is how our people here in Buganda got a proverb, Nantabulirwa yasabala bwa bbumba . We tell people that please - in the book of Genesis- Ate bino bya Katonda - this is now 9094ADDRESS ON THE STATE OF THE NATIONnot mine. The other one was mine, but this one now- mbigira dala mu Baibuli - In the book of Genesis 1:9, God commanded the water to separate from the dry land. Imagine, Katonda , in the Book of Genesis says, let water and dry land be separate. “Then God said, ‘Let the waters under the heavens be gathered together into one place and let the dry land appear. And it was so.” That is what God said. But a Ugandan comes and says God was wrong. What was water, I will turn it into a garden- Eeeh bana Uganda tebatya . God said, this is water and you say no, he made a mistake - we shall get time and talk. All the death from landslides, floods, etcetera, come out of rebelling against God, rebelling against science and rebelling against common sense. Water bodies and their miiga - miiga  is a Runyankole word for the edge of the water body, are not for human settlement. They are for water conservation. Priorities:The Government approved, the Agriculture Value Chain Development Strategy which recognises that intervention under the Parish Development Model will prioritise the following;1. Guiding farmers on enterprise selection;2. Ensuring adequate quantities and qualities of seed, breeding and stocking material; research and breeding;3. Ensuring sustainable high yields through control of pests, vectors, and diseases for crops and animals;4. Facilitating precision agriculture, that is, water harvesting, irrigation infrastructure and machinery;5. Provision of farm power, that is the land opening, cultivation machinery and assorted post-harvest and small value addition equipment;6. Ensuring that the materials planted survive through ensuring adequate farmer education and extension services;7. Ensuring that there is proper post-harvest management to avoid pre and post-harvest losses;8. Supporting primary processing through the provision of skills and assorted equipment to address specific value chain needs;9. Supporting medium to large scale model or extensive farmers, because these create effective demand for the small scale and intensive farmers. Tourism Tourism is another area that has got significant potential for the economy. We have the best tourism sites, including our national parks of Kidepo, Murchison Falls, Queen Elizabeth, Lake Mburo, Elgon, Rwenzori, Kibale Forest, Lake Bunyonyi, and many game reserves across the country. Uganda’s tourism sites rank highly in international media outlets and global tourism agencies. Despite the global lockdown, we received about 500,000 tourists in 2021 and revenue of $530 million. The number of tourists coming here has recovered since the lifting of the COVID-19 lockdowns to 814,000 by December 2022 and earned us $1 billion in the calendar year 2022. To harness the tourism potential further, the Government is undertaking the following interventions in the tourism sector:1. Ensuring the security of the country and tourism sites2. Construction of tarmac roads from Kitgum to Kidepo - 116 kilometres. Lake Bunyonyi-Kisoro-Mgahinga - 74 kilometers. Karenga-Kapedo-Kaabong - 70 kilometers. Kisoro-Rubuguri-Muko – 65 kilometres which are soon starting;[Gen. Museveni]9095THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 24 MAY 20233. Wildlife conservation, especially of Mgahinga, Lake Mburo, Semliki, Kibale, Murchison, Kidepo, Katonga, Tooro-Semliki, and Queen Elizabeth;4. Preventing the conflict between wildlife and human activities;5. Enhancing digital destination marketing, using modern ICT online technologies;6. Strengthening enforcement and adherence to tourism standards through a strict licensing regime for service providers in the sector. AchievementsTourism directly employs a total of 1.5 million people in Uganda along the entire tourism value chain and contributes 6.7 per cent of the country’s GDP.In the year 2022, Uganda’s national parks hosted 367,000 visitors, surpassing the pre-COVID-19 levels of 323,000 visitors recorded in the year 2019. Sixty-three per cent of these were domestic tourists. So, Ugandans are getting richer; the middle class are now visiting our national parks. I congratulate you. Mukulike obwavu, atte namwe mweyagaleko. Although the coronavirus stopped people from outside from coming to the country, the figure here shows that arrivals into the national parks went up and the main reason was because of the Ugandans who were going to the national parks. In the year 2022, Uganda’s national parks hosted 367,000 instead of 323,000, and this is in spite of the coronavirus. Why? It is because 63 per cent were the rich Ugandans, who were moving around the country, even during the coronavirus time. The international visitor arrivals increased to 815,000 in 2022 up from 473,000 in the year 2020, during the COVID-19 pandemic. Although there is recovery, the performance is still lower than the 1.5 million tourists recorded in 2019. Full recovery is expected in the year 2025. Leisure and holiday visitors stayed longer (11 nights) in 2022 compared to 7.6 nights in 2019, and spent higher daily at US$ 172 per night compared to US$ 168 per night in 2019. The wildlife populations for most animals have increased. For example, the number of elephants increased from 5,700 in 2011 to 8,000 now, while the buffalos increased from about 36,000 to over 44,000 during the same period. Mountain gorillas in Bwindi-Mgahinga Conservation Area have steadily increased over time from just 200 in the 1990s to about 459 now.Infrastructure DevelopmentThe total national road network now stands at 21,000 kilometres of roads, of which 6,000, which is 29.6 per cent is tarmac; paved. Although the construction of bituminous roads started more than 60 years ago, more than half of the paved network has been constructed to bitumen standards within the last 15 years. The Government continues to implement 16 projects to upgrade over 892 kilometres of national roads to paved bituminous standards while at the same time rehabilitating 300 kilometres to restore their service life. Construction of the following roads has been completed, adding 351 kilometres to the paved network:i. Critical oil roads through the towns of Buhimba - Nalweyo - Bulamagi - Igayaza - Kakumiro (93 kilometres);ii. Masindi - Biiso, Hohwa – Nyairongo - Kyarusheesha - Butoole and Kabale - Kiziranfumbi roads (78 kilometres); iii. Rukungiri - Kihihi - Ishasha/Kanungu (97 kilometres); iv. Kapchorwa - Suam Road (73 kilometres);v. Kitala - Gerenge (10 Kilometres); 9096ADDRESS ON THE STATE OF THE NATIONThe rehabilitation works of Mityana - Mubende (86 kilometres); 14 kilometres town roads in Mubende; Olwiyo-Pakwach (62 kilometres); Alwii - Nebbi (33 kilometres) are ongoing. The Government is expediting the construction of the Standard Gauge Railway, starting next Financial Year 2023/2024, starting with Malaba to Kampala. I welcome the decision of His Excellency, President William Ruto of Kenya, agreeing to extend the Standard Gauge Railway from Naivasha to Malaba because that was a problem. In the meantime, the rehabilitation of the Tororo to Gulu Metre Gauge Railway and Kampala Metre Gauge Railway are underway. As regards road transport, priority will be given to the maintenance of existing road networks, especially in the urban areas, continued upgrade of selected strategic roads from gravel to bituminous surface, maintenance of national districts and community roads by facilitating each district in the country, with a minimum of Shs 1 billion to upgrade and compact the dry weather marram roads next financial year. Infrastructure priorities Government has over the years invested heavily in infrastructure. This has helped to narrow the huge infrastructure gap we had in the 1990s. However, there are still critical gaps that Government will continue to prioritise in order to reduce the cost of doing business such as lowering the electricity price. You know, these people use their mysterious language; power tariffs and all that. Mwe ba wanainchi, ekyo mukitegele bulungi, bano byeboogela ebya “power tariffs”. They simply mean electricity prices for manufacturers and other businesses. The critical infrastructure include the railway, upgrading of airports, including completion of Kabaale International Airport, which is at 91 per cent completion and Entebbe International Airport, which is at 71 per cent completion; development of new ports on our lakes; and completing the heavy investment in the energy infrastructure, for example, Karuma Dam and associated transmission lines. We also need to build new airports near the tourism destinations such as Kidepo, Bwindi, Kasese, among others. Tourists, who are the rich people, do not have time to come, land at Entebbe International Airport and drive for 700 kilometres to Kidepo. No, they do not have time. We need to build airports for the rich foreigners to land near the national park, see the animals and go away. Those airports, of course, also help with security. Like now with night operations in Karamoja, we fly very far; from Nakasongola and all those places. It is better to have a good airport which can operate day and night in those areas.Government will prioritise infrastructure that supports industrialisation, production of oil and gas, and promote tourism. These include industrial parks, electricity power substations, extending and upgrading electricity transmission lines, water for industrial use and ICT infrastructure. EnergyThe total electricity generation capacity is now 1,346.6 megawatts. This is from 60 megawatts in 1986. This will increase to 1,800 megawatts once Karuma is commissioned this year. This means, therefore, that the construction of the transmission lines to evacuate this power must be completed without further delays. These lines include Karuma-Kawanda (400 KV), Karuma-Olwiyo (400 KV), Karuma-Lira (132 KV) and Kole-Gulu-Nebbi-Arua. They did not include the strength here; I think it is 132 KV . The demand for electricity is increasing by 15 per cent per year, although these figures of finance are kasoobo . You heard my figures on the milk; 193 per cent. Bano bali ku 15 per cent. Anyway, we are talking with the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and I think we shall eventually agree. They are beginning to wake up because they are the ones who wrote this. Mukawulire kano . Bebawaandika  bino; Katonda yebazibwe . [Gen. Museveni]9097THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 24 MAY 2023(Laughter)  They are the ones who wrote this; I am just reading.This means that even with the 1,800 megawatts installed electricity generation capacity by the end of this year, there will not be enough power for consumption and manufacturing in the next five years if we do not continue to invest in generation. Katonda yebazibwe . When you hear the finance ministry talking like that, then you know that Katonda yennyigiddemu. Ab’Afirika baamanyira obwaavu; tebaaagala abatawanya okuva mu bwaavu .Given the many manufacturing factories that are being established in Uganda, we shall need to both increase and diversify our energy sources, including nuclear energy, to supplement our other sources such as hydro, solar and thermal power.Nuclear energy is expected to add another 2,000 megawatts to the national grid by 2036. However, by 2040, we must ensure the generation of 52,000 megawatts from all sources. I am glad they have now put it here because I had a long discussion with these wonderful people. You know, when our brothers of the African National Congress in South Africa came in, the whites whom those people were fighting were generating 36,000 megawatts of electricity. In 1994, South Africa was already generating 36,000 megawatts. Now here, my people are talking about 1,800 megawatts and they are talking about it as a big thing. They are very happy and not embarrassed.I think South Africa now is generating 42,000 megawatts or something like that but there is a big power shortage there. President Ramaphosa told me. You can imagine 42,000 megawatts but our brothers are crying in South Africa and here, my people are talking of 1,800 megawatts as a big thing. They do not even feel embarrassed. They go to international conferences with PowerPoints showing how wonderful they are. I feel embarrassed. Please, do not show these figures; keep quiet. (Laughter)  However, they have now committed themselves because the problem is not money; the problem is vision. If we have got a vision, we shall get the money, even from our own sources. But if you do not see, what can people do? They are now talking of 52,000 megawatts by 2024 - I think that is a bit too far but wakiri .In the immediate future, the Government shall prioritise investment in:(i) Rural electrification in the remaining subcounties;(ii) Electricity connections for upcoming industrial zones and factories;(iii) Construction of additional power substations;(iv) Strengthening the capacity of the Uganda Electricity Generation Company and so on. Above, in this speech - these are my own words now. Most of the others have been the ones of finance people and those other groups like energy and agriculture. As a loyal delegate, I have represented them. I have told you exactly what they wrote, but this is now mine; bino byange.Above, in this speech, I have said our economy will have a GDP size of $55.2 billion by the end of the Financial Year 2023/2024.This is assuming a rate of growth of 6 per cent per annum. This is all while our economy is still largely raw material based. This is the problem I have with the people in finance and all those wonderful people in agriculture and others. The 6 per cent rate of growth - on this one, they are assuming we remain a raw material-producing country, which I do not accept. This is assuming a rate of growth of 6 per cent per annum. This is all while our economy is still largely raw materials based. Coffee is a good example. Ninety-nine per cent of our coffee is exported as unprocessed coffee; a raw material for cleverer people - ffe abatalegela  9098ADDRESS ON THE STATE OF THE NATION- (we who do not see far); we sell our raw material to cleverer people to earn big money out of our sweat.With unprocessed coffee, we get $2.5 per kilogramme. If the same coffee is processed, a kilogramme will give us $40 increase in value by a factor of 15. If this logic of value addition is extended across the entire spectrum of our raw materials, our economy will expand by at least a factor of 10. It will expand from $55 billion to $550 billion in the short term. Why? It is because apart from the said raw materials that are already in place, all the other factors are there. These include: an educated workforce, electricity, better road network, the railway which we are about to start building and the old line we are repairing piped water, telephone lines, the internet, etc. Is this not what countries like South Korea that did not even have the same raw material base as we have, did? Look at the history of South Korea. What was the GDP of South Korea in 1961? Go back and look at that because you have the internet. What was the GDP of South Korea in 1961 and what is it now? The answer is, in 1961, the GDP of South Korea was $2.42 billion. You can even check the GDP of Uganda in 1961. I do not think it was very far behind this one. Today, the GDP of South Korea is $ 1.81 trillion; it is almost 2 trillion. Moreover from $2 billion in 1961 to $2 trillion now just 60 years and South Korea is half the size of Uganda in land area. They do not have the resources we have.  I am not part of this Vision 2040 - temu nteka mwebyo . The plan is to remain poor until 2040. That is their plan - nze sigilimu eyo . That is not mine but I am the presiding officer and when you preside over confusion, you can bring some confusion. (Laughter)Let us add value to all these raw materials. We only have two obstacles to this remaining problem that is, delaying and tossing up and down investors. One day, our late Prime Minister, Prof. Nsibambi and I were sitting in one of those rooms. There was a rich man from America; a white - I have forgotten the company’s name but its wealth was bigger than the GDP of the whole of East Africa. I was trying to convince this man to come here but Prof. Nsibambi said, “You write to me”; that the investor should write to him.I told Nsibambi in Luganda, nti oyo musajja tasobola kuwandikira gwe  – (This man cannot write to you Nsibambi Apollo; he cannot write to you”).  Imagine the man had wealth bigger than the GDP of East Africa but Prof. Nsibambi said “Write to me”, as if he was applying for a job. If that is the mentality, why did we set up Uganda Investment Authority? We set up Uganda Investment Authority - okusaaka-kusakira  - to get people to bring investors. It is to take the trouble to bring these investors but not to just sit so they can beg us as if we are going to give them welfare money. This ignorance must end. I told Prof. Nsibambi in Luganda, oyo musajja tasobola kuwandikira gwe. You just over-estimate yourselves. So, this tossing up and down of investors must stop. (Applause)  This is the biggest problem I have. You need to kusikiriza; you need to bring them. That is number one.There is the issue of corruption by some decision-makers. They want to get money from these investors. Can you imagine? Not only do they waste their time - the ones who bribe are desperate ones. Credible investors will not waste time with you. If you delay him, he will not even come back. I am not as rich as the other American but I am also not poor. You cannot waste my time with my cows. I will just go back to my cows because I have no time to waste with people who are not serious. These two problems are a blockage.We have now an educated population; our children are educated; electricity, roads, security and raw materials are there; even the production of raw materials is there. The problem is value addition.[Gen. Museveni]9099THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 24 MAY 2023What is blocking the transformation from raw materials to final products is mishandling investors, wasting their time and corruption. Let us crush these two remaining evils, the sky will be the limit.In Kyankwanzi, I shared with our MPs, the social metamorphosis that takes place when societies undergo modernisation. If you could check on all the modernised countries, you would find two phenomena. One, a small percentage of people are still in agriculture and more people living in the towns than those living in the rural areas. So when we come- I really feel sorry for Africa; you see all these big leaders- and we had them in the 1960s. We had our leaders here but many of them were not able to tell our people the future; where do we need to go? However, let us just take the example of agriculture. Here below are the figures. In the USA, the percentage of people in agriculture is 1.3 per cent. The United States is land of 3 million square miles, the population is 320 million but only 1.3 per cent is in agriculture. UK 1.5 per cent, France 3.6 per cent, Germany 1.2 per cent, Japan 3.4 per cent, Chile 10 per cent, India 55 per cent, Nigeria 70 per cent, Burundi 80 per cent and Uganda 70 per cent. Therefore, having more people in agriculture is a sign of backwardness. If you are looking for characteristics of backwardness, one of the characteristics is having more people in agriculture than in the other sectors. And secondly, having more people living in the rural areas than living in the towns. Therefore, the quad-tier - these are my words, they are not for the other group. Bino byange  because they gave me that power that I am the one to read the speech. So I read theirs but also mine. Therefore, the quadro-tier efforts we are currently involved in- the four layers of efforts are in order to enable Uganda to achieve this metamorphosis. One of the MPs asked me a question that helped me to remember, we must have these three levels of effort:Tier oneInvolve all adult Ugandans in the money economy with e kibaro  through the PDM, Emyooga etcetera- all Ugandans must be involved in the money economy; the 39 per cent must join in. Gen. Saleh helped us with 29 per cent, but we now need to remove the other 39 or join the money economy through PDM and Emyooga.Tier twoAdd value to all the raw materials that do not have to be consumed fresh so that we create more jobs and get more money for our sweat.Tier threeBuild a knowledge-based economy using advanced scientific knowledge such as the technology of automobiles, therapeutics, etcetera. Kiira - you the MPs, need to support Kiira so that they get moving, instead of having only the economy of coffee, tea, tobacco and Malakwang and I do not know what –(Laughter)-  let us have an economy of automobiles. Why do we have to beg? Why can’t you have automobiles as part of your economy? Struggling with Kiira Motors, the scientists have made the vehicle but the people who have money to support it do not support them. We are struggling and begging.I know in our clans we have emiziro  (totems), okweddira but we should not okweddira transformation. Okweddira okukola e motoka, ah, nze ekyo sikiliko.  Let us have part of our economy based on automobiles. So you are losing twice; first of all, you sell your coffee as embidde before you kusogola omwenge, okukyusa omubisi okujamu omwenge omuganda , then nofumba omwenge omuganda, nojamu kali akattira ddala , you do not do that. You just sell embidde.  It is the other man who gets all the value.9100ADDRESS ON THE STATE OF THE NATIONHowever, now add new economies which your children are now able to add. Dr Ogwang was able to make medicine for us for Corona. These other people are making wealth out of automobiles; let us support them.Tier fourExpand and modernise the services sector; health, education, tourism, hospitality, entertainment, sports etcetera. Among the services, it is good that our youth are active in music and sports. In music, we have been assisting some groups and individuals to build the recording capacity in the country- Gen. Saleh has been coordinating with the musical groups. Capital and equipment will be provided to our talented groups. At the local level in the countryside, artists are one of the 18 Emyoogas . You have seen how our youth have excelled in sports; marathons, etcetera, for example, Cheptegei and the group. Since 1986, we have been struggling with economic recovery, expansion, diversification and transformation. The talented sports youth have come up because of these general improvements. With a bit more revenue that we have now, we shall focus deliberately on sports by building more stadiums and training facilities.  It is good that the high-altitude training centre at Teryet is now finished. These are just endozo, jaribu . In Ntungamo, there were women who were selling local beer. When you come there, somebody will come and say I want you to taste it first, it is called okuroza. He drinks and says, “This is not good.” It goes on like that and by the time he has finished Okuroza about  six, he is drunk and does not buy -(Laughter)With our growing economy, we shall do much more for sports. It is good, therefore, that the East African countries together put in a bid for the AFCON - the continental football competition of 2027. Apart from Namboole and Nakivubo, we need more world class stadiums to be built. It does not matter whether they are government or private, as long as they are in Uganda. On the side of music, the Attorney-General and the Minister for Gender, Labour and Social Development need to resolve the issue of copyrights. It is unfair not to protect ownership of Okuhiimba . Okuhiimba  is the Runyakore word for composing songs. That is how we shall be able to create a big economy by doing the four tiers; the ones I mentioned. We shall be able to create a big economy that is able to accommodate our expanding population. In 1810, the UK had a population of 10 million people. A priest by the name of Alfred Malthus started pushing views that the population in the UK was too big, etc. The UK now has a population of 70 million people, which is many times more prosperous than that of Malthus’ time. What happened? It was the metamorphosis of the society and the economy into a middle-class skilled working society. You cannot have peasants producing younger peasants on increasingly fragmented agricultural plots and think that you will not be an enemy of your country, if as a leader, you do not see this and combat it. So, to sit here as leaders of whatever we call ourselves - I was watching our leaders in the 1960s and we were telling them about these things that time. You people, go abroad - because even in the colonial times - I remember in 1955, the British would take our chiefs to England for a study tour, but when I was in the school system in the mid 60’s and I was reading - I had not gone abroad myself, but we were reading. I started asking these people, “You go abroad and see what is happening there. Why don’t you tell us, when you come back, to copy? You go and see progress but you come here and maintain backwardness in your own people. You supervise and play the oversight role - you are oversighting backwardness and you have no problem with that. God will not like it.” [Gen. Museveni]9101THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 24 MAY 2023In the cattle corridor - the Members of Parliament were there the other day - you saw people with nice houses in Goma and income, even when the infrastructure is not there. You saw the very bad road, but the people have income.Therefore, every leader calling himself a leader - even these religious leaders, the cultural leaders like these who are here – Please, if you do not see the importance of metamorphosis - metamorphosis is a biological process in insects. An insect starts as an egg, the egg hatches and it becomes a caterpillar; the caterpillar changes and then becomes a pupa; then, it becomes a mature butterfly. In biology, it is called “metamorphosis.” That is the same thing with society. We must be clear that we work for social metamorphosis of African societies because that is where the problem is.The middle class women who live in the town here do not carry children on their back -(Laughter)  Mama Janet has never carried children on her back. Even when we were in exile, we were pushing our children in these small “ wheelbarrows” -(Laughter).  You have got a few people where the children are being pushed in those small - whatever they are - those motor vehicles. They have piped water and use gas cookers and electric cookers. Then, you have your people blowing into the fire -(Laughter)-  this is not acceptable. It is a betrayal and we say that we are leaders, “Your Excellency, right honourable…” (Laughter ) You cannot have peasants producing younger peasants on increasingly fragmented agricultural plots and think that you are not an enemy of your country, if as a leader, you do not see this and combat it. You should not be leaders into futurelessness to our people. You can see, in Latin America, people are running away. They walk on foot to go to America and yet Latin America is one of the richest parts of the world in terms of natural resources, but the problem is the leadership. In the United States of America, they had leaders who could think about how to transform their country while in South America, they are busy with other things. Africa should not be like that.Education I am about to conclude; so, do not worry. I have another 10 pages or something -(Laughter)-  because you are the ones who invited me.The NRM Government introduced UPE and USE programmes in order to ensure that no child of school-going age misses out on schooling, on account of school fees. These programmes were created to provide free education, especially for the poor families that cannot afford to pay the school fees. It is, therefore, unacceptable for school authorities to demand fees from the poor parents. The Government will not tolerate this practice. Education must be totally free in Government schools. The local leaders must enforce this when we give them renewed orders after an internal review, to find out the obstacles hitherto. We are going to review and issue fresh orders. Once these fresh orders are given, please, I do not expect any deviation from what we shall tell you to do. The literacy rate is currently 76 per cent while overall, school enrolment is at 85 per cent. The demand for free primary and secondary education has increased significantly, which is overwhelming the current education infrastructure. Part of the problem is that private schools have increased school fees, making Government schools more attractive. To meet the increase in demand for free education, the Government is now rehabilitating the primary schools and the traditional Government secondary schools. These include 18 secondary schools such as:1. St Peter’s College, Tororo;2. St Henry’s College, Masaka; 3. Mvara Secondary School, Arua; 4. Nabisunsa Girls’ Secondary School Kampala; 5. Kabalega Secondary School, Masindi; 9102ADDRESS ON THE STATE OF THE NATION6. Nabumali High School, Mbale; and7. Namasagali College, Kamuli, among others. In addition, Government is constructing and equipping secondary schools with laboratories and completing the construction and upgrading of technical vocational institutions in Bushenyi, Luweero, Lira, Mbale, Nyamitanga, Rwetanga, Kaberamaido, Butaleja, Ssesse, Kitgum and Kaliro, among others.The construction of 115 seed secondary schools in the subcounties, which do not have these schools at the moment, will continue in the next financial year. To improve school learning and accountability in Government-supported schools, the following will be undertaken starting next financial year: (a) Strengthen the link between education and socio-economic transformation by promotion of Science, Technology En -gineering and Mathematics in education, research and incubation;(b) Enhancing the technical capacity and skills to support industrial growth especially manufacturing; (c) Electronic tracking of enrolment, dropout and retention, and identifying learners, teachers and institutions using ICT capabilities;(d) Improving the overall staffing levels in the schools and; (e) Development of a complete national vocational qualification framework.With our oil money, we shall be able to complete our targets of a Government primary school per parish and a Government secondary school per subcounty. The railway, electricity, technical and science education as well as some national roads, will be the elements our oil money will deal with. I intend to meet with the Petroleum Authority of Uganda and the oil companies to harmonise so that we do not miss the target of 2025 as the first oil date. (Applause)  I do not want this Petroleum Authority of Uganda to delay our programme with petty things; local content. Let us start. HealthOver the last three years, since the outbreak of COVID-19, the Government has strengthened health systems. This included equipping regional and national referral hospitals and 225 health centres II have been renovated and upgraded to health centres III. In addition, we have strengthened the capacity of the country in vaccine development. For the Government to be able to sustainably improve health services, emphasis will be placed on transforming the health care from predominantly curative to preventive, through:(a) Timely supplies of drugs to address stock-outs as well as provision of relevant medical equipment;(b) Prevention and control of communicable diseases through immunisation;(c) Operationalising Mulago Super Specialised Hospital and expediting the construction of the Lubowa Specialised Hospital, all existing health centre IVs and health centre IIIs;(d) Strengthening the supervision and accountability role of the regional technical supervisory structures;(e) Emphasising, through radio programmes, the importance of nutrition and hygiene, among others, and;(f) Malaria prevention through killing the mosquitoes and the use of treated bed nets. Strengthening security and good governanceUganda’s borders remain secure, save for the spill-over effects occasioned by activities of negative armed groups in Eastern Congo and [Gen. Museveni]9103THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 24 MAY 2023South Sudan. I wish to assure Ugandans and investors that Uganda is a secure and peaceful country. The recent isolated incidents of misuse of firearms and killing of innocent people is being handled with immediate response. These include, among others; strengthening the capacity of security agencies to address emerging security threats; addressing discipline issues of security personnel in the Uganda People’s Defence Forces, in the Uganda Police Force and the Uganda Prisons Services; enhancing the security infrastructure to detect crime before it happens; and addressing the welfare of personnel in security uniforms. The ability to manage a huge preannounced event like the recent Martyrs Day without any insecurity incident, while terrorists are still running around in neighbouring countries such as Congo and Somalia among others, demands salutations to our security personnel, weaknesses here and there notwithstanding. (Applause)An event like Martyrs Day, which is preannounced, is a big magnet for terrorists. They would love to come and cause trouble there. They plan but we do not allow them. So, while we quarrel with our security personnel, they are really miles away from many of the groups in the world. Although there are a few weaknesses here and there - Otherwise, an event like that, preannounced – We were following groups in Congo planning to – You do not know how many of them are in prison now, who would want to come and kill people during an event like this one of millions of people who gather in a preannounced huge event. So, while we criticise our security personnel, we should also appreciate them. Anti-livestock theft and disarmament operation in KaramojaGovernment has enhanced troop levels and combat capabilities in Karamoja to combat cattle theft. Disarmament operations, code named “Operation Usalama Kwa Wote”  remain on course. A total of 125 guns with 1,323 rounds ammunition have been recovered since January 2023. Similarly, an estimated 4,771 stolen livestock were recovered and handed over to their rightful owners.At bilateral level, Uganda and Kenya entered a Memorandum of Understanding on Cooperation in Defence and Security, which was signed in April 2022. The agreement provides for concurrent disarmament operations in both countries. There have been mistakes and some corruption in the disarmament in Karamoja. I am now in direct touch with the raiders. The raiders came and met me; they looked for me and I met them. So, please do not arrest me, that I am aiding and abetting raiding. (Laughter)  These young people have their own issues; those issues are not very difficult to deal with. There have been so many mistakes by our own people. I am now in direct touch with the raiders; some have already come out. They came and I took them around. They visited all these places. They were wearing suits. When they arrived back in Kotido, everybody could not recognise them because they were totally changed. Some have already come out and others seem to be ready to come out.The corrupt elements in the army that stole the money of the vigilantes will be punished, and so will all the corrupt that undermined the total peace we had achieved in Karamoja between 2007 and 2018. Between 2007 and 2018, we had total peace in Karamoja. Everybody agreed, but then what happened? It was destabilised by the mistakes of mainly our people, civilians and the army. The Turkana of Kenya are also another problem. They must stop entering Uganda with guns and I do not want to hear even one incident of those people again raiding in Uganda, if they want to stay here. (Applause)  All the points put forward in the recent Executive Order - I gave an Executive Order recently, dealing specifically with the cattle rustling. It must be fulfilled. I think I will be able to bring back other clans of Karamoja 9104ADDRESS ON THE STATE OF THE NATIONbecause I am already in touch with all these groups: the Dodoth, Jie, Matheniko, Bokora and Pian. The ones where we need to collaborate with Kenya are the Turkana but we shall do it. They will stop. Otherwise, they even killed three of our geologists. I want those who killed the geologists to be brought back. They brought back the guns but not the killers; I want the killers. We also have a problem with our Pokot. There is a man called Lolem. Have you heard of him? He must be around here. If you see him, inform the police. (Laughter)  Which female Member represents Pokot in Amudat? Can I see what she looks like? Where is that girl? Come and I see you; I have not seen you. There was one we were shooting with the other year. Was that one of them? Is she not here? She has gone to raid. THE SPEAKER: Your Excellency, she sent an apology; she is not feeling well. She is unable to be here today.GEN. MUSEVENI: I hope she is not going to raid. (Laughter)  Our Pokot here must not continue to steal from the other clans and take the cattle to Kenya. They should stop – (Applause) - because I am going to concentrate. Hon. Lolem, they are my good people but tell them that you saw the old man and he said that they should stop. Is Hon. Lolem here?HON. MEMBERS: Yes.  GEN. MUSEVENI: Hon. Lolem, come to the microphone so that Members can see what you look like. (Laughter)  Where is Hon. Lolem? Come so that the Ugandans see what you look like. (Laughter) According to the Speaker, you are not supposed to say anything because the Speaker said Hon. Lolem is now very fat.  (Laughter)  How do they greet people in Pokot?5.32MR MICAH LOLEM (NRM, Upe County, Amudat): “ Subai ” when greeting a fellow male and then for a female, you say, “ Takwenyo ”. GEN. MUSEVENI: Takwenyo  like Sabiny? MR LOLEM: Yes.GEN. MUSEVENI: You have now heard my message. Please, help us. MR LOLEM: I will, Your Excellency, immediately after the Budget Speech. (Laughter)  I am mobilising.GEN. MUSEVENI: Thank you. Operation Shuja in DRCSince the launch of the Joint FARDC/UPDF, operation codenamed “Operation Shuja” in November 2021, a total of 109 SMGs, five light machine guns, three RPG tubes have been recovered; 508 ADF combatants have been put out of action – killed – 50 captured alive, 90 abductees endeavour rescued and 20 defectors received. In March 2023, UPDF put out of action 29 ADF rebels in Ntoroko District and recovered SMGs. They had invaded Uganda from Congo.The East African Community Heads of State Conclave held in April2022, resolved to establish and deploy the East African Community Regional Force (EACRF) to pacify Eastern Congo. Uganda has contributed a battle group to that regional force. The recent deployment of the EACRF augmented by diplomatic efforts from the regional states will address the security challenges posed by the instabilities in Eastern Congo. Acts of sabotage in form of vandalism targeting electricity and water infrastructureSecurity forces have arrested 15 key suspects in connection with masterminding vandalism [Gen. Museveni]9105THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 24 MAY 2023of electricity and water infrastructure in central Uganda. Key among them is the so-called Col Muwonge, leader of a subversive group called “Uganda Defense Forces” (UDF). The arrests also targeted elements within Umeme and a network of scrap dealers. The operations have since recovered over 300 tonnes of assorted electricity equipment. This vandalism is done by “haters” of the NRM-inspired progress in Uganda. They do not want to see progress. They feel very unhappy when they see electricity wires because they thought Uganda would not rise up; we are going to be very harsh with them. It is good we arrested them and they did not resist; otherwise, they would have gone somewhere prematurely. Those involved in this will feel sorry for their bankruptcy.Land and Land Fragmentation I wish to reiterate my call against destructive inheritance practices such as land fragmentation. Over-fragmented land becomes LWD (Land with Disability). That is why, as back as the elections of 1996, in the NRM Manifesto, we talked of the 4acres model as the medicine for those who had already fragmented the family lands. Hence, the recommendation for the seven activities: coffee (clonal), fruits, pasture for zero-grazing, poultry for eggs, food crops, piggery and fish-farmers for those near the wetlands. All these are products that can give good money, even if they are done on a small scale. That is why we recommended them. There are, however, other products that the country needs, but can only be done on a big scale. These are Cotton, maize, tea, sugarcane, beef, tobacco, etcetera. In fact, you cannot do the 7 without being assisted by these, for example, maize - for all the animal feeds; poultry, cattle, fish, in addition to humans and industry. The NRM has been recommending to you inheritance by shares (emigabo).  You do not divide the property itself, but you divide what comes from the property and you can aggregate your annual share and acquire your own property; thereby, the family property is not only preserved, but it can be expanded and, moreover, all the shareholders can get their own separate properties from the original family one. CorruptionAs regards fighting corruption and improving accountability of institutions, priority will be given to:(i) Ensuring transparency, accountability and anti-corruption measures across Govern -ment systems by the implementation of Electronic Government in especially pro -curement, health, education and taxation. Doing things through the computer elim -inates meetings in hotels between gov -ernment officials and business people be -cause that is where the corruption is. What are you going to discuss in the hotel? Why don’t you send him a message on the com -puter? That is why e-governance is cru -cial; it will help.(ii) Fast-tracking and monitoring the effective implementation of government programmes; (iii) Strengthening the courts and case management systems through adequate staffing and digitisation; and (iv) Implementation of other covert and overt efforts in the fight against corruption. Economic Priorities of the Government in the Next Financial Year In the next Financial Year 2023/2024, the following key strategic areas will be prioritised:(i)   Peace and security of persons and property; (ii)  Effective implementation of the Parish Development Model and Emyooga ; 9106ADDRESS ON THE STATE OF THE NATION(iii) Acquisition of right of way and starting the construction of the Standard Gauge Railway as well as finalising the rehabilitation of the Metre-Gauge Railway; (iv)  Investing in small-scale solar-powered irrigation systems to address climate change and ensure food security and eliminate the erraticness in agricultural production; (v)  Constructing transmission lines and power sub-stations; (vi)  Maintenance of both tarmac and murram roads;(vii)  Development of industrial parks to ease manufacturing;(viii)  Support to medical schools and science-based research and development;(ix)  Expedite the development of the infrastructure for oil and gas production;(x)  Capitalisation of the Uganda Development Bank (UDB) and Uganda Development Cooperation (UDC); and(xi)  Support to Information, Communication and Technology (ICT) development.The Anti-Homosexuality LawBefore I conclude and talk about the planned legislative agenda for the coming Session of Parliament, I cannot avoid commenting on the noise about the anti-homosexuality law that you enacted and I signed recently. My stand on homosexuality has been repeatedly laid out to all and sundry. It starts with a few questions: Why does somebody become a homosexual? Is it on account of genetic, hormonal or psychological reasons? Discussions with our doctors and the other African doctors who had a conference with African Members of Parliament from 22 countries, unequivocally, led us to conclude, that homosexuality, is a result of psychological disorientation at some point in one’s life - not genetic and not hormonal, as some of us  initially thought. This conclusion that homosexuality is a psychological disorientation, gives us a way forward, logically and reasonably without bias. If somebody is a victim of psychological disorientation, do you criminalise him or her on account of that? Is it logical or fair to do so? The answer is “No”. Instead, such a person needs assistance to, if possible, overcome his psychological disorientation. I am glad the MPs agreed with me and clarified this point in the law. Therefore, those who say that homosexuals will be arrested if they go for medical care etcetera are wrong. The law now says that a homosexual will not be criminalised for merely being so if he or she keeps the being to oneself. What, then, does the law fight? It fights this homosexual when he or she goes from merely being and starts recruiting other people who are not psychologically disoriented like him or her, to be like him or by misinforming or bribing them. There, he becomes a criminal and if convicted, goes to prison for a period not exceeding 20 years.If he goes further and rapes a person, a child, an indigent - indigent means a weak person - he commits a capital offence and he faces a maximum sentence of death. This is the law I signed. These are the three substantive points. I think there is something missing here - Oh, these are the three substantive points. Being a homosexual is your personal problem; merely being a homosexual and you find disoriented people that you do not like the ones you should like and like the ones you should not like. Being a homosexual is your personal problem. Promoting it is criminal and qualifies you for prison. Raping qualifies you for a possible death sentence. Therefore, when you are arguing with these people, go for the substance. Do not be diverted to these other - [Gen. Museveni]9107THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 24 MAY 2023Additionally, in Uganda, sex is confidential, even heterosexual sex. Therefore, if a homosexual keeps his “being” to himself or confidentially seeks assistance from the doctors or priests, it will not offend this law. I have told our Members of Parliament that if there are still some illogicalities in the law, such as forcing employers to know who is homosexual in the company or for the landlords to know which tenants are homosexuals, we shall work to amend them and keep the substance. We should go for the substance and not these others - because I have heard some people talking about that. I will call our Members of Parliament and we talk about it. Therefore, doctors and other health workers or providers should assist those patients who come to them bearing the three substantive points in mind. I will arrange a dedicated broadcast on this issue towards the end of June. Finally, you are about to be saved from me. I wish to end this address by thanking Parliament for enacting the following legislation during the last Session. Out of the 62 Bills presented to Parliament on the last State-of-the-Nation-Address in June 2022, the following Bills were introduced and passed:1. The Companies (Amendment) Bill, 2022.2. The Insolvency (Amendment) Bill, 2022.3. The Law Revision (Miscellaneous Amendments) Bill, 2022. 4. The Museums and Monuments Bill, 2022. 5. The Physical Activity and Sports Bill, 2022.6. The Anti-Terrorism (Amendment) Bill, 2022.7. The small Arms and Light Weapons Control Bill - They are all here. The following five were introduced by the Government in addition to the 62. I think the Speaker had also spoken about those. Now, there are these Bills which are ready for second reading; The Employment (Amendment) Bill, 2022; The Competition Bill, 2022; and The Public Service Pension Fund Bill, 2023. The following reports, as highlighted in the State of the Nation Legislative Agenda of June 2022, were processed and adopted. They are also listed here.Madam Speaker, it is now my pleasure to declare the Third Session of the 11th Parliament open. (Applause)  I thank you very much and I hope the coming Session will be fruitful. (Applause)THE SPEAKER:  Thank you so much -GEN. MUSEVENI:  I need one minute. In the morning, I felt as if I had a slight cold so I called my medical team to check for the Coronavirus. They took samples, as usual - there is what they call, “a rapid test.” It was negative and then there are two other tests, which go for deeper analysis. One was negative and the other was positive. So, I am a suspect of Coronavirus, as I stand here. (Laughter)That is why you saw me come in separate cars with Maama . I said, “ Maama , please use your car.” Since I am here, I will not infect you. I have kept my distance. We shall sort out that little issue. Thank you very much.THE SPEAKER:  Thank you, Your Excellency, for the clear and concise expression of the Government policy in your address, and for fulfilling your constitutional obligation, as per Article 101(1) of the Constitution of Republic of Uganda, 1995. We take cognisance of the Government’s Legislative Agenda for the Third Session, and we do pledge our proven commitment that we will make sure Parliament will do what we have agreed today. 9108ADDRESS ON THE STATE OF THE NATIONYour Excellency and honourable members, having listened to your passionate appeal to increase industrialisation, I would like to put the record clear - this is the Hansard  of Parliament and we want it to be very clear - that in this financial year, we appropriated Shs 77 billion for Kiira Motors Corporation. However, the money was used for other purposes. I, therefore, appeal to the line ministers to exercise their political supervisory role. The blame should not come to Parliament; we did our part and appropriated money. Secondly, the Employment (Amendment) Bill, 2022 and the Competitions Bill were passed by Parliament, awaiting assent of the President. So, we will be expecting an assented copy from the President. Honourable members, I would like to reiterate a few things; in the Third Session of the 11th Parliament, we shall reactivate and intensify the monitoring and reporting of attendance of the House sittings by both the Members of Parliament and the ministers. This will help us in giving accountability to the electorates on how effectively we have represented them; both in the House and in the committee. Remember, in Article 79(1), one of our roles is representation. So, we should be accountable to our voters. We need to know where you are; whether you are in Parliament, Kampala or anywhere. The voters need to know where you are. We are going to reactivate the data where you are going to log in for us to know how many Members attend the House. The money that is paid to us, Members of Parliament, is taxpayers’ money, and we must be able to account for it to avoid becoming corrupt. Honourable members, His Excellency the President, will be back here on 15 June 2023 to deliver the Budget Speech. We, therefore, encourage you to be here to know how much you have appropriated to your people and work for this country.Once more, Your Excellency, we thank you for creating time to come and deliver the State of the Nation Address even in the condition that you are in. We thank Maama  for accompanying you.On a special note, we thank all the dignitaries that are here. I thank the Members of Parliament. (Applause) I say all this, for God and my country. God bless you all.Your Excellency and honourable Members of Parliament, the House is adjourned to 15 June 2023 at 2.00 p.m. at Kololo Independence Grounds.The East African Community AnthemThe National Anthem(The House rose at 5.41 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 15 June 2023, at 2.00 p.m.)[The Speaker]