Wednesday, 25 June 2014

Parliament met at 3.19 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this afternoon’s sitting. I would like to announce that at the close of this session, the Anglican Chaplaincy has organised a prayer service for the country, so members are invited to go to the usual place for the same.
Secondly, I will amend the Order Paper briefly to allow hon. Tashobya and hon. Okot Ogong to make statements of personal explanation. I will announce other matters after we have constituted the committees.

3.21
MR STEPHEN TASHOBYA (NRM, Kajara County, Ntungamo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise under rule 46 of our Rules of Procedure in regard to the story entitled, “Blaming Kadaga: Is she the reason Uganda’s most expensive Parliament cannot deliver?” that appeared in the Independent Magazine of 20 June 2014. 

In the story, I am quoted to have said that the House is doing badly, in reference to Parliament. I want to categorically state that it is my opinion that this Parliament is in fact doing well. The statistics, as provided by the Speaker in her communication to the House yesterday, supports this view.

The role of Parliament can be explained to include legislative, oversight and representation. It is evident, Madam Speaker, that this Parliament has done well in its oversight and representative responsibilities, surpassing the set target. On the legislative front, Parliament greatly improved on its performance by passing 19 Bills in the last session. It is my view, which I have stated several times, that we as Parliament can do better if the Executive can bring Bills, without withdrawing them, in a timely manner. This was not done in the previous session.

The committees’ leadership should also expedite work in their committees to meet the statutory time given of 45 days. This is a position that has been emphasised by you, Madam Speaker, and the Deputy Speaker. Thank you very much for giving me this opportunity to make this statement.

3.23
MR FELIX OKOT OGONG (NRM, Dokolo County, Dokolo): Madam Speaker and honourable members, I want to thank you for giving me this opportunity. Honourable members, you are aware of the New Vision story of today, 25 June 2014, under the headline, “Bank grabs MP’s home over debts”. I would like to state as follows: 

As you are aware, honourable members, in 2011 Government ran an advert inviting companies to import sugar under a duty-free arrangement to avert soaring prices of sugar at that time. In September 2011 my company, Felistar Uganda Ltd, responded to this call and applied for a duty-free licence to import sugar and was granted to import 2000 metric tonnes of sugar by the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives. We identified a supplier from India called M/s Rika Global Impex Ltd, negotiated with them and concluded the agreement to supply the sugar at US$ 2 million, which was duly executed in 2011 under agreed terms and conditions.

We therefore entered into a trade financing agreement with dfcu Bank to finance the transaction; whereupon, dfcu Bank opened up a line of credit. A letter of credit was duly processed and payment was made to the supplier as per the terms and conditions of the agreement. Dfcu Bank identified and appointed ACE Company to be the collateral manager to monitor, inspect and control the entire sales of the consignment. According to the agreement, the goods would be shipped CAF Kampala up to my warehouse. All the shipping documents were delivered to the bank and payment to the supplier was effected by the bank in the same way.

In November 2011, the consignment arrived at Mombasa as planned and the process of transportation was to be immediately effected. However, to our surprise the whole consignment stalled for over six months in Mombasa due to reasons unknown to us and therefore affecting the whole process. The duty free licence that we got from Government was to expire within six months and yet my consignment arrived after the expiry of the licence. When my goods arrived at the border and were transported to Goodshed warehouse, URA seized some of my goods on arrival and imposed a 100 per cent tax amounting to Shs 1.6 billion and my goods remained in the hands of URA for over six months.

Concerted efforts were made by management of Felistar Group of Companies to request the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives and the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to help in this desperate situation. We managed to settle the matter with URA and the goods were released after one year, incurring a lot of losses in terms of demurrage and some goods were spoilt.

We sold the sugar but the prices at that time had dropped drastically, leading to losses amounting to Shs 1.6 billion. Our cost price was at Shs 180,000 per bag but the selling price dropped to Shs 110,000 and we incurred losses of Shs 1.6 billion. Dfcu Bank had pegged the exchange rate at Shs 2947 but immediately the exchange rate dropped to Shs 2300, leading to additional loss of Shs 800 million in the foreign exchange transaction alone. 

We also had issues with the supplier due to poor packaging and unnecessary delays in transportation of our goods, which also led to a lot of losses. Madam Speaker, we have already served the supplier with notice of intention to sue, in which we are seeking to recover Shs 3.4 billion and we are in the process of filing a case against them in India. 

The sugar consignment was collateral and security and it was managed by a renowned collateral manager, ACE, appointed by the bank. I have had a good track record with dfcu and other banks for over 20 years and I have successfully handled several business transactions with them without any problem; I expected the bank to have taken this into consideration. In all these mishaps, dfcu Bank was and is still part and parcel of the whole transaction. We have been trying to find amicable solutions to these problems.

Dfcu Bank is well aware of these losses and we have been discussing with them. I was greatly shocked that the bank is acting in a manner in total disregard to the prevailing situation and yet I was not informed. They just decided to recall the loan without any discussion with me and with only arrears of two months. The loan was restructured for 15 years but they unfairly decided to recall the entire loan, which was definitely unfair. 

Subsequently, I was advised by my financial advisers and lawyers to hold paying dfcu any instalment and take the matter for legal redress because the bank also owes a duty in this whole transaction. My lawyers filed a civil suit relating to this matter against dfcu and an interim order has been issued stopping the sale of any property until final determination of the main suit.

In conclusion, Madam Speaker and Members, I would like to inform you and the entire world that this matter is already in court and I am optimistic that justice will prevail. Thank you for giving me this opportunity to clarify what appeared in the New Vision this morning.

Madam Speaker, I want to inform you that we incurred losses to the tune of Shs 8 to 10 billion, which was basically very unfair. We have appealed to the ministry because they are aware of all this. Hon. Amelia Kyambadde is aware of all this; the Ministry of Finance, the Prime Minister and everybody is aware of this awkward situation. I am wondering why such a thing could happen to me yet people who should actually address the situation are there. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable member. We wish you well. 

LAYING OF PAPERS

3.33
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON LOCAL GOVERNMENT ACCOUNTS (Ms Winifred Kiiza): Rt Hon. Speaker and honourable colleagues, I wish to lay on the Table financial statements for the year ended 30 June 2011 together with the report and opinion thereon by the Auditor-General for the following: 
    • Bardege Division, Gulu Municipality
    • Paicho Sub-County, Gulu District
    • Odek Sub-County, Gulu District
    • Bobi Sub-County, Gulu District
    • Lakwana Sub-County, Gulu District
    • Aputi Sub-County, Amolatar District
    • Arwotocek Sub-County, Amolatar District
    • Akura Sub-County, Alebtong District
    • Omoro Sub-County, Alebtong District
    • Awei Sub-County, Alebtong District
    • Abako Sub-County, Alebtong District
    • Apala Sub-County, Alebtong District
    • Butiru Sub-County, Manafwa District.  

I beg to lay.

Rt Hon. Speaker and honourable colleagues, I beg to lay on the Table financial statements for the year ended 30 June 2012, together with the report and opinion thereon by the Auditor-General for the following sub-counties:
    • Koome Sub-County, Mukono District
    • Nabbale Sub-County, Mukono District
    • Nakisunga Sub-County, Mukono District
    • Nagojje Sub-County, Mukono District
    • Kimenyedde Sub-County, Mukono District
    • Kyampisi Sub-County, Mukono District
    • Ntunda Sub-County, Mukono District
    • Pujule Sub-County, Pader District
    • Atanga Sub-County, Pader District
    • Acholibur Sub-County, Pader District
    • Aduku Sub-County, Apac District
    • Akokoro Sub-County, Apac District
    • Nambieso Sub-County, Apac District
    • Abongomola Sub-County, Apac District
    • Apac Gem Sub-County, Apac District
    • Ibuje Sub-County, Apac District
    • Chawente Sub-County, Apac District
    • Labongo-Akwang Sub-County, Kitgum District
    • Orom Sub-County, Kitgum District
    • Labongo Layamo Sub-County, Kitgum District
    • Namokora Sub-County, Kitgum District
    • Lagoro Sub-County, Kitgum District
    • Omiya Sub-County, Kitgum District
    • Najjembe Sub-County, Buikwe District
    • Kyalulangira Sub-County, Rakai District
    • Kasaali Sub-County, Rakai District
    • Kalisizo Sub-County, Rakai District
    • Kifamba Sub-County, Rakai District
    • Alito Sub-County, Kole District
    • Akalo Sub-County, Kole District
    • Ayer Sub-County, Kole District
    • Aboke Sub-County, Kole District 
    • Kalamba Sub-County, Butambala District 
    • Palabek Ogili Sub-County, Lamwo District 
    • Nakaseke Sub-County, Nakaseke District 
    • Kinyogoga Sub-County, Nakaseke District 
    • Ngoma Sub-County, Nakaseke District
    • Kasangombe Sub-County, Nakaseke District 
    • Wakyato Sub-County, Nakaseke District 
    • Lira Palwo Sub-County, Agago District. 

I beg to lay.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, chairperson. All those are sent to the Committee on Local Government Accounts for expeditious perusal and report back.

3.40
MR GEOFFREY EKANYA (FDC, Tororo County, Tororo): Madam Speaker, as the Opposition, we shall seek the indulgence of this House to pass a resolution to request the House to allow the district public accounts committees to handle sub-county, division, town council and even municipality reports of the Auditor-General, otherwise at this rate – Yesterday we had reports, today we have reports; just between yesterday and today, we have had over 200 reports. 

We have over 1,000 sub-counties to consider and yet the Constitution says that the reports of the Auditor-General must be handled within a period of six months. So, we are giving notice of that motion that next week, with your permission, Madam Speaker, the House, if agreeable, should authorise the district PACs to handle the reports. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, your thoughts are noted. However, I think that you have to go beyond that resolution and amend the Local Government Act because the powers emanate from the Local Government Act. I thank you. 

COMPOSITION OF THE SECTORAL COMMITTEES FOR FINANCIAL YEAR 2014/2015

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, yesterday we received nominations from the NRM party. We now want to hear from the Opposition, UPDF, the Independents and the unallocated. Is that the Leader of the Opposition? (Laughter) Okay, hon. Nzoghu.

3.42
MR WILLIAM NZOGHU (FDC, Busongora County North, Kasese): Thank you, Rt Hon. Speaker. The Opposition has designated its members to the various sectoral committees and the parties include UPC, DP, FDC, CP and JEEMA. 

On the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development, we have hon. Winifred Kiiza, FDC, Kasese - Member. 

THE SPEAKER: Run through them all.

MR NZOGHU: On the Committee of Public Service and Local Government, we have the following members: 
    1. Hon. Nambooze Betty Bakireke, Mukono Municipality, DP; 
    2. Hon. Santa Alum, Oyam District, UPC; 
    3. Hon. Mugume Roland, Rukungiri Municipality, FDC.  

For the East African Community Affairs committee, the Member who had been designated prefers to be transferred. I want to seek your indulgence, Rt Hon. Speaker; she has sought to be transferred to the Committee on Physical Infrastructure.

THE SPEAKER: So you have no representation for the Community?

MR NZOGHU: As of now, yes. On the Committee of Natural Resources, we have the following: 
    1. Hon. Reagan Okumu, Aswa County, FDC; 
    2. Hon. Beatrice Anywar, Kitgum District, FDC; 
    3. Hon. Ken-Lukyamuzi, Rubaga South, CP; 
    4. Hon. Yokasi Bihande Bwambale, Bukonzo East, FDC; 
    5. Hon. Florence Ibi Ekwau, Kaberamaido District, FDC; 
    6. Hon. Alice Alaso Asianut, Serere District, FDC; 
    7. Hon. Jimmy Akena, Lira Municipality, UPC;  
    8. Hon. Deogratius Kiyingi, Bukomansimbi County, DP. 

On the Committee of Communication and Information Technology, we have the following members: 
    1. Hon. Bernard Atiku, Ayivu County, FDC; and 
    2. Hon. Benson Obua-Ogwal, Moroto County, UPC. 

On the Committee of Physical Infrastructure, we have the following members: 
    1. Hon. William Nzoghu, Busongora North, FDC; 
    2. Hon. Cecilia Atim Ogwal, Dokolo, FDC; 
    3. Hon. Sebuliba Mutumba R., Kawempe Division South, DP; 
    4. Hon. Patrick Amuriat Oboi, Kumi, FDC; 
    5. Hon. Mohammed Kawuma, Entebbe Municipality, DP; 
    6. Hon. Elijah Okupa, Kasilo County, FDC; 
    7. Hon. Stephen Ochola, Serere County, FDC; 
    8. Hon. Acheng Joy Ruth, Kole District, UPC. 

On the Committee of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries, we have the following members: 
    1. Hon. Francis Epetait, Ngora County, FDC; 
    2. Hon. Kassaino Wadri, Terego County, FDC; 
    3. Hon. Susan Namaganda, Bukomansimbi, DP; 
    4. Hon. Amongi Betty, Oyam South, UPC. 

On the Committee of Defence and Internal Affairs, we have the following members: 
    1. Hon. Fungaroo Kaps Hassan, Obongi County, FDC; 
    2. Hon. Muwanga Kivumbi, Butambala County, DP; 
    3. Hon. Christine Bako Abia, Arua District, FDC; 
    4. Hon. Ibrahim Ssemujju Nganda, Kyaddondo East, FDC. 

On the Committee of Tourism, Trade and Industry, we have the following members: 
    1. Hon. Nabilah Naggayi Sempala, Kampala, FDC; and 
    2. Hon. Lucy Ajok, Apac District, UPC. 

On the Committee of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, we have the following members: 
    1. Hon. Geoffrey Ekanya, Tororo County, FDC; 
    2. Hon. Nathan Nandala-Mafabi, Budadiri County West, FDC; 
    3. Hon. Odo Tayebwa, Bushenyi-Ishaka Municipality, FDC; 
    4. Hon. Mathias B. Nsubuga, Bukoto South, DP; 
    5. Hon. Judith Franca Akello, Agago District, FDC; 
    6. Hon. Maxwell Ebong Akora, Maruzi County, UPC; 
    7. Hon. Ssasaga Isaias, Budadiri County East, FDC; 
    8. Hon. Kevina Taaka, Busia Municipality, FDC; 
    9. Hon. Jack Sabiiti, Rukiga County, FDC.

The Committee on Presidential Affairs has the following members: 
    1. Hon. Peter Omolo, Soroti County, FDC; 
    2. Hon. Odonga Otto, Aruu, FDC; 
    3. Hon. Jacinto Ogwal, Otuke, UPC; 
    4. Hon. Hussein Kyanjo, Makindye West, JEEMA. 

Rt Hon. Speaker, on the Committee of Foreign Affairs, we have the following members:
    • Hon. Jack Wamanga-Wamai, Mbale Municipality, FDC; 
    • Hon. Issa Kikungwe, Kyaddondo South, DP; 
    • Hon. Fred Ebil, Kole County, UPC;  
    • Hon. Latif Ssebagala, Kawempe North, DP. 

On the Committee of Legal and Parliamentary Affairs, we have the following members: 
    1. Hon. Abdu Katuntu, Bugweri, FDC; 
    2. Hon. Medard Lubega Sseggona, Busiro East, DP; 
    3. Hon. Joseph Balikuddembe, Busiro South, DP; 
    4. Hon. Brenda Nabukenya, Luweero District, DP; 
    5. Hon. Paul Mwiru, Jinja Municipality East, FDC; 
    6. Hon. Kripus Ayena, Oyam North, UPC; 
    7. Hon. Acire Christopher, Gulu Municipality, FDC.

On the Committee of Education and Sports, we have the following members: 
    1. Hon. Angelline Osegge, Soroti District, FDC; and 
    2. Hon. Joseph Ssewungu Gonzaga, Kalungu West, DP. 

Finally, Madam Speaker, on the Committee of Health, we have the following: 
    1. Dr Michael Bayigga Lulume, Buikwe South, DP; 
    2. Hon. Betty Aol Ochan, Gulu District, FDC; 
    3. Hon. Femiar Wadada, Sironko District, FDC. 
Madam Speaker, I beg to lay.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Let us hear from the Independents; hon. Otada.

3.50
MR SAM OTADA-AMOOTI (Independent, Kibanda County, Kiryandongo): Madam Speaker, I wish to propose the following names of Independent Members of Parliament to the following committees:
    1. Hon. Fox Odoi-Oywelowo, Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs;
    2. Hon. Achile Manoah,  Committee on Natural Resources;
    3. Hon. Vincent Ssempijja, Committee on Agriculture;
    4. Dr Sam Okuonzi, Chair, Committee on Foreign Affairs;
    5. Hon. Haruna Kyeyune,  Committee on Natural Resources;
    6. Hon. Jesca Ababiku, Committee on Presidential Affairs;
    7. Hon. Benjamin Cadet, Committee on Natural Resources;
    8. Hon. Rhona Ninsiima, Committee on Health;
    9. Hon. Gilbert Olanya, Committee on Physical Infrastructure; 
    10. Hon. Grace Namara, vice-chairperson,  Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry;
    11. Hon. Kafeero Ssekiteleko, Committee on Physical Infrastructure;
    12. Hon. Lilly Akello, Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs;
    13. Hon. Mariam Nalubega, Committee on ICT;
    14. Hon. John Bagoole, Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development;
    15. Hon. Rosemary Nyakikongoro, Committee on Natural Resources;
    16. Hon. Sam Otada Amooti, Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs;
    17. Hon. Andrew Allen, Committee on ICT;
    18. Hon. Kezekia Mbogo, Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs;
    19. Hon. Atim Joy Ongom, Committee on Natural Resources;
    20. Hon. Kenneth Lubogo, Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry;
    21. Hon. Nalubega Mary Tunde, Committee on Education and Sports;
    22. Hon. Phyllis Chemutai, Committee on Natural Resources;
    23. Hon. Jacob Oboth, Committee on Natural Resources;
    24. Hon. Jennifer Mujungu, Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs;
    25. Hon. Joshua Anywarach, Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development;
    26. Hon. Mathias Mpuuga, Committee on Presidential Affairs;
    27. Hon. Aja Baryayanga, Committee on Natural Resources;
    28. Hon. Julius Maganda, Committee on Education.

Madam Speaker, some Independent Members of Parliament are not available – I did not receive their committees of preference. I seek your indulgence that I should return after getting their choices and I will propose their names for designation accordingly.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Let us hear from the UPDF.

3.53
CAPT. SUSAN LAKOT (UPDF Representative): Thank you, Madam Speaker. In accordance with rule 175(1) of the Rules of Procedure, I wish to propose the names of UPDF Members of Parliament for the sectoral committees as follows:

    1. Gen. Elly Tumwine, Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry;
    2. Gen. Edward Katumba Wamala, Committee on Physical Infrastructure;
    3. Lt Gen. Charles Angina, Committee on Foreign Affairs;
    4. Lt Gen. Jim Owoyesigire, Committee on Agriculture;
    5. Maj. Gen. Dr Julius Oketta, Committee on Presidential Affairs;
    6. Brigadier Phinehas Katirima, Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs;
    7. Col Innocent Oula, Committee on Natural Resources;
    8. Lt Col Sarah Mpabwa, Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs;  
    9. Capt. Susan Lakot, Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development.  

Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable members. Before we take the vote, I announce that on the Committee of Gender, there are only 12 members; on the Committee of Natural Resources, we shall have to harmonise because they are 36 – they are over-subscribed; the Committee on Public Service has only 14 members; the Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry has 19 members; the Committee on ICT has 17; the Committee on Physical Infrastructure has 24 members; the Committee on Agriculture has 20 members; the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs has 22 members; the Committee on Finance has 27 members; the Committee on Presidential Affairs has 20 members; the Committee on Foreign Affairs has 17; the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs has 28; the Committee on EAC has only 14; the Committee on Education and Sports has 15; the Committee on Health has 17; and at least 12 Members have not requested to be allocated anywhere. So, I appeal to them to inform us where they want to go. In the meantime, I put the question that the committees as proposed be approved. (Mr Epetait rose_) Yes, hon. Epetait?

DR FRANCIS EPETAIT: Thank you, Madam Speaker. You have just stated that certain committees are oversubscribed while others are undersubscribed. Wouldn’t it be procedurally correct for us to first harmonise so that when we pronounce ourselves, all the committees will have been duly constituted, rather than making a pronouncement now and then go back later to harmonise? 

I also take exception that some Members clamour to belong to some committees and shun others; I thought that all committees are equally important and we all do this on behalf of Parliament. I propose that we first harmonise membership of each committee before we take a vote. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, other than the Committee on Natural Resources, which is oversubscribed, we should accept the proposals as they stand for now. For the others, we can add later because they are still below 30. We cannot stop work because some Members have not taken interest.

MR WILFRED NIWAGABA: Madam Speaker, I seek your guidance. On my own behalf and on behalf of my colleagues, we did write to you requesting that you designate us to our respective committees. (Laughter) I personally remember bringing my letter to your office, requesting that I be designated on the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs.

THE SPEAKER: You are there.

MR NIWAGABA: Most obliged.

THE SPEAKER: It is your colleagues who have not yet identified where they want to belong. (Laughter) I want to appeal to Members that all the committees are important. Being on the natural resources committee does not mean that you will get oil. (Laughter) I want to appeal to you to consider moving to other committees.

MR OTADA: Madam Speaker, maybe just to provide clarification regarding the concern of my colleague in the group of four - their names are in here but I did not want to usurp your powers to read their names. On the list of the Independent Members of Parliament, the choices or preferences are here for hon. Tinkasimiire, hon. Niwagaba and the others. So as we pronounce ourselves, you could look at this list and then you designate them. I did not want to take your powers, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Niwagaba is already on the Committee on Legal and Parliament Affair; he is not moving. It is the others whose positions we have not yet received. His, I know, is for the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs. When the others let me know, I will designate them. 

Honourable members, let us take the vote on the other committees except the Committee on National Resources. I put the question that all those committees be approved. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: So, the whips, please try to harmonise on the issue of the Committee on Natural Resources; it is oversubscribed. By the way, when you are oversubscribed, you share the same amount of money as the committee which is small. It is in your interest to go to a smaller committee where there are fewer members. 

PRIME MINISTER’S QUESTION TIME

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, it is the Prime Minister’s question time but I want to appeal to you not to have preambles; just ask your questions. 

4.01
MR JOHN NIZEYIMANA (NRM, Bufumbira County North, Kisoro): Thank you, Madam Speaker. A list of accounting officers was released and my concern is on Annex 111, No.5, Kisoro District. 

Rt Hon. Prime Minister, on this list of non-compliant local government accounting officers, in Kisoro District the name of a one Mr Wilson Tibugyenda appears. Mr Tibugyenda has not been working in Kisoro District –(Interjection)- He has been in Oyam, I am being informed, and he is on the list of non-compliant accounting officers. Whereas the other 12 have been in their districts and they have been non-compliant in those districts, Kisoro has this non-compliant person who has been newly posted and he is appearing as non-compliant in Kisoro even before he gets there. 

I want some explanation because the person we know in Kisoro as non-compliant is the CAO. Several letters have been written to the Minister of Local Government on this. So we would wish to know why Kisoro is receiving “non-compliant” yet the CAO, Mr Asuman Masereka Amis, is the one with such problems that I am reading about. 

4.03
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Yes, Mr Wilson Tibugyenda is on transfer to Kisoro. As the Minister of Finance stated yesterday, there are a number of accounting officers that had not complied with certain requirements who, therefore, have not yet been appointed accounting officers until these issues have been sorted out. We are in the process of looking at this issue. I am certain we will sort this out soon and report back to Parliament. 

4.04
MS LILLY ADONG (NRM, Woman Representative, Nwoya): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to ask the Prime Minister whether they suspended the law that stops people from feeding wildlife. When you are travelling from Karuma to Pakwach, you find baboons being fed on the road, which is against the law, and the game rangers are employed to stop this. There is a risk to the population because this is making wildlife dependant on people and they are losing their natural habitat. 

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Ignorance of the law is no defence. Those acting in breach of the law therefore risk the consequences of such acts. 

4.05
MR DENNIS OBUA (NRM, Ajuri County, Alebtong): Madam Speaker, under the India-Africa Initiative on Science, Technology and Innovation, is the Prime Minister aware that Uganda, which was initially selected among five African countries, is set to lose on the construction of a food processing plant because - they will finally select three out of five - we do not have a substantive ministry in charge of science, technology and innovation, which is a requirement for this aid by Government of India? If so, what is being done by Government of Uganda to ensure that we do not miss this important initiative?

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: I am not aware that we do not have a substantive ministry in charge of technology. If it is not substantive, what is it? I had been invited to go to India one time to have a discussion about this relationship and I did not gain the impression that the requirement was to have a ministry on its own just dealing with science and technology. I think what is important is to have a department of government, a ministry indeed, that handles this subject so that Government has someone answerable on these issues. However, if this is the requirement, which I was not aware of, we will certainly take the necessary steps to fulfil the requirement for Uganda to benefit from the initiative. 

4.08
MR ANTHONY OKELLO (NRM, Kioga County, Amolatar): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Mr Prime Minister, at the moment when a government agency loses a court case, government property gets attached in case of failure to pay court costs. There is a case with a recent attachment of a tipper lorry for Amolatar Town Council, which was part of the consignment of the road equipment that was given to the district, for inability to compensate individuals whose property was damaged during a road construction. 

Rt Hon. Prime Minister, as you are bound to agree with me, these are fake development efforts. Is Government aware of these unfortunate incidences and what can Government do to salvage and make Government property immune to attachments? Thank you.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Until the Constitutional Court nullified the law that protected government assets from attachment, they were indeed in practice protected. But since this law was nullified, whenever government officials engage in activities that lead to court awards in local governments especially, and they are unable to pay, there have been cases of attachment of assets of Government. As far as I am concerned, this is absolutely wrong and we are waiting to get a report to see what steps we can take to restore the protection of government assets.

Secondly, I think those responsible for the actions that lead to these attachments should be held responsible for their actions. I don’t think it is right that individual officers of Government should commit mistakes and Government or the State as a whole pays heavily while these people go scot-free. So, yes, that is the current position. We had one unfortunate situation where even an ambulance was attached, actually while it was going to pick a patient. So, it is a matter that has been drawn to our attention. That ambulance case in Karamoja has been drawn to our attention and we hope we will find an answer. Thank you.

4.11
MS OLIVIA KABAALE (NRM, Woman Representative, Iganga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have three questions for the Prime Minister –(Interjections)– okay, let me choose the best.

Hon. Prime Minister, last week but one, I was in Bukwo and we found that in Bukwo, 1,200 families had been displaced - the Ndorobos. They don’t have anywhere to stay and there are reports that the tree teams that came from your ministry stopped in Kapchorwa yet these people are nearing starvation. I would like to know what your office can do as of now because this is an ageing population. They were displaced by the Uganda Wildlife Authority and are now staying on one acre of land, which belongs to another person. They use only two toilets and so, I would like to know whether your office is aware of that situation. Thank you.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Madam Speaker, I would like to thank hon. Kwagala Kabaale for giving me the opportunity to answer hon. Kassiano Wadri’s question exactly in the same terms that he asked last week and I undertook to answer it in a bit of detail because I didn’t have the details then.

The Department of Relief, Disaster Preparedness and Refugees in the Office of the Prime Minister is spearheading a multi-sectoral exercise to identify, verify and recover land to be utilised to resettle the Ndorobos in Sebei. The Office of the Prime Minister, following the advice of the President, convened two meetings in April this year with members of Parliament from the sub-region to find a lasting solution to resettling the Ndorobo community.

An inter-ministerial technical team was established to survey the 2,250 hectares of land erroneously allocated by the land allocation committees in 1983 and 2008 beyond the 600 hectares degazzeted from Mt Elgon National Park. This was for purposes of resettling communities that had been displaced from the park. The committee will also verify displaced persons and identify genuine beneficiaries, prepare physical development plans and resettle the 500 Ndorobos.

The team set off to the field on 12 May 2013 and has held meetings with the district leadership. Progress is being made: 

    1. Already, 100 hectares of land have been identified and mapped for recovery. Even a higher amount of land is expected to be recovered from areas yet to be covered in the audit of the 1983 allocation processes;
    2. Major surveying of land was completed on 20th June and the residual survey exercises are being completed;
    3. Verification of the displaced people is on-going to identify genuine claimants;
    4. Plans are now ready for the resettlement exercise to commence this week. Indeed the Minister of State for General Duties in the Office of the Prime Minister held the last meeting yesterday at which, on the basis of the extensive technical briefs they received, they agreed that a minimum of two weeks and a maximum of four weeks will be allowed for the comprehensive completion of this exercise so that the resettlement exercise actually takes place with effect from 1st August this year.

The task is complex and needs a comprehensive study for a solution once and for all. I urge the leadership of the areas to support the resettlement exercise and I would like to thank them for their cooperation in this effort. Thank you.

4.17
DR MEDARD BITEKYEREZO (NRM, Mbarara Municipality, Mbarara): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Rt hon. Prime Minister, there is a machine called the “CT scan” and in full it is the Computerized Tomographic machine. This machine looks into the brains. In Mulago, accessing the machine costs Shs 120,000 and even if you have been operated on the head, they can repeat the scan, where upon you again pay Shs 120,000. But for Mbarara Hospital – and I have seen that even the accounting officers have not been changed - they are charging Shs 250,000 when it has got contrast media and Shs 200,000 without contrast media.

So, Mr Prime Minister, I want to know what criteria – and these are both government hospitals – does Government use to charge people in Mulago less money and then charge my people of Mbarara Municipality and western Uganda Shs 250,000 for a CT scan that belongs to Government of Uganda and which cost the government Shs 1.8 billion? Why are we being overcharged?

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: I did not have that information. I thank the hon. Member for bringing it up. I will crosscheck it and inform him about the accuracy of the information he has and the explanation of the differences, if any.

4.20
MR STANLEY OMWONYA (NRM, Okoro County, Zombo): Rt Hon. Prime Minister, in the early 1960s, the then colonial government planted Fir trees on the hills of Lendu, Lukii and Awani in Zombo District. These trees made Zombo one of the coolest places in Uganda. As I speak, all the trees have been ferried down because of timber. What plan does the Government have to re-plant trees on these hills?

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: I thank the hon. Member for that good question. It is government policy as you know, to protect the environment and not only to protect the environment but actually to take definitive action to do so and one of the policies we have is afforestation by planting trees. We have encouraged the private sector to plant trees and the ministry responsible has leased out land to private people to plant trees in order to protect the environment. I hope Zombo District is part of this overall plan. 

I would like to say that in the case of bare hills in areas that are mountainous, where Zombo would qualify to be, we plan to plant a new species of plants - bamboo and rattan. Everybody knows bamboo; rattan is - I know it in Rukiga and I do not know how to describe it. In our area, it is the plant that our teachers in school used to cane us. Bamboo and rattan have become a major industry in the world and an international association has been formed, actually headquartered in China and it is a huge industry because from bamboo you can get textiles, hard wood, drinks - both soft and hard, you can get medicine and of course as the people of Bugisu region know, you can get food (Malewa) and other things.

The ministry responsible is advanced in preparing a plan to cover all the bare hills of Uganda with bamboo so that they are afforested and then it becomes a commercial activity in Uganda. I hope in Zombo where the Fir trees may have been cut down because they take longer to grow, they will benefit from this programme. Thank you.

4.24
MS SARAH MATEKE (NRM, Woman Representative, Kisoro): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to inquire from the Prime Minister what mechanism Government is putting in place for the new mushrooming institutions which are robbing students of their money. Parents send students to school but at the end of the day, their papers are not recognised because the institutions are not recognised by the National Council for Higher Education and it is hard to upgrade and get jobs.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: I did not get it.

THE SPEAKER: You have not got it? The mushrooming institutions that are purportedly educating children but their qualifications are not recognised by the National Council for Higher Education. It is a business.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: I hope I got the question right because what hon. Mateke seems to be saying is that there are illegal institutions here acting unlawfully and taking advantage of our children. We will look into that and take appropriate action. Thank you.

4.25
MR GEOFFREY EKANYA (FDC, Tororo County, Tororo): Thank you very much. According to Article 123, the laws of Uganda Cap. 204, the Ratification of Treaties Act, 1998 requires that Cabinet or Parliament ratifies a treaty. The ones that are ratified by Cabinet must be laid before Parliament but others require that they are ratified by Parliament. How many treaties have been ratified by Cabinet and when is the Government of Uganda ratifying a treaty banning trade on small arms.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Madam Speaker, I think I have to say this every week. Surely, questions that require statistical data are anticipated by the Rules of Procedure as questions for oral answer. The whole idea is that relevant departments should be asked in time so that they can give you a researched answer. I think the Prime Minister’s Question Time is not meant for that kind of thing. I can tell you of course that I will ask the relevant ministry to go and get the information and pass it to you.

4.28
MR TAYEBWA ODOO (FDC, Bushenyi-Ishaka Municipality, Bushenyi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Rt hon. Prime Minister, Mulago Hospital is charging parking fee of Shs 2,000 whenever you enter into the hospital. Whether you are taking your sick person, taking a coffin to collect a dead body or if you have been referred to go and pick medicine for a sick person, whenever you enter, you have to pay. If you enter five times a day, you pay Shs 10,000 because entrance is Shs 2,000 for parking inside Mulago. Hon. Prime Minister, I believe that this would be a free service hospital moreover inconveniencing all sorts of people who are even sick. Why is this the case?

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: I will find out.

4.30
MS MARIAM NALUBEGA (Independent, Woman Representative, Butambala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. My question to the hon. Prime Minister is that in financial year 2012/2013, Government committed to construct 88 health workers’ houses in the Karamoja region under the sponsorship of the Italian Government. I want to know how many health workers’ staff houses were constructed and where. And can the Prime Minister lay on Table the list of those completed staff houses in Karamoja region? Thank you.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Well, I know that houses were constructed. I will come back and tell you how many have been completed.

4.31
MR LATIF SSEBAGALA (DP, Kawempe Division North, Kampala): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Rt hon. Prime Minister, is it true that the US Government has imposed a travel ban on government officials and if it is true, who are they? Are we safe? Is the newly elected UN President safe to go to New York? Can you produce that list so that we are aware?

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Yes, I have read those reports in the media. I did discuss it with the minister responsible for Foreign Affairs, hon. Sam Kuteesa, and we are waiting for official communication to give us the details of the action taken and if true, who is involved and the reasons why. When we get it, this House will be informed.

4.32
MS MARY NALUBEGA TUNDE (Independent, Workers’ Representative): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Hon. Prime Minister, you are aware that Public Service is a very important ministry and of late, it has been swimming in very many problems. Recently, a committee was formed but I know if something very substantial is not found out, the problem will reoccur. I am just asking government why it has taken so long to appoint a substantive permanent secretary to that very important ministry.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: The answer is the one I gave to the same question not long ago, which was that the permanent secretary in the Ministry of Public Service is still acting like the one in the Ministry of Local Government. This was because the term of the Public Service Commission had expired and it took time to reconstitute it. Fortunately, Parliament has now done its part and the matter is being handled. So, I expect that when the new commission begins to work, all these will be sorted out. Thank you.

4.34
MR HASSAN FUNGAROO (FDC, Obongi County, Moyo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and Rt hon. Prime Minister, I salute you. This year, Uganda is carrying out very important exercises which include the national ID project and the forthcoming census. The national ID project is riddled with inefficiencies where we have wrong names of parishes, villages and places and defective computers. For example, yesterday, when I went to the headquarters after coming from Obongi, I was informed that there are 2,500 defective computers that were bought and are not working.

Hon. Prime Minister, I am scared. Have you lost the interest and the capability to run an efficient Cabinet and Government? Thank you.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: As you know, Madam Speaker, we have indicated previously, I think actually at your request, that we will come to this House and give a comprehensive update on this project. I am happy to say that I think the ministry –(Interjections)- that is what I was asking; how far they have gone. They are advanced and as soon as they are ready, we will come and give you the answers and we will have the opportunity to discuss all the details. Thank you.

4.36
MR KENNETH LUBOGO (Independent, Bulamogi County, Kaliro): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Hon. Prime Minister, we passed the Higher Education Students Financing Act and in that law, we provided that students pursuing degrees, diplomas and other higher qualifications would be supported to pursue those studies on loan and scholarships. However, recently, Government has put out information stating that they are focusing on those who are going to pursue degrees leaving out those in technical institutes and those pursuing certificates. Is it the position of Government that the support is only going to be limited to those pursuing undergraduate degrees and not diplomas and certificates? Please clarify.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Well, as my honourable friend knows, we are limited by the resource envelope. Therefore, I have adopted an approach that will handle this issue in phases because we cannot take on everyone now. We are beginning with phases. In the case of interest loans or loans for education, we decided we would handle science subjects first and then as resources expand, we will expand the area of coverage. So this is the answer, generally speaking. Thank you.

4.38
MR WILFRED NIWAGABA (NRM, Ndorwa County East, Kabale): Maziba Gorge power station, which used to provide power to Kabale District from 1962 to 1993 or thereabouts when it was deliberately laid to waste has been appearing in the Budget speeches since 2009 and the State of the Nation addresses up to the last financial year. This particular financial year, it has not appeared anywhere. Should we take it that its fate has been sealed and that it should permanently be laid to waste?

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Maziba Gorge power station which produces just less than one megawatt - the hon. Member is right that it started in 1952 but it collapsed a long time ago. Since we came into power, we have repaired it and it became obvious that the equipment at the old station and its location needed revisiting. So, the last briefing that I had was that a new study was being carried out to determine what needs to be done to ensure that there is constant supply of power to Kabale and that sub-region.

Fortunately, a new micro hydropower project was opened within the sub-region in Kanungu and it produces 6.5 megawatts. Kabale, Kanungu, Rukungiri and Kisoro combined do not consume 50 percent of the power produced. So, while the study is being carried out to see how we can produce even more power on that river in that area, there will not be shortage of power because of Maziba’s collapse. Fortunately, we have enough power, more than we can consume in the area. 

We hope that as Kabale develops – because it is taking on an industrialisation character – as they grow more tea and new factories come up and therefore the demand for power comes up, we will be ready to supply additional power to what we are producing in Kanungu for that area. I thank you.  
 
THE SPEAKER: Hon. Ken-Lukyamuzi. You are the last one.

4.42
MR JOHN KEN-LUKYAMUZI (CP, Rubaga Division South, Kampala): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Rt. hon. Prime Minister, in the absence of the Chief Justice of Uganda and the Deputy Chief Justice, Uganda is an orphan. It is now over one year since the Chief Justice of Uganda, Benjamin Odoki, retired from the Judiciary as Chief Justice of Uganda. Uganda, as I raise this concern, does not have a Deputy Chief Justice. When do we expect to have a Chief Justice in serious and explainable terms?

Under Article 133 of the Constitution of Uganda, the Chief Justice is the head of the Judiciary and is responsible for the administration of all courts in Uganda. Can Uganda afford not to have a Chief Justice and Deputy Chief Justice for a full year? What sort of society are you managing, Mr Prime Minister?

Lastly on the same point –

THE SPEAKER: No, please. The Prime Minister.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: As my honourable friend knows, because this is knowledge or information available in the public domain, the President did, as the Appointing Authority, propose names for approval. So, this is under process. But as that process goes on, it is not true that the functions of the Office of Chief Justice and Office of the Deputy Chief Justice - even if substantive holders of those offices have not been appointed - are not being carried out. They are being carried out by those who are doing so in acting capacities and I think that Uganda is moving and it has not stopped.

THE SPEAKER: That concludes question time. But maybe in closing, Mr Prime Minister, there is a question that hon. Obua asked on the absence of the Ministry of Science and Technology. In this House, we have made recommendations that there be established that ministry. The President wrote back to say that he is considering it but we are increasingly being confronted by queries as to where to go when we have issues of science and technology. It is a fishing expedition and so, it is a serious matter and do remind the President that he did write to us to say that he is considering it. 

MOTION THAT THE HOUSE RESOLVES ITSELF INTO A COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY TO CONSIDER THE VOTE-ON-ACCOUNT FOR FINANCIAL YEAR 2014/2015

4.45
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PRIVATISATION) (Mr Aston Kajara): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the House do constitute itself into a Committee of Supply to consider and approve a motion of Parliament on Vote-on-Account to the financial year 2014/2015. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Seconded? Yes, Minister.

4.46
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PRIVATISATION) (Mr Aston Kajara): The motion reads:
 
“WHEREAS Clause (4) of Article 154 of the Constitution allows the President to authorise the issue of monies from the Consolidated Fund Account for purposes of meeting expenditure necessary to carry out services of the government until the expiration of four months from the beginning of the financial year or the coming into operation of the Appropriations Act, whichever is earlier;

AND WHEREAS the government financial year will end on the 30th day of June 2014 and the President believes that by that date, this House will not have approved the estimates of revenue and expenditure of Government for the next financial year, 2014/2015;

AND WHEREAS it is necessary that the President authorises the issue of monies from the Consolidated Fund Account for the purposes of meeting expenditures necessary to carry out the services of Government;

AND WHEREAS clause (5) of Article 154 of the Constitution provides that the authorisation of the issue of funds from the Consolidated Fund Account for purposes of clause (4), has to be approved by a resolution of Parliament; 

I am moving this motion for Parliament to approve the Vote-on-Account allocated for the various votes attached to this resolution. In this motion, Madam Speaker, we are seeking approval of Shs 1, 999,174,251,716 as recurrent expenditure and Shs 2,477,175,415,264 as development expenditure.”

Madam Speaker, you will recall that the Minister for Finance, Planning and Economic Development presented a Budget Speech for the financial year 2015/2016 on 12 June 2014 on behalf of His Excellency the President, as required by Article 154 of the Constitution. 

Madam Speaker, yesterday, 24 June 2014, I presented a motion on a Vote-on-Account to Parliament. However, during the debate on the motion, a number of issues were raised on the Floor, which required further clarification. Before I explain the issues pertaining to Vote-on-Account, I wish to explain the summary of the total revenue and expenditure for the financial year 2014/15.

On the revenue side, the total budget for the financial year 2014/15 amounts to Shs 15,584.64 billion, including appropriation in aid and shall be financed from domestic resources which includes URA tax revenue, non-tax revenue and domestic financing. It will also be financed by external financing, which comprises of project support and budget support and also from the appropriation in aid, projections collected by ministries, departments and agencies, amounting to Shs 510.3 billion. This revenue altogether amounts to Shs 12,338.9 billion.

The projected expenditure arising out of revenue above will be in the category of wage, non-wage, recurrent, development, external financing and appropriation in aid, all totalling to Shs 15,584.64 billion.

Now, regarding Vote-on-Account, the legal basis for it is enshrined in Article 154(4) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, which states that, “If the President is satisfied that the Appropriation Act in respect of any financial year will not or has not come into operation by the beginning of that financial year, the President, may, subject to the provisions of this Article, authorise the issue of monies from the Consolidated Fund Account for purposes of meeting expenditure necessary to carry on the services of Government until the expiry of four months from the beginning of that financial year or the coming into operation of the Appropriation Act, whichever is the earlier.”
Article 154(5)(b) further provides that, “Any sum issued in any financial year from the Consolidated Fund Account under clause 4 of this Article in respect of any service of the government shall be set off against the amount provided in respect of that service in the Appropriation Act for the financial year when that law came into operation.”

Madam Speaker, basing on those provisions of the Constitution, and whereas the practice has been to compute Vote-on-Account as one third of the Budget, there is no legal restriction on exceeding one third, provided the services that are to be delivered within the stated period are within four months. And Madam Speaker, we have read the Constitution, the Budget Act, the Finance and Public Accountability Act and nowhere is it mentioned that we should spend only one third of the Budget as Vote-on-Account. It has just been the practice of this House.

Now, Madam Speaker, in line with the above, we prepared a Vote-on-Account for the financial year 2014/15 amounting to Shs 4,468,349,666,981 and the summary of that is to cover referral hospitals (Shs 24 billion), Central Government (Shs 3.5 trillion), missions abroad (Shs 31.8 billion) and local governments (Shs 787.494 billion). If we are to go by the fact that we only need to spend 33 percent of the total Budget, this would amount to Shs 4,345,608,203,000 but because Government requires additional funding for activities which will take place within the four months of passing of this Vote-on-Account, namely, we shall need money to support the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development for thermal power and compensation of those affected by the oil refinery, which amounts to Shs 34.9 billion; the National Citizenship and Immigration Control for the continuance of the identity card exercise project activities which did start and will assist, among other things, the elections that are imminent – which needs Shs 14 billion; and also to support the East African Single Tourist Visa and Passports, which will need Shs 934 billion. And this is required because our passports are required to be updated by a certain time and if we do not do it in time, they will become invalid.

The other vote where we have to spend money is under the Uganda Bureau of Statistics. Madam Speaker, we are all aware that the national population census activities have been delayed for two years and they are due to take place in the month of August this year. And this is within the time when the Vote-on-Account will be at play and it requires Shs 58.7 billion. And there is some classified expenditure from State House which will require Shs 12.1 billion. All these additional requirements, not covered under the 33 percent, will equal to Shs 122.74 billion.

Madam Speaker, the above Vote-on-Account is based on one third of the Budget for appropriation, which is Shs 13,062,824,610,000 excluding statutory expenditure which is in the region of Shs 2.5 billion. However, due to the need to frontload expenditure for some critical activities, which I have mentioned, which require funding during the Vote-on-Account period, the Vote-on-Account that is being presented to Parliament, as I have already said, exceeds that one-third by Shs 122 billion.

Madam Speaker, I also need to mention that the total statutory expenditure for the Financial Year 2014/15 amounting to 2.54 trillion has already been laid in Parliament as the law provides; Article 155(3) of the Constitution, to be charged on the Consolidated Fund. This does not require appropriation and this is the reason we are basing the Vote-on-Account on the money that is provided for appropriation, which is less than the Shs 2.54 trillion, which is for statutory expenditure. 

I wish to request you to approve a total Vote-on-Account for the Financial Year 2014/15 amounting to Shs 4,468,349,666,981 and also to note that the Vote-on-Account being requested for exceeds one third of the budget by Shs 122,741,464,000 and this is due to front-loading for these critical activities, which I have just enumerated to this House. 

We appreciate that these activities are vital and fall within this period. The census must be carried out; the registration exercise must continue; there is Foot and Mouth Disease, which has broken out in Karamoja Region and also covering Teso and this emergency cannot wait for the Appropriation Act nor can it wait until we have passed the budget. 

Madam Speaker, I beg to move that we approve this Vote-on-Account for the Financial Year 2014/15. I thank you.

5.02
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Hon. Colleagues, I rise to seek your support. Yesterday, we had a presentation that raised many questions. The minister has raised a question, may be, that he should not have raised because we were all agreed on this yesterday. The question is not the law because that is not to be debated; we cannot resolve it by vote. We agreed yesterday, that anyway, whatever the law is, the practice has been that Vote-on-Account is one-third of estimates of the bill intended to be appropriated. 

So, we do not have to debate the law; whichever argument we have is not so critical now. What the minister is saying is that that 4,468 billion, just over that, is actually 30 percent of the amount of money to be appropriated, which is 13 trillion plus. It is 13 trillion because 2.5 trillion is a statutory expenditure; that is how 15 trillion comes up. So, the total figure is 15 trillion something. When you take away the Shs 2,547 billion, then you remain with 13 trillion as the amount to be appropriated. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you, Madam Speaker, and I want to thank the Prime Minister. The clarification I am seeking is; we are dwelling on anything. The statutory expenditure, we know, is a direct charge on the Consolidated Fund and we know it will also be a third for the period we are looking at. We are not questioning you on that. So, I seek clarification on why you are bringing in the statutory expenditure instead of telling us what exactly a third is equal to?

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Well, I am glad that my brother, hon. Nandala-Mafabi, got my point exactly as I intended it; that is brilliant. Shillings 2,500 trillion is a statutory expenditure; so, it was not appropriate to present it as we did yesterday. That is why the minister in his presentation is talking of the Shs 13 trillion as the total amount for appropriation and one-third of that is Shs 4,468 billion. That is what we are seeking your authority as a Vote-on-Account for, which is in compliance with our tradition – one-third of the amount to be appropriated and that is Shs 4,468.

However, the minister says that a small amount of only Shs 122 billion out of Shs 13 trillion is not even 0.1 percent; so, it is small. This amount does not shift the percentage significantly. Statistically, you could say it is even ignorable; 30 percent of 13 trillion is 4 trillion. Therefore, 122 billion is some amount, obviously, but in terms of percentages, and in terms of being compliant with our tradition, it is not a substantive departure. And yet, this is an expenditure that we cannot avoid because we have all agreed in this Parliament and the whole country that we will have a census. We have agreed on all the projects, which are going on, which require expenditure in this period. 

Therefore, I would like to urge my colleagues to support this. In the past, Vote-on-Account is really a matter of routine. If it is one-third, we never spent too much time on it. And I would like this time to be the same because we will come back anyway and begin to debate the estimates in full when we are handling the appropriation. 

So, I stood to seek your support so that we do not have full debate as we have during appropriation because this is something that is necessary for Government services to continue after the end of this financial year which, as you know, is ending in a few days. Thank you. (Mr Ekanya rose_)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you, Prime Minister. Before the Shadow Minister comes in, I just want to say that I am disappointed that the minister who is seeking our support is trying to create a confrontation between Parliament and the Executive on the interpretation of Article 154. Four months out of 12 months is one-third of 12 months. (Applause) There is no debate about that. 

Therefore, the money required for 12 months is one-third. So, you cannot say there is no legal basis. You want our help; please, do not cause a fight over our powers. We want to support you. You say, “I acknowledge that we normally require one-third but now, I need a bit more” and explain the reasons and we shall support you, if you need more. But to say that there is no legal basis, I will not accept.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Madam Speaker, I stood deliberately to make the point I made that I do not think we should take that line of questioning that one. I said anyway, this is the practice; it is the tradition and we would like to comply. That was the substantive presentation I made. And asking for your support and the support of this additional Shs 122 billion without – because, maybe, I did not state it, but the Executive –

THE SPEAKER: Prime Minister, it was not you; it was the minister. I am talking about the minister. In his presentation, he was saying there is no legal basis yet we have a legal basis in Article 154.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Okay, I just want to say that the Executive is only fully aware that Parliament has been very supportive in the efforts we have been doing. It has been along even urging action on the part of Government in the actions that we are going to take and we do fully appreciate that support. That is why we are asking you today not to depart from where you have been in the past but to go along with us to achieve your own demands. Thank you.

MR EKANYA: Madam Speaker – 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, I have a procedural issue –(Interruption)

MR EKANYA: I am the acting Leader of Opposition. So, kindly wait.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, a few minutes I had to go out; the minister was reading figures. He read 13.062 trillion; but my figures say Shs 13.036. So, I want to know whether there is any other sheet apart from this one, because now I have got two of them, they are reading the same figures; so, which figure of the total budget, which is not statutory, is this, because the figures I have are different from what you read. I have Shs 13,036,824,610 but the minister read 13,062 something.

THE SPEAKER: But honourable former Leader of the Opposition, you are now usurping the role of the acting Leader of Opposition. (Laughter) 

MR EKANYA: Thank you, very much, my brother hon. Nandala-Mafabi. Since yesterday, we have been working together with him. So, I appreciate what he has raised. But also thank you very much, Madam Speaker, and the Rt Hon. Prime Minister.

Hon. Minister of Finance, we want to support you and like the Prime Minister has said, we always support you. The Constitution is categorical. First of all, we do not have copies of the motion you read. Here is my iPad – you only read the motion but the information in that motion is not as detailed as it is posted onto our iPads. There is only a brief summary.

Yet, yesterday, all this we have now, was withdrawn. We do not have anything on statutory bodies. We do not have any figures on districts because everything was withdrawn. So, what are you presenting to us? You are only presenting to us your motion and what has been posted onto our iPads today because that is what we have so far.

Madam Speaker, if you look at what has been posted onto our iPads, you will realise that it is only 4,068,349,669. It is not in the details in which this matter was withdrawn. So, you are destroying yourself and therefore do not blame us. 

Secondly, -(Interjections)- this was withdrawn. The Constitution is categorical - and that is why the media sometimes writes negative articles about Parliament. The Constitution says that if the President is satisfied that the Appropriation Act in respect to any financial year will not or has not come into force – if the “President is satisfied”. The President would have linked up with the Speaker to know whether the Parliament would be working. Are you getting me? If the President is satisfied - But we are here working and not in our constituencies to bury. So, why are you claiming that we will not because you are representing the President? And the Constitution goes in detail, you need money to do work for a period of four months – even if it is statutory, Rt Hon. Prime Minister, statutory is salary - are you going to pay salaries for all the 12 months, for example? No. So, you need to conform to the Constitution; money, you need for four months.

Thirdly, you know that we operate a cash budget. URA is supposed to collect Shs 9.5 trillion. So, even we gave you all the Shs 10 trillion, URA every month collects about Shs 1.5 trillion. Allow us to perform our work to analyse policies and to examine programmes of Government, work plan and procurement plans. Unless you are passing a vote of no confidence on Parliament that we are not competent to examine policy statements and activities of Government.

The Constitution says that if the President is not satisfied – so, you need money for a period of only four months. And the one you quoted – I want to refer you to Article 154, on withdrawing money from the Consolidated Fund. This is the most important Article and it says thus: “(1) No monies shall be withdrawn from the Consolidated Fund except – (a) to meet expenditure charged on the fund by this Constitution or by an Act of Parliament.”

By an Act of Parliament is through appropriation and by this Constitution, is what is called the direct charge, which covers salaries – look at Article 155 (3). It says that, “The estimates prepared under clause (2) of this Article shall be laid before Parliament by the President under clause (1) of this Article without revision….” This means we cannot increase or bring it down but we have to pass it. It is not just for noting. Whatever is laid here must be passed without revision but with any recommendations that Government may have. This is what is categorically clear.

Madam Speaker, the Minister of Finance presented a Budget of Shs 15 trillion. If you want one-third of that Shs 15 trillion, you cannot then come with annual draft estimates of only Shs 13 trillion. It contradicts this because the draft estimates for 2014/15 as per the budget is Shs 15 trillion. But what you have posted onto our iPads is Shs 13 trillion. Are we going to go with this illegality? Yes, Rt Hon. Prime Minister, we have to acknowledge that our Budget is Shs 15 trillion but your minister is saying annual draft estimate is Shs 13 trillion, and they are asking us for 30 percent. What you need to do, hon. Minister of Finance, acknowledge the Shs 15 trillion, ask for money you need for four months, if you need any excess even Shs 1 trillion, justify using census and diseases. We will give it to you, present it properly and neat.

It is this Parliament that has been pushing for census; it is this Parliament that has been pushing for identity card, we understand it. Mr Aston Kajara is a very smart man but these are the technical people misleading him. But stand on your feet do not accept to be embarrassed on the Floor, that the draft estimate is Shs 13 trillion when what you read and presented is Shs 15 trillion.

I beg to move a motion that this matter be withdrawn and the minister brings a budget of Shs 15 trillion. 

MR KAKOOZA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. When I look at this document which the minister has presented, which has a total figure of 4,468,349, to my understanding the Vote- on-Account if it is a third, I do not see why you present an additional column of the additional requirement because the reason is simple, the money you want totals up to 4.468 that means that the additional requirement you want is embedded in each and every sector that you want to give a vote-on-account. So what does that mean? It means that a person who prepared for you this did not internalize - the question is simple; you want 4.468, each sector which you want to give money for four months must be embedded here and the activities must be provided for which is a quarter of the money you want to collect.

There is no need for any additional requirement. Suppose we scrutinise and find out that it is embedded within the figure. You do not need to put it here. You say, “I want a vote-on-account for all the activities in the four months”.

THE SPEAKER: I think the minister has explained that beyond what he needs for the four months he has another three activities: the census which we have been demanding for, which must done by August, and this is one month away; the identity cards; and Foot and Mouth Disease - he has explained!

MR KAKOOZA: Madam Speaker, yes, he has explained but which is going to take this money and these activities which are provided for in each sector could have been on the schedule. On this extra sheet, there is not schedule for the activities to be done. You do not have it that is why there is a question. If you want the total sum of 4.6 trillion, the schedule could have been added on this and it is added onto it.

MR KAJARA: Madam Speaker, I did explain that we have supplied this schedule, summary of the vote-on-account where we state that the annual draft estimates for the purpose of the vote-on-account is Shs 13.036 and not 62 as my colleague former Leader of the Opposition said.

Secondly, I have also said that in this very schedule 33 percent of 13.06 is Shs 4.345 trillion, which is less the amount required to satisfy these extra activities by Shs 122.7 billion. When you add 4.345 to 122 billion that is when it comes to a total sum of 4.468 which is the Vote-on-Account, which we are requesting to be provided mainly because of these other activities, which we shall need to perform within the four months before the Appropriation Act.

THE SPEAKER: I put the question that this House resolves itself into a Committee of Supply for Consideration and Approval of Vote-on-Account for Financial Year 2014/15. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY

5.30

Vote-on-Account 2014/2015 Recurrent Expenditure:

Votes 001 – 162, Central Government 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 1,285,692,129,000 be provided for Central Government vote as Vote-on-Account for recurrent expenditure for financial year 2014/2015.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Votes 163 to 173, Referral Hospitals

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that a total sum of Shs 19,613,932,000 be provided for Referral Hospitals as Vote-on-Account for recurrent expenditure for financial year 2014/2015.
(Question put and agreed to.)

Votes 201 to 236, Missions Abroad

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 26,490,672,000 be provided for Missions Abroad as Vote-on-Account for recurrent expenditure for financial 2014/2015.
(Question put and agreed to.)

Votes 501 to 176, Local Governments

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 659,377,519,000 be provided for Local Governments as Vote-on-Account for recurrent expenditure for financial year 2014/2015.
(Question put and agreed to.)

Development Expenditure 

Votes 001 to 162, Central Government

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 2,339,265,000 be provided for Central Government Vote-on-Account for development expenditure for financial 2014/2015.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Votes 163 to 176, Referral Hospitals

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 4,483,393,000 be provided for Referral Hospitals Vote-on-Account for development expenditure for financial year 2014/2015.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Votes 201-236, Missions Abroad

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I now put the question that the total sum of Shs 5,310,067,000 be provided for Missions Abroad, Vote-on-Account for development expenditure for financial year 2014/2015. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Votes 501-778, Local Governments

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I now put the question that the total sum of Shs 128,116,691,000 be provided for the Local Governments as Vote-on-Account for development expenditure for financial year 2014/2015. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Total Vote-on-Account for the Financial Year 2014/2015

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, I now put the question that the grand total of Shs 4,468,349,667,000 be provided.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

5.31
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PRIVATISATION) (Mr Aston Kajara): Madam Chairperson, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of Supply reports thereto.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, I put the question to the motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed and the Speaker presiding)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY

5.31
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PRIVATISATION) (Mr Aston Kajara): Madam Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of Supply has considered the Vote-on-Account for the Financial Year 2014/2015 and passed it.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY

5.32
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PRIVATISATION) (Mr Aston Kajara): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the report of the Committee of Supply be adopted.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I put the question to the motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, as I indicated earlier, there is a church service by the Anglican Chaplaincy to which you are all invited. However, as you looked at our Order Paper, there is not much work. So, I would want to adjourn the plenary for a few days; one, to permit the committees to do their action plans and for those who have Bills to complete them so that when we start the Budget, we shall not be doing any Bills.

On Friday 4th July, the Business Committee will meet and I expect a report from all of you about how far you have gone so that we can make a lay out of the programme for the rest of the sittings. 

Thank you very much. House adjourned.

(The House rose at 5.33 p.m. and adjourned sine die.)
