Thursday, 13 June 2013

Parliament met at 2.45 p.m. at the Serena Conference Centre, Kampala.

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

National Anthem

East African Community Anthem

PRAYERS

PROCLAMATION 

THE SPEAKER: WHEREAS under Article 95(2) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, a Session of Parliament shall be held at such place within Uganda and shall commence at such time as the Speaker may, by proclamation, appoint;
 
AND WHEREAS the President of the Republic of Uganda is required, under Article 155 (1) of the Constitution, to prepare and lay before Parliament in each financial year, but in any case not later than the 15th day before the commencement of the financial year, estimates of revenue and expenditure of Government for the next financial year;

COGNISANT of the fact that the Financial Year 2012/2013 will end on the 30th day of June 2013;

AWARE that it is expedient that the President lays before Parliament the estimates of revenue and expenditure of Government for the Financial Year 2013/2014 at the Kampala Serena Conference Centre; 
 
NOW, THEREFORE, in exercise of the powers conferred upon the Speaker by Clause 2 of Article 95 of the Constitution, I hereby proclaim that Parliament shall sit at the Kampala Serena Conference Centre on the 13th  day of June 2012 at 1400 hours to receive the estimates of revenue and expenditure of Government for the  Financial Year 2013/2014;

AND FURTHER, in exercise of the powers conferred upon the Speaker by the Constitution, the Parliament (Powers and Privileges) Act, Cap 258, and the Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of Uganda, it is hereby proclaimed and declared that the said Kampala Serena Conference Centre, including its forecourt, the yard and the gardens, be the precincts of Parliament for the aforementioned purposes. 

Given under my hand, at Parliament House, Kampala, this 4th day of June 2013.

Ms Rebecca Kadaga, Speaker of Parliament.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Your Excellency the President of Uganda, Mr Yoweri Kaguta Museveni; Mrs Museveni, Member of Parliament; Your Excellency the Vice-President, Mr Edward Kiwanuka Ssekandi; My Lord, the Chief Justice; the Rt Hon. Al-Hajji Moses Kigongo; the Rt Hon. Prime Minister and Leader of Government Business and the Deputy Prime Ministers; Your Highnesses, the traditional leaders; the Leader of the Opposition in Parliament; honourable ministers and ministers of state; the Judges of the Courts of Judicature; honourable Members of Parliament; the Dean and members of the diplomatic corps; the Chief of Defence Forces; the Inspector-General of Police; the Commissioner-General of Prisons; the Governor, Bank of Uganda; leaders of political parties; religious leaders; the business community; distinguished invited guests; ladies and gentlemen.

Your Excellency, last Thursday we sat here for the opening of the Third Session of the Ninth Parliament and delivery to Parliament of an address on the state of the nation. Today is yet another important occasion in the parliamentary calendar in fulfilment of the Constitution. I wish to welcome Your Excellency and all the other dignitaries to this occasion. 

Today, we expect the President to cause to be presented to Parliament the estimates of revenue and expenditure for the Financial Year 2013/2014 as provided for by the Constitution. You may recall that during the State of the Nation Address, His Excellency the President outlined the achievements so far registered in the preceding year, the plans and programmes Government intends to undertake during this financial year, as well as the legislative business Parliament is expected to receive from the Executive. The President’s intentions pronounced last week are translated into action by provisions of the Budget, which is to be outlined shortly. Later, Parliament’s task will be to evaluate whether the pronouncements made in the State of the Nation Address match with the financial provisions in the Budget and advise accordingly.  

Your Excellency, we note with deep concern that a distinguished son of Africa, the former President of the Republic of South Africa, Mr Nelson Mandela, is indisposed in hospital. We are aware that he is getting the best medical attention and treatment, but on behalf of the Parliament of Uganda and on my own behalf, I wish to take this opportunity to convey our message of support to President Jacob Zuma, the Government and the people of South Africa, and President Mandela’s family and to let them know that we are still with them. We pray to the Almighty God to give him courage to carry on and wish him a speedy recovery.

Your Excellency, I believe honourable members and the nation are anxiously waiting to hear what you, through the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, have to present. However, before I invite the minister, honourable members, I want to remind you that when you were sworn in, you took an oath to preserve, protect and defend the Constitution. One of the provisions that I would like you to protect and preserve is the one that says that the President of Uganda is the fountain of honour and we expect you to treat him with honour. 

I am aware that there are Members who may have come with newspapers, which they want to raise during the proceedings. I would like to say, please do not raise up anything because if you do, I will name you and when I name you, you know what happens. I now invite the Minister of Finance to present her motion.

MOTION THAT PARLIAMENT DO RESOLVE ITSELF INTO A COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY FOR CONSIDERATION AND APPROVAL OF:
I) THE REVISED REVENUE AND EXPENDITURE ESTIMATES FOR THE FISCAL YEAR 2012/13
II) THE BUDGETARY PROPOSALS FOR THE ESTIMATES OF REVENUE AND EXPENDITURE FOR THE FISCAL YEAR 2013/2014
	
3.00
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mrs Maria Kiwanuka): Your Excellency, the President; Your Excellency, the Vice-President; the Rt Hon. Speaker of Parliament; His Lordship, the Chief Justice; the Rt Hon. Deputy Speaker of Parliament; the Rt Hon. Prime Minister; the Rt Hon. Leader of the Opposition; honourable ministers; honourable Members of Parliament; distinguished guests; ladies and gentlemen.

Madam Speaker, in fulfilment of Article 155(1) of the Constitution and in exercise of the powers delegated to me by His Excellency the President, I beg to move that Parliament resolves itself into a Committee of Supply to consider: 

i) 	The revised revenue and expenditure estimates for the Financial Year 2012/2013; and
ii) 	Proposals for the estimates of revenue and expenditure for the Financial Year 2013/2014. 

Madam Speaker, in April this year, Uganda’s long-term collective development aspirations as embodied in the Vision 2040 was launched by His Excellency the President. Vision 2040 provides a roadmap to transform Uganda from a low income to a modern middle income country within 30 years. It requires a fundamental change on the way of doing things by Government and the private sector, to unlock the binding constraints to Uganda’s progress. 

There are no quick answers to the challenges that face us today. The economic and social challenges that we are working to address have happened over several years and will take time to resolve. They require patience, co-ordination and good humour. The FY 2013/2014 Budget seeks to continue towards socio-economic transformation one step at a time. 

Madam Speaker, recently a young child asked me, “What is transformation?” I think I can best answer that in the words of one of an official from the African Development Bank: “Picture a country where 90 per cent of workers have jobs, literacy rates have risen to 95 per cent, 95 per cent of roads have been paved, the population have access to electricity, people are free to move freely in the continent without visas, using one-stop border posts and spending 10 minutes at the border rather than hours or days.” This is transformation, and that is what we are working towards.

Madam Speaker, consistent with our National Development Plan, the ruling Movement Party manifesto, and in pursuit of the Vision 2040, the theme for next financial year’s Budget is, “The journey continues: towards socio-economic transformation for Uganda.” The Financial Year 2013/2014, like the one last year, will continue to focus on translating Government’s strategic priorities into practice over the next 12 months. Scarce resources will be allocated to reflect key Government strategic priorities within existing resource constraints. This is because the definition of “budget” itself means using scarce resources to see how best to advance many priorities.  

Financial Year 2012/2013 

The interventions that I pronounced last year sought to restore macro-economic stability, accelerate infrastructure development, increase agricultural production and productivity, improve the business climate, and achieve better service delivery, particularly in education and health. A detailed report of sector performance during the last year is provided in the Background to the Budget of Financial Year 2013/2014. However, I wish to highlight some progress achieved in key areas.
 
The economy rebounded significantly, growing at 5.1 per cent last year. Inflation subsided and was recorded at 3.6 per cent as at the end of May 2013, a marked reduction from the double digits at the start of the financial year. The volatility of the Uganda exchange rate subsided and the dollar currently averages around Shs 2,575. In addition, Uganda regained a quick credit rating of B+ stable as per Standard and Poor’s, which keeps us on a path with other countries, like Kenya and Ghana. 

Government registered significant progress in the implementation of the budget for the financial year now ending. In the works and transport sector, 845 kilometres of national roads were fully or substantially completed, or have their construction on schedule.  Construction of a further 88 kilometres of national roads will commence shortly, having had their contracts signed. In addition, the designs for 723 kilometres of several national roads have been completed and procurement for contractors will commence. Rehabilitation of the Marine Vessel Kaawa was completed during the year and she now operates between Port Bell and Mwanza in Tanzania.

In the energy sector, the 250 megawatt Bujagali Hydropower Project was fully commissioned. In addition, a number of small renewable hydropower projects have been commissioned and are now delivering a total of 68.5 megawatts to the national grid. This is a total of total of over 300 megawatts added to the grid in this financial year just ending. A total of 2,322 kilometres of transmission lines have been laid under several rural electrification schemes to deliver electricity throughout the country. 

During the year, over 35,000 farmers directly benefited from provision of improved maize seed in addition to accessing other inputs such as fertilisers under the commodity based approach. Furthermore, 13,486 kilos of foundation seed for Arabica coffee, beans, maize and rice were distributed to seed companies and farmers’ groups. To enhance irrigation for water for production and to reduce agricultural reliance on rain water, the rehabilitation of all the three irrigation schemes of Mubuku, Doho and Agoro is substantially complete. 

In order to improve accessibility to tourist sites, road access to several tourist areas is being rehabilitated. I will say more about that under the roads sector. In order to enhance hospitality standards, 20 East African Community–accredited hotel assessors have been trained, and the inspection of hotel accommodation was completed to enable grading and classification to be undertaken next financial year. The Hotel Training Institute at Jinja also had 390 students graduate in May this year. 

Madam Speaker, to improve human development, an additional 6,172 health workers were recruited to work at health centres and the remuneration of medical officers at health centres IV was enhanced. Government also increased salaries for primary school teachers by 15 per cent and science teachers in post primary education and training institutions received an increase in wages as well. I will detail more of these achievements when I return to the sector priorities for this coming year. 

Financial Year 2012/2013 Economic Performance and Outlook 

Economic Performance

Over the last year, Uganda’s economy has proved resilient and demonstrated strong signs of growth. At a global level, Uganda recently regained her credit rating of B+ with a stable outlook according to Standard and Poor’s, an international rating agency. Uganda’s higher credit rating is important to us because it lowers our cost of borrowing on international markets. This achievement is remarkable because it happened at a time when major economies like the US and the UK are suffering downgrades in their credit rating. 

I will also mention here that Uganda is one of the very few African countries that went to HIPC in the 1990s where they had debt forgiveness and have never been back to HIPC. Most of our African sister countries have had to go back to HIPC. 

GDP Growth

Economic growth has rebounded strongly during the year. The economy expanded by about 5.1 per cent. This is significantly higher than the 3.4 per cent recorded in the previous year. The construction sector grew by 8.2 per cent and electricity supply by 10 per cent. The manufacturing sector recovered strongly, growing by 4.2 per cent, compared to a decline of 0.3 per cent the previous year. During last year, the agricultural sector output grew by 1.4 per cent improving from a modest 0.8 per cent the previous year. The recovery in agricultural production was driven by a bumper crop harvest and favourable prices, which signals the potential value of food for household security and incomes for Ugandans. 

Inflation and Interest Rate Developments 

Madam Speaker, inflation has declined substantially. It was recorded at 3.6 per cent in May 2013 compared to 18 per cent at the beginning of the financial year. The drop in inflation is a result of increased production in addition to the improvement in the global economic prospects. To this end, Government will accelerate supply-side measures to remove production bottlenecks, and we congratulate all the Ugandan workers on this remarkable feat.  

Overall, interbank interest rates declined to 8.6 per cent in March 2013 from 26.2 per cent in January 2012. This was a result of a reduction in the Bank of Uganda’s benchmark reference rate, the CBR, which has translated into lower commercial bank borrowing rates during the financial year, albeit a bit slowly. Commercial banks’ lending rates have also reduced from nearly 30 per cent in August 2011 to an average of about 24 per cent by the end of March 2013. These rates are still high because of the non-performing loans, which have increased from 3.4 per cent to 4.7 per cent in March 2013. 

External Sector

The stock of our foreign exchange reserves amount to US$ 3.3 billion. This is the equivalent of four and half months of future import demand of goods and services. This reflects a significant improvement in our reserve position of about US$ 2.6 billion one year ago which was equivalent to about four months of imports. The balance of payments recorded a surplus of US$ 417 million on account of strong performance of foreign direct investment and other investment inflows, which increased to US$ 1.76 billion and US$ 723.4 million respectively. Also assisting the positive picture were the remittances from Ugandans working abroad in the diaspora, which amounted to US$ 767 million. 

Private Sector Credit

Private sector credit expanded by about 15 per cent during the year compared to 11 per cent in the previous year. Domestic currency lending stagnated as a result of high lending rates and other factors, including the fact that the private sector borrowers were working their way through their debt burden. The temporary closure of the land registry in preparation for its computerisation also played a part. With the resolution of these issues, domestic currency lending is now showing signs of recovery. 

Financial Sector Development 

Access to financial services is key to encouraging savings and providing credit for investment purposes. The commercial banks now number 22 with combined outlets of 360 branches across the country. In addition, four Microfinance Deposit-taking Institutions (MDIs) have been registered with the Bank of Uganda and two MDIs have upgraded to commercial bank status. In addition, DFCU Bank has got a new partner, Rabobank, which has got a very good reputation in agricultural financing in Rwanda next door. Their investment in DFCU Bank, of over 25 per cent, is testimony of the confidence the international finance community has in Uganda’s financial sector and of the need to provide affordable credit for agricultural and other related financing.

In order to increase access to micro finance, Government has implemented the Rural Financial Services Programme since 2008. As a result, membership to financial cooperatives has grown from 650,000 in 2008 to about 1,150,000 as at the end of December 2012. There has also been increased implementation of the Village Savings and Loan Associations (VSLA) and Savings and Credit Co-operatives (SACCOs) programmes by both Non-Governmental Organizations (NGOs) and Government, and an increase in use of mobile money services. Centenary Bank is also leading the way in working together with micro-finance institutions to increase coverage across the country.

The financial sector will be deepened by proposing amendments to the Financial Institutions Act to allow new innovations in financing. These innovations include agent banking, banking according to Islamic principles, – where there is no interest charged but rather equities position is taken – microfinance, micro insurance, and mobile money.  I am also happy to report that Uganda Reinsurance Company has started operations this year, which means that reinsurance policies can now be taken up in Uganda Shillings and do not need to done in foreign currency.

The monitoring and supervision of micro-finance institutions will be enhanced to improve management and governance, and ultimately build trust and confidence. Government will also formulate a microfinance regulatory and supervisory framework to regulate and provide guidelines on the provision and accessing of financial services by all microfinance institutions. This is because money is money, no matter the size of the institution and limit.

Investment 

Driven largely by the private sector, the investment rate rose to 25.2 per cent of GDP compared to 24.5 per cent in the previous year. While this trend is encouraging, findings estimate that survival rates of investments in Uganda are at about 46 per cent. This is on account of projects being negatively affected by poor preparation and costing, relatively high cost of borrowing, limited access to affordable credit, and energy and transport infrastructure bottlenecks. A survey by Uganda Bureau of Statistics, and a similar survey carried out by the International Finance Corporation across Africa, asked investors, both local and international, what where the 10 things most needed to encourage them to bring investment money or to start an investment project in any country. The investors’ four highest priorities were all-weather roads, reliable power, piped water and a skilled human resource. This is what Government is working towards and this is what this Budget is going to try to assist.

During the year, Government tabled the Public–Private Partnerships (PPP) Bill before Parliament. The proposed law aims to efficiently mobilise private sector investment in the development of key infrastructure projects that boost competitiveness. Preparatory work for some PPP projects have started, including the relocation of Kigo Prison and the Uganda Police housing project.
 
Economic Outlook, FY 2013/2014

Madam Speaker, ultimately, the maintenance of macroeconomic stability is vital for Uganda’s long-term economic growth and structural transformation. The macroeconomic objectives underlying the budget strategy next year and over the medium term are therefore the following:
 
1. 	The achievement of real economic growth of at least seven per cent per annum in the medium term; 
2. 	Keep annual consumer price inflation to within a single digit; 
3. 	The maintenance of a prudent level of foreign exchange reserves of at least five months import cover, to mitigate external shocks; and 
4. 	The maintenance of a competitive real exchange rate to support the growth of exports but taking care not to destabilise flow of investments. 

Madam Speaker, the economy is expected to accelerate its recovery to an estimated growth rate of 6.0 per cent per annum next financial year. This continued recovery in growth is premised on maintaining macroeconomic stability and improving resource mobilisation and utilisation. In addition, investment in priority sectors, including the commencement of major infrastructure projects, will spur economic growth. 

Inflation will average about six per cent per annum next financial year and about five per cent over the medium term. The exchange rate, which is a key determinant of economic competitiveness and has a major effect on the resource envelope, is expected to remain stable owing to the improvement in the trade balance. 

Financing Infrastructure 

Increased investment in infrastructure will require non-traditional approaches to supplement our domestic revenues and external support, especially in view of the on-going challenges in the Eurozone, USA, Japan and other development partners. In addition to traditional grants and concessional loans, other non-traditional financing sources such as non-concessional borrowing or suppliers’ credit and using the external and domestic debt markets will be judiciously used to finance key infrastructure investments. 

Madam Speaker, Government will increase external borrowing for those essential investments in infrastructure, particularly roads, energy and water for production. Preference will be given to debt on concessional terms in order to maintain our debt sustainability. I wish to reiterate that non-concessional borrowing for consumption expenditures or for low value projects is not productive. It does not generate the necessary returns required to enhance growth and development. Any future borrowing, therefore, from both external and domestic sources will only be secured for financing the productive sector, specifically to address our infrastructure needs. This is where we are positive that the net costs to the country are outweighed by the net benefits by the projects.

As far as the business climate is concerned, in order to simplify business licensing, I am pleased to announce that an e-licensing registry was launched last week at the Uganda Registration Services Bureau, which will host and co-ordinate the transition of licensing processes to an online service. The total saving anticipated from the implementation of this portal is Shs 32 billion. This means that people no longer have to travel to Kampala to register their businesses; they can go to the local portal across the country and register online. 

Kampala City Council Authority (KCCA) implemented a 25 per cent reduction in trade licence fees and further streamlined the time taken to issue a trade licence through decentralisation of the issuing authority. This has reduced the time taken from 60 days to four working days. These reforms translate into annual cost savings of Shs 23.4 billion. Government has embarked on simplifying and rectifying the licensing process so that intended entrepreneurs and business people can quickly register and then get on with the job of doing their work.

In order to partly address the challenge of unemployment, Government implemented the Youth Venture Capital Fund to enable youth start up enterprises, and has now got the Graduate Venture Capital Fund ready for investment. Over 5,200 small businesses have been supported through the Youth Venture Capital Fund and Shs 21 billion had been disbursed to eligible youth by the end of May 2013. A detailed report on this Youth Venture Capital Fund is in Parliament, Madam Speaker.

Financial Year 2013/2014 Budget Strategy 

In the next year, Government will accelerate implementation of interventions aimed at improving competitiveness and reducing the cost of doing business. Key aspects will be accelerated investment in infrastructure. 

Infrastructure development will address gaps to reduce the cost of doing business, promote private sector growth and create jobs. Accelerating this development will enable connectivity between centres of production and processing on one hand and national and regional markets on the other hand. The lowering of transport costs and the quicker transport times will help increase Uganda’s export earnings. Increased electricity generation, transmission and distribution infrastructure will also increase productivity by enabling mains electric power to agro-processing and light manufacturing projects upcountry.

In the business environment, Government will continue improving the business climate for better private sector competitiveness. Government has simplified the business registration and licensing process and is on the way to enabling the online registration of businesses. In order to increase the security of land ownership rights and enhance the role of land markets countrywide, a further 21 zonal land offices, especially in Northern Uganda, will be rolled out. 

Computerisation of the land registry was completed during the year. The digitisation of land titles has improved security, retrieval and time for carrying out transactions requiring land titles. Six zonal land offices have been operationalised to improve access and reduce costs of processing land titles across the country. 

Government also commenced implementation of business licence reforms, following a review of licensing laws and regulations in various sectors. The total estimated saving from the reforms being carried out and to be carried out this financial year is about Shs 54 billion, representing a 7.5 per cent reduction from the total cost of Shs 725.73 billion from the previous fiscal years. 

In addition, several commercial laws enacted by Parliament had their regulations operationalised. Other key enabling legislation such as the PPP Bill, the Bio-Technology and Bio-Safety Bill, the Free Zones Bill, Anti-Counterfeits Bill, Insurance (Amendment) Bill, Anti–Money Laundering Bill and the Investment Code (Amendment) Bill are before Parliament. Madam Speaker, I appeal that these laws be enacted expeditiously to further enhance competitiveness. 

Creating work opportunities for young people remains one of our most pressing development challenges. In the words of former British Prime Minister, Margaret Thatcher, “Young people ought not to be idle because it is very bad for them and for the country. There are few worse things that society can do to its young than to leave them in limbo…” While regulation of the labour market through legislation for a minimum wage seeks to protect workers’ rights, this should not detract from the importance of creating employment for the vast majority of the unemployed. The first step to ensuring strong protection of workers’ rights is the creation of as many job opportunities as possible, while ensuring security and safety at work. The rest will ultimately follow. 

Within the context of Uganda, youth unemployment is widespread due to a number of different causes: 

1. 	The demographic “Youth Bulge” due to our population growth rate; 

2. 	A mismatch between the mostly academic-focused curriculum being taught under UPE and USE on one hand and the more technically based skills demand from the work place.

3. 	A prevailing mind-set that it is Government’s job to provide jobs as well as free basic education and healthcare.

4. 	Another mind-set has youth preferring to line up for white-collar jobs and ignore the potential that is possible in agriculture, agro-processing and other technical jobs.   

All these factors are happening against a global economic crisis, which has impacted on foreign investment and the capacity of the domestic private sector to quickly expand job opportunities. Fortunately, Uganda has a comparative advantage for agriculture production, which is relatively labour-intensive and includes opportunities for all workers, urban and rural, educated and not so educated. 

Our overseas Uganda Diaspora is also another solution on how to fight unemployment. The Diaspora send home foreign exchange and are often highly skilled. They can be engaged not only to provide financial inflows, but in efforts to collect the best international lessons in employment generation such as upgrading skills levels, exchange of knowledge and technical employment initiatives, especially higher knowledge industrial start-ups. 

The employment problem, as mentioned earlier, is complex and cannot be solved by Government alone. Therefore, Government, including the ministries responsible for economic development, for labour, foreign affairs, trade and industry will collaborate with the private sector, the Uganda overseas Diaspora and international development partners. This collaboration will develop a well-designed employment market programme to address the various identified causes and formulate a multi-solution package including basic education shifts, relevant technical education and quality assurance measures, opportunities and modalities to include skills, knowledge and experience provided by the Ugandan Diaspora.
 
Madam Speaker, the Budget for Financial Year 2013/2014 will continue to prioritise the following: 
1. 	Productive infrastructure; 
2. 	Agriculture production and productivity; 
3. 	Human resources development especially in technical skills.

All this so as to provide the macro objectives of increasing employment opportunities, increasing incomes, especially in rural areas, and enhancing the export value of our exports through value addition.  

The strategy will entail the following: 
1. 	Creation of job opportunities in agriculture and industry; 
2. 	Provision of rural electrification to agro-industrial centres around the country;
3. 	Empowering agricultural productivity through improved field and extension workers; 
4. 	Ensuring food security and enhanced household incomes by creating market surplus for agro-processing and exports; 
5. 	Facilitating sustainable growth of the services sector; and
6. 	Increasing our competitiveness at a national and regional level.

Financial Year 2013/2014 Revenue and Expenditure Framework 

Madam Speaker, before I elaborate the sector priorities for the next year, I would like to present the revenue and expenditure framework for the FY 2013/2014 Budget. The framework has been developed in line with the recent trends in the domestic, regional and international economy. In particular, the framework has been impacted by a sluggish recovery of the global economy, the performance of domestic revenues and expected level of external support from development partners.

Next financial year, total resource inflows in FY 2013/2014 are projected to amount to Shs 13,169 billion. Domestic sources will contribute Shs 10,509 billion, representing 81.1 per cent of the total budget resource for the year. The Uganda Revenue Authority will collect taxes amounting to Shs 8,486 billion and Non-Tax Revenues of Shs 275 billion will be collected. The Budget will also be financed by issuing Government securities worth Shs 1,040 billion on domestic markets and net Government drawdown from our savings of Shs 708 billion, all towards accelerating the infrastructure development and rehabilitation programme.

Total external financing of the Budget will amount to Shs 2,660 billion, equivalent to 20 per cent of the total. Budget support comprises of Shs 213 billion while project aid amounts to Shs 2,447 billion, an increase of Shs 234 billion over the financial year now ending. This shows the agreement we have reached with the development partners, to ask them to direct their systems from budget support to project support where we feel it has the most leverage factor; and for that, we thank them.

The resources available to finance discretionary Government expenditure next year therefore amounts to Shs 9,498 billion, excluding project aid and statutory external and domestic debt repayments, which amount to Shs 2,695 billion. The total resources available for discretionary Government expenditure next financial year represent an additional Shs 1,427 billion above the level in the year now ending.

Financial Year 2013/2014 Sector Performance and Priorities

Madam Speaker, the sector performance over this year serves as a basis for priorities for next year. There has been significant progress with implementation of the priority interventions that I announced in last year’s budget statement. This progress has contributed to economic recovery significantly, following the challenges of increasing prices and volatile exchange rates that Uganda and the East African region has faced. I now wish to elaborate the sector priorities for next year.

The FY 2013/2014 Budget will continue to prioritise the creation of an enabling environment for growth, development and socio-economic transformation. Sector priorities to achieving these goals are as follows: 

1. 	Aggressively continue to invest in infrastructure development, particularly roads and energy. 

2. 	Support increased agricultural production and enhancing productivity by the Ministry of Agriculture concentrating on seed improvement, seed certification, extension work, disease control and irrigation. 

3. 	Enhance scientific innovation for industrialisation and private sector competitiveness. In this respect, we are putting the scientists of Uganda together with the private sector to see how they can best combine their initiatives and the financing of the private sector.

4. 	We also aim to improve the quality and access in social services provision in health, water and education by introducing performance measurements for the people working in those areas. 

5. We will enhance transparency and accountability to improve value for money and fight corruption vigorously in public service delivery.

Infrastructure Development

Madam Speaker, Government will continue to build Uganda’s stock of infrastructure to serve as the springboard for economic growth and development. Interventions in this area will include the improvement of transport, provision of electricity, the development of the oil and gas sector and enhance information and communication technology.

Transport Infrastructure

Madam Speaker, in accordance with Government’s priority accorded to transport infrastructure, I have allocated Shs 2,395 billion to the roads and works sector next financial year, an increase from Shs 1,650.75 billion this year. The additional allocation to the roads and works budget totals to Shs 744.7 billion over the last year’s provision. 

During the forthcoming financial year, we have prioritised clearing of outstanding contractual obligations for completed roads, completion of ongoing projects and commencing construction of new ones. In this respect, this year, with all our challenges, we have ring-fenced counterpart financing to pay road contractors’ certificates. This has helped us on road construction, like you can see whenever you move out of Kampala.

Government will also accelerate efforts to rehabilitate the country’s railway network and improve the quality of water transport on the major water bodies including Lake Victoria. This will include the construction and rehabilitation of major strategic roads, new bridges, equipping local government road units, and the maintenance of district and community roads. This is aimed at increasing agricultural production by improving the intake and the evacuation of products to the markets. We are also looking to improve the connectivity to tourist sites and facilitating national and regional trade. Every road on the works programme has been labelled an agricultural, tourist or trade road.

Road Construction
The construction of various national roads has progressed satisfactorily. A total of 518kms of national roads were fully or substantially completed. These are: Kabale-Kisoro–Bunagana/Kyanika (101 km); Masaka–Mbarara (154 km); Busega–Masaka (120 km); and Nyakahita–Kazo (143km).

A total of 327kms of national roads have their construction on schedule. These are: Fort Portal–Bundibugyo-Lamia (104km), with the Fort Portal–Sempaya section being fully completed; Overlay of Kawempe–Kafu (166 km); and Jinja–Kamuli (57km). A total of 88kms of the following national roads projects have had contracts signed and land compensation is underway. These are: Mbarara–Kikagati–Murongo Bridge (74km); and Mbarara Bypass (14 km).

Madam Speaker, a total of 626kms of national roads have completed designs for upgrade from gravel to tarmac. These are: Muyembe–Nakapiripirit, and Moroto–Kotido Road (200km); Rwenkunye–Apac–Lira–Kitgum–Musingo Road (230km); Hoima–Butiaba–Wanseko Road (111km); and Kayunga–Galiraya Road (85km).

The design for dualling of Kibuye-Busega–Mpigi Road (30km) and Kampala Northern Bypass (17km) has been completed. The design of Kampala-Jinja Expressway (80km) is being finalised. In the next year, the construction of 1,363kms of the following ongoing roads projects will be accelerated: 
Atiak-Afogi (104km); 
    • Fort-Portal–Bundibugyo(103km); 
    • Nyakahita–Kazo(68km);
    • Kazo–Kamwenge (75km);
    • Mbarara–Kikagati(74km); 
    • Malaba–Bugiri (82km); 
    • Tororo–Mbale (49km); 
    • Mbale–Soroti (103km); 
    • Jinja-Kamuli(58km); 
    • Moroto-Nakapiripirit (95km); 
    • Gulu–Atiak(74km); 
    • Vurra–Arua–Koboko–Oraba (95km); 
    • Hoima–Kaiso–Tonya (85km); 
    • Ishaka-Kagamba (35km); 
    • Kampala-Masaka intermediate sections (51km);
    • Rehabilitation of Mukono–Jinja (52km); 
    • Mbarara–Ntungamo (59km); 
    • Ntungamo-Kabale-Katuna (65km); 
    • Kayunga-Galiraya(88km); 
    • Kampala–Entebbe Expressway (51km).

Government will also commence the construction of 837kms of the following new road projects: 
    • Atiak-Nimule (35km) 
    • Kyenjojo-Fort Portal(74km) 
    • Mbarara-Bypass (14km) 
    • Dualling of Kampala Northern Bypass (17.5km) 
    • Masaka-Bukakata (41km) 
    • Kamwenge-Fort Portal (66km) 
    • Ntungamo-Mirama Hills (37km) 
    • Kigumba-Bulima-Kabwoya Road (135km) 
    • Rehabilitation of Mukono-Kayunga-Njeru Road (94km) 
    • Rehabilitation of Kafu-Karuma Road (88.5km) 
    • Rehabilitation of Kamudini-Gulu Road (65km) 
    • Ishaka-Katunguru Road (56km) 
    • Designing of Zirobwe-Wobulenzi Road (23km)
    • Designing of Seeta-Kira–Matugga–Wakiso-Najjanankumbi–Busabala (64km). 

Madam Speaker, I have also allocated funds for the clearing of outstanding payments for the following completed roads: 

    • Matugga-Semuto (41km) 
    • Kampala-Gayaza-Zirobwe (44km) 
    • Jinja-Bugiri (72km) 
    • Masaka-Mbarara (149km) 
    • Busega-Muduuma-Mityana (57km) 
    • Kawempe–Kafu (166km) 
    • Kampala-Masaka, Package A (63km). 

Madam Speaker, Government is also negotiating financing from the World Bank, African Development Bank and Islamic Development Bank to commence the upgrade of the following roads next year: 

    • Kapchorwa-Suam 
    • Rukungiri-Ishasha 
    • Olwiyo-Anaka-Gulu-Kitgum
    • Musita-Nankoma-Majanji 
    • Kamuli-Bukungu
    • Mukono-Kyetume-Katosi 
    • Soroti-Katakwi-Moroto
    • Mbale-Igale-Lwakhaha 
    • Tirinyi-Paliisa-Kumi-Ngora 
    • Atiak-Adjumani-Moyo
    • Nabumali-Butaleja-Namutumba
    • Mpigi-Kabulasoke-Maddu-Sembabule 
    • Nyendo-Sembabule 

The construction of some roads is behind schedule as a result of delays by the contractors to mobilise machinery, land compensation, delayed environmental approval by NEMA and delayed completion of design reviews. This underscores the need to improve procurement, contracting and implementation of Government projects. The projects affected include: 

    • Mbarara–Katuna; 
    • Vurra-Arua-Koboko-Oraba;
    • Gulu-Atiak;
    • Ishaka–Kagamba;
    • Tororo-Mbale;
    • Mbale-Soroti;
    • Ntungamo–Mirama Hill;
    • Moroto–Nakapiripiriti;
    • Kampala-Entebbe Expressway;
    • Atiak-Nimule;
    • Jinja–Mukono.

To this end, Madam Speaker, UNRA is working together with the International Finance Corporation to see how to improve capacity to monitor and expedite construction of these roads.

Road Maintenance

Madam Speaker, I propose to allocate an additional Shs 72.7 billion to the Uganda Road Fund to enhance funding for national road maintenance. The total allocation to the Uganda Road Fund now amounts to Shs 352.98 billion. The Uganda Road Fund will fund routine maintenance of 22,500km of district and town council roads, and 4,500km of Kampala Capital City Authority (KCCA) and municipal roads, as well as removal of bottlenecks on 30,000km of community access roads. 

A further 1,670km of paved roads and 9,000km of unpaved roads will undergo routine maintenance by the Uganda National Roads Authority. An additional 700km of unpaved roads will be re-gravelled and periodic maintenance of various bridges undertaken. District roads will also be maintained using recently acquired road equipment at district road units. 

Furthermore, Independent Parallel Bid Evaluation that has contributed to the reduction in national road costs will be extended to national road maintenance to enhance value for money. Independent parallel bid evaluation has seen the average cost of road construction drop from the neighbourhood of US$ 1 million per kilometre to US$ 750,000 per kilometre. 

Proposals to amend the Road Fund Act will be tabled in Parliament this coming year to ensure adequate and timely provision of funds for road maintenance and rehabilitation. This will require increasing support, given the large investments in road development. There will be many more road kilometres to maintain and we pledge that this money will be monitored and evaluated properly.

With support from the World Bank, Government will next financial year commence rehabilitation and reconstruction of the road network in 14 municipalities across the country. These include Arua, Gulu, Lira, Moroto, Soroti, Mbale, Tororo, Jinja, Entebbe, Masaka, Mbarara, Kabale, Fort Portal and Hoima. In addition, Kampala Capital City Authority will continue to be supported to improve the road network within the city and accelerate the programme for introduction of the Rapid Bus Transit System in order to decongest the city.

Bridges

For bridges, over the last year, the following progress was recorded: 
Bridges completed included: 
1. 	Daca, Ore, Eventre and Uzungo on Wandi-Yumber Road 
    2. Apak Bridge in Lira 
    3. Bulyamusenyu Bridge 
    4. Construction of the Atiak–Moyo–Afoji bridges is at advanced stages and will be completed by July 2013. 
 
The following works will be undertaken on bridges during this coming year: 
    • Rehabilitation of the existing Nalubaale Bridge and the construction of the second Nalubaale Bridge with Japanese assistance are scheduled to commence. 
    • Construction of the Apak and Birara bridges. 
    • Construction of the Ntungwe and Mitaano bridges in Kanungu. 
    • Complete construction of the Muzizi and Awoja bridges. 
    • Construction of 17 bridges in the North and North Eastern Uganda including Olyanai, Obalanga, Alipa, Ajeliek, Ojanai, Opot, Akol, Airogo all in Kumi; Balla, Abalang, Agali and Enget in Lira; Kochi and Nyawa in Moyo, using funding from the Islamic Development Bank. 
    • We also plan to commence construction of Nyacyara, Goli, Nyagak, Enyau, Pakwara, Anyao and Alla bridges all in West Nile. 

I have also provided resources to reconstruct the bridges destroyed by the recent floods in various parts of the country such as the Mubuku and Kilembe bridges in Kasese District. 

Railway Subsector
In the rail subsector, implementation of the following interventions to revitalise railway transport will be accelerated next year: 

1. 	Rehabilitation of Tororo-Pakwach and Kampala-Kasese railway lines. 
2. 	Commence design of Gulu–Atiak–Nimule–Juba to be constructed jointly by the governments of Uganda and South Sudan.
3. 	Complete design of the Kampala–Malaba railway.

Madam Speaker, Lake Victoria is central to Uganda’s overall economic objectives. It is an essential factor in our regional integration strategy. Bordered by Uganda, Kenya and Tanzania with river access to Rwanda and Burundi, it is home to over 30 million people living around its shores. It is a pivotal part of Uganda’s alternative southern route for export and imports to and from the Indian Ocean, connecting us via Mwanza and then by road or rail to Dar-es-Salaam or even to Kisumu, and then to Nairobi and Mombasa by road or rail. 

The development of water transport on Lake Victoria will enable the following objectives to be met: 
1. 	Ensure a strategic alternative route to the sea; 
2. 	Facilitate transportation of agricultural produce around the lake in the four countries; and  
3. 	Support Uganda’s geographic location to be an inland distribution hub to Rwanda, Burundi, South Sudan and DRC 

Revitalisation of Lake Victoria by rebuilding port infrastructure and carrying out a definite navigational survey as well as environmental measures will enable the lake to become a major waterway by facilitating and lowering the cost of transport to both domestic and regional destinations. Together with my four colleagues from other EAC countries, we are seeking multilateral assistance for a regional integration development project with Lake Victoria at its centre. As a positive sign in support of the revitalization of the Southern route to the Indian Ocean through Dar es Salaam, the rehabilitation of the Marine Vessel Kaawa was completed during the year and is operating between Port Bell and Mwanza. 

During the year, the Lwampanga–Namasale ferry was commissioned and the rehabilitation of the Laropi ferry is underway. The Kayunga (Kasana) and Mbulamuti (Bugobero) ferry is undergoing trials and the construction of landing sites is being completed. One of the two new Kalangala Infrastructure Services (KIS) ferries was launched. The ferry previously used in this area will be refurbished and deployed to the Kiyindi– Buvuma crossing. 

In the next year, Government will continue to improve the inland water facilities by providing ferry services and constructing landing sites. The Obongi-Sinyanya and Kayunga-Mbulamuti ferries will be commissioned and construction of the New Kampala Port at Bukasa will commence. These interventions will improve connectivity of various parts of the country and the entire East African region, and ultimately reduce transportation costs. 

Electricity 

Madam Speaker, the 250 MW Bujagali Hydropower Project was fully commissioned during the last financial year. In addition, a number of small renewable hydropower projects, delivering a total of 68.5 MW to the national grid, have been commissioned. These include Buseruka (9MW), Nyagak I (3.5MW), Kisizi (0.26MW), Bugoye (13MW), Mpanga (18MW) and Ishasha (6.5MW). 

The detailed feasibility study and engineering designs for the 188 MW Isimba Hydropower Project was completed and arrangements for its financing are underway. With support from the Government of Japan, the pre-feasibility study for the 600MW Ayago Hydropower Project was completed and the detailed engineering designs are being prepared. 

The construction of the Karuma Hydropower Project (600MW) has faced procurement challenges, but it will commence next financial year. In addition, the Global Energy Transfer Feed-in-Tariff (GETFiT) East Africa Pilot Project was launched. It will support construction of a further 15 mini hydropower projects that will deliver a total of 125MW over the next three years. 

Under the rural electrification schemes, a total of 2,322 km were under construction. These include: 

1. Mubende-Kyenjojo, 156km. 
2. Rakai-Isingiro; Lyantonde-Lumbugu;Kaliro-Lwebitakuli; and Sembabule-Lwemiyaga, 283km. 
3. Kabale-Kisoro, 166km. 
4. 	Rwachikoko-Awere-Laloi, 58km. 
    5. Gulu-Adjumani-Moyo, 238km. 
    6. Apala-Adwari-Kiru-Morulem, 109km. 
    7. Ibanda-Kazo, 137km. 
    8. Soroti-Katakwi, 96km. 
    9. Ayer-Kamdini-Bobi, 90km. 
    10. Ntenjeru and environs, 75km. 
    11. Ruhiira Millennium Project, 106km. 
    12. Nkonge-Kashozi, 177km. 
    13. Masindi-Waki-Buliisa, 178km. 
    14. Gulu-Acholibur with Paicho-Patiko-Palarotee-off, 118km.
    15. Opeta-Achokora, 58km.
    16. Wakiso/Mpigi/Mityana/Busuunju, 43km.
    17. Lwengo/Mbarara/Isingiro/Ibanda/Kiruhura, 58km.
    18. Bushenyi/Buhweju/Kasese/Kyenjojo, 48km. 
    19. Rukungiri/Kanungu/Ntungamo/Kabale, 78km.
    20. Kasese District rural electrification, 28km. 

Consequently, a number of district headquarters were connected to the main grid. These include: Nakapiripirit, Amudat, Kaberamaido, Dokolo, Amolatar, Ntoroko, Alebtong, Moroto and Napak, Kiruhura, Kyegegwa and Katakwi. 

Furthermore, the following community schemes have been under implementation: 
1. 	Kikubamitwe Village in Luwero, 3km; 
2. 	Rusekere Secondary School in Fort portal, 0.6km; 
3. 	Namazige-Kasenge in Mukono, 1km; 
4. 	Simba Farms in Ibanda, 0.2km; 
5. 	Cougar Industries Ltd in Mukono, 0.6km;
6. 	Nine resettlement villages in Bujagali, Jinja, 15.9 km; and
7. 	Omagoro Village in Kumi, 1km. 

Commencing next financial year, the electricity utility distributor, Umeme, has been required to install 15,000 pre-paid meters in order to ensure increased efficiency in electricity use, and also reduce distribution system losses through further investment in the distribution network. Madam Speaker, the roll out of prepaid metres means electricity consumers will pay for what comes into their metres and no more.

Madam Speaker, I have allocated an additional Shs 25.73 billion to the Rural Electrification Programme to facilitate the extension of electricity to the under-served areas of the country including the district headquarters. For this, we thank our development partner, KFW, and the World Bank for their one-time grant assistance to assist rural households to get connected to the grid and then take on their payments on their own.

Oil and Gas 

Madam Speaker, during the last year, legislation for prudent management of Uganda’s oil resources framework was passed by Parliament. This legislation includes the following: 
i) 	The Petroleum (Exploration and Production) Bill, 2012. 
ii) 	The Petroleum (Refining, Gas Processing and Conversion, Transportation and Storage) Bill, 2012. 

There is need to expedite the consideration of the Public Finance Bill 2012, still pending before Parliament, which contains the framework for management of petroleum revenues, among other reforms.
 
Madam Speaker, next year the construction of the Kenya–Uganda and the Uganda–Rwanda oil pipelines using the public private partnership arrangement will be fast tracked. I have also allocated an additional Shs 3.0 billion to National Environment Management Authority to conduct the Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) for the gas and oil exploration and development in the Albertine region. 

Minerals
 
In order to promote mineral investment, a Geological and Mineral Information System (GMIS) to host geological and mineral data has been established. This will provide a one-stop centre for all geological and mineral information countrywide, which is now accessible to potential investors. In addition, a computerized mining registry will expedite mineral licensing, the timely generation of revenues, and provide transparency and accountability in the management of mineral rights. 

In the forthcoming year and the medium term, Government will undertake the following interventions to enhance mineral development: 
1. 	Promote optimal use of minerals and mineral trade for social improvement of the people. 
2. 	Provide technical services in the field of geosciences to guide national planning and development. 
3. 	Ensure best mining practices and accountability. 
4. 	Promote mineral value addition and trade to increase revenues. 
5. 	Gazette geosites and geoparks; and 
6. 	Complete preparation of an earthquake administration policy and an earthquake disaster management plan. 

The various mineral licences out there, Madam Speaker, will also be reviewed to see who is not using their mineral licence or who is not developing their mineral concession and they will be reviewed and redistributed as need may be.

ICT, Science and Technology 

Madam Speaker, during the year, Government completed the readiness for commercialization of the first two phases of the National Backbone Infrastructure (NBI) that enables access to the information superhighway by telecommunication companies and public institutions connected to the infrastructure. The Business Process Outsourcing (BPO) centre has continued operations, providing 100 jobs during the year and an additional 150 jobs will be added next financial year. 

The e-Government Master Plan was developed in collaboration with Government of Korea. The plan provides priority information technology projects for implementation so as to improve service delivery. Cabinet also approved the strategy for the rationalization of IT initiatives and services in government. 

Innovations in information and communication technology, science and technology are no longer an option in today’s global competitive economic environment. Science and technology have been a major factor behind the success of the world’s fastest growing economies in South East Asia and Latin America. Unprecedented developments in information and communication technology have permitted the growth of products and services with a significant increase on factor productivity and firm profitability. 

In the next year, Government will continue to support scientific and technological innovation to drive value addition, increase our competitiveness in the global market and create employment among other benefits. The National Backbone Infrastructure will deliver bulk internet bandwidth to connect Government at a cheaper cost. Information technology service use will be mainstreamed across Government to avoid duplication and minimize costs. This will also improve information security and reduce incidences of electronic fraud. 

The 700km third phase of the re-designed National Backbone Infrastructure will be implemented to provide connectivity to the Rwanda backbone through Katuna and the Tanzania backbone through Mutukula, hence allowing alternative access to the coastal internet submarine cable. 

Digital television transmission will be implemented and Cyber laws operationalised. Government shall also develop and disseminate Business Process Outsourcing (BPO) operations standards. 

Agricultural Production and Productivity 

Agriculture 

Agriculture continues to play a critical part in our economy. The sector employs about 66 per cent of Uganda’s total labour force and the vast majority of our population directly and indirectly depend on it. It not only generates incomes and a livelihood for the majority of Ugandans but it has great potential to transform the economy. However, agriculture is a private sector activity; Government has no farms and it runs no agro processing factories.

Government will continue to use its scarce resources to facilitate the private sector to increase production and productivity in agriculture. Government will focus its support towards further development in research and also see how to take that development from the lab to the field. Research will facilitate seed multiplication and certification together with Uganda Prisons and Ministry of Finance. It will also concentrate on disease control for both animals and crops.

Other key interventions relate to provision of extension services and support for agro-processing to agricultural produce. This will be done with an emphasis on rolling out the commodity based approach that focuses on 10 key food security and household income commodities. These commodities are maize, beans, coffee, market fruits and vegetables, rice, bananas, fish, dairy and beef cattle. 
 
Madam Speaker, during the year, over 35,000 farmers directly benefited from provision of improved maize seeds - Arabica coffee, beans, maize and rice. These were all distributed to seed companies and farmer groups.  The rehabilitation of all the three irrigation scheme of Mubuku, Doho and Agoro is also substantially complete. 

Next year, Government will reform the National Agricultural Advisory Services (NAADS) to create a single spine extension system aligned to the relevant directorates in the Ministry of Agriculture. The other part of NAADS will be turned into a rural agri-business secretariat to disseminate knowledge on how to promote and operate profitable agriculture enterprises across the country; in other words, how to treat agriculture as a business. The single spine extension system will go back to working with the farmers in the fields and on demonstration farms.  

In an effort to increase the availability of improved seed for farmers, Government has adopted a concerted approach to ensure the availability of improved seed varieties and animal breeds. Building on successes in improved seed varieties and breeds by the research organisations, improved seeds and breeds will be multiplied with the help of the prison farms and distributed extensively across the country. This multiplication of improved seed will be implemented with the co-ordination between the ministries of agriculture, local government, and finance, together with the Uganda Prisons Service and also private sector operators. 
 
Furthermore, on-going efforts to rehabilitate large scale irrigation schemes and promote small scale and affordable irrigation technology will be accelerated. The rehabilitation of the Olweny Scheme will commence next year, together with 33 schemes in other districts. Feasibility studies are planned for the rehabilitation of Atera, Labori, Odina and Kiige irrigation schemes. This will reduce excessive reliance on natural weather for agricultural production. 

I have allocated Shs 394.4 billion to the agricultural sector next year. I have also provided an additional Shs 9.2 billion to strengthen the fisheries department in enforcing fishing regulations and standards. Our approach to agriculture has been to say: where can the Government exist? What can the Government do better in the private sector farm? To invest in those bulky products like irrigation dams or those that take a long time to germinate and where the benefits do not accrue back to the financier like research, development and extension services.

Tourism Development 

This is another sector that is predominantly for the private sector. The Government does not run any hotels, any tour groups or any fishing expeditions. In order to best assist the private sector to run the tourism sector, Government will focus on four areas: 

First, Government will improve accessibility to tourist sites. Road access to Kidepo Valley National Park is under maintenance and works on the Ishasha–Katunguru Road have commenced. Contractors for the Kisoro-Mgahinga, Kyenjojo-Hoima-Masindi, and Kabwoya–Kyenjojo roads are being procured. These will all help improve access to the parks in Queen Elizabeth, Kabalega and Kidepo as well as Bwindi.

In order to enhance hospitality standards, 20 East African Community accredited hotel assessors were trained and the inspection of hotels accommodation was completed. One hundred and eighty two (182) students were enrolled at the Hotel Training Institute at Jinja and a further 390 students graduated in May 2013. 

In support of domestic tourism, two multi-stakeholder platforms in the Kigezi and Busoga regions were launched to spearhead the identification of local tourist products and their development. Government will continue to support tourist platforms as vehicles for promoting domestic cultural and other product development. 

The key constraints to Uganda’s tourism are: poor physical access roads, the lack of international accreditation for our hotels, and hospitality standards. There is also the need to enhance protection of the wildlife and conservation within the game parks; and also, to develop a comprehensive tourism sector development action plan, which will then direct us how best to enhance the tourism sector to become one of the most important in the nation.

Next financial year, Government will continue to provide the necessary facilities and establish a conducive investment climate for tourism development through the following interventions: 

    1. We will continue supporting the hotel, tour and guide businesses to attain accreditation and provide world-class hospitality businesses.

    2. To repair road access to the national parks and to support skills training of critical tourism sector human resources, including the re-construction of the Uganda Hotel and Tourism Training Institute at Jinja.


    3. Finally, we will work together with the Ministry of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities to develop a comprehensive Tourist Development Plan similar to that in our neighbouring countries. 

Increasing Social Service Delivery

Madam Speaker, social welfare indicators such as literacy, safe water coverage, and the reduction in infant and maternal mortality rates, are a sign of progress of society’s well-being and human development. 

Education 

For education during the year, Government enhanced salaries for primary school teachers by 15 and 30 percent for science teachers in post primary education and training institutions. In an effort to reduce teacher absenteeism, the percentage of teachers at task improved from 60 percent in 2011 to 77 percent in 2012. In addition, head teachers at task improved from 63 to 70 percent. We will continue to monitor these performance indicators, Madam Speaker. 

I have allocated over Shs 1,801 billion, representing 13.3 percent of the total budget to the education sector to impart the necessary skills and knowledge required to tap the creative ability of individuals, in order for them to lead a better life and enhance wellbeing. Interventions will be undertaken in the education sector as follows:- 
    1. To accelerate Government investment in vocational and business training, including support to the private sector to provide the youth with the requisite skills.

    2. Forge a strong relationship between education institutions and private companies to make sure that the supply of students coming out of the institution better matches the need in the market place.

    3. To provide adequate infrastructure and promote science and technical education through provision of incentives for science, maths, technical and vocational education, supporting science and research development, encouraging the private sector to support science education and equipping schools with science laboratories.

    4. The gender gap will also be considered.

Madam Speaker, Government will also implement key interventions in education to enhance efficiency and effectiveness. These are:- 
(a)	Students Loan Scheme: Government will implement the Student Loan Scheme initially for science, medical and engineering students in higher institutions of learning. The Student Loan Scheme will also be complemented by the bonding of those graduates to Government employment after their respective courses as used to happen in the 60s and 70s. This will serve towards the repayment of the student loan. In this way, we will make sure that the students who study at Government’s expense assist in developing the national development priorities. I have allocated an additional Shs 5.0 billion towards operationalising of this scheme.  
(b) 	Teachers SACCOs: In line with the government policy of encouraging savings, I have allocated a total of Shs 5.0 billion to support Teachers SACCOs across the country. (Applause)

Health 

Madam Speaker, an additional 6,172 health workers were recruited for health centres and the remuneration of medical officers at health centre IVs was enhanced to Shs 2.5 million per month inclusive of allowance. The construction and equipping of the Government of Japan-funded Kabale and Hoima regional referral hospitals was completed. Procurement is underway for contractors for Mulago National Referral Hospital rehabilitation and the construction of the Kirudu and Kawempe hospitals. In this past financial year, the Naguru Referral Hospital was also opened.

In addition to the seven immunisable disease vaccines, the Pneumococcal Conjugate Vaccine (PCV) against pneumonia was launched in April, 2013 with support of the Global Alliance for Vaccines Initiative and immunisation campaigns were conducted in 41 districts. 

But, Madam Speaker, the major killer in Uganda is Malaria. The following interventions will be implemented in an all-out drive to significantly bring down the incidents of Malaria. Malaria is a drain on health care costs and also badly affects work productivity when people have to stay home because of recurrent Malaria. It is also a major killer of children under the age of five. So, the government will through the Ministry of Finance, the Ministry of Health and development partners will also be invited to come on board to:-

1. 	Develop and implement a comprehensive strategy for Malaria eradication to build on current efforts of prevention, diagnosis and treatment. This strategy will by the end of the financial year be designed and costed and ready for financing and implementation. We must bring Malaria down in Uganda and this will be the single biggest initiative that the Government will start in the health sector.
 We will also continue improvement in health infrastructure.
    2. Recruit key health care personnel
    3. Provide staff housing 
    4. Accelerate ongoing campaign to prevent and control communicable and non-communicable diseases.
    5. Help to re-equip key health facilities such as Uganda Heart Institute, Uganda Cancer Institute and Uganda Blood Transfusion Services, among others.
    6. We will also improve the governance and efficiency in health service delivery through increased joint supervision and monitoring of performance indicators in collaboration with non-governmental health institutions. 

Safe Water Coverage and Sanitation 

To improve the benefits of access to safe water and sanitation, Government has undertaken the following key activities, over the past year:- 

    1. Construction of piped water supply construction works in Kiruhura (95 percent), Kazo (92 percent), Kakuto (70 percent), Kakyanga (80 percent), Lyantonde (80 percent)
    2. Completion of phase One of the Tororo-Manafa Gravity Flow Scheme and continued construction of the Kanyampanga Gravity Flow Scheme.
    3. Boreholes drilling in several districts including Namayingo, Lira, Mubende, Apac, Oyam, Kaliro, Butaleja, Luweero, Namutumba, Kumi, Ngora, Kaberamaido, Lwengo, Kaliro and Tororo among others.
    4. Implementation of water schemes in the towns of Nakasongola, Kalungu, Wobulenzi, Rakai, Kinoni, and Mbirizi.
    5. Rehabilitation of water works is at various stages in the districts of Wakiso, Luweero, Masindi, Mityana, Buikwe, Kagadi, Kakumiro, Kiboga, Mubende, and Butambala among others.
    6. Progress with the construction of the Lubigi sewage system is under way.

Madam Speaker, in order to increase access to quality water, Government will focus on the following interventions: 
    1. Upgrade Ggaba Water Works treatment facilities and to construct Namasuba Hill Reservoir;
    2. Complete construction of the Lubigi Waste Water Treatment Plant, and rehabilitate Bugolobi Sewage Treatment Plant;
    3. Commence construction of Nakivubo and Kinawataka Waste Water Treatment Plants; and
    4. Continue provision of sanitary Ecosan toilets in schools, and mobilise communities for better hygienic practices, such as hand washing. In this, we thank the World Bank for our recently signed project to improve municipal infrastructure in 14 towns across the country and to implement a water management facility.

Strengthening Accountability in Public Service Delivery

Madam Speaker, the challenge of service delivery in Uganda is not so much lack of sufficient financial resources, but the achievement of maximum efficiency and effectiveness in the utilisation of those limited resources. 

Challenges to service delivery include delayed implementation of projects, lack of adherence to financial management procedures, corruption and misappropriation of public resources. The Government is committed to improving transparency and accountability in order to achieve enhanced service delivery, for which we have undertaken several reforms. 

Madam Speaker, I am happy to report that progress has been made, even as we continue to fully reform the system. It will take time but Uganda will get there. Government will undertake the following measures next financial year:- 
i. 	Strengthen the accountability and anti-corruption institutions such as the Inspectorate of Government, Auditor- General’s Office, Uganda Police and the Judiciary, among others;

 ii. 	Institute an elaborate system of sanctions for delayed accountability. The Ministry of Finance will enhance its emphasis on quarterly performance reporting to monitor programme implementation in the big six ministries with the biggest budgets: water, health, education, roads, energy and agriculture that will be strictly enforced every quarter to show the physical output that has been undertaken under development budget.

iii. 	To rollout the Integrated Financial Management System (IFMS) in all government ministries, departments and agencies.

iv. 	To fully implement  all modules of the Integrated Personnel and Payroll System (IPPS) and to link staff recruitment, payroll and salary processing, retirement and pension management and link the IPPS to the IFMS, to eliminate “ghost’ workers;

v. 	To improve coordination, monitoring, inspection and evaluation of Government programmes and projects at all levels.
 
vi. 	To coordinate implementation of the National Identity (ID) Card Project together with the National Census and the Electoral Voting Registration process.

vii. 	We will review the Public Investment Plan to include only those for which cost-benefit analysis and feasibility studies have been conducted and for which the benefits have been proven and sources of financing secured. 

viii.	Government will also continue to rationalize the current use of office space by ministries and government departments. The policy is to move away from renting office space to construction of new Government office buildings for which we are actively soliciting finances. (Applause) And in the interim, any ministry or department that has been renting space and the contract comes to an end and they have their own building, money will not be released for any more renting. They will have to move to their own buildings.

Madam Speaker, the Executive has fully supported a Private Members Bill to seek further advancement to fight against corruption. Other relevant Bills include the following:- 
    i. Anti-Money Laundering Bill which is to track funds gained from illicit activities and for enhancing global security.
    ii. The Public Finance Bill, which explicitly seeks to ensure timely and accurate reporting of Government funds spent and to place individual responsibility on accounting officers for proper management of funds under their control. 

I have accordingly allocated additional funds to the various anti-corruption institutions such as the Office of the Auditor-General, the Criminal Investigation and Intelligence Directorate, the Directorate of Public Prosecution, the Inspectorate of Government and the Department of Ethics and Integrity to enforce accountability and the Accountant General’s Office to facilitate the rollout of the Integrated Financial Management System (IFMS). 

Madam Speaker, experience from the successful developing countries shows the importance of fiscally sustainable and well-functioning local governments for delivery of public services. Local governments have an advantage of being closer to the recipients of such services, but they may not use this advantage if they lack effective administrative structures and resources. 

During the last two decades, the number of district governments in Uganda has more than doubled. It is now time to implement reforms aimed at improving their performance in particular increasing value-for-money in the services they provide. This would involve bringing greater stability in the districts and intergovernmental system, enhancing its institutional design, and redesigning funding of the district governments. 

The following actions will be emphasized in this regard: 
    i. Review the staffing models of district governments.
    ii. Enhance the district governments’ own-sources of revenues to strengthen bottom-up accountability of district governments and will help alleviate fiscal pressures. 

And this, Madam Speaker, for local governments as with the central government, the focus for this budget is not so much the value of the money available but value–for-money available. Monitoring, accountability to make sure we get the maximum output for each of the scarce shilling that we have at our disposal. 

Constitutional Self Accounting Bodies 

The budgetary proposals of the following self accounting bodies have been submitted in compliance with Article 155(2) of the Constitution. 
    1. Courts of Judicature 
    2. Electoral Commission 
    3. Inspectorate of Government 
    4. Parliamentary Commission 
    5. Uganda Law Reform Commission 
    6. Uganda Human Rights Commission 
    7. Uganda Aids Commission 
    8. National Planning Authority 
    9. Office of the Auditor-General 

In accordance with Article 155(3) of the Constitution, Government has made recommendations on these proposals. I hereby lay both the budgetary proposals and the recommendations of Government before this august House, as required by the Constitution. 

In order for me to submit a fully financed national Budget for your consideration in accordance with Article 155(1) of the Constitution, the budget provisions of these self-accounting bodies are in accordance with the resource envelope conveyed to them in the course of budget preparation, including the presentation of the National Budget Framework Paper to Parliament, in accordance with the Budget Act, 2001. 

Financial Year 2013/2014 tax and revenue measures

Madam Speaker, the objectives of the various measures for the financial year 2013/2014 are to raise revenues, enhance transparency in collection and enforcement, improve compliance and encourage investment. I will propose amendments to the tax laws to improve tax administration and enhance compliance. I will also highlight decisions reached at the East African Community level pre-budget consultative meeting, which was held in Arusha last week. 

Income Tax 

Expansion of withholding tax agents 

Madam Speaker, I propose widening the scope of withholding agents to capture non-compliant tax persons engaged in economic activities and not registered for income tax purposes. This measure is expected to generate Shs 5.0 billion. The details are contained in the Income Tax (Amendment) Bill, 2013. 
I also intend to provide collaboration between URA, KCCA and local governments in tax collection. Madam speaker, I propose to provide a legal framework through which URA will collaborate with the Uganda Registration Services Bureau, local governments and KCCA to identify taxpayers and collect taxes on small businesses, which are hard-to-reach by URA. This is aimed at easing tax administration and enforcing compliance by bringing more taxpayers into the tax net. In other words, to make sure that taxes that are due are paid without even trying to enforce more taxes on those few visible entities that are already paying.

Value Added tax (VAT) 

To eliminate VAT exemption on hotel accommodation

I propose to eliminate the VAT exemption on hotel accommodation to improve tax administration and generate revenues. This measure will raise Shs 6.0 billion and details are contained in the VAT (Amendment) Bill, 2013. 

Eliminate VAT exemption on supply of water for domestic use 

I propose to apply VAT on the supply of water to improve tax administration and generate revenues. This measure will raise Shs 8.0 billion and details are contained in the VAT (Amendment) Bill, 2013. This should not affect the prices paid by the majority of low-income consumers, as the price of a jerrican from National Water and Sewerage Corporation (NWSC) will amount to about Shs 40 at communal taps. Anything in excess of that is a premium from the operator. The money that ends at national water charges plus VAT is about 40 shillings per 20 litre jerrican. When an operator charges more, they are getting a premium rental.

Eliminate VAT exemption on wheat and wheat flour 

Madam Speaker, I propose to introduce VAT on wheat and wheat flour to improve tax administration and generate revenue. This measure will raise Shs 30 billion and details are contained in the VAT (Amendment) Bill, 2013. 

Rationalising of exemptions 

In a bid to improve compliance and administration, I have rationalised the VAT exemptions in line with sector definitions and best practice. 

Excise Duty 

Increase of excise duty of Shs 50 on petrol and diesel 
I propose to increase excise duty on petrol and diesel by Shs 50 to increase tax revenues. This is expected to raise about Shs 72 billion and details are contained in the Excise (Amendment) Bill, 2013. 

Restore Excise Duty of Shs 200 on kerosene 

Madam Speaker, I propose to restore excise duty on kerosene at Shs 200 per litre – (Interjections) - this is to discourage the practice of adulterating diesel by mixing it with kerosene and as a result motorists’ cars are suffering permanent damage. And it will not be long before kerosene is used to adulterate jet fuel. This measure is expected to raise about Shs 15 billion and details are contained in the Excise (Amendment) Bill 2013. 

Increase excise duty on cigarettes

Madam Speaker, I propose to increase excise duty on cigarettes – (Applause) - from Shs 22,000, Shs 25,000 and Shs 55,000 for Soft cup (whose local content is more than 70 percent of its constituents), other Soft cup and Hinge lid, respectively, to Shs 32,000, Shs 35,000 and Shs 69,000 to collect more revenue. This measure is expected to raise about Shs 3.2 billion and details are contained in the Excise (Amendment) Bill, 2013. 

Increase excise duty on undenatured spirits 

In a bid to curb the excise duty evasion by some unscrupulous distillers of spirits, I propose to increase the excise duty from 70 percent to 140 percent at importation.

Impose excise duty at 20 percent on revenue from promotion activities
 
Madam Speaker, I propose to impose excise duty at the rate of 20 percent on revenue from activities that are similar to gambling to expand the tax base. (Applause) This measure will generate about Shs 8.0 billion. The details are contained in the Excise Tax (Amendment) Bill, 2013. 

Introduce an excise duty on money transfers 

Madam Speaker, I propose to impose an excise tax of 10 percent on fees charged on transfer of money – (Interjections) – by mobile network operators and other money transfer operators to widen the tax base. Details are contained in the Excise Bill 2013. 

Stamps duty 

Madam Speaker, I propose to impose an extra Shs 30,000 on stamp duty on third party insurance policies for motor vehicles to raise more revenues, especially for those victims of boda boda accidents and other accidents. This measure will generate about Shs 12 billion. Details are found in the Stamps Duty (Amendments) Bill, 2013. 

Fees and Licenses 

Increase motorcycle registration fees by Shs 70,000 from Shs 130,000 to Shs 200,000 

Madam Speaker, I propose to increase motorcycle registration fees by Shs 70,000 to raise more revenues. This measure will generate about Shs 8.64 billion. Details are found in the Finance Bill, 2013. 

Increase motor vehicle registration fee by Shs 200,000 
Madam Speaker, I propose to increase motor vehicle registration fees by Shs 200,000 to raise more revenues. This measure will generate about Shs 8.0 billion. Details are found in the Finance Bill, 2013. 

Non-Tax Revenue 
Introduce the International Calls Levy 
Madam Speaker, I propose to impose an International Calls Levy on international incoming calls and generate about Shs 43 billion. Details are contained in the Finance Bill, 2013. 

Implementation of the revised NTR rates by MDAs 

Madam Speaker, this financial year, I propose to revise some NTR rates through the Finance Bill, 2013 to raise about Shs 32 billion. Details will be found in the Finance Bill, 2013. 

In order to improve service delivery and expedite the process of payment, the public will be allowed to pay fees and other charges for services performed by MDAs using their mobile phones and Internet for those who have access. This will reduce on congestion and time it takes to go to the banks and wait for confirmation before getting the service. 

Collection of Non-Tax Revenues 
Following the good performance of Uganda Revenue Authority in the collection of Non-Tax Revenues, I am extending the mandate of the Uganda Revenue Authority to collect all fees and other charges under the Uganda Registration Services Bureau, the Directorate of Citizenship and Immigration and the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development collection. 

However, the assessment will remain under the various MDAs. As part of encouraging ministries, agencies and departments which collect Non-Tax Revenue, some will be allowed to retain the NTR and use it at source. However, this will be part of the funds appropriated by Parliament to them and their budgets will be reduced by the shortfall in case they fail to meet the targets. 
 
Lotteries and Gaming 

There has been unprecedented development in the lotteries and gaming industry in the country. This has necessitated a strong regulatory framework to ensure that investments in the sector flourish but at the same time, the public, especially minors and those not keen to participate, are protected from unscrupulous dealers. The Ministry of Finance will present necessary amendments to Parliament. 

Taxation of the petroleum value chain 

Review the taxation of the value chain for petroleum and minerals sector 

Madam Speaker, during the coming financial year, the value chain for petroleum and minerals sector will be reviewed with the aim of ensuring that Government gets maximum benefit from the sector. 

New tax laws and other reforms 

Madam Speaker, as part of its efforts to promote investments, welfare of Ugandans, equity and enhance compliance and tax administration, Government has proposed new excise, stamps duty, lotteries, gaming and pool betting laws and a tax procedures code. 

In financial year 2013/2014, Government will comprehensively review the exemptions in the VAT Act and the Income Tax Act with the aim of eliminating them to increase revenue and improve administration. 

Madam Speaker, Government will also undertake a study on VAT being collected currently in comparison to its potential (VAT Gap). In addition, a similar study will be undertaken on income tax which will form a basis of improving the law to enhance performance, offer better services to taxpayers and ensure more of a level playing field. 

Tax Administration 

Uganda Revenue Authority has built a strong foundation for obtaining significant improvements in taxpayer compliance and tax revenue performance. Government has invested in tax administration through building human capacity, modernisation of systems and equipment. As a result, tax revenue performance has increased year on year by about 17 percent and we thank Uganda Revenue Authority. (Applause)

In the coming financial year and over the next three years, Uganda Revenue Authority will build on this progress to obtain significant increase in tax compliance as we look to move even closer to funding more and more of our own budget. The authority will:- 
    1. intensify its efforts to enforce compliance on the different types of tax-payers, that is, large, medium and small; 
    2. continue expansion of the audit coverage to include the bulk of the largest traders and conduct joint audits in the domestic tax and customs departments to detect and sanction non- compliance and fraud in a number of taxes; 
    3. enforce the use of the Tax Identification Number (TIN) for all traders who receive trading and other licenses and permits from KCCA and local governments;
    4. clean up the VAT register to ensure that only those capable of filing monthly and paying remain on the register. 

In addition to the revenue targets that the ministry sets for URA, the ministry will put in place a wider suite of performance indicators in tax and customs to help URA management monitor the results of the modernisation programme on a regular basis.

URA needs to have direct access to considerable information to determine a potential taxpayer’s liability. In this regard, Government is to propose an amendment to the Financial Institutions Act to allow URA to access a taxpayer’s financial record as an exception to the confidentiality provisions held by most financial institutions. This will be in cases where a bona fide tax audit or investigation has already been initiated.
 
The decisions made at EAC pre-budget consultations by ministers of finance 

The Sectoral Council of Finance and Economic Affairs considered pre-budget issues. One of the key issues discussed was the granting of zero percent import duty on Uganda’s raw materials and industrial inputs which, under the EAC Customs Union Protocol, was to last for a period of five years until 2009. The East African Community has now terminated this facility. However, we secured reduced rates for most of our industrial inputs. 

Details of the positions agreed to by the council will be contained in a gazette to be issued by the East African Community Secretariat.
 
Report of tax expenditure for financial year 2012/2013
 
Article 152(2) of the Constitution requires me to periodically report to Parliament on the exercise of powers conferred upon me by any law to waive or vary a tax imposed by that law. This is to report that this fiscal year, I did not exercise powers conferred by the Income Tax Act and Value Added Tax Act to waive any tax. However, I exempted Pride Microfinance Limited, a wholly owned Government financial institution, from stamp duty of Shs 48 million on transfer of property. 

Government has also paid Shs 7,951,178,192 in respect of hotels, hospitals and tertiary institutions and non-government Organisations with tax exemption clauses in their legal contract. 

Schedule of indebtedness 

In accordance with the provision of Article 159(4), section 13 (1) and (2) of the Budget Act, 2001, I hereby lay before the House, a report on Government’s total external indebtedness as at 31 March 2013 and all the loans contracted and the grants that Government received during financial year 2012/13. I wish to call upon colleagues and members to spare some time to read and discuss the report and provide insights, comments and guidance.

With respect to Section 13(3) of the same Act, I wish to report that Government did not extend any guarantee to any agency, company or statutory corporation during financial year 2012/13.
 
On the utilisation of loans and grants, I have highlighted key issues in each respective case. Details of the utilisation and the performance of each loan and grant, including the extent of the achievement of the objectives and targets, will be provided in the ministerial policy statements for agencies that received loans and grants, as well as in our poverty monitoring and assessment reports.
 
Members of this House are aware that Government has met a number of challenges in the utilisation of loans and grants which have been mobilised. The main challenge is low absorption arising from lack of readiness of sectors to utilise resources. To address the challenges, I propose the following measures: 

    (i) Streamline budgeting for counterpart financing in sectors/ministries to ensure that projects are totally funded. 
    (ii) Bring forward to financing, only those projects that have been totally prepared and are ready to go both in terms of financing and manpower requirements and cost benefit authorisation.

    (iii) Prioritise project selection by accounting officers to ensure that sufficient funds are availed to match loan disbursement.

    (iv) The accounting officers will be required to provide detailed information on implementation of all programmes under their area, before Parliament approves new funding to a given sector.
 
    (v) Expedite a loan approval process by Parliament to ensure the conditions existing at project appraisal have not been overtaken by events and that costs have not escalated.

    (vi) With regard to large infrastructure projects, undertake studies and designs in advance of the loan approval to enable project execution to commence immediately; and if necessary Government finances the studies and designs for which agencies or ministries must budget appropriately. 

    (vii) There is need for accounting officers and political heads of Government departments to ensure the projects develop implementation and procurement plans well in advance of loan approval. In this regard, project management units should be staffed with persons who are proactive in decision making and consultation.

    (viii) There should also be continuous capacity building of our nationals in project and contract management; a capacity that is both visible and affordable. 

I hereby lay the schedule of indebtedness before you, Madam Speaker.

Madam Speaker, this year’s Budget is historic as over 80 percent of the resources are internally generated. (Applause) For this, I thank the taxpayers of Uganda. Thank you very much! Your tremendous support and your contributions are heartfelt. This will enable more resources to be allocated to infrastructure investment, which will reduce the cost of doing business to the private sector. 

I wish to pledge that these resources will be utilised efficiently on investment, rather than consumption and that all the monetary and evaluation mechanisms I have mentioned today will be enforced. So, if you hear some squealing from some implementing agencies you will know why.

Before I conclude my speech, Madam Speaker, I would like to thank very sincerely His Excellency, the President, for his guidance and wise advice in the preparation of this Budget. (Applause) I also thank the Rt Hon. Prime Minister, my colleague, ministers, development partners and the private sector for your invaluable views and suggestions. 

I also wish to thank my ministry’s long serving Permanent Secretary and Secretary to the Treasury, Mr Chris Kasami, who has since retired after 43 years of service - (Applause) - and all the officers of my ministry for their dedication during the entire budget process. 

The future of our economic growth and development will largely dependent on a favourable development climate for private sector investment in the economy, and attraction of foreign direct investors and reduced reliance on foreign aid. We shall continue to align all sector budgets to the National Development Plan by investing heavily in key productive and infrastructure sectors - investing heavily, visibly and accountably.
 
The expenditure priorities, revenue measures and policies announced in this budget demonstrate the Government’s commitment and determination to rise to the challenges ahead and pursuit of the long term development agenda as envisioned in Vision 2040. This year that is concluding, has been the year of transparency- (Interjections) - and as we move forward it will be the year of transparency and accountability.

I cannot move without paying tribute to our sportsmen and women. We all need to be inspired by the valour of Stephen Kiprotich when he won Uganda’s first Gold medal in 40 years- (Applause) - and to the gallant national team the Cranes to take Uganda to the 2014 World Cup. We should rise up and support them as they seek further glory.  “Uganda Cranes we go, we go”; no matter what we go! (Applause) 

Madam Speaker, I thank you for your attention and I commend the Bill to this House. And again I thank the taxpayers and the people of Uganda without whom this Budget would not have been possible and on whose behalf we promise to execute this Budget. Thank you. I beg to move. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, on your behalf, I want to thank the Minister of Finance for delivering the Budget Speech. 

Your Excellency, the President, distinguished guests and Members of Parliament, the responsibility of presenting the Budget to Parliament lies with the President. The Minister of Finance just carried out a delegated function; she does not hold the ultimate power and responsibility.

Having heard from the delegate, it is now important that we hear from the President who gave her that assignment. I also know he may want to make some remarks about the Budget.

But let me remind Members that we are in Parliament at Serena. Please take note of Rule 110 (4) of the Rules of Procedure, which says that while the President occupies the Chair of State in the House, he may make a statement, which shall be heard in silence and not followed by any comments or question. I now invite Your Excellency, the President to make your remarks.

4.45
THE PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF UGANDA (Mr Yoweri Kaguta Museveni): Your Excellency, the Vice-President; Rt Hon. Speaker; Your Lordship, the Chief Justice; Rt Hon. Prime Minister; Rt Hon. Leader of Opposition –(Interjections)– you hear them – no balance at all. Ministers; Honourable members of Parliament; Members of the Diplomatic Corps; Ladies and Gentlemen. I greet you.

I thank all of you for the positive contribution you made in the past financial year, not the negative one. As you heard, our economy grew by 5.1 percent in the last financial fear.  The sectors which grew fastest were: industry at 6.8 percent; services at 4.8 percent; and construction at 8.4 percent. The manufacturing sector grew by 4.2 percent. Those were figures of 2012/2013. Agriculture grew by 1.4 percent. This is good but could have been much better. As you can see, sectors like telecommunications and construction grew very fast. This is because of the correct policy of liberalisation that we put in place in 1987 and subsequently.

By liberalising the telecommunications sector in 1997, there has been this phenomenal growth in telephones. There is, however, one factor that is common to telecommunications and construction:  both of them use little electricity.  

A sector like manufacturing needs much more electricity in order to grow.  Since this sector grew by 4.2 percent in 2012/2013, it could have grown much more, if there had been no shortage of electricity in the previous years. We, at last, have adequate electricity at least for a little while. Let us see its impact on manufacturing in 2013/2014.  

Between the years 2000, when the Owen Falls dam was extended, and 2005, we had adequate supply of electricity. During those years, the manufacturing sector was growing by an average of about nine percent per annum. Between the years 2005 and 2012, we had inadequate electricity supply. During those years, the manufacturing sector was growing by an average of about seven percent; it went down.

Manufacturing is a sector that can create employment and earn more income. While in Japan recently, I visited the steel making Japanese company known as Nippon.  It employs 50,000 people and earns $ 50 billion per annum.  This is the way to go –(Interjections)– if you don’t know, we know. He doesn’t know where we are going. Of course you don’t know because if you knew you wouldn’t have been on that side.

As you heard, the other data for the economic performance is: inflation rate 3.6 percent; total GDP, according to foreign exchange data, is $ 22 billion. If you use the PPP Method, it is $ 51 billion; export earnings, this year was $ 4.9 billion; remittances from Ugandans aboard were $ 767.26 million; and imports however, were only $ 7.45 billion. Fortunately, investment inflows were	$1.47 billion. Therefore, overall balance of payments was a surplus of $ 416.63 million - (Applause) - and the foreign exchange reserves were $3.3 billion.

These are good figures, especially compared to our starting point in 1986.  The comparative figures were – since you must know - GDP rate of growth, in 1985 and 1986 was 0.6 percent – (Interjections) – corruption was at 200 percent - (Laughter) -size of GDP was US$ 1.55 billion. Export earnings that year were US$ 411 million and that was because the price of coffee that year was quite high otherwise it would have been much less. Inflation rate was 144 percent. Investment inflows were US$ zero between 1987 and 1993. That is when it grew by US$ 9 million annually but in 1986 it was zero inflow. Foreign exchange reserves were US$ 16 million. So, these are figures which are available at no cost to anybody.

However, the Banyankore say, “otarikumanya ngu bamutsigire ati bandinzire” which means that the one who does not know that he is left far behind thinks that the fellow travellers are still waiting for him. When we say that the GDP of Uganda is now US$ 22 billion, if you use the foreign exchange method and even if you say it is US$ 51 billion, if you use the PPP Method, we should not forget that the turnover of Samsung Company - one company in South Korea has got an annual turnover of US$ 32 billion; bigger than the GDP of Uganda.

When we say that the GDP of the whole of East Africa today is US$ 77 billion, we should not forget that the annual earnings of the USA company called Wal-Mart is US$ 220 billion per annum;so one company in the USA has got a bigger income than the whole GDP of East Africa today. Uganda is growing, Africa is also growing; both Uganda and Africa will grow much more and to far greater heights. However, we are still far behind. The tragedy is that Africa or Uganda, which can grow much faster than they are doing today, are not doing so because of the disorientation of either all or some of the elements of the leadership in the respective countries including some of -Here in Uganda, the mistakes of the elements of the leadership are well known. Who delayed Bujagali? [Members: “You”] It was not me for sure. Rt Hon. Speaker, is it in order for people to tell lies in Parliament?

THE SPEAKER: No, it is not.

MR MUSEVENI: The Speaker has said that it is out of order. So please at least do not tell lies. Who delayed Bujagali? It is actually some of you. And the delay of other projects, who were they? [Members: “OPM”] – OPM did not delay any projects. Actually OPM were expediting only that they were doing so in the wrong direction. (Laughter)

Therefore, the tragedy is that countries which are so far behind find that they are the ones who are delaying programmes of transformation and this is very sad. Anyway, for us we always work systematically. Corruption on the part of some of the actors also delays many projects and distorts decisions, it is true. Let us stop these and Uganda will roar. I hope the courts will punish severely those guilty –(Interjections)– But yours is not in court. I think some of you fellows – You know you need to improve our rules. The problem we have is, these fellows are suffering from nyekomatekkan. They do not even know the language. (Laughter)

I hope the courts will punish severely those guilty of corruption and will not give bail to them before the constitutional time of 180 days.

Uganda now has a lot of opportunities. As I told you the other day, we have got several offers to fund Karuma, Ayago and Isimba. We are also promoting Oryang and Kiba for funding. An American Company known as AAE Geothermal has been licensed to generate electricity from the geo-thermal site around Lake Katwe. They think there may be 300 megawatts in the ground there.

Given the peace the UPDF has brought over to Uganda –(Interjections)– You look for him because you are always there - (Laughter) - and the liberal economic atmosphere ever since 1987, the two dangers we face are corruption and delays as well as disorientation in decision making in matters affecting the economy. 

As you heard in the minister’s speech, the Government of Uganda will fund more than 80 percent of the Budget –(Applause). The outsiders will fund only 18 percent of the Budget. In the middle of the financial year, some development partners withdraw budget support that has been planned because of failure to understand each other’s methods of fighting corruption and criminality.

Surely, many people in the world know that the NRM is in a category of its own – (Applause) - unique compared to many actors in the world, when it comes to fighting criminality and corruption. When I look around, I see some of these young people – some of them are old enough to have fought against terrorism, but I did not see them when we were fighting terrorism. You had a very good opportunity to show how you can fight but you did not. 

Having eliminated extra-judicial killings by state agents in Uganda, animal poaching, and so forth, we have now started the war on embezzlement, bribery, nepotism and misuse of office. The cases from the Office of the Prime Minister, from the Ministry of Public Service and from the Ministry of Health that are now in court were detected by the NRM sympathizers and the Police – (Interjections) – you can indulge your heckle as much as you wish, but you cannot remove that. It was the NRM sympathizers and the Police that uncovered the corruption in the Office of the Prime Minister, in Public Service and in the Ministry of Health. 

They were certainly not detected by the Auditor-General or anybody else. The NRM knows what to do and when to do it – (Applause). Therefore, those partners who cut off aid because we had discovered the corruption were not correct. It was a high-handed approach and could not be the correct way to fight corruption. Fighting corruption does not need public relations and publicity seeking actions. It needs the thorough going approach of the NRM.  

In spite of this “aid cuts” and other global economic problems, our economy grew by 5.1 percent – (Applause), inflation was brought to 3.6 percent from 30 percent (2011) and the reserves stand at US$ 3.3 billion.  This proves what the Bible says in Mark 7:15: “It's not what goes into your body that defiles you; you are defiled by what comes from your heart.” It is our internal weaknesses that need to be addressed; we do not need to bother with the outsiders. Let us solve our internal weaknesses and we shall move on.

The low rate of growth of 3.4 percent in 2011/12 was caused by the, mainly, internal mistakes – (Interjections)– yes, sometimes by the NRM elements – (Laughter) – and sometimes assisted by external actors that oppose our initiatives on the economy. The NRM must get rid of these mistake-makers – (Interjections) – you are obsessed with Mbabazi. Mbabazi must be a great man because you seem to be talking about him all the time.

This Budget laid emphasis on infrastructure – roads and electricity.  All the major roads will be done – (Applause).  Many of them will be done with the Government of Uganda funding – [Members: “Taxpayers”] – fine, but organised by the Government of Uganda and the Government of Uganda was elected by those taxpayers, if you have forgotten. Where the development partners have come in, we salute them – (Applause).  

The examples of roads handled by development partners are the following: Nyakaita-Kazo-Ibanda, Fort Portal-Bundibugyo, Vura-Arua-Koboko-Oraba, Ntungamo-Kabale-Katuna, Gulu-Atiak, Atiak-Nimule, Kampala-Entebbe Expressway, Kigumba-Masindi-Kabwoya-Kyenjojo, Masaka-Bukakata etcetera. (Applause) These are being done by our development partners and I am glad you clapped for them. 

The ones that will be handled by the Government of Uganda are the following- and these, by the way are fully funded. We are not looking for money for them, we have the money here – (Applause) – you may hackle, but the money is here. I think some of them may commit suicide out of disappointment. (Laughter) The roads to be done by the Government of Uganda money are: Olwiyo-Gulu-Kitgum-Musingo- honourable minister put in quite a bit of money to start as soon as the tender is awarded. Mukono-Kyetume-Katosi-Nyenga, Musita-Lumino-Busia–Majanja, Mubende-Kakumiro-Kagadi, Mpigi-Maddu-Sembabule, Sembabule-Villa Maria, Kafu-Gulu, Moroto-Nakapiripirit etcetera. These will be done in the new budget with Uganda Government money. (Applause)

The ones completed or nearly completed that have been done by the Government of Uganda are the following: Kampala-Masaka, Busega-Muduma-Mityana, Malaba-Bugiri, Kawempe-Kafu, Tororo-Mbale- although it has delayed they are working on it. Mbale-Soroti, Jinja-Kamuli and Hoima-Kaiso-Tonya. This is the first time, since independence, that such infrastructure tasks have been directly funded by the Government of Uganda on such a large scale.

Emphasis on infrastructure, not only in Uganda but also in the whole of Africa, is justified because that is where one of the major bottlenecks is.  Let us look at the kilowatt-hour (Kwh) per capita of selected countries in the world today. There is this measurement which I keep mentioning to you, the amount of electricity per person. Electricity Consumption for selected countries as per kWh/capita: USA 12,914, UK 5,467, Egypt 1,304, China 3,494, India 498, South Korea 9,314, Nigeria 107, South Africa 4,347, Libya 4,078, Niger 38, Chad 8, Kenya 133, Uganda 150, Tanzania 73, Rwanda 20, Burundi 26. The source is internet; just go to the internet. 

Uganda’s kilowatt per capita in 1986 was 21. This is not acceptable and cannot continue. This is where the problem is. The leaders in Africa, starting with you, if we were in the bush you would not cause this problem. I will not go back instead I will send you back - (Interjections) - You go and join him, you will see what will happen. Let us know that Africa is really backward including Uganda and we work without delay.

I would like to conclude by commenting on regional affairs a bit which is also linked to the same subject of development. I have seen in the print media statements coming out of Egypt regarding the commendable work of the Government of Ethiopia of building dams for electricity in that country.  This is what the whole of Africa needs to do.  That is one reason the economy of Ethiopia has been growing in double digits.  It is, therefore, advisable that the new Government of Egypt and some chauvinistic groups inside Egypt should not repeat the mistakes of the past Egyptian governments.

I am sure you have seen in the papers stories - while you have been seeing only Sejusa, me I see more things. The Egyptians think that the threat to Nile is building those hydro power stations on the Nile. The biggest threat to the Nile is continued under development in the tropics such as lack of electricity and lack of industrialisation. On account of these two, peasants cut the bio-mass for fuel (firewood –enku) and invade the forests to expand primitive agriculture.  

Here in Uganda, the peasants destroy 40 billion cubic meters of wood per annum for firewood. When you get people like Lukyamuzi pretending to talk about the environment - you cannot talk about the environment without talking about electricity. Lukyamuzi is a shadow minister of darkness not electricity.

They also invade the wetlands to grow rice. This interferes with the transpiration that is crucial for rain formation.  Our experts have told me that 40 percent of our rain comes from local moisture – meaning from our lakes and wetlands. That is why, for instance, West Nile and West Acholi have got more rain than Karamoja being on the same latitude notwithstanding. (Interjection) You think that Janet Museveni is the one who caused aridness in Karamoja? You can see that these poor people need some attention. They are just lost, that the low rainfall in Karamoja is caused by Janet Museveni.

It is apparently, on account of the huge wetlands in South Sudan, the forest in Congo and the wetlands in Uganda that West Nile and West Acholi are able to get much more rain than Karamoja, although they are on the same latitude.

Ironically, the Egyptians wanted to drain the wetlands in South Sudan through the Jonglei canal. It was one of the causes for the people of South Sudan to wage war against Khartoum, which was collaborating with the Egyptian Government’s misguided and dangerous policies of that time. Therefore, the threat to the Nile is lack of electricity and lack of industrialisation in the tropics. Electrification so that people stop using wood fuel and industrialisation so that people shift from agriculture to industry and services in the correct way. (Applause)

I have given these views to the past Egyptian governments and to the present one. Therefore, it is advisable that those chauvinistic statements coming out of Egypt are restrained and through the Nile Valley Organisation rational (not emotional and uninformed statements) discussions take place. (Applause) No African wants to hurt Egypt; however, Egypt cannot continue to hurt black Africa and the countries of the tropics of Africa.  (Applause)

I thank you and wish you good luck especially for my young friends on this side. I thank you very much. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Your Excellency, the President, and distinguished guests. I want to thank you for fulfilling your obligations under Article 155 of the Constitution and presenting the Budget to the country.

Your Excellency, following the presentation of the Budget, certain processes and formalities have to be completed to mark the beginning of the financial year. To that extent, I draw the attention of the Minister for Finance, Planning and Economic Development and the Permanent Secretary/Secretary to the Treasury about the provisions of Article 164 of the Constitution and the provisions of the Public Finance and Accountability Act that he should present to Parliament the names of all the accounting officers of the ministries, their institutions and departments of government for the financial year 2013/2014.

I am also giving notice that on 25 June 2013 at 2.00 p.m. the House will convene to do the following: To receive the list of accounting officers; to constitute the sessional committees and to consider the Vote-on-Account.

I am also giving notice to the Business Committee that the Business Committee will sit at 10.00 a.m. on Thursday, 27 June 2013 to handle the business that is ready and give it a sequence. So, please, take note of that arrangement.

On behalf of Parliament, I want to take this opportunity to thank Mr Chris Kassami, the former Secretary to the Treasury/PS Ministry of Finance, for his service. (Applause) He was a very regular feature on the technical benches of Parliament. We wish him a happy retirement.

Now, honourable members, I want to also give notice that tomorrow there will be a sitting of Parliament at 10.00 O’clock to consider some urgent business. So, please, come at 10.00 O’clock and I promise I will not keep you for too long so that you can thereafter proceed to your constituencies until the 25th June. 

So for now, all of you are invited to the Parliamentary Gardens to enjoy the cocktail; have a chat with the Minister for Finance and the President and all our invited guests. I thank you very much. (Applause) The House is adjourned to 10.00 O’clock tomorrow.

EAC Anthem

National Anthem

(The House rose at 5.37 p.m. and adjourned until Friday, 14 June 2013 at 10.00 a.m.) 
