
THE REPUBLIC OF UGANDA

IN THE PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA

Official Report of The Proceedings of Parliament

FIFTH SESSION - 9TH SITTING - FIRST MEETING

________________________

Thursday, 23 June 2005

Parliament met at 10.30 a.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, you have seen the Order Paper. There is a personal statement by hon. Odonga Otto that I suggest we shift to the afternoon in order to get the response we need. The concerned ministers who may have to give answers to some of your problems are not yet here. 

I have also been advised that the Administration of Oaths will be done in the afternoon. I wish to make a comment on the issue, which for several days has been running in the papers. People, including Members of Parliament, have commented on this issue. On 28 May 2005, at around 8.30 p.m., hon. Maj. Kazoora, Member of Parliament for Kashari rang me to say that he was in Kashari. I do not know if he did this because I know his name. He informed me that there was a letter from hon. Brig. Tumukunde. I was at a social function and this was already nighttime. He told me to get in touch with a lady called Stella. When I said I did not know Stella, he gave me her telephone number. 

I rang the lady who told me she was Stella Tumukunde and she is the one who wanted to talk to me about a letter she wanted to deliver to me. I said, “How will you do this? I do not know you and you do not know me.” She said it was urgent that the letter is delivered to me. I told her to take the letter to Parliament since there are Police personnel there. At around 9.00 p.m. Mrs Stella Tumukunde rang me to say she was at Parliament to deliver the letter to me. I did not know the contents of the letter, neither did hon. Kazoora tell me anything to that effect. I did not ask but I just told her to leave it there.  

I rang my driver to go to Parliament and get that letter. He brought it to me at exactly 10.30 p.m. It is known to all honourable members that the Speaker does not get personal letters from the public, apart from cards and letters from Members of Parliament. The other type of letter stipulated in our rules and Constitution is the letter under Article 83, when a member wishes to resign his seat. The provisions are very clear: when you intend to resign, you write under your signature to the Speaker. The Speaker is merely the address to which you deliver that resignation letter. 

This was a resignation letter. I could not do anything about it until Monday when I was able to come to the office. I did not talk to any other person about this letter other than hon. Maj. Kazoora and Stella Tumukunde. In that letter there was no such thing as writing under duress. If there is a copy of any letter in quotes, it is not the one I received. The letter is open and I can give it to you to read.  

The Speaker and the Constitution need not know why a Member of Parliament is resigning. You may tell me it is due to medical reasons, pressure of work, pressure from your constituencies requiring you to resign; it is all up to you. The function of the Speaker in as far as that matter is concerned is just to receive the letter giving all the required details. 

You remember many years ago, President Ahijo of Cameroon was advised by his doctors that unless he resigned from his office, his health was in danger. When he reached France he was told that he was in good health but he had already resigned. Please, let this be clear. Hon. Sabiiti quoted that I was acting on the right tips. Nobody directed me to do this. It was not Maj. Kazoora or even Stella. I was doing my work. That is the role of any Speaker in as far as that provision is concerned. 

I am a lawyer, I have trained many lawyers in this country, I have been a member of the Law Council and I have practised on the Bar. I think I know the law. The seat became vacant and that is the reason somebody is coming to be sworn in. I do not know how his name came in and I do not know him. I just found this item on our Order Paper. I have been very frank with you, honourable members.
 
BILLS
FIRST READING

THE WAREHOUSE RECEIPT SYSTEM BILL, 2005

10.38
THE MINISTER OF STATE, TRADE (Mr Nasani Nabeta): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the Warehouse Receipt System Bill, 2005 be read for the first time.

THE SPEAKER: Certificate of Financial Implications?

MR NABETA: Unfortunately I have not been able to get this. 

THE SPEAKER: If you do not have it here I suggest you complete the process this afternoon.

MR NABETA: That is okay, Mr Speaker.

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE CONSTITUTION 
(AMENDMENT NO.3) BILL, 2005

 (Debate continued.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, you will allow me to start with members from Acholi region who are here because they have an assignment to do this afternoon and tomorrow.  

10.40
MR ODONGA OTTO (Aruu County, Pader): Mr Speaker, I thank you for giving me this opportunity. I am a member of the committee and it is my humble opportunity to submit that since it is a Constitution Amendment Bill, I am now a member of the Constituent Assembly.

I want to comment on Article 105(2). I reject the idea of lifting term limits. For purposes of emphasis and wooing some more people to my side, I will give some reasons. I know many reasons have been given on the Floor of this House –(Interruption)

CAPT. STEVEN BASALIZA: Mr Speaker, I seek your guidance. Hon. Otto Odonga is a member of Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Committee and in fact he wrote a minority report. Is he supposed to contribute? 
 
THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, it is true members of committees normally do not debate but what we have here is a motion for second reading. It is not only the report of the committee that we are debating. He has been given the opportunity as any Member of Parliament, to debate on the motion for a second reading. He may use this opportunity to refer to the report but he is not debating the report. He is debating the motion for a second reading.  

MR ODONGA OTTO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.   I still –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I remind you that you have seven minutes to make your contribution.

MR ODONGA OTTO: We have enough safety nets to ensure Presidents leave State House using elections. Many people may not believe me. They say we should strengthen institutions but even if I were the President of this country it is very unlikely that I would lose elections. I would stop at nothing to ensure that I rig the elections. Therefore, the easiest way to get rid of people in State House is to have term limits. We have gone ahead to amend the Constitution before we have tested term limits.  

If the sympathisers of lifting term limits came honestly and told this Parliament, “We just love Museveni but we also want to retain term limits, what can we do?” the debate would have taken a different direction. We would appreciate that they have a personal liking for the person of the President. Mr Speaker, I believe there are many capable people who can lead this country. There are people in this House I hold in high esteem. If they think they cannot manage then they should get up and say, “Hon. Otto Odonga, I cannot manage the office of the President.”  

The National Political Commissar is a very professional and knowledgeable person who can stand and be voted the President of Uganda, and Prof. Mondo Kagonyera is here. These are people are skilled and can lead this country. I do not want to add Aggrey Awori on this lift, I am just choosing from the Movement side. It is annoying for all these Ugandans of high moral integrity to say they cannot manage. 

Yesterday Prof. Latigo Ogenga said, “Should we lift the term limits, the President will start getting rid of those who were against the idea.” Where term limits cannot remove anyone from State House, the sitting President will want to get rid of all the influential people who are capable of causing problems.  

I want this Parliament to move with caution. I feel - of course there is an argument that there is no morality where there is the law - but I feel it is immoral for this Parliament to open up term limits. In fact this is going to be the biggest factor that will determine who will come back in the next Parliament or not because outside there the response of the society is that the old man has worked. He should go home and keep his cows. 

The moral aspect is very serious outside Parliament. For those who will get up openly on the Floor of this Parliament and say, “open term limits”, I think the morality of the law is not on your side. If we open term limits and President Museveni runs for the next term, we shall reach a stage where if we do not have democratic options to remove Presidents from State House, I am sorry to say, you will open doors for military options.  

If I have a problem with President Mondo Kagonyera I will run to exile in Kenya and wait for ten years. It also takes ten years to change a government using the gun so I rather take ten years in Kenya and come back when he is leaving. However, in a situation where I am not sure when he is leaving State House, I think we are really opening the doors for people to look for other means of changing governments.

In Uganda one of the most obvious means of changing governments is the military option. I have been listening to - I am sorry to say this - a telephone conversation with one of those people who wanted to benefit from the amnesty law. I tried to convince him to come out because people like Brig. Kolo are out and no one has tortured them. For that LRA rebel to say, “I told you. You see President Museveni is so bad that he has even started to violate the Constitution”. 

If your actions can make someone in the LRA have an excuse to say that you are now violating the Constitution, it is a very terrible action. Of all things Kony should not get an excuse to convince the people he is harking to death day and night that he is fighting for a common cause. If your action gives Joseph Kony an excuse to say he is fighting because you are going ahead to violate the Constitution, I think it becomes a very undesirable action – (Interruption)

MR LUKYAMUZI: Thank you very much, for giving way.  The information I want to add to your articulacy is that President Museveni himself is a product of a struggle, which went to the bush to fight an oligarchy.  

MR ODONGA OTTO: I have not benefited so much from that information because I have not understood it.  

Lastly, many people have tried to convince me to vote for the lifting of term limits. I want to use this opportunity to warn them to leave me alone. In this category I also want to take this opportunity to tell my over-zealous colleague, hon. Moses Kizige, that I will not vote for the third term. You know it is not good to preach to a converted person. You must look for a pagan to whom you sell your religion. 

Personally, I have decided that come that day I want all Ugandans to know that hon. Otto Odonga is against the third term because there are other people who are capable of leading this country, like the National Political Commissar, Prof. Mondo Kagonyera and many others. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for giving me an opportunity to reject kisanja.  

10.48
MR REAGAN OKUMU (Aswa County, Gulu): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to thank you for giving me this opportunity to contribute to the motion. I want to start by thanking members of the committee for both their main and minority reports. I know it has not been easy for them because they were under a lot of pressure. To come up with a report like this is something we should appreciate. I want to thank hon. Oulanyah and his team.

Seven minutes will not be enough for me to comment on all the committee reports’ issues, so I will talk about only two issues. I want Members of Parliament here to remember the background to this Constitution Amendment Bill and the timing at which it came. It came at a sensitive time of political struggle, a time when there was fear of the unknown.

Secondly, although I have thanked hon. Oulanyah, it was very unfair for the committee to have abandoned the idea of dual citizenship. I do not think there is controversy on this and as a representative of the people of Aswa I would like to urge Members of Parliament to support this. There are other things, which can be waived, but not dual citizenship.  

About the status of Kampala, I have been seeing many things since the system of decentralisation started. I want to support that Kampala be controlled by the central government. I do not want us to consider only Kampala; the centre should take over all the municipalities as well. There are many sectarian demands for new districts. The management of and accessibility to some of the services in some of these cities and districts are sectarian and I think this is not good for nation building. It is only through the centre’s control of municipalities that we can forge national unity. With decentralisation, when you go to a different district you feel as if you are in a different country because of the implications of decentralisation. This includes jobs, allocation of plots and all sorts of things yet Uganda is a nation that belongs to all of us. 

My second and last point is Article 105(2). I have listened to many people debating and arguing. I have heard people trying to equate Tony Blair to Uganda’s third term where President Yoweri Museveni is involved, with total ignorance about the two separate systems. In Britain they have a different Parliamentary system. In Uganda we have a combination of both Parliamentary and Presidential systems.

I thought that Members of Parliament would look at this during the debates so that all their examples are relevant. Our people need to be educated in order to understand why we have taken certain points of view. There were many reasons advanced by the people who framed the Constitution in 1995. They advanced various reasons. Some of my colleagues here are saying, “If Members of Parliament have no term limit, why should the president?” 

This kind of argument is very shallow because it does not take into consideration the knowledge available. You cannot equate the office of the Members of Parliament, the office of the chairman or even any other office in Uganda with that of the President. The President has tremendous powers, has a lot of influence and is at the helm of everything. The people who made this Constitution must have considered this. Such kind of powers should not be left in the hands of an individual for such a long period. He should go and play some other roles. 

Therefore, people who advance reasons that Members of Parliament have no term limits should look at our history and see what we have gone through. I have never heard anybody going to the bush because a Member of Parliament has won an election. I have never heard of anybody going to the bush because an LC V has won an election. But we have had problems in this country, we have had coups against sitting presidents and these are the ideas we should be looking at.  

I have three reasons, as a leader from Aswa County, I have a responsibility to offer my people guidance. I do not believe in certain things and I must tell my people the dangers of these things. It is for the reasons I am going to give that my people of Aswa and I will not support the amendment of Article 105(2):  

One, as a matter of principle, we do not agree that something, which has not been tested, should be amended. It is a principle that we should have tested this Article 105(2), we should have had some president changed and then eventually we can then say, “Look this is not good.”

Two, we think that it is dangerous for us to create institutions or even amend our Constitution with the mind set on an individual. This Article has its mind set on that individual and I think it is dangerous for this to get into our history. It is dangerous that Parliament should amend the Constitution because of an individual.

Three, we do not accept this because there is the fear of the unknown and fear of some Ugandans against the third term. President Yoweri Museveni is an interested party.  I have seen him put on kisanja at some functions and yet bringing him to power as an individual has been very expensive to Uganda in terms of bloodshed. People fought in Luweero, they lost their lives on either side simply because President Museveni had to be brought into power. Maintaining him in power since 1986 has been extremely very expensive because people have died and they continue to die because of one individual.

Because of Yoweri Museveni there has been a lot of intimidation, harassment and rigging of elections. The Electoral Commission is registering voters at different polling stations and issuing them with NRM/O cards. This is simply because of this one individual. We have also had a problem of fusing of the state with that person to the extent that –(Interruption)

DR KHIDDU MAKUBUYA: Mr Speaker, I hate to interrupt members when they are making their contributions to this important debate. However, I have some difficulty with what hon. Reagan Okumu is saying about the voters’ register, an exercise undertaken by the Electoral Commission. Is it true that when you go to check to find out whether or not you are in the register, you are issued with an NRM/O registration card? 

This is a very serious matter, which will be put in the Hansard. Is hon. Reagan Okumu in order to put these allegations in the Hansard without verification? Is he in order to proceed to malign the Electoral Commission without facts? Is hon. Reagan Okumu in order to proceed in this manner? Where is this happening? Where has he reported this? 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the exercise of displaying voters’ registration lists is done by the Electoral Commission and its agents. Your contribution has been to the effect that this exercise by the Electoral Commission is being used to deal with the affairs of a political party. I do not know if it is true. Can you substantiate? 
 
MR REAGAN OKUMU: Mr Speaker, we are actually in the process of formulating a formal complaint to the Electoral Commission. We have received these complaints from Busia, Kitgum, Kabale, Arua and the West Nile.  

THE SPEAKER: You have received those complaints so you are acting on information. Is the information on oath or just telephone calls and newspapers? If you have that evidence you should tender it. If you are in the process of gathering or verifying the information, that is perfectly okay but until you have completed that, what you are saying is depending on information, which is not verified. That is a natural conclusion from what you have said, so can you substantiate it? 

That is the point but you may go on with the process of verifying, but as of now, can you substantiate it? If you cannot then you should withdraw and proceed but subsequently you will verify this information and bring it here.

MR REAGAN OKUMU: Mr Speaker, the information I am raising here is coming from the fact that I visited Busia and got these complaints. I have also received these complaints in our FDC offices –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: When you say “complaint”, would you say, “Mr Patel or so and so told me this” because that is how you verify otherwise you are still in the process of verifying. If you are in the process, then carry on but as of now are you in position to give us the facts? A point of order has been raised. I may rule in your favour if you can substantiate. If you cannot I rule against you without prejudice to you. 

MR REAGAN OKUMU: Mr Speaker, I do not know whether I should tender individuals into this House because I have –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Can you tell us the names and addresses?

MR REAGAN OKUMU: Mr Speaker, I can get these names.

THE SPEAKER: Now?

MR REAGAN OKUMU: Not now, but I can avail the names.

THE SPEAKER: If not now then for the moment withdraw until you have the details then we can give you an opportunity to present them.

MR REAGAN OKUMU: Mr Speaker, what do I withdraw?

THE SPEAKER: A point of order was raised about your allegation that the Electoral Commission, which is supposed to be independent, is acting on behalf of a party and using public funds. When you go to check for your name they give you – that is why he stood up. You may have that information but do you have it as of now? If you do not, then withdraw and continue with your debate.

MR REAGAN OKUMU: Mr Speaker, as of now I do not have the list of names. If that is the case let me withdraw it but I promise that I will lay on the Table all these facts.

THE SPEAKER: I will give you the opportunity to do so. Proceed.

MR REAGAN OKUMU: Mr Speaker, that was the point I was raising. An individual has been fusing with the state and this is very expensive for the state. The final cost is that many people keep on losing jobs and business opportunities all because of politics.  If there were term limits we would not have this kind of thing. Presidents would know that after ten years their terms of office expire. 

In conclusion, if Article 105(2) is amended as proposed, I want to assure you that the people of Acholi will feel condemned to misery. For the last 20 years they have lived in misery because of that person. If the current political manipulation, intimidation, harassment and blockade of other alternative political players is not stopped because of that one individual – I have been a victim myself having been blocked by mambas. Mr Speaker, I want to assure you that we would also look for our alternative mambas to protect us. 

If the current manipulation is not checked, if the playing field is not leveled, if 2006 elections are rigged, I want to assure you we shall resort to all means because Uganda belongs to all of us.  Thank you.

11.05
MRS MARGARET BABA DIRI (Representative of Persons with Disabilities, Northern Region): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the report on this very important Bill. I have a number of issues to talk about and I hope you will give me enough time.

I would like to thank the Executive and the committee in particular for maintaining the Equal Opportunities Commission in the Constitution. This Commission has been in the Constitution for the last nine months and if it had not been the efforts of the women and the other marginalised groups it was almost thrown away. We have the Equal Opportunities Commission maintained in the Constitution. If we leave this Commission as it is with no time limit, it will be pushed on and on until the end of the Eighth Parliament. Therefore, I am requesting the House to support me so that we give a time limit for this Commission to be established. It could be by the second year of the Eighth Parliament so that we shall have this Commission in place. 

Equal opportunities are important for marginalised groups like people with disabilities, women, and children. Without the Equal Opportunities Commission we shall not receive any benefits. In the budgets we are sidelined. When it comes to programmes, people with disabilities and women are left out. Please, let us have a defined period for the establishment of the Equal Opportunities Commission.

I suggest Swahili as one of our official languages. It is very easy to learn and now widely spoken all over Uganda. It will help people who do not understand English, especially the local councils. They should be given chance to deliberate in the language they understand. English is foreign. When you say one word it means many things but Swahili has been made out of our African languages. Moreover, it has for a long time been used in the training of the Army. It is a business language. If you make it official, we shall have a language shared by all African countries. This will unify us. 

I would like to talk about the appointment of support staff by the Judicial Service Commission. The initiation of the clause for the appointment of interpreters and court clerks is very important. This may appear minor but it is very important. They assist people who are not familiar with legal language and enable them to express their views. Therefore, support staff should be in place but my request is that the interpreters should include those of sign language. If we do not specify, they will only think of verbal language and leave out sign language. 

Deaf people suffer a lot in courts because there are no interpreters to help them understand what is being communicated in court. This should be included in the Constitution so that during the recruitment exercise, sign language interpreters are not left out. This has always happened because for a long time we have trained a number of sign language interpreters but when it comes to employment they ask them, “Where is your certificate? Where do you belong?” Therefore, they are always left out and never appointed. Please, let us incorporate sign language interpreters in addition to all the other interpreters we have. 

The lifting of the presidential term limits seems to be closely associated with His Excellency Yoweri Kaguta Museveni and yet we know very well when we open up we shall go into the Multi-party system. We may have another president who will be very good, who may have all the will to develop the country, who will bring peace. Why should we terminate the services of such a person? The provision is very clear. If the president is not performing, the people have the power to vote him out. 

Let us forget the issue of attaching third term to Yoweri Kaguta Museveni. We should think of our country, the problems we have, and the way forward. We cannot copy from other countries. They have their own problems and even those you claim are happy having put up presidential term limits are regretting. I am sure a person like Mandela if there were no term limits the people of South Africa would still have had him for President. His views would still be entertained and his people would not release him but because of the term limits, he had no alternative. 

Therefore, let us remove the term limits. My people and I do not want any other option for as long as we have a good leader. How many leaders are we going to pay? Every President will want his retirement package after ten years. How much money shall we spend for presidents who could have served longer? We need to have a good president until we are tired of his services so that we do not have too many ex-presidents all around us asking for facilitation.

MR SEBULIBA:  Hon. Baba Diri, thank you for giving way. The information I want to give you is that most of the past presidents are dead. Maybe natural selection will help us to wean them off. 

MRS BABA DIRI: With the comfortable living they are provided now, they normally do not die soon. They live for many years. 

Lastly, I would like to talk about clause 23, which talks of banning marriage between people of the same sex. Homosexuality is imported into Africa. It is not natural. We cannot allow woman-to-woman and man-to-man marriages. These are ideas started by naturally and sometimes psychologically impaired people. We do not need homosexuals, gays and lesbians here. Unfortunately the practice has already started. 

One time I was moving around town shopping and I found a certain person speaking in a very queer voice. The voice sounded like a woman’s and yet at the same time like a man’s. I said, “What kind of person is this one?” They told me, “Margaret, do you know how this person looks like? He is wearing a shirt, a pair of trousers but has earrings, plaited hair and with lipstick on his lips”. Then I said, “Homosexuals! This one is now playing the role of a woman”. I said. “For sure, why is he trying to be a woman when the women are available in plenty?”  

Mr Speaker, I suggest that there should not be homosexuality allowed in Uganda. Thank you. 

11.15
MR JOHN ARUMADRI (Madi-Okolo County Arua): Thank you, Mr Speaker. This is perhaps the most important single item the Seventh Parliament is considering. Listening to the public especially over the radio I regret that we are not held in high esteem. The public does not believe that we shall consider these items objectively. But I will speak for myself because my colleagues will have time to say their bit. Right and wrong, good and evil cannot be determined by numbers. But since there is no better mechanism, those who have the numbers will surely prevail. 

As for me, I will rely on my conscience to decide on this grave matter, which affects our country. The decision I will make today I will carry to my grave and history will judge me whether I made the correct decision for my grandchildren. My grandchildren will get to know about this. My colleagues will also be judged accordingly. As Shakespeare said, the evil that man do lives after them. Some of us are giving genuine advice. Good advice is not criticism. 

Let us not be like the fly in the story told by Chinua Achebe. This fly sat on a corpse and thought he had found himself a very big chunk of meat, which he would not leave unfinished. But a friend advised him that that was not meat to have so much appetite for. The fly insisted and when the corpse was taken to the grave, he was buried along with it. 

Well-intentioned advice should be taken for what it is. Lifting the presidential term limits is not good for our country. I would have liked to see Ugandans emulating the standards already set by His Excellency the President. Even good things must end. We should give other Ugandans an opportunity to show us what they can also do for this country. Before President Museveni came into power, many people did not know him but he has shown us how much he can do. 

It is possible that God has blessed many other Ugandans, including some of us here. I need not dwell on this matter very much; I have made my own decision. I will live with it, my conscience is clear. I cannot sell my conscience just like that. My decision is that term limits are good for me, my children and for my country. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much.

11.22
MR BADRU KATONGOLE (Kyaaka County, Kyenjojo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the committee for the good report. Thank you for giving me this opportunity to make my contribution on the Constitution (Amendment No. 3) Bill, 2005. I support the committee’s position that despite the time constraints, amendments to Article 14 and 15 should be amended in order to take care of dual citizenship, given the importance of the remittances and investments of the intended beneficiaries to the economy.

I also want to support that the Office of the Auditor-General be made autonomous so that it can employ and discipline its own staff. The Auditor-General should be an officer of Parliament. I had an opportunity to visit New Zealand where the Auditor-General is an officer of Parliament. He is autonomous and his operations are not interfered with. I recommend that government should take this proposal by the committee seriously.

I support the proposal to create the Office of the Prime Minister and that of the Deputy Attorney-General as constitutional offices. 

I support that the appointment of the chief administrative officers should be done by the Public Service Commission. Most of the resources meant for the Local Government come from the centre. The centre should, therefore, have a say on how local governments are managed.

Finally, the committee indicates that the proposal in view of Article 105(2) provides indefinite legibility for the President. The committee indicates that the two perceptions for and against do not reconcile and should therefore be decided by vote. I agree with the committee that this proposal is the most controversial. This is because it is the one at the centre of politics. 

Politics is about political power and how we handle this Article will determine the person who will be in office as President in 2006. It will also determine which organisation will ascend into power in 2006, when we get into Multi-party politics. It will determine how Uganda’s interests will be taken care of in the Great Lakes region on the African continent and the world at large. There are indications of powers that are interested in having a purport regime in Kampala.

While I may sympathise with those who are against the lifting of term limits – since they might pick their candidates against the incumbent if at all he offers himself for election in 2006, given that he has not committed any fundamental political mistakes - I would say that given the fragile geo-political situation and to ensure that the interests of Ugandans are taken care of, I support the lifting of presidential term limits. This will enable Ugandans and any other political organisations present candidates of their choice. It is my wish that given the performance of His Excellency Yoweri Museveni, he would offer himself for election in 2006.  

11.28
MR PAUL LUBOWA (Budiope County, Kamuli): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the Government for coming up with this Bill. I thank the Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Committee for its report. The Government White Paper on the Constitutional Review Committee Report states it clearly that after some years the 1995 Constitution was found to be inadequate and had deficiencies, which required correction to make the administration of this country better. 

It states that certain communities in Uganda felt unfairly treated by what was provided in the 1995 Constitution and required redress. Among other things is the question of federo. I am surprised that some members have orchestrated the constitutional review process to focus on one item that is ridiculed as Kisanja. It means lifting presidential term limits. 

Right from day 1, after the promulgation of the 1995 Constitution, one prominent Ugandan, Mzee Besweri Mulondo, had his status severely affected. This was because of the fact that he advised against the kind of federo advocated for at that time. There are more contentious issues than the lifting of the presidential term limits but the whole process is ridiculed to refer to kisanja, which is not the case. A few days ago there was an occasion where somebody was talking about federo, while we talked about different things. This clearly shows that there are more contentious issues than kisanja.  

I wish to talk about the office of RDC, which has received a lot of criticism. Some honourable members here have suggested that we scrap that office.  I say no because there is evidence that some of the RDCs are good. We have former RDCs like hon. Kigyagi, hon. Basaliza Araali, hon. Fabius Byaruhanga, hon. Mukisa and so many others. In my opinion the problem is the appointing authority, which has not properly handled the personal specifications of the individuals meant for this office. Up to now the appointing authority has not properly handled the phrase “senior civil servant”.  

If we asked for a list of RDCs to be laid on the Table so that we compare the qualifications of senior civil servants with the RDCs we might find out that most of them are not properly placed. I advise that when you have a jigger in the toe, it would be unwise for you to propose that the toe be chopped off other than plucking out the jigger. 

I am quite happy with the proposal of the committee that the office remains but the qualifications should be spelt out clearly so that they are easier for the appointing authority to interpret. I would like to add another provision namely that the RDC should be a person of high moral character and proven integrity since most of the RDCs we complaining about lack integrity.  

The other issue is the office of the CAO. I wish to support those members who advocate that appointment be by the Public Service. I think this will help us break the clique-ism at the districts. Instead of harmonious relations we have cliques and many cases of bitterness. Most of us know how CAOs are appointed. The chairman appoints a district service commission and other statutory commissions and boards. The service commission in turn appoints the chief administrative officer and the chief administrative officer appoints other public servants in the district. Therefore, sometimes we have clans or families filling these positions, which is very unfortunate. It affects accountability and there is a lot of nepotism.  

The other thing I want to talk about is Article 105(2). I support the lifting of the presidential term limits, a view I share with people I represent. There has been a common question on the Floor concerning when and how dictators are created. I will give an example. 

I have said some RDCs are dictators but what do you know about dictators? What do you know about these RDCs? You will all agree that no RDC ever spends more than four years at a station and yet they can afford to be dictators, even when they are aware that the next day they will be transferred. Therefore, a dictator is naturally born and it is a question of personality. So whether it means one year, two or three years, one will always be a dictator. 

I also want to talk about clause 27, which continues as an amendment on Article 84 of the Constitution. The clause proposes that after clause 6 of the Constitution another clause 7 should be added. It says the right to recall a Member of Parliament shall only exist while the Movement System is in operation. What then is the purpose of putting in place such a provision? I feel we are perpetuating the doctrine that one should only reap where he sows but I cannot imagine somebody who has been elected as an NRM candidate being subjected to the dissidents of the Forum for Democratic Change, Uganda People’s Congress and or any other party to be recalled. The spirit is also destroyed when we are saying that in clause 3 the fraction be extended to a half or 50 percent instead of two-thirds. 

I read that book, which indicates how each one of us scored in the results of 2001 elections. None of us really achieved more than 35 percent. It would be dangerous to expose the small percentage attained by individuals since the opposition would get a chance to unseat you. I suggest that we maintain that percentage of two-thirds to make it difficult for recall. 

11.36
MR BENEDICT ETONU (Amuria County, Katakwi): I thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me the opportunity to contribute to this very important Constitution amendment. I am going to give members a history and I request that the honourable member behind me gives me chance to talk without interference because listening is another way of wise contribution. You, I and other colleagues here were in the Constituent Assembly and I remember that all of us agreed that we make a Constitution that would not be rigid, a Constitution, which could be amended when need arose. 

I want to give you an experiment, which was carried out somewhere. There was a good secondary school, which was doing very well. Students, teachers and parents got on well with each other. The school’s academic performance was excellent. Because of that all the parents in the surrounding villages decided to take all the children to that school. The school’s population was overwhelming. The school administration decided to divide it into two. When the school was separated, they got another headmaster for the new wing. Five years later the students started becoming hostile to each other until sharing the borehole, which they used to share, became a problem and one of the students was killed. School authorities decided to reunite the school. When the school was reunited, it started doing well again.  

Here in Uganda when we were in party politics, which I enjoyed during the 1980’s, members in this Chamber used not to share tables on the third floor. They were always at each other’s neck. I wish hon. John Kawanga, hon. Mwondha and hon. Okot were in the House today. They would tell you that we used not to share tables or even talk with opposition members. Today with the elections based on individual merit brought in by Movement Government, we are able to sit together and discuss the development of our country. 

Mr Speaker, we are going into Multi-party politics. We need continuity, we need people to be united and because of the fact that Uganda still needs the current leadership to lead us through the transition, we cannot afford to let a new President mess us up after 20 years of leadership. I am sure the majority of the people in Uganda, particularly the middle class, are not familiar with western democracy. We need the middle class to grow so that we can have continuity in this country.

Because of the continuity of the Presidency in this country, our debts have been waived in addition to a few other countries. Why should you say we limit the President to two terms when before the 1995 Constitution we did not have presidential limits in this country? Did the presidents last two terms? What we need to cherish is the peace we have had for these 20 years under the good leadership of one President. 

Why do you think Uganda has never had term limits before? I know all of us here know the answer only that you do not want to accept the fact -[Hon. Ken Lukyamuzi: “Information”] I cannot take information from a person who was not here in the 1980’s. I know hon. Lukyamuzi always wants people to hear him talking but what I am stating here are facts, which are difficult. My humble request is –(Interruption)

MR LUKYAMUZI: Mr Speaker, as Members of Parliament we have a code of conduct and we have Rules of Procedure. There is a rule related to a point of order and a point of clarification. Is the honourable member holding the Floor in order to imply that when I rose to seek for a point of information I just wanted to be heard? I rose on principle to inform you, and it is part of our procedure. Is he in order? Does he know what he is talking about?

THE SPEAKER: I thought that it is a compliment for you to want to be heard by your constituents. Any Member of Parliament would want his people to hear him. 

MR ETONU: I thank you, Mr Speaker, for that ruling. Looking at all these scenarios, we need continuity in Uganda. We need a leader who has been tested and known to perform. To bring in a new person will take this country back to its history of turmoil.  

Good Ugandans really look forward to this Parliament to save them from constant problems. We need to save ourselves from this shame. It is only in Uganda out of the three East African countries where there is always turmoil and yet Uganda was the first to be held in high esteem. I worked in our London Mission in the 1960s. This was very much respected that time. I went to London last year and our mission, probably because of that turmoil, has now been run down. 

Mr Speaker, for the good of this country we Ugandans, and particularly in this House, need to remember our past so that we do not go back to it. Therefore, the people of Amuria and Teso generally have asked me to say in this august House that they want President Museveni to continue guiding this country until we are sure of the middle class. 

The people we are talking about are those who were born in the 1970s. Some of them qualified to vote only recently –[Capt. Byaruhanga: “Clarification”]– I do not want any clarification because I know hon. Byaruhanga was not here in the 1980s. I am giving you that information and you should just listen and benefit from that history.  

When you talk of President Obote, somebody said here he has had his share. People of Teso and my constituents have asked me to say that they need President Museveni to continue until the middle class has developed so that he can hand over to them. They will then have learnt party politics and Movement politics, which we have had. They will be able to compare. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. 

11.49
MR HERBERT MUNTUYERA (Kajara County, Ntungamo): Thank you, Mr Speaker for giving me the opportunity to contribute.  

I suggest the delineation of Kampala so that it becomes the capital city and is run by the central government. I support this because I have heard people say that Kampala is a very beautiful city.  It could be true but in the state it is today I doubt that beauty because there are so many areas wanting, particularly drainage, planning the suburbs and many other areas. 

Courier companies, which deliver parcels and letters to specific addresses, must be having a bad time trying to locate some of these areas. You only have to see Kampala after it has rained to know that it is not as beautiful as people think. There is a lot of runoff, which carries a lot of mud and soil. This covers our tarmac roads and one wonders whether we ever had any tarmac in this city. Therefore, even if it were handed over to the central government you would need a team of serious people to do its planning. 

The second issue I want to talk about is the repeal of Article 105(2). When this issue was brought up it was supposed to be debated considering the merits and demerits. The debate was supposed to focus on the principle and leave out the personalities. When I went to Kajara to consult, about 60 to 65 percent of the people suggested that the term limits should be lifted. 

I tried to de-link the personality of the President from the principle but at the end of the day the 60/65 percent were actually saying we should open up for President Museveni. The others who were saying, “No, we should not open term limits” were saying so because of President Museveni.  Therefore, it was a difficult scenario. At the grassroots people do not know the difference between the personality and the principle but even when you come to the middle and the upper echelon of our society, the thing persists.  

When I was doing coursework for my postgraduate degree at the University of Nairobi, I did some statistics and for those who have done analysis of variants, you must have met a concept called nesting, which is very difficult to de-link just as it is difficult to de-link the personality from the principle. For others it may be so. Of course I have heard people argue that ten years ago in the Constituent Assembly some people took certain positions but now they have changed. Honourable members, I am sure you have heard statements from old politicians like, “A day in politics is a long time”. So if a day in politics is a long time, how about ten years? There is another saying that, “Nothing is constant except change”. 

If certain people took positions ten years on this issue and they seem to have changed, that should not be surprising. I want to quote from the autobiography of G. Kariuki who was a Member of Parliament in Kenya and was one time a Minister of Security in the Office of the President. He wrote and I quote, “Politics, like the globe, rotates ceaselessly, never settling at one point. Therefore, nothing can stop political evolution now or in the future as long as human beings live by the presumption that there is always room for progress”. 

When all is said and done we should be aware that political necessities at one point in time sometimes turn out to be political mistakes. As we debate, vote and do all these things that should not be lost on us. As I conclude, I want to leave you a quotation from J. Golbrith, which says, “Politics is not the art of the possible. It consists in choosing between the disastrous and the unpalatable”. Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

11.57
MR ALOYSIUS OKUMU-RINGA (Padyere County, Nebbi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank you for giving me an opportunity to make a contribution to this very important Constitution (Amendment No. 3) Bill. I visited my constituency during the White Paper discussions and I looked at many issues, which surround the Bill, and these are my observations and the views from my constituency. 

On the issue of a Constitution, which is the basic law, I would like to submit that since 1962 when we had the Lancaster Constitution, Uganda had stability for only four years and that stability was because of constant leadership. The four years of stability, that is 1962 to 1966, were basically because the elite of that time accepted the leadership. But when circumstances changed everything changed, which led to the abrogation of the Constitution. Therefore, a Constitution in itself does not make leaders. Rather, leaders emerge because of the circumstances of the time. Whether later they will be accepted or not, that remains to be judged.  

The question would be, why was it that in 1962 Kabaka Yekka chose to have an alliance with UPC and gave up the other option, which would have been to ally with DP and its leader Benedict Kiwanuka? Those were the circumstances of the day. The subsequent confusion, which arose was not because of the Constitution per se but because the circumstances created led to the abrogation of the Constitution. Therefore, it is from the selfish interests of politicians in pursuit of political leadership that leaders emerge.  

Adam Smith said when he defined private enterprise, “It is from the selfish interests of individuals in pursuit of wealth that the society benefits”. He also used the concept of marginal utility in economics. When you have one car, you will guard it jealously. When you have the second car your relatives can use it, the third car becomes a taxi and everybody will be using the fourth car. That is the concept of marginal utility in economics. Therefore, in politics it is from the selfish interests of politicians in pursuit of leadership that the society benefits. Why do I say this? I am using this analogue to see whether this country has either benefited from good leadership or has suffered from bad leadership.  

From 1986 to date constitutional works have been in place and indeed the 1995 Constitution, which is now the bedrock of stability, is what has kept the leadership of this country up to where it is. My contribution with regard to Article 105(2) reflects on this aspect of the leadership. Do we assign a constitutional amendment to a leadership or to the greater good of society? 

Look at the social cross benefit analysis of the constitutional amendment we are looking at. You know that society is not composed of an abstract or element but rather composed of individuals who have preferences. One would say that from analysis and from my visit to the constituencies the social cross benefit analysis of amending Article 105(2) of the Constitution is that the people ill benefit from the longevity and from the stability, which this country has attained. That is the long term social cross benefit analysis, which we shall achieve from the amendment.

The Constitution, for example, will not help us get people out of the camps in the North. It will not help us get rid of the backlog of cases, which are piling up in the judiciary; and it will not give us money in our pockets tomorrow. It is the elements involved in the management of the provisions of the Constitution, which will help us achieve all this. The majority of the people of Padyere County commended me and asked me to make their point clear that they support the amendment of constitutional provision Article 105(2) for a change of term of office of the president.  
The second point is with regard to the Chief Administrative Officers (CAOs). CAOs have become people who manage resources recklessly. The appointment of CAOs through the District Service Commission has been an anomaly from the start because the capacity of districts to manage and supervise resources has been lacking and so the CAO is the one responsible for the management of those resources. I support the fact that chief administrative officers should be appointed from the centre and also disciplined by the Public Service Commission.

My other point is with regard to the elections of Members of Parliament, the President and Chairman, Local Council V on the same day. This provision is supported by my constituents because it used to be that during a presidential election those who were not supporting a particular system would turn around and confuse the population that they are supporting the elected president after all. Most Members of Parliament, I am told although I do not have the statistics, came because they were able to ride on the popularity of the President. This arrangement will ensure that you are honest with yourself and that you declare your interests from day one of campaigning to the time of voting so that there is no question of turning around and having a free ride on a popular president.

The United States Constitution, which is the oldest known Constitution, has had amendments. Abraham Lincoln, one of the defenders of that Constitution who is credited for his witty speech at Gettysburg, Pennsylvania when he became the proponent of democracy stated that, “Democracy is government of the people by the people and for the people”. And by the way, it is in that order. Most politicians tend to change the order. 

Abraham Lincoln himself was not a great proponent of slavery but he was a defender of the Union. He was a person of charisma, most intriguing, who would divide from within and without, but he remained a very important and popular President. In our case, the National Resistance Movement (NRM) has delivered and I think it is time we maintained this stability. Anybody who feels that they are not able to take leadership can always remain in the queue and work through the various political structures for leadership. 

The most important thing, which we must recognize that the NRM Government has brought, is peace and stability and the Constitution we are working to amend is the bedrock of our stability. It is this stability, which I believe will live beyond us. It is not we the individuals who should imagine that we shall be here perpetually. Rather, we are creating conditions so that the people beyond us will maintain peace and stability.

On behalf of the people of my constituency I would like to reaffirm the fact that when we open up political space all of us will be starting from zero. When we open up, even I, Okumu-Ringa, will be going for the first term because right now I am just working as a Movement Member of Parliament but when I go back I will be going to campaign as a Member of Parliament in the Multi-party arrangement, and that will be my first term. 

In our case if we choose President Yoweri Kaguta Museveni as our flag bearer and party leader, I think he will also be starting from the beginning. Let us all start as one and build for the future. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much.  

12.10
MR DEUSDEDIT BIKWASIZEHI (Buhweju County, Bushenyi): I thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me an opportunity to contribute on this important Bill. Because of lack of time, I will not tackle many issues.  

There is the issue of a second language of Uganda. In this era of globalisation, I would hesitate to recommend Swahili as a second language in this country because ideally a country should promote a language that is rich in culture and knowledge. 

Only the other day hon. Nsubuga Nsambu talked about Swahili as a language, and apparently it almost has no roots. Also in this era and with the problem of unemployment, we need to promote a language that will give our people the opportunity to compete internationally. If any of us has attended international conferences or has sat for an interview at an international level, you will see how disadvantaged we are as a country because of the one international language we have, which is English. 

Currently China, with a population of about 1.3 billion has a widely spoken language but they have realized that in order to be players in this global economy they must also acquire another language. Now they have got about 30 million teachers of English and they hope that in the next few years they will have a population of over 500 million people speaking English.  

Mr Speaker, you may recall the day we met our Ambassador in Paris. She told us that even France is looking for teachers who will teach English in their country so that they can have another language. This is something that the Ministries of Education and Foreign Affairs should take up because those could be job opportunities for our people. She even indicated that there are opportunities in other professions like nursing but we have a problem of language. Besides, even the costs of living there are cheaper compared to the UK. 

Because of those reasons I would hesitate to recommend Swahili and instead recommend French, which is going to open opportunities for our population so that they can be major players in the global economy and in view of the fact that jobs may not be available locally. You realize we have a lot of Bazungu here working in various departments. They come and look around for opportunities in developing countries. When they realize that the opportunities may be in water or HIV they go and study those courses only to come and take those opportunities. 

As regards clause 37, the worst time for a politician is campaign time. I will say that happy are those who attain and enjoy political offices. I am not referring to anybody who has not been subjected to elections. I have witnessed presidential candidates and Parliamentary candidates campaigning and it is a hard life. You may recall when our honourable colleague here run out of fuel when he was in the sky flying and he almost had a disaster because he had forgotten to refuel. He was lucky the plane he was using did not require a runway and he could land anywhere and acquire the fuel. 

If you look at our history you will realise that the small number of elections is partly responsible for our bad history. I will illustrate. In 1962 when the UPC Government came to power, UPC was able to win because of the convenient alliance between them and KY. By the next elections that alliance had run sour. Because UPC could not rely on KY, they could not organize elections because they knew that they could not win without KY. It is because of this that the elections were postponed and this continued until 1969. That is how tricks started until the Government was caught up by the military coup and this enhanced the case of our bad history in Uganda. 

As I indicated, if a system allows regular and fair elections and every system is to be subject to elections, then it is a guarantee and there are laws in place to ensure that elections will take place regularly. 

I do not have any hesitation in agreeing with the proposal to amend Article 105(2) so as to open political space as long as there is that guarantee of elections, which will act as a check and determine whether a leader comes back or not. If you consider the recent elections you can see the trend they took even if you may have talk of people being intimidated. The trend has been that people vote freely and decide whether to retain their leaders or not. You can see all this from the turnover in Parliament and even the declining votes, which the incumbent President has been getting.

Finally, I support the idea of Kampala having special status because we are sitting on a time bomb. More than 90 percent of Kampala uses septic tanks. It is only about five percent of the city that does not use them. Because of that I am a bit skeptical about whether it will be possible to create a modern city out of the present Kampala. Because of this efforts should be made to ensure that physical planning is done before construction takes place. We need physical planning not only in Kampala but also in urban centres of other towns. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Before hon. Anang-Odur speaks, in the public gallery today we have students from St Peter’s College Buwela. It is located in Kagoma County in Buwenge, Jinja. You are most welcome. (Applause)

12.19
MR TOMSON ANANG–ODUR (Kwania County, Apac): I wish to thank you, Mr Speaker for giving me this opportunity to make my contribution to this important debate. Permit me to thank the committee and the minister responsible for this sector for the good job they have been able to do so far. 

The question is, should we amend Constitution? My answer is yes. In a young country like ours it is necessary, from time to time, to amend Constitutions to be able to build the capacity of institutions so that we can govern ourselves better. We should amend the Constitution to enhance the separation of power and harmony to settle institutional relationships so that our country can move in the right direction. It is because of these reasons that I agree with the various recommendations of the committee among which are to join presidential and Parliamentary elections so that they are on the same day. 

I support the committee on retention of the current status of the IGG and the Uganda Human Rights Commission. I also request the chairperson, if it is possible, to recommend that in the procedures prescribed for a judge, the removal from office should also be included. This is to ensure security of tenure of office and the capacity to deliver without fear or favour.

The Army should not be involved in political affairs. We need a non-partisan Army and that cannot be if we have them in Parliament. The current treatment of a former Member of Parliament representing the Army, Brig. Tumukunde and others before him is a clear testimony that it is not feasible to have Members of the Army in Parliament taking part in debate without the problems, which you have seen.

Mr Speaker, I think the CAO should be appointed by the District Service Commission. I implore the chairperson to consider strengthening the capacity of the commission instead so that they cannot be influenced by local governments. I also suggest that the creation of new districts be nationalized and that the Electoral Commission Chairperson be a person qualified to be a judge and should be treated with the respect accorded to a judge. Also, that the appointment to the Electoral Commission should be in consultation and with the approval of Parliament to ensure impartiality, fair play and trust on both sides. 

The regional tier should be based on a rationalised definition where similar functions and responsibilities are transferred to regions by Parliament from the local and central government. This will rationalise and ease function relations between district governments, central government and the regional tier. This should be in accordance with the proposal in Article 178(7), which states that the regional government is the highest political organ and authority in the region. I proposed this before and I request the chairman to remember that it would be better to have districts report to the regional tier, which in turn will report to the central government to ease relationships. 

On the question of removal of term limits, because of lack of time let me just note that throughout the CRC hearings there was no mention of removal of term limits. In the Uganda Round II PAFO Barometer Report Survey in 2003, 80 percent of Ugandans stand by constitutional term limits. Where did the idea come from, Mr Speaker? We all know that it came from Kyankwanzi when the NEC of Movement met. It was born in the Conference Centre. 

Various arguments have been advanced for and against term limits and I want to mention just a few. Opening term limits allows for healthy competition. Even in those countries where you have got presidential term limits like America, there is healthy competition for power. This argument cannot be shunned and I think we should be honest with the arguments we put forward. 

We agree, and I have stated it here before, that President Museveni is a test leader. In 1980 I noted that in Nyabushozi people did not think he was a good leader. It was until he came to power that these qualities were demonstrated. Now for us to argue that because President Museveni is a test leader nobody else should come in is most unfortunate and it is a dishonest intellectual exposition. In Uganda we have many leaders in the making who are capable and who can do even better. Yet Hon. Etonu was saying that in this transition, we need to have the incumbent continuing!

Our elections took place at the same time with Tanzania and I want to note that Tanzania is one of the most peaceful countries in Africa and they are doing well. In fact they are moving faster and better. This argument, therefore, should be taken very seriously. Let us agree that Ugandans are capable of getting another leader. We have argued that the term limits we put there were to ensure that there is possibility of political change so that nobody feels compelled to use force because of lack of another option.

We know what is happening and I think we should be serious and have a new wheel of leadership so that it is an opportunity for reconciliation to be built and so we can move forward as one. We have no time but let me reply my sister hon. Syda Bbumba. She made some comments yesterday about her constituency and I have no reason to doubt that she is speaking the truth, that there are mass graves of 30,000 skulls. She blamed Obote for being a dictator and so on and I am not going to answer that. 

However, as I speak, we in Acholi and Lango have been not been able to bury the skulls of our people. There are thousands of them in the bushes of Acholi and Lango. We do not know how many there are. But if you consider that we have had 1.6 million people in the camps over the last 19 years, then you can understand how we feel. 

As leaders, let us not be myopic when we are making arguments in this Parliament. Let us not say we have peace in this country, because if you look at what is happening in the North and you continue talking about peace when the situation is continuing, I feel pain. I feel pain because we are not being human beings with regard to our feelings. 

I think what we could be arguing for is an opportunity for Ugandans to lead so that the people in the North can have hope. In the last 19 years, that hope has not there and we do not see it coming. There is despair in the camps, with seven percent of people HIV positive and we fear what is going to happen because it is a very serious matter.

Lastly, it has been argued that free and fair elections will be an option to term limits. We are in Africa and we are in Uganda. I sympathize with Members of Parliament in this House, if they can join Kalangala Action Plan in spite of its record. It tells you the magnitude of suffering we have to endure. 

As a Member of Parliament you might fear that you will be thrown out and so you join them to survive. We have a problem of conscience as regards our actions and this is a fact of life. This Parliament carried out an investigation into election violence. We have a report and we know what happened yet we come here to Parliament and say, “if we have free and fair elections we can change the leadership”. It is not possible and this is the sad situation. 

I must speak now just like a prophet does when people have lost hope and they have gone astray and they cannot hear. I can only hope that in the next Parliament and with the next generation of Uganda we shall have people who shall be at peace with their conscience and actions so that this country can be saved. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. What surprises me is that since we started debating this Bill nobody has seriously come up to talk about the election process when actually Article 105(2) is connected with this. I had left it as a known issue but the two subjects should go hand in hand.

12.31
MR JOHN KIGYAGI (Mbarara Municipality, Mbarara): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to join my colleagues to thank the Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Committee for the work well done. 

I only have one issue of contention and that is clause 85 of the Constitution where Parliament retained the power to determine its own emoluments. I remember very well that during the constitutional review process there was an overwhelming request by the population that a body –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: There has not been a constitutional review process. We are doing it here.

MR KIGYAGI: I mean that when they were collecting views there was an overwhelming request that a body be set up to review salaries and remuneration. This request was dropped but the reasons given were not very convincing. I request the chairperson, when they are winding up, if they could amplify this case because it is very important.

Secondly, on Article 105(2) of the Constitution, which is about the lifting of the presidential term limits, fellow Ugandans and Members of Parliament, I think the issue of politics in this country was sorted out by the Movement Government when they gave power to the people. I call upon my colleagues to give Ugandans an opportunity to either renew or terminate leadership at all levels and I am sure that through their wisdom they will be able to do this without any problem. 

This issue of term limits is not an important issue yet it seems to be debated here all the time. I think this is because of the powerful leader that we have. To assess power you must struggle for it and you must be strategic in assessing it. I call upon the people who are opposed to this to combine their efforts to put a strong candidate who will compete with other candidates. 

Like one member said, when you ask the population about the merits and demerits of this amendment, they seem to zero down on the candidature of a person. My view is that if you feel that a candidate is very strong, put your efforts together, get a good candidate and compete. But if you are going to stifle another party because they have a strong candidate, then I think that is unfair to the population. We should let the population determine the leadership. 

The other day, hon. James Kakooza spoke on the issue of resident district commissioners and I thought he was a bit unfair in his speech. He said that resident district commissioners are useless, the office is useless and that the office should be scrapped. I would like to call upon my colleagues, and I am happy hon. Kakooza is here, and say that the office of the Resident District Commissioner, just like any human institution, is not 100 percent perfect. 

Between you and I, we know very well that the resident district commissioners in this country are doing a commendable job in monitoring government programs, disaster management and in making sure that the President and Vice-President of this country are able to fulfil their obligations of security to districts by ensuring that heads of security organs comply and have appropriate control over their security organs. 

Also with issues of domestic violence, foreign affairs, borders and many other aspects, resident district commissioners are doing a commendable job. Even in fighting subversion, like when Universal Primary Education was introduced, there were many people, including some Members of Parliament –(Interruption)

MR KAKOOZA: Thank you honourable colleague for giving way. I want to set the record straight about what I stated because I have been misquoted. I said that if a party wins, it has got structures at all levels and it can draw a strategy instead of wasting money in public expenditure. I quoted that we are still getting donor funding and this money can be used to strengthen the Police and other organs other than having resident district commissioners. This is because the situation analysis does not give a true picture of what these people are supposed to do. I did not say that they are useless but rather I gave an alternative. The Government is still donor funded by 25 percent and yet you find a lot of shoddy work when you check the records of local governments. Instead of wasting all that money, it can be used to strengthen the Police. This is what I said. 

MR KIGYAGI: Thank you very much. I am happy you have mentioned it again. Mr Speaker, I want to amplify the issue hon. Kakooza raised about public expenditure and say that resident district commissioner actually earns Shs 1.2 million. If there is any public expenditure to be reviewed, it should begin from this House because of the 340 Members of Parliament as compared to less than 100 RDCs and their deputies. This is not comparable. 

I think hon. Kakooza is being unfair and unjust to say the hiking of public expenditure is due to resident district commissioners when actually it is not. I have laboured on about why the office of the resident district commissioners should be retained in monitoring. 

If you go to the offices of the IGG, to the ministries for all programmes in health, education and works, you will find that the people who have been at the helm of monitoring and fighting corruption and shoddy work are the resident district commissioners. This is well known from the reports they make, from what they follow up and from the work they are doing. If this House is not sensitive to that then I think they have not been aware of what the resident district commissioners have been doing.

I agree there have been points of conflicts with local government and I actually support part of the amendment. There have also been points of conflicts with hon. Members of this House who have come to try and sabotage the UPE programme and say it is useless. And of course the RDCs stand up and defend what has been passed in this House and what has been provided for. Therefore, I advocate that we retain the office of the RDCs and actually give them a pat on the back for the work they have done. I know there are a few who are errant and misbehave just like any other officers would, but these can be dealt with. 

There is another issue, which –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, you have made your point on that issue and it is time.

MR KIGYAGI: Yes, I am summarizing. Regarding qualifications for RDCs, I absolutely agree that since they are senior civil servants, minimum qualifications should be set so that they can comply with the work they are doing.

In summary, I would like to –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Your time is up.

MR KIGYAGI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

12.42
MRS RUTH TUMA (Woman Representative, Jinja): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I join my colleagues who have already contributed to thank the committee and the chairperson for producing a good report and for giving us some work to do. 

This Bill deals with 38 Articles and I would like to appeal to my colleagues to be dedicated when we are doing the work, which has been assigned to us by our electorate, so that we can help the Government do a smooth and transparent job in a manner, which will be admired by all neighbouring countries. The job before us is serious and the end results will judge us.

The Constituent Assembly (CA) did a wonderful job but we know that man is not perfect and God always has the last word. The Constituent Assembly was very careful, working day and night to come out with the Constitution of 1995. There are clauses, which help us to follow and digest what is going on and to have a vision for our nation. There are Articles like Article 1, with clauses on who to govern, how to be governed and how to have regular and free elections.  

Mr Speaker, I had a few problems when I was reading the Article especially in connection with the elections. Members of Parliament in this House have contributed about violence in elections especially during the last elections and you have rightly guided us that we have not come about the election process. 

I have a few points, which I wanted to bring out here. We have the Electoral Commission, which is appointed by the President. However, I wonder whether we should continue to follow the process of the appointment of the Chairperson of the Electoral Commission when we turn to Multi-partism. I wonder whether the committee had some consultations on this. Should we have the Executive advertising so that people apply? What kind of person should we look for?  

I have an idea that maybe we could think of having a judge of high repute to be in charge of the Electoral Commission. This may put our hearts at peace especially those who think that the Electoral Commission manipulates elections for the incumbent, which I know is wrong. The Electoral Commission is independent and acts independently. It has its own Articles that it follows while making arrangements for elections.

I am also aware that members are not sure of themselves. Are we trying to amend the Constitution because of the incumbent? We have a provision in the Constitution, chapter 18, and it provides for amendment in the Constitution. I think everybody should be happy that we have been given an opportunity to contribute our ideas. Let us not fight or be abusive. Rather, let us work together for the good of this nation. 

Ours is a young democracy, which we are trying to mould into a model country for the whole of Africa. As it is, many delegations have come to Uganda to look at what we are doing and how are we doing it and they say it is admirable. Yesterday I met some people from South Korea and they invited me to go and meet them at their hotel. They asked us how Parliament is doing its work and we narrated to them the way we are doing it and they admired everything. We should be proud of what is happening and instead of ridiculing it, let us put in more firewood so that everybody can know what is going on.

I would like to comment on Article 105(2), which has raised a lot of dust. When we talk about the amendment or repeal of Article 105, I take it that we are talking about lifting of the term limit. But for some reason some of us think we are talking about ekisanja. I cannot understand what ekisanja is. Let us not confuse the two issues. We should focus on lifting the term limit as a principle. We must have principles and be honest. We should stop attacking individuals because we are talking about a principle, which we are all aware of and which I know you all admire and would like to have in our Constitution. We are talking about lifting the term limits and very soon we are going for a referendum. People will make their choice and when they do this we are going into Multi-partism. Each party will have its own constitution and its own leadership. At that time it will be up to each party to decide who their leader will be.

On behalf of the people of Jinja –(Interruption)- I have run out of time, we can talk about that after Plenary. The people of Jinja have been discussing Article 1 with me and they want to be given an opportunity to choose. We believe that we will be the majority and democracy is the rule of the majority. They recommend lifting of term limits and repealing Article 105, clause 2.

I would also like to talk about the office of the IGG. This is an office, which should be strengthened and I support the committee’s position and would like to share this with my colleagues. I was going through the report of the Auditor-General, 2004. My goodness, the filth in that report! The IGG must be given an opportunity to do its work. I urge the Government to give the IGG an opportunity to deal with these corrupt people who are making our government look incapable. We must weed them out so that we can have a clean government.  

I would also like to talk about Kampala. Kampala is a beautiful city. We used to learn during geography lessons that Kampala was a city of seven hills. But now when I move around Kampala it has several agents of rumours and what a mess! There are no good roads and no public conveniences. When you go to Nakivubo, rubbish and buveera are all over the place. But I know that when government takes over, they will have enough funding for the city and the city will be able to shine as one of the wonderful cities on this continent.

I would like to join voices with one colleague, hon. Reagan Okumu and ask that once government takes over Kampala they think about other municipalities because they need the same attention. These include Jinja, Mbarara, Mbale, Gulu and Soroti municipalities. We would also like those cities to shine.

Lastly, concerning the elections for President, Members of Parliament and Chairpersons LC V, the people of Jinja have discussed this on several occasions and they have told me to come and report that they support the elections on the same day for these reasons.  

One, it will reduce on influence pedalling; two, it will also help to save on resources so that candidates can have enough time to do their work; three, it will shorten the election period; and four, it will also save us from campaigning fatigue. Thank you, Mr Speaker, for this opportunity. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable members for your contributions this morning. We have been able to cover 13 contributions. We started a bit late because you were not here but I hope we shall cover more in the afternoon. I have looked at those who have been with me up to the end and you will definitely get first opportunity to air your contributions. I have got you on my list. The proceedings are suspended up to 2.30 p.m. this afternoon.

MR AMURIAT: Mr Speaker, I just want to get a clarification. I have looked at the legislative timetable and I wonder whether debate on this Bill will continue until next week. It would be a good thing to give us an idea as to how much time we actually have.

THE SPEAKER: No, it will not go up to next week. I am trying to exhaust those who want to contribute today, tomorrow and Monday, but I think we shall vote on the issue on Tuesday. So it will not go up to the end of the week. I will cover those who are here. The House is suspended until 2.00 p.m.

(The House was suspended at 12.56 p.m.)

(On resumption at 2.34 p.m._)

ADMINISTRATION OF OATHS

The Oaths were administered to:

Brig. Andrew Gutti

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Andrew Gutti, you are welcome to Parliament and you will find friends here. You are expected to work for the good of our country. I wish you well. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: I want to recognize senior UPDF officers who are in the gallery. You are welcome to your Parliament. (Applause)

PERSONAL STATEMENT

2.44
MR ODONGA OTTO (Aruu County, Pader): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for having accorded me this opportunity to make a personal statement on three issues in Aruu County in Pader District.  

While I was in my constituency last week on Thursday the 16th, in Aruu County, Pader District, Awere sub-county, in Rwakikoko trading center at 1.00 a.m., 24 people were beaten up and seriously injured by some UPDF Officers under the command of 2nd Lt Patrick Abawo of the 25th battalion, 509 Brigade, 5th Division. 

Currently there is a sequence of general panic in the districts of Kitgum and Pader because of an alleged ghost woman, which one Lt Komakech allegedly brought from the Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC). Lt Komakech allegedly changes into cats, dogs and snakes and pinches people at night. Mr Speaker, this situation has set the camp populations in Kitgum town, Achoi-Bu, Pajule, Corner Kilak, Rwakikoko and Purang in panic, fear and desperation. I slept in one of the camps and people were shouting the whole night.  

Traditionally the Acholi respond to such fears by chanting and drumming to scare away evil spirits. On the night of the 16th the people of Rwakikoko IDP camp, like in other camps, were performing the drumming ceremony when one Lt Patrick Abawo moved armored vehicles and marched soldiers from the army detach to the camp, ignoring the advice of the GISO, and broke into people’s houses and beat people for close to one hour. They broke 15 huts, injured 24 civilians, including two pregnant women who were beaten to unconsciousness, and one infant of two months who got knocked down in the scuffle.  

Mr Speaker, allow me to present the details and some pictures of those who were beaten and sustained injuries by the soldiers. The list is as per the GISO of Awere sub-county. Alice Abwal has swollen legs, Robert Odongkara of 12 years has a wound on the head, Helen Adong of 48 years has a wound on the head and a swollen back as per medical reports, Doreen Alangom’s condition is unclear as per now, Martina Ajok of 45 years has her condition still unclear, Simon Okullu of 21 years has got some chest problems, Peace Lalam has got a swollen face and back, and Susan Alango of 15 years has got a wound on her left hand as a result of speared by a bayonet.  

In the statement I presented to you there was a picture of a primary seven girl. This is the Susan Alango I am talking about with wounds on her hand. Fred Sankara of 14 years was beaten on the back, Helen Adong of 17 years was pregnant and lost her two months’ pregnancy in the scuffle. Tarsis Angom of 30 years was beaten on the buttocks and chest, David Ogwang of 35 years still has his condition unclear, Night Lawino of 39 years is pregnant and was beaten on the face, chest and ear, Udong of 28 years was beaten on the chest and arm, Bosco Oryem of 19 years has got a wound on the left leg, Helen Lakot of 40 years was beaten on the right jaw, Mary Akongo was beaten on the right arm. 

Desire Angom was beaten on the right jaw and lost her teeth, Beatrice Akello of 19 years has got a bruise on her left knee, Simon Abwola of 14 years has got what the doctor called traumatic injury, Lucy Akwero of 31 years sustained a broken tooth, Richard Kinen of 28 years was wounded on the face, James Okello of 35 years got an injury on the face, arm, wrist and back, and last but not least, Jakayo Abila, an old man of 65 years, lost three teeth to a drunken UPDF soldier.

I personally went to the Army detach and met the UPDF soldiers and their commander. Second Lt Patrick Abawo offered to meet all the medical bills and to repair all the broken houses as long as the issue was left as a Pader affair. Some people have been rushed to Kitgum hospital and Rwakikoko dispensary is entirely full.  

My second statement is on the security situation. Mr Speaker, the security situation is not good. On Friday at 11.00 a.m., the LRA abducted four people from Rwakikoko IDP camp. In Pajule sub-county LRA rebels clubbed three women to death by smashing their heads. These women had gone three miles to gather fruits. People cannot go more than three miles out of the camps even though roads are open between 11.00 a.m. and 5.00 p.m. Certain roads are still unsafe and impassable, for example the Pajule-Pader road where the rebels have ambushed two vehicles in the last two months. According to me the situation is bad contrary to major reports by some people.

Thirdly on the status of LDUs, it is sad that the local defence units in the entire Pader County have not been paid their salaries since January 2005. The LDUs last got their salaries in December and they got a pair of uniforms that same month. To date it is coming to six months and the LDUs have not received a penny. They have been surviving on the World Food Programme and in some cases they go ahead to uproot peoples’ food and crops around the camps. Many LDUs I visited in the camps of Pajule, Lapulu, Kilak and Lagire have openly complained and threatened to desert. In Agago close to 300 LDUs have openly clashed and left the Army detach and are still at large. 

Mr Speaker, allow me to make the following recommendations:

One, that the UPDF officer, 2nd Lt Abawo be brought before the court martial and transferred because of his bad record. I want to use this opportunity to thank Capt. Ivan who is the commander at Lagire for his high level of respect for civilians. 
 
Two, in relation to these ghosts, which are scaring people in the camps, I urge the Government especially the Ministry of Health, to urgently send a team of experts, counsellors and psychiatrists to Aruu County to help salvage the society of trauma. This is a very serious matter because all the elders and children are busy banging jerricans all night against the ghosts. When the society is collectively traumatized, this can be a very dangerous situation.  

Three, there is urgent need for medical assistance to help the injured people in the IDP camps. 

Four, the LDUs salary should be paid immediately to avoid massive exodus from the armed forces. Last night there was a shoot out in Pajule between the LDUs and the UPDF after they heard my statements on radio so I urge the Government to take this as a matter of urgency.

Five, the LDUs salary should be channeled through the Ministry of Defence and not the Ministry of Internal Affairs, which has proved very ineffective to date. At an appropriate time I will Table a motion, urging Parliament to change the manner in which the salary of the LDUs is being channeled. The UPDF soldiers get their salaries by the 28th of every month and it is the Ministry of Internal Affairs, which is delaying the LDUs. 

I await the Government’s response in determining the legal action we can take. I thank you for the opportunity you have accorded me.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, as you might have observed, this statement is not a personal statement but a statement on a matter of public importance. Under our rules you can debate or comment on such a statement. However, I think I should ask the Minister of Defence if he has anything in response.

2.55
THE MINISTER OF DEFENCE (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I thank hon. Odonga Otto because he sent this statement to the Ministry of Defence in advance. The Minister of Defence received it and instructed that investigations of the allegations be started immediately and they were. I am sorry that at the moment I have not received a full report from the field about the person mentioned in this statement and regarding the violation of human rights. 

Therefore, I seek the indulgence of the Speaker and the House to give me time to come up with a response. My view is that human rights violation is a matter of fact and either it happened or it did not. I think it is only fair and reasonable that the ministry be given time to come back and state whether these allegations are true or not and then on that basis we can have a debate. The question of security falls in the same category as human rights violations. In fact I think even the first one should have been treated as security because that is precisely what hon. Otto is talking about. 

About the status of LDUs, it is true that they have not been paid for quite some time and this Parliament is well aware of that. Only a few weeks ago this Parliament passed a supplementary and the Vote of the Ministry of Internal Affairs for the purpose of paying the LDUs. I think, therefore, that the process of raising the money for paying these LDU is undergoing the bureaucratic channels. I am quite confident that they will be paid at any rate. I would like to assure them that all their dues will be paid. 

I am not aware that 300 LDUs have mutinied and are in the bush - because that is what hon. Otto is saying. It is not true that this has happened because if a thing like that had happened I would have had an immediate report on it. Therefore, I am certain that there is no mutiny and for 300 LDUs to go into the bush! Three hundred is a big force and they would not hide. We would all know. So, Mr Speaker, I beg the indulgence of the House to allow me establish the facts about the statements and mistreatment of individuals, which hon. Odonga has made. It will be responded to in full by a report, which I undertake to produce latest by Tuesday. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Yes, but we cannot open the debate unless we have disposed of his prayer.

3.00
MR AGGREY AWORI (Samia-Bugwe County North, Busia): Thank you, Mr Speaker. It is a pity this kind of report comes on a day we are swearing in one of our colleagues from the armed forces. However, I hope he does not represent the true image of the UPDF. 

My main concern really this afternoon is to duplicate the statements of the response from the Minister of Defence on this serious matter. Why am I duplicating this statement by the minister? As a minister responsible for security in this country, I know it is a general practice that you get reports every 24 hours on the entire nation. Any small incident especially pertaining to such a number of people being ill-treated by whatever means, should not escape the notice of the minister. Fortunately the honourable colleague –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: No, no! Let us direct our contributions to the prayer made by him. He says that he has instructed for details but has not yet received them. He wants to give you details if you give him time. He will come back and give you the details so that we can have a debate. Concentrate on that prayer and postpone the debate until such a time as will be agreed upon.

MR AWORI: Mr Speaker, I was actually in the preamble of disputing the prayer. (Laughter)  His –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: We have little time, honourable members. The prayer is that he is not ready with the report but he has said that he is going to bring the report to assist you to get the two sides of the case so that you are in position to debate. I would definitely accord you some time when we agree to debate this statement. It is better that way.

MR AWORI: But must we live with a very inefficient minister who does not know what is going on in his ministry? He comes here, we challenge him with information, he cannot answer, he prays for more time!

THE SPEAKER: No. That is an issue, which you can raise when we start the debate. Honourable members, I do not think we should debate today before he brings the report. It is question of when we should debate the statement because when hon. Otto gave the copy of the statement his intention was to facilitate the debate so that the other side gets to know his case in order to come with information so that we can meaningfully debate it one way or the other. Since the minister has got the details as requisitioned, we give him up to Monday afternoon then we shall deal with this statement. 

3.03
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH, PRIMARY HEALTHCARE (Dr Alex Kamugisha): Thank you, Mr Speaker and honourable members. Unlike the Minister of Defence, before this report came to this House I did not have that opportunity and I have no information to show that my colleagues who are not here may have been informed about what happened in hon. Otto’s constituency. However, he has mentioned the number of injuries, multiple injuries, pregnant women and so on, and usually when something is so severe to warrant the intervention of the headquarters, we would by now have received that kind of report. 

However, like the Minister of Defence, after here I will undertake to find out what is happening to these people who are reported to have sustained injuries to that extent and whether or not a team, as suggested by hon. Otto, is necessary and then at an appropriate time - may be at the same time when my colleague is reporting - we can update hon. Otto and the House on what our findings have been. So, at this material time I do not have full comments to make. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Okay. Let us have the comprehensive report on this statement on Monday so that we can meaningfully debate it. Thank you.

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE CONSTITUTION 
(AMENDMENT NO.3) BILL, 2005

(Debate continued.)

3.05
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH, PRIMARY HEALTH CARE (Dr Alex Kamugisha): Thank you, Mr Speaker and honourable members for giving me this opportunity to make a contribution, and a very humble one, to this debate, which I also regard as a historical debate in our country. I would also like to thank the committee, hon. Oulanyah and his members for a job well done. 

As you may know, in this House I belong to that small group of members who do not represent a constituency. I am an ex-officio member, here in accordance with Article 114 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda. In view of this I will not be voting on this matter but I take this opportunity to air my views that may sway around one or two people in this debate. And in view of this, I will not be able to use words like “my people” or “my constituency”. So, what I will be saying is a mixture of what I believe in as a person as well as what I have been able to gather from my wide interaction with members of the public and many of you members will recall that I have been to many of your areas and I have been listening so I am not ignorant on what the population thinks about the amendment of this Constitution.

Having said that, the Prime Minister made some comments on behalf of Government arising from what we agreed upon in cabinet and I want to state straight away that I support what he stated here as part and parcel of our collective responsibility. 

 Let me restrict my contribution to Article 102.  Mr Speaker, when the Movement Government came into power, it restored among other things; peace, security, unity, but above all, it restored freedom and human rights for individuals as well as for communities in this country.  Freedom is a word I frequently hear in this House and it is a word that we cannot take very lightly, because if freedom is restricted, then you create problems.  It must therefore, be exercised without any restriction.  Members will recall that in this regard of restriction, when the Movement Government came into power, political parties were put on hold for good reasons. The country has made tremendous achievements under this no-party Movement system.  However, because it was in some ways restrictive to people’s freedom, like hon. Lukyamuzi felt, there was agitation and that is why there is now going to be release of political parties.  

Here, I am underscoring the importance of unrestricted freedom for individuals and for communities.  Why am I saying this Mr Speaker?  I am saying this because, in exercise of individual freedom, I want to refer to freedom of individuals to choose and freedom of individuals to be chosen.  Every Ugandan without any restriction must exercise those.  If you restrict, then you are in for problems as I have just mentioned.   

We have heard that restricting lifting term limits will breed dictatorship.  I am one of those people who do not agree, because you can be a dictator in the first term, in the second term, but above all, if we know that it can do so, then we are forewarned to put in place other measures which do not restrict individual freedom. Such laws should be like strengthening the law, elections laws and so on.  

Mr Speaker, who benefits from lifting of the term limits?  Principally, all Ugandans should benefit; all Ugandans and anybody who is aspiring to be a leader should look forward to benefiting from this.  However, at this point in time, it is clear and I don’t know why it is sending very wrong waves in the event that the incumbent benefits from this. I have heard so many people expressing a lot of fear.  

During the CA, I had some delegates who were saying, “We should put term limits, if we don’t, this man will come back, this man will not leave power.” Meaning the incumbent President –they were debating for an individual, which is not correct.  You must never make a law for individuals.  That was wrong, but having said that, I want to say that there are very many good reasons; and as I go around the countryside, I hear very many good reasons that will enable the incumbent to benefit. 

MR LUKYAMUZI:  Mr Speaker, I am standing on a point of order. Yesterday, the NPC, the Minister in charge of the Movement Secretariat, Dr. Kiyonga, was very elaborate when he was defending the opening of the presidential term limits.  He said in his own words, “There is nothing wrong for President Museveni to regain power under this arrangement; he is good enough as he happens to be.” If a whole MP can make such a statement, it is a very serious statement.  So, is the hon. Member of Parliament and Minister holding the Floor, in order to negate what the NPC openly defended?  If so, should he continue to be minister?  Shouldn’t he resign?  

THE SPEAKER:  Honourable members, I expect the 303 members of Parliament to have an opportunity to independently make their own submissions. (Applause) 

DR ALEX KAMUGISHA:  Thank you Mr Speaker.  I was not differing from my NPC, but reinforcing the fact that there are very many good reasons why the incumbent should benefit from this arrangement.  However, it would not be the main principle, but since he is the incumbent and we lift, then he would automatically benefit.  But also, you know that he has done a very good job for this country since the 1980s; look at programmes in Health, Education, HIV/AIDS and roads; you cannot ignore his contribution. 

On regional issues, Mr Speaker, the President has reversed the bad image of this country, a country that had already been condemned.  Look at regional issues; Sudan is gaining stability because of his personal intervention.  Somalia has a new government, which was never going to be. He is now the chief consultant of the African Union on this matter. Therefore, you cannot ignore his contribution; the country needs him, the region needs him, and the continent needs him and globally, he is required.

In conclusion, Mr Speaker, lifting of term limits is not meant or tailored for the incumbent, it is a coincidence but also a blessing in disguise. Since I will not be voting here, I call upon all my friends in this House to support the lifting of term limits so that this country can continue along the path of peace, stability and development.  Thank you, Mr Speaker.

MS MUGERWA SAUDA (Woman Representative, Masaka): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to join other colleagues who have contributed on this topic.  I would also like to thank the Committee, which submitted a very good report and recommendations.  In my opinion, I think it gave an objective view to the proposal made by Government to amend the Constitution. I think it is very appropriate for Uganda to amend the Constitution because of a number of reasons. 

Just going around the world, many countries are doing this, in fact in the last ten years, about 34 countries, including South Africa and Venezuela, have adapted new constitutions. Venezuela, which achieved its independence in 1811, amended or adopted a new constitution in 1999, being its 26th Constitution.  So, I think so many countries are amending their constitutions, especially former colonial countries, former Communist countries, because they were originally or traditionally using laws that were colonial oriented; laws that were Communist oriented; so they have been using those laws because it is not very easy to amend the laws but gradually they are getting out of them and it is very appropriate for Uganda to follow suit. Uganda, as you know too, was a colonial state and a lot of our laws are colonial oriented. 

Mr Speaker, let me talk about Article 105 (2). It is good to have it amended, why? Given what these countries have been going through, the wars, the absence of constructive institutions because of our history, you find that if a president or a leader is elected for five years, the first five years are for learning; the second five years are for infrastructure, especially in the Ugandan case.  

By the time the National Resistance Movement came to power, the whole country was almost destroyed. When they came in, they started by rebuilding.  President Museveni started looking for people to work with and new plans or programmes to build the country. His first term was on that; the second term was for implementation; implementing those programmes to get progressive reports on how best they had performed and also to monitor and evaluate what could take the country forward.  So you find that the second term of office for any leader is devoted to that type of activity.  

Then the third term would be for delivery; the third term is for maturity. I would like not only to recommend this for Uganda alone but for all countries so that actually money is not wasted on elections, money is not wasted on politics but devoted to economic, social and political development in general. So, you find that, in Uganda we need a period of maturity and delivery.  

The current Government if given an opportunity in the forthcoming period, would be able to deliver what it has planned to do for this country. Otherwise, saying that term limits should be limited to two terms; you would find that the leaders head would be slaughtered without being given an opportunity to deliver.  

Mr Speaker, we copy a lot from the developed countries, but the history of developed countries is not similar to ours.  Even those countries, when they were still developing, were in a similar situation. I quote the example of Franklin who ruled for four terms and died during his fourth term. If you look at our Article 102, section B, you find that we have a clause which is saying that no life president can be permitted because a president is supposed to be between 35 and 75 years of age, after that, nobody is to lead for life; so the concept of life presidency is not possible in Uganda.  

Mr Speaker, allow me to go to an item, which deals with dual citizenship. Dual citizenship under international law is a controversial issue. I am sure you know this, because a country is supposed to protect its citizens. So if a citizen falls between two countries, you would find that there is a problem on who is protecting him or her.  But given the trend worldwide that the world is turning into a single village, I agree to the dual citizenship, but I caution Uganda to think of who should get citizenship of Uganda as far as foreigners are concerned, because I understand a lot of people come to Uganda as economic seekers and I do not know whether they are treated as refugees or  they will be given Ugandan citizenship in the long run.  

Another issue, Mr Speaker, is on Chief Administrative Officer. The Chief Administrative Officer is very controversial because I have not heard a good presentation in the House to give us an idea on what we should do. People are saying that if we took the CAO to the district or central level, there would be deletion of decentralization, but what can we do?  

Realistically, there is a big problem, a problem of a CAO who has been in a place for years and years and cannot be promoted, cannot be transferred; what is the solution? This problem applies to the Town Clerks as well.  You find a Town Clerk who was caught up by the Local Governments law and is stuck in this area, what can we do about this?

Lastly, Mr Speaker, allow me talk as a Muganda in this House. People have agitating been for Swahili as a uniting language for people of the East African region.  I am saying that charity starts at home and Ugandans should first be united; if we all adopted Luganda as one of the official languages, definitely we would be united.  I do not disagree with what is being proposed that Swahili can unite us but I think we should have also considered a national language, Luganda, to unite us.  Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Members, you will excuse me, I had listed hon. Eresu to be followed by hon. Wesonga but I have got a special request from hon. Wabudeya; she has a meeting to attend, then after that, she may be away for some days; she wants to make a small contribution before she can go.  Let me make that adjustment.

MRS BEATRICE WABUDEYA (Woman Representative, Sironko): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to join my colleagues in thanking the committee for a job so well done; I think they have made our work very easy.

Mr Speaker, it looks like we are all in agreement that it is time for Uganda to go to multiparty politics and for that matter we need to support the referendum and campaign for the vote.  In the same vein, I would like to observe that it is also the right time for us to discuss the issue of presidential term limits.  Why do I say so? I say so because I think that the experience we have had in this country since 1986 has prepared us well enough to discuss the important issue of presidential term limits.  

Uganda has now had a reasonable experience in general elections; we had one for the CA, another in 1996 and another in 2001, we also added on the referendum of 2000.  I think that that experience makes us have the feeling that we are able to choose leaders through the ballot. I therefore think that as we think about the presidential term limits, we need to focus on areas that will help us achieve free and fair elections. This will give the people of Uganda an opportunity or a sure way in which we shall be able to choose the leaders of our choice. 

With the coming in of multiparty or multi-organisational politics, Mr Speaker, I think that we are going to have many more leaders emerging for Ugandans to make a choice from.  Therefore, the fear of people saying that some people will overstay in power should not arise because multiparty politics, in my view, is going to give us more possibilities to choose from using the power of the ballot.

I therefore, would like to appeal to my colleagues that as we discuss Article 105(2), we should do it in principle and avoid attaching it to an individual.  Because I am very sure that if you have a good leader, you would want him or her to stay on longer, but if you have a bad one you will also work to get him or her off the stage as soon as the next five years come round.  So, Mr Speaker, I would like to appeal to my colleagues to join me as I represent the people of Sironko in voting to lift presidential term limits.

Allow me, Mr Speaker, also to mention the issue of the Chief Administrative Officers. I have experience of being a civil servant and I know that if you work in a place, which has no opportunities, you have no incentive to work.  I therefore believe that this is the right moment for us to handle this amendment and liberate the Chief Administrative Officers and make their job more attractive.

This is the time for us to forget other fears.  Let us look at the amount of work the Chief Administrative Officers have to do. The kind of responsibility they have and the freedom they require to effectively carry out that duty and we move and amend this Article so that we make a job of a Chief Administrative Officer more attractive.  Mr Speaker, thank you, very much.

MR JOHN ERESU (Kaberamaido County, Kaberamaido): Mr Speaker, thank you for giving me the opportunity.  About 10 years ago, this Constitution was being written against the backdrop of suspicion, fear and general uncertainty of the future of this country.  Today, it is 10 years and we are reviewing it against the backdrop of hope, confidence and progress. Given the two different positions is one of those reasons and circumstances which made the writers of the Constitution 10 years ago, who stood for two term limits to revisit their thinking and we are justified to review their thinking.  

There has been a debate, Mr Speaker, throughout the country that Article 105(2), if removed, Parliament is trying to create a situation of a life presidency.  They say when Article 105(2) is removed, is one way of creating and enshrining in the Constitution a dictatorship. They are also saying Article 105(2), if removed, is one way of perpetuating an individual into power.

This is my reply, Mr Speaker.  The Constitution must be interpreted not by individual articles but as a whole document.  Article 102(2) states the qualification of the President of Uganda and if Article 105(2) is read to the Floor of this House, which I know most members are aware of, it states clearly that between the age of 35 and 75, a person can be a President of Uganda, and the limitation has been put in place wisely because a good person who is serving the country as a President by the age of 75 is tending towards becoming senile.

Mr Speaker, what I am saying is the principle, which has been held there, could be exceptions.  I proceed to state this, against the backdrop of hope, against the backdrop of confidence; we are opening up because Ugandans are trusting one another.  The political space is being open and many political parties have been registered, and we should look at this particular article and debate alongside the realities of the time, especially, with regards to the political space and the political parties that have been put in place.  

The question is, Mr Speaker, fellow members, while we have registered parties, while we have parties trying to canvas for support, while we have parties registering members and trying to put themselves on the ground, how competent are they today?  How much can they deliver in terms of holding the country together?  How much can they give in terms of hope and confidence?  

We are opening up and it is good political parties are being registered.  But I would like to point out very clearly that, most of, if not all these political parties need time to gain ground.  I would like to give examples.  We have the Uganda People’s Congress, we have the Democratic Party, we have the Workers Party, we have the Party by Abatasoma, we have FDC, the major question to ask, when they come into play as they are doing, what have they told the people of Uganda as their own aspirations to hold this country together?  In other words, the question of this country moving forward under a plural system needs to be gradual and very well nurtured.  As a matter of fact, some of these political parties have not up to this point in time had a clear leadership that we can see.  

An example I can give is that, it is only until a few days ago that I knew that my former Chairperson of the Committee on Presidential and Foreign Affairs is a leader of a party.  Because otherwise a few months earlier, I was thinking it was retired Col. Besigye, hon. Ruzindana or hon. Amuriat Oboi. These parties must come out with their intentions clearly because we do not like to have another experiment in this country.  

Mr Speaker, I have taken trouble to walk round the Parliamentary Buildings and one significant thing I have seen, are the bullet holes on the walls. This is a clear reminder of the past, which was uncertain and we do not like that uncertainty to continue.

Finally, we are legislating on two issues. The opening up and the presidential term limit. The people of Kaberamaido have this to say, Mr Speaker - can I say that I have been to this Parliament for quite sometime and I have not come here by accident. I represent the people of Kaberamaido.  I do not know whether hon. Okot has authority to question whether I have been there or not, because I do not know whether he goes to Moroto County, either.  Which I doubt! 

Mr Speaker, in conclusion, while we anticipate, while we want to open up, the people of Kaberamaido say, “We would like this House to see us very clearly on these issues.  While we agree on opening up, we think that this opening up should not be messed up by having people or someone to lead this country without a proper grouping to supervise and to see the nurturing of opening up of a plural system.  The alternative is if we do not want to open up, then we can get rid of those who have the experience to nurture the system of our political progress.”

Finally, the question of our political maturity is the function of our patience and understanding and appreciating our own achievements. These things can be passed on to any other leader with time, but not in a manner in which we have to dismantle everything that we have put in place.  Therefore, Article 105, Clause 2, if it gives the opening space, if it is removed, will function effectively to create a situation of nurturing the progress of our democratisation.  Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you.

MR KAMANA WESONGA  (Bubulo County West, Mbale): I thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  Mr Speaker, the reason why I have thanked you is that for the last one and a half years, I had failed to catch your eye, and I must pray to God that today I have been very lucky.

Mr Speaker, allow me to add my voice to those who have already thanked the Chairman and Members of the Legal Committee for the report well articulated. Because of the limitation of time, I will go straight to a few points that I had prepared and with the permission of the people of Bubulo West, to address.  

On the Presidential and Parliamentary elections being held on the same day, Mr Speaker, the people of Bubulo West and myself do say, that should be the matter and that should be the case.  The reason why we are saying so, is that in the past whenever the Presidential elections were over, there came others who massacred it, saying they had been lined up by the President and the President says, “ so and so should not go, except so and so.”  This time, when we hold both elections at the same time, we know everybody will be busy and there will be no body to appoint or disappoint the other.  

Mr Speaker, on the point of the current term of Parliament, although the Committee had suggested that it be reduced to match with that of the President, my people of Bubulo West and myself do suggest that it should be the other way. The parliamentary term should remain, but the term of the President should be matched with that of Parliament since elections will be on the same day.  In so doing, we are avoiding a situation, which is expected to happen during the life of this Parliament. If this Parliament ceases to exist in March 2006 we shall have lost time, and not only time as a Parliament, but we shall have made the country pay for services not done. 

Mr Speaker, I beg to be protected, somebody is telling me that contractual jobs can end at any point of time, but contracts have specified periods. 

Mr Speaker, my people of Bubulo West and I stress that the term limit of the President should be of five years in order to move together with Parliamentarians. (Interjections) Mr Speaker, protection please; hon. Nandala Mafabi seems to be attacking me and he does not know that we come from the same direction; he has forgotten but I have reminded him.

On the question of the Inspector General of Government (IGG), it is a very serious office and it should be strengthened.  It should be strengthened in such a way that even its trying system is different from the current courts, although those supervising the current courts should supervise it. The reasons why the people of Bubulo West and I have said, it should be strengthened is because of the nature of its responsibility. You will find the IGG investigating billionaires who have stolen from various institutions.  Recently, you heard of a staff in Stanbic Bank going away with more than a billion. If the office of the IGG is maintained in the way it is, compromise is likely to penetrate the system. Special courts will assist to create the independence within the IGG so that their decisions are not usurped from elsewhere.

About the Chief Administrative Officers being appointed by the center, it is a very crucial point in terms of the civil service.  You know in the recent past and currently most politicians – and when I say most politicians, I do not exclude the Chairmen of districts who appoint the District Service Committees, which committees are responsible for appointing and disappointing Chief Administrative Officers. When I am a chairman, LC 5, and I have appointed you to be my chairman of the District Service Commission, it is very possible that when people make applications, I can add my voice and say, “I want so and so.” In that way, Mr Speaker, when so and so is appointed I can still add, “Even in these other offices I want people who supported me.”  It will create a vicious cycle of only those who supported the Chairman to be appointed in various positions.

Mr Speaker, on the term limit, Article 105(2), over 80 per cent of the people of Bubulo West say the term limit should be opened.  For those who are saying that it should not be lifted, should be ready to compete but not fear to create a situation of people competing for offices.

THE SPEAKER: Your time is up, you wind up; please wind up, you have run out of time.

MR WESONGA: I know I have a problem with hon. Nandala Mafabi because we do not subscribe to the same party.  So, I am not very surprised, but that is the position of the people of Bubulo West and myself.  Thank you so much, Mr Speaker, for giving me this very rare opportunity today.

THE SPEAKER: And very rarely appearing.

CAPT. MATOVU DAVID (Kooki County, Rakai): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to begin my making two assurances to this Parliament and to the country, that the work we are doing is not a crime; we are doing our noble duty and it is within the law to amend the Constitution.

The other assurance; looking at the way the debate has been going, we are really sharply divided and tempers are high. Of course this one is inevitable because of the opening up; and also that our terms are ending, there is maybe panic here and there because we are all vote seekers, we have interests here and there.  There is already panic for power; there is power struggle.  But I want to assure the country that I think we shall overcome it as long as we do it democratically.  

Mr Speaker, I want to talk about the Chief Administrative Officers.  This was wise and I really commend Cabinet and I will support it.  We need to liberate the CAOs; we need to liberate the districts; they have been held hostage.  You find the CAO is fighting with the council and yet he cannot go away.  But with this new arrangement, if there is something wrong, the CAO can have room to either be disciplined or taken elsewhere.  So, we should support this amendment; and even look at other officers like the Town Clerks, and say, “Do we also bail them out?”  Otherwise, I want to support this amendment. The CAO actually implements council resolutions and decisions. Basically, whether he is appointed by the center or district, I do not see any harm because he is implementing council decisions and resolutions.

About Kampala City, this one was marvelous because we do not even have a city; this is just a modern slum.  Those of us who come through Entebbe Road after that round-about, by the time you reach here the vehicle is in a bad state, you have to send it for washing – the drainage and whatever.  So we need a well-planned city devoid of politics, with standards, well lit, so that we give it to a technocrat, either Mayor or Town Clerk, to manage it for the good of our country because this is a gateway to Uganda.  

So, I want to support that Kampala falls under the center so that we really hand it to professional people; we remove this law pulling from Kampala. Councilors are building in the road, this one is doing this, no, no, we cannot allow this and I want to support this proposed amendment. 

Defence and National Security, there is something about introducing Article 22(a) that we have special courts to try wrong doers, especially bordering around terrorism.  When you hear the talk around, I think there are indicators that there are people who want to behave undemocratically because we are here bargaining.  If we fail to achieve consensus, we vote, why do you fear a vote?  I would like to remind colleagues that the era in which we are in Uganda now, if anybody is worried about a vote, I think he had better try elsewhere.  So, I want to support this amendment; that we need special courts to be prepared for troubleshooters so that we really move as a country.  

These people you have just seen in the gallery here, honourable Gutti and the others, we want them also to rest really to look after their children, they cannot keep running around putting order in the country.  So, I want to support also this amendment that those troubleshooters who do not want to abide to democracy I think we put them where they deserve. 

My last contribution, Mr Speaker, is about 105(2). I must pronounce myself on that Article on behalf of my people of Kooki.  I have been trying to look at our records about the performance of presidents in this country. Obote I was here for 8 years, I do not know whether he was within the term limit or not.  Binaisa, for 11 months; Lule, for 68 days; Obote II, four years; who refused them, what happened?  So, I think it is not the term limit alone, no. There are several factors at play.  So, as we discuss this, it is not a crime to lift and have everybody. What should be in our conscience are the rules, the institutions –(Interjection)- of course, you know I cannot allow it –(Laughter)

 The electoral laws, how are they? Let us plug them so that there is free and fair elections. I am going to be with you to plug the laws, to put in place institutions so that we move.  The Speaker has reminded us time and again that let us discuss the merits and demerits but Members have insisted and brought in Yoweri Kaguta Museveni.  

I want also to say like this; assuming he was to come in, what is wrong if he is doing it within the law, if the party brings him up?  I do not think this should be an issue. What is important is, what does the question say, have you opened up? Yes. I want to support the amendment that we open up because we are in an era of opening up. The region opened up, the culture opened up, politics opened up, no limitation, economy opened up so why do you fear because we began it. So, Mr Speaker, thank you for giving me this chance.  

THE SPEAKER: Okay.

MR JAMES MWANDHA (Representative of Persons with Disabilities): Thank you very much.  Mr Speaker, although, you guided us that when discussing lifting of presidential terms we should avoid personalising it but rather we concentrate on the merits and demerits, it is clear that this has been difficult for colleagues. I get the impression that if President Museveni today announced that he was not interested in standing, come 2006, I am sure many colleagues here would certainly not support the lifting of the term limits. That is my impression. 

I have no problem with President Museveni, I think President Museveni is so far the best President we have had in Uganda –(Applause)- he has made a lot of achievements. I say this because in 1966, I was younger but old enough to remember what we went through.  In 1971, when Amin overthrew Obote we witnessed the excitement of people in Uganda; they were all over the place.  Including people who were singing “congress of the people” when Obote was in power, they were jubilating and calling Amin a savior and a liberator. But it did not take long before the true colours of Amin surfaced and we all suffered, we lived under fear, we lived under permanent mourning of relatives, of friends, of workmates who had disappeared never to be seen. 

The short-lived government of the UNLF was also characterised by insecurity.  The Muwanga’s government, I think was one of the worst probably as bad as Amin’s, of course, the second government of Obote was undermined by insurgency and it became difficult for him to govern. 

I have a dream; I have a dream for Uganda; a dream of when President Museveni will be at the airstrip to hand over power peacefully, with dignity, with pomp so that he is not chased like other presidents.  I say this because in my view, Article 105(2) was never a controversial article at all during the CA.  It has not been tested; why don’t we give it a chance to test it and make sure that we agree on the basis of our history to put in our Constitution limitations of presidential terms?  Why should we have to change it as if Uganda is going away tomorrow? 

Even during the constitutional review period, this article was not one of the terms of reference for CRC because the matter of presidential terms had been settled during the CA.  Everybody accepted that this is the way to go forward, because while you may have regular elections, experience has it that it is difficult to have free and fair elections. We have seen this in this country, we have seen this in various parts of Africa; we have seen it elsewhere.  That is why many countries have taken on the provision of having term limits in their constitutions.

The number of countries that have done this in Africa have been mentioned. I will not repeat them; hon. members know them. But let me tell you, if we were to lift the term limits, and knowing that a large section of Ugandans object to the lifting of the term limits, as the committee mentioned in their report, this may cause political strife. It may even cause conflicts and we may go back to the bad days before the 1986. 

Those are not my words, those are the words of our own Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs. In their report –(Mr Oulanyah rose_)- you are the chairman, you can clarify when you come. In their report on the White Paper I could quote if I had time. I therefore want to appeal to this House not to make the historic mistake of lifting term limits. The future will never forgive the 7th Parliament if we were to lift the term limits and cause problems to this country; problems we can avoid. 

People can say we have a strong army, we have this. But what haven’t we seen in this country? What didn’t we seen during Amin’s days? It is important that this Parliament does not make the historic mistake of opening up. 

I want to make an appeal to the President himself. The President promised the people of this country that he would not seek another term at the end of his second term. I would like the President to commit himself to his promise to the people of this country. People have loved him; people have supported him; he should not let the people down and come again and stand for another term. 

Finally, I want to make another passionate appeal to our colleagues, Members of Parliament who represent UPDF. The issue of lifting terms has become so controversial, so contentious, so divisive and so partisan that in the spirit of the Constitution of Republic of Uganda, that the members of UPDF should withhold their vote one way or the other since they are supposed to be non-partisan. This is just an appeal. It is up to them. But I think it is in the interest of the political future of this country that the UPDF do not show their side on this matter because it is partisan. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

MR JACK SABIITI (Rukiga County, Kabale): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to start by submitting that constitutions provide safeguards to protect or to prevent absolute rulers assuming tyrannical terms  and these safeguards undermine absolutism wherever it should be. 

I would also like to submit, Mr Speaker, that the function of any constitution is to limit the powers of the rulers and safeguard the interests of the ruled. The 1995 Constitution was made at a time when we were recalling what we had gone through. We had gone through political instability, constitutional instability. The people had come together in different groups to oppose the operation that was in existence and this constitution was put in place to put things right. 

That stated, Mr Speaker, I do agree that constitutions must change. Constitutions are made in a certain time and given a political milieu; it should be expected therefore that with changing times, changing values, obviously constitutions can change. But to change a constitution to suit either personal or group interests, such attempts may cause unnecessary conflict, which may not be good for this country. Changing or removing safeguards such as the term limits, the human rights, the equal opportunities et cetera, this may not serve to cement the continued development, stability that this country has achieved so far. I am sure, Mr Speaker as I am sure of my own existence that if we selfishly amend certain articles in this constitution that touch on the  safeguards, this may unnecessarily rekindle or bring about the unnecessary things that happened in the past: chaos, rebellion, wars, et cetera. I hope note.

Uganda has had four constitutions in just a spell of 44 years: the 1962, 1966, 1967 and 1995. And in my opinion, what we are doing today, although we have refused to name it the “2005 Constitution,” I think we are changing this constitution. But I want to remind hon. members that in 1966, Milton Obote dissatisfied with the federal arrangement, in his opinion and selfishly, moved quickly to change the constitution. You know where we ended. 

In 1967 you also know that the constitution was enacted out of selfishness and as you know Parliament has a limited role in this particular area.  

In 1971, Obote was overthrown and the population thought that the messes that Obote had done actually would stop. What happened? Amin ruled through the marshal law; Obote came back; he was removed after a weighty resistance by the National Resistance Movement. 

In 1985 Museveni took over power. Cautiously thought of how to lead this country and in the end we came up with this new constitution, and now in 2005 we are here again trying to look at areas, which had already been sorted out.

This time, the whole game is designed to protect individual interests at the expense of public interest.  There is no doubt that every regime has its advantages and disadvantages. Regimes do good things and bad things. Granted our President and the Movement of which all of us, all Ugandans have been a party have done good things, there are bad things, which have been done. 

If you compare what was done during Obote’s days, Amin’s days, during the Movement – Museveni’s days - we look at a number of people for example who died in Obote’s government.  Look at those who died in Amin’s government and look at those that have died in this government under the leadership of Museveni.  The number of deaths in terms of deaths from facts and figures presented on this Floor of Parliament by even the Minister of Defence clearly citing the people they have killed and those that have been killed by the rebels, they far exceed the number of people that died during Obote’s and Amin’s days.  I want those who want to do research, go in the newspapers and read and start adding, then you will come to my calculation.  

Mr Speaker, if we look at the economics of this country, what has been achieved in terms of what we have built? Many governments have done their work, and I cannot see why we should only cling to one person that he should – I want to specifically address lastly on my concerns which concerns have already been presented to this Parliament. I have my suspicions and they are yet to be proved right that the amendment of Article 105 (2) is meant to benefit the incumbent President yet it is my humble view that we delete Clause 2. 

I want to emphasise it, Mr Speaker, and I have said this time and again on this Floor of Parliament, amending Article 105 in any way, will not benefit the incumbent President.  It seems to me that this article the President was elected under in this Constitution, he has held two prescribed terms of office as President and he swore to protect the 1995 Constitution; he cannot legitimately be elected President of this country under this Constitution. Whatever manipulation President Museveni may use, his insistency to be in power by whatever means will produce unnecessary absurd situations in this country. What is being done, in my opinion is -(Interruption)

DR NSABA BUTURO:  Mr Speaker, the hon. member for Rukiga is on record to have said many times, and he has repeated it this afternoon that if this august House legitimately and fairly approves the amendment of Article 105 (2) there will be war; there will be instability. This is a very strong statement coming from a Member of Parliament, who knows that this august House is there constitutionally to resolve matters of controversy. Is it in order for the hon. member to seemingly overthrow the legitimate authority of this House, which is to legislate, debate matters, and the outcome must be respected by everybody? Is it in order, Mr Speaker, that the hon. member should consistently remind this country that when this Parliament debates and argues and legitimately and fairly comes up with a position, some members will not accept what is agreed on account that it is not their position? Is it in order that he should consistently argue that sort of line?

THE SPEAKER: No, what has happened is this; the hon. member has argued his case as a Member of Parliament contributing to the debate. But I think his last position was to act as a constitutional court to interpret the consequences of the amendment in that, even if we lift it, he is saying if it is meant for the incumbent. In his interpretation of the Constitution, the incumbent will not be able to benefit from the changes he will have protected; he is playing two roles. Well, the validity of his interpretation notwithstanding, I think that is what he has done. (Applause)

MR SABIITI: Before I was interrupted, I want to make the following as I conclude.  In my opinion, Mr Speaker, what is being done is to overthrow the Constitution, the consequences of such; the course of action is difficult to imagine. 

THE SPEAKER: That is imputing improper motives because if you say overthrowing a constitution, it is wrong for Parliament to overthrow a constitution. 

MR SABIITI: Mr Speaker, I am now looking at the way this was brought in this Parliament.

THE SPEAKER: Because you see, whether who or who brought it here, eventually as I see it brought, it is you here. It is not done outside, it will not be to the people of the country, it will be the Parliament enjoined to amend that particular provision, so when you say overthrowing the Constitution, you are saying this body, including yourself; we are going to overthrow the Constitution and that is improper motive.

MR SABIITI: That is why I am giving my advice to this Parliament; which is why I am presenting this scenario-

THE SPEAKER: It can be wrong judgment that is different but intention and overthrowing a constitution is a crime. Proceed.

MR SABIITI: Mr Speaker, what I am trying to put across is we are empowered under Article 3 of the Constitution, Ugandans are empowered actually, now I am conveying a message that what we are doing in my opinion is unconstitutional and it could tantamount to the overthrow of the Constitution.

THE SPEAKER: Doing something unconstitutional is not the same thing as overthrowing a constitution - the two are different. I can do something inadvertently, wrong as you seem to say but to say we are overthrowing it is a deliberate act. To overthrow a constitution! This Parliament cannot deliberately overthrow a constitution, because it is not its mandate to overthrow a constitution! 

MR SABIITI: I take your guidance, Mr Speaker.  Lastly, I want to advise my colleagues, if power is of a sole end for political leaders in Uganda, particularly Presidents as it has been, and this is in most cases at the expense of people’s livelihood; and if power has to be retained at any cost, I advise the Ugandan leaders and particularly President Yoweri Kaguta Museveni, that it pays to take turns on any hard task and to share leadership.  

In civilized societies where conflicts have reigned for 6, 10, 20 years, where poverty is rampant, where people live in camps for 5, 10, 15 years, it would be advisable even for such a President in power to resign. But to seek continuation, so that certain sections of society continue in poverty and misery is very strange.  With this, I request the hon. Members of Parliament to leave Article 105(2) as it is so that we may have continuity and peace reigning in our country.  Thank you, very much.

MR PHILIP NTACYOTUGIRA (Bufumbira county West, Kisoro): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for allowing me this opportunity to talk on behalf of the people of Bufumbira North.  

First, I would like to register my appreciation and thanks to the committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs for their efforts and good report.

Mr. Speaker, I consulted the people of Bufumbira North Constituency on the proposed amendments.  I convened meetings in nine parishes of my constituency; the turn up in each case was very high.  We had discussions, we debated on many constitutional amendments but the most controversial one is the one of term limits.

Mr Speaker, the reason they gave, I shall refer to a Latin saying which states that Vox populi vox deus.  It means, the voice of God is in his people; God speaks through his people and God continues to speak through his people.  

I want us to reflect on our lives, the stages through which we have passed, where have we come from.  If you reflect, you will realize that the stages through which you passed, you actually did not take notice of them. For example, we did not know that we would be Members of Parliament.  And Mr Speaker, you did not know you would become the Speaker of this House one time.  

All I am saying is that each and everyone of us is led by the invisible hand of God, therefore, Mr Speaker, if each one of us is led by the invisible hand of God and we believe that, God speaks through his people, vox populi vox deus, we should allow God to speak through his people. And how does he speak through his people? By this universal suffrage; the vote.  

This question of limitations- limiting people is bad because many philosophers, especially the naturalists do not want this closed system of doing things.  Why must we use closed systems?  When we bring limitations, we are actually bringing in a closed system of doing things and that is bad philosophically and psychologically; we must not limit people, we must be open-ended.

Mr Speaker, there is this question I have heard hon. Members, especially of the opposition talking about –(Interruption)

MR NANDALA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  Is it in order for a hon. Member to say that there is opposition in this House when in reality we all came under the Movement System; is he in order?

THE SPEAKER: Well, it is a concept. Perhaps he thinks there is opposition forming but as far as I am concerned, you are under the Movement System as of now.

MR NTACYOTUGIRA: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for that wise ruling.  You see, we actually judge according to the way people talk and then we get to know who is on opposition and who is not.  Mr Speaker, I have heard time and again, people say that Museveni said that he would not come back again after he has served this term. I want them to clarify on this.

One time, I had a professor say that people who do not change are fools; and indeed if you think you do not change in your life, for example, when you write a letter you cannot complete that letter without altering some phrases or some sentences.  

Some time back, I heard some honourable Members saying that they would not come back for elections.  But again I hear that they are coming back.

Two- I am just giving some examples.  When you are putting up a house, you cannot complete it without making any changes.  So when you say, Museveni said this, that he will not come back and therefore, he must not come back, you are wrong, because in life, we change.  A person who does not change is a fool, definitely.

It is not right, therefore, to establish closed systems in the Constitution.  You will be hindering the President from exercising his will.  The moment God has given us a good leader and then we want to shelve him, to put him in a political limbo, I think that would be actually blaming God who gives us good leaders.

Mr Speaker, once a bad leader comes to power, according to my belief, God will speak through his people and people will get rid of this leader.  Let us allow God to exercise His will.  

As I conclude, according to my analysis, the advocates of the removal of Presidential term limits are led by the invisible hand of God, hence, the love and trust they have for the incumbent President.  I believe Vox Deus, Vox Populi, God is speaking through his people.  If the incumbent President is no longer desirable, God will speak through his people and he will be rejected and God will speak through his people and we shall get another leader; it may be honourable Sabiiti.

THE SPEAKER: Your time is out.

MR NTACYOTUGIRA: Mr Speaker, once a leader is God given and his vision and talents are quite discernable and such a leader is still strong, contentious, visionary, loves his country and he has great cause not only for his country, but also a vision for our region, East Africa, and he has great vision for the African Continent, such a leader must not be put in the political limbo.  

God needs him to serve his people and we need him to serve us.  So, my constituents do support that we remove the limits. Finally, we must support the incumbent President to come back.  Thank you.

DR ALEX OKOT (Moroto County, Lira): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  This country is passing through a very fundamental moment.  If I remember well, it could be the first time that this country is making a real constitutional amendment- more-or-less reviewing the Constitution.  It is a chance that this country has to reflect on the ten years we have had when the Constitution was promulgated and to check on the fundamental areas, which we need to develop.  

Mr Speaker, and honourable Members, many Members have come up on the Floor and have expressed how, all the other governments, without exception, caused problems to this country.  Starting from Independence to date.  But what disturbs is, after giving a thorough analysis and determining that the problem of this country has been in its politics, in its leadership, all of us have ended up trying to find a solution in term limit and a regional tier.

I have been asking myself, did Idi Amin come to take power because there was a term limit; did he mistreat this country because there was a term limit; or was there a regional tier; is it the same problem that Obote or Binaisa had?  Is it the same problem for Museveni; is it a regional tier; is it the term limit?  

I think our problem is more fundamental than term limit and regional tier and we have refused in this 7th Parliament to handle the problem.  We have decided to act on the Constitution just like this Italian soup called, “minestrone”, where you have the beans, the vegetables, the carrots and everything inside and you do not know what you are eating.  You are eating everything, but actually you are eating none of those things. This is the problem we are facing with this Constitution Amendment.  

How good is the foundation of our politics in this country?  Do we have a good foundation? Where is it?  Is it in the camps in the North, has it been in the skulls which were in Luweero, has it been with the ADF, with the UNLF?  

These are the real fundamental questions that we should be asking in the 7th Parliament; and if he only gave an answer to that, it would have been enough for this 7th Parliament, and all the Parliaments coming after us would have had a foundation on which to work.  But we are thinking of the regional tier and the term limit. We have left the original question; and therefore the constitution amendments we are making now, do not have the right foundation, which this country can be proud of.  

This is a fundamental question, what is our politics?  A President comes from the North and you find Northerners are fluking into the government; a President comes from the South, then it is the Southerners who are fluking the government.  Nowadays I hear that you must have a curving nose in order to go somewhere.  These are the problems we face, and either we act on the problems and solve them in our Constitution rather than burying our heads in the sand like the ostriches.

If the process were to be successful, it would have been five years not one. Where have the people discussed and come up with a decision to amend this Constitution?  

In my constituency, the Commission was there only for two hours, and what can two hours do to the peasants in Moroto County?  Are they able to give their opinion on all these issues; were they asked on the term limit; were they asked why there have been killings in this country?  No, they were told what to say and they said it.  Is that the Uganda we want, where it is a few people who know what they want for Uganda and they tell others to repeat it like parrots?  

Mr Speaker, I feel this is so fundamental and that is why we get people eating rats to bring change; that is why you find that even hon. Members of Parliament are changing their ideology overnight to get a district to bring a change.  It is because the issue is very fundamental.  

Mr Speaker, going to the issue of the term limits, which seems to be the interest of every person here, so many people have come to say that it will stop dictatorship.  But term limits have nothing to do with dictators; you can elect a person and the person becomes a dictator.  So it is not the term limit, which stops dictatorship; and neither is it freeing the term limit. Term limit is a political arrangement depending on the historical situation of the country and the system you have. It has nothing to do with dictatorship.  We have to make other laws to deal with dictators.  

When we came and decided on the term limit, there were some historical facts.  We have known how our country has been running, and how our leaders have been behaving. So the country decided that we should have a term limit.  In all these days, I have not heard of anybody coming up to tell me that the present new historical situation has changed so drastically that we have to stop the term limit.  Everybody is coming on the theoretical reasoning of freedom.  

Opening up will not give anybody freedom. Freedom is God-given; and the law we may make to open up can provide some lofty objectives for this country, where anybody can run for presidency and even institute organs, which can create a situation; but of no restraint to individuals, conditions and organs which want to make sure that they retain power at all cost.  This is what we are trying to do, to open up so that we create objectives; situations where anybody who wants to retain power can do it.  

Nobody can say that the incumbent cannot have power and please, those who are talking of experience, if you want experienced people to be President, then let us forget about elections, because you can gain experience as a President only by being a President. Therefore experienced Presidents should not be voted out, they must die.  Is that what you are talking about?  Museveni was not experienced when he became a President.  So the issue is not being experienced, the issue is somebody should have the capability of becoming a leader. And let us not talk of vision because all Ugandans have vision, nobody dominates vision.  Every human being has a vision; it depends on how people take your vision, it may be good for the country or not.

On the issue of the Prime Minister and the Deputy Attorney General, we have over 60 Ministers and now we want to get an extra office.  What is the use of having an extra office; will it solve the problems? Has Government been losing cases in court because there was no Deputy Attorney General; is that the reason or we just want to extend the distribution of the political cake throughout the country?  

What do we want?  There is nothing we want in having a Prime Minister. We have even a Minister of Parliamentary Affairs.  Why do we not strengthen the organs we have rather than thinking that the more you create, the more problems you solve?  No, the more offices you create the greater the risk of creating more problems; and I think this is a principle we should use in Government so that we streamline our activities.

Concerning political leaders, I sometimes hear people saying that there is no need to have these qualifications, because some of our people who have not gone to school have the capability of being leaders.  Such times have passed.  Why should Government waste money on educating citizens?  There is a reason, because we cannot deal with uneducated people.  Do we want to have peasants in this Parliament; what will they do here?  Politicians must be well educated, and I would suggest that we institute a higher level of qualifications for higher offices.  Even now that the LC 3s are going to be paid from the centre, we should limit them to HSC level; they are dealing with graduates! Can we request them to be anybody? Even a peasant who has not gone to school?  

Mr Speaker, we need to lift the level of this country, we need to raise the level of politics in this country; and if you have to raise the level of politics in this country, it is by getting people who are educated to do the politics.  We are raising it on the side of the civil service to provide better services, so we should also rise the level of politicians to provide better politics.

Mr Speaker, I still had a lot to say but the bell is ringing continuously and I do not want to be embarrassed by you having to stopping me.  Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much.

THE MINISTER OF STATE-ANIMAL INDUSTRY (Mrs Mary Rutamwebwa Mugyenyi): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for the opportunity and I thank the management of this country, including Parliament, for the opportunity that has been given to Ugandans to air their views on these important issues of the governance of our country and the constitutional review in particular. 

I have listened to the debate about the review of our Constitution. It has gone on for some time; it has been in Parliament, and the media has done a good job in terms of covering the different views expressed.  

In my view, the most contentious articles in the process of reviewing our constitution is opening up the presidential term limit and political space.  Ugandans hold different views and I am very grateful that at this moment, we have the freedom to express our feelings and to accommodate each other.  Many times we do not agree ideologically and although we claim that there is no opposition, we all know that in practical terms, we really do belong to different political organizations and parties.  We are just waiting for Parliament to –you all realize what I am saying.  After disagreeing we are able to sit together and laugh, and talk and eat together; discuss and even exchange notes as we sit, knowing that we do not belong to the same political party or hold the same views. 

The constitution of any country is supposed to protect and preserve the interests of the people of this country.  The point is not to suffocate each other, it is not to suffocate us; there are some who would not have wanted to open up the political space, who still seriously prescribe to the Movement System of Governance.  But because we know that there are a number of us who want to belong to other political organizations, we are able to compromise. 

I want to appeal to my colleagues, to realize that this country also has a number of people who happen to believe that if a President has performed, just like a Member of Parliament who has performed or a Chairman LC3 or LC1, he should be given the opportunity to continue to perform. (Applause)

Article number one of our Constitution clearly gives the power to the people.  The power belongs to the people of Uganda and I am sure by doing that, we put a lot of trust in our people to make decisions and right decisions at that. Therefore, there is no need to use the constitution to suffocate their interests, when we clearly know what they want.  

Mr Speaker, you sent us on a mission to consult our people on the constitutional review exercise and we did. I want to clearly state that the people of Nyabushozi were almost 98.8 percent in favour of opening the presidential term limits, so that any President that performs well can continue to perform.  

It’s unfortunate, that some members of our society have personalized the opening up of presidential term limits to the incumbent President. Sometimes, we see people in pain, quoting the bible at times, to make all sorts of allegations.  As we all know, the bible can be used in different ways. The church can use the bible, but the devil can also use the bible and we can make different interpretations using the same holy book.  There is no need of creating fear, predicting doom if the presidential term limits are opened, and the President is given the opportunity to stand many times, that in other political offices there will be doom.  There will be no doom because I trust that the people of Uganda know what they want. As long as there is freedom to speak, there is freedom to choose their regular elections conducted.  

So, our focus should be on how fair and free our elections that we have periodically are, so that we can be sure that we will have the leaders that we want and that the leaders will be weighed according to their performance. Mr Speaker, those who have been using the incumbent President, tarnishing his name; sometimes I think that it goes too far and it becomes unfair.  

You guided us and said that we should not personalize it, but many times I have felt that the debate has gone on the wrong side and we have failed the incumbent President to form the principle of opening presidential term limits.  

But even if that were to be, it would still work in favour of those who want to open the presidential term limits.  If we are going to use the incumbent President as an example to show why it is important to open up political space- I think the incumbent President has performed well. 

Those who want to derail us would want to use that to get rid of a performing President even when they know that he has performed and I think that is part of the fear.  Even the freedom to say what we want, to sit here and criticize the President and sometimes even go to the extent of being abusive, but still go home to sleep and come back the following day to do the same is a testimony that there has been democracy.  

This government, particularly the NRM under the leadership of the Chairman of the Movement has performed well. There is no one in this country that you tell about President Museveni and does not know him.  He has been able to associate with a range of people, even the poorest of the poor and the most disadvantaged. People have gone to the existent of eating rats in front of him and he has listened, he has bowed, he has accommodated and tolerated.  

So, we think that by attacking the presidency, we actually could make a point and convince the population- (Mr Lukyamuzi rose_) - I will not accept a clarification right now, honourable Lukyamuzi, you had so many chances in this House; please allow me to continue.  It is not my habit to interrupt, as you know, so let me continue if I can. 

I want to beg my colleagues to focus on the principle of opening term limits and the advantages. We listen to what our people want rather than attacking an individual, and we end up giving him more popularity. I think that is why more and more people are for opening up Presidential term limits because we are unfairly attacking an individual who happens to have performed well as a leader of this country. Even those who would not want to support him, clearly accept that he has performed. 

In future we might have other leaders that will perform also, so why don’t we allow our people to have the choice? If through an election, the people of Uganda feel that there is need to change, they will vote for another political party or whatever, in case he becomes the chairman. 

If I had a way, I would ask him to be a presidential candidate and I will tell you why. (Applause). I will, because we are changing too many things. We know how the parties behaved in the past. We are changing from the Movement System to Political parties; that is completely something that many Ugandans are still sceptical about. We want to change the leadership at the same time. I am now being frank, that is one of the reasons why I would imagine that we are moving too fast and if the party that he belongs to would want to ask him to stand, I do not see any problem with that. 

Therefore, Mr Speaker, I would like to request my colleagues to give Ugandans a chance to open up political space, open up the term limits so that the people can choose and have a choice. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much; it is time.

MRS MUGYENYI:  Secondly, Mr Speaker, I wanted to comment on the issue –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: It is time, honourable.

MRS MUGYENYI: Time is over? 

THE SPEAKER: Yes. Just one second.

MRS MUGYENYI: Mr Speaker I will take one minute to strongly appeal to my colleagues to support the centralisation of the chief administrative officers. I happen to have served on one district service commission and I realised that the politicians compromised the Chief Administrative Officer, and that even if decentralisation has achieved a number of things for us, this country has in a way been denied nation-building capacity. If the overall chief accounting officers can be shifted up and down, they can be appointed according to their ability and qualifications without being compromised by tribe, nepotism and so on. It would work better for the whole of Uganda. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR HARRY KASIGWA (Jinja Municipality West, Jinja): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would want to make a correction. I am not Michael Kasigwa; I am Harry Kasigwa.

 Mr Speaker, I would like to thank the Committee for having produced this report. But above all, I would like to thank the people of Jinja Municipality who elected me and gave me the opportunity to be part of this process that will determine the future of this country. And I want to assure them that I will offer what Uganda deserves. 

Mr Speaker, the core of this process is nothing other than Article 105(2). I have a book of speeches written by Mr Yoweri Kaguta Museveni: What is Africa’s problem?, which was forwarded by the Late Mwalimu Julius Nyerere. On page 180, he talks about confronting real issues. 

Now, the issue at hand is the future of this country and this is what he had to say: “Can freedom include manipulation? Should there be freedom to manipulate, misinform and take advantage of peoples ignorance?  Is that democracy?” And he answers; “I personally do not think so. If you have indisciplined democracy, that is democracy based on manipulation, lies and tricks. I am afraid our situation will get worse. What we are experiencing right now is basically manipulation, for selfish interests.” 

Mr Speaker I want to say this –(Interjection)- you have a chance to speak. When the Late Nyerere was forwarding this book, he said this that freedom and democracy, however, are neither commodities, which can be lifted from a shelf; nor can acts of Parliament give them life.

 What he basically meant was that it is intuition and reason. What Uganda needs right now is nothing but reason. What has caused problems in Africa is lack of reason. I have heard people say times have changed. In Ivory Coast they were independent for 40 years of bliss. Today what is there? The times have changed. 

Mr Speaker, there is another document that I would want to read here. Mr speaker, you are on record to have commended one of our colleagues for having researched about the changing roles of Ugandan MPs since 1945. That was Dr. Frank Nabwiso. Colleagues, let us be honest to this country. This is what Dr Nabwiso has to say: “The role of the Ugandan MP has changed significantly from an appointed legislature in 1945, to an elected multi-functional worker from 1995, which position makes him vulnerable to a lot of temptations, which can easily undermine his integrity or self-confidence.” 

Mr Speaker, we should be honest to one another. It should not be a question of numbers at this point in time. I agree 100 percent that democracy is about numbers. But let us look at this; when you sing our National Anthem we say, “Oh Uganda May God Uphold thee, we lay the future in thy hands.” The future of this country is in your hands. Should we mess it up, we are to blame. And I want to state this categorically, that this process that we are going through is based on nothing other than greed. 

We read the White Paper and saw what had been put there in as far as amendment of Article 244 was concerned. This is because Uganda is about to heat oil. I would like the Members of this Parliament to let us understand the dynamics of power in oil-rich countries. What does it mean? It means that we are on the way to create a presidential monarch and this is the first step. You could be free; it is your right to do whatever you want; everybody is entitled to do anything, including buffoonery, but I would appeal to colleagues- [An. Hon. Member: “Buffoons?”]- I said “buffoonery”. I did not say “buffoons”.

Mr Speaker, protect me from my friend here. He is the Chairman of the Committee. As we speak today, an oil refinery has been set up in Rwembisengo and we are only waiting to tap it.  The moment we tap it, there will be chaos in this country; and you can put me to record. 

There has been chaos in Angola because of oil; there is chaos in Arabia because of oil, there is chaos in Kuwait- all over the world, in all oil-rich countries.  As legislators in this country, We should be extremely cautious, let us not polarize this country, let us understand the issues at stake. We should understand what power means. What does power mean? Hon. Hope Mwesigye knows what powers is. Hope, you know what power means; the kind of power that this Constitution grants?

MRS MWESIGYE: Thank you Mr Speaker. Hon. Kasigwa has alluded to me as one who understands power, which I have failed to understand- including the context in which he is using it. Is he in order to make such kinds of allegations without substantiating them?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable, can you substantiate.

MR KASIGWA: Thank you, Mr Speaker.  When I said that hon. Mwesigye knows power, I was referring to the other day when she was giving out Shs 5 million and everybody was scampering all over the walls to receive Shs 5 million - that was power; she was showing power.

THE SPEAKER: Do not make personal allusions.

MR KASIGWA: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for that guidance. I withdraw that one but the power I am talking about here is the power that lies in the presidency in a country like ours.  We trek to go to Rwakitura to beg-

THE SPEAKER: Can you use another word that is clearly understood rather than this one?

MR KASIGWA: Give me guidance; I substantiate which word, Mr Speaker?  

THE SPEAKER: The way you used the word “power” - in what sense did you use “power”?

MR KASIGWA: Ah, power in the sense of political power.  The power to allocate resources, that is-

THE SPEAKER: You mean honourable minister has that power to allocate resources and apparently to allocate resources for bad motives. You withdraw the statement.

MR KASIGWA:  Mr Speaker, obliged. But Members of Parliament, I would not like us to come back two years down the road, and say that we made a mistake. I can hear my friend Madada saying that we shall amend the Constitution again. Well, you are entitled to your opinion; he will come back here again if there are problems, but colleagues, I would rather we do not become extremists.  

Fine, we are talking about the transition, but what is the win-win situation that will be respected in this country?  Tomorrow, you will celebrate with your numbers because you got Article 105 (2). Well, you can have it; you are entitled to it. But remember, Uganda is for all of us and no one should think in a parochial manner. We should think in terms of experience, because this is – I would want to make a small citation here, this is what hon. Nyerere had to say as I wind up.  “A nation can draw ideas and learn from experience elsewhere, but it is only the very foolish and very arrogant to believe that there exists a temperate of prototype.”

The people of Jinja always tell me that, “we elected you to guide us”, and they are watching me as I speak, because I am giving them guidance.  It is my duty as a leader to give them guidance and tell them where we are going wrong or right. They told me that, “hon. Kasigwa, you are our son, so you go and do the right thing in Parliament.” Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

MR AEL ARK LODOU (Dodoth County, Kotido): Thank you Mr Speaker.  I wish to thank you and the committee for the good job well done.  I am standing to raise some issues on Article 10 of the Constitution, which we are going to amend. We have an indigenous group community called Miguto, who have not been recognised and entered in the Constitution. There is need to amend the article of the Constitution, to recognise them as of the year 1926. 

We have a community called “the Yukoto”, this indigenous community came by migration from an Ethiopia region called Abyssinia and they lived between Karinga Sub County and Orum division in Kitgum district.  They speak the language called “Nakuto”. 

On the position of the Chief Administrative Officer, the people of Dodoth said the following, the CAOs need to be centralised, if they are to have a national outlook.  Some of them have been localised. Somebody is born from a sub county A; he grows up there, then comes to Makerere and goes back to work in the district. There is no national outlook for such a person.  There is need to give different environments to the CAO for experience. 

On dual citizenship, during 1980, the people of Dodoth were chased away from their county as a result of famine and migrated to Sudan. Some went to Kenya, our other bordering country.  

Now, some international NGOs came and took them out to Canada, to America and to Australia; there is need to have dual citizenship so that they can come back.  We have international boundaries, in my area; I have international borders with Sudan and Kenya.  Our people move freely across borders and we have relatives across in Kenya and Sudan. So there is need to have a dual citizenship for such a group of people.

Now, we enjoy democracy ushered in by the NRM Government; there is freedom of speech and association, which most of you have exercised. We have a good political climate and a fast growing economy.  We have many FM radio stations, more mobile phones and networks. I do not know what Ugandans want! I thought these are things that you wanted for development of a country.  Some people want to take us back. Maybe what you can do is promote the Government in power that you may have all this accessible to all people in the country.

Many people have tested Parliamentary seats for the first time, unlike Aggrey Awori who has been MP in UPC. Now, many of us have had a great turnover of MPs. We should appreciate the efforts of this Government, for having made us what we are. (Applause) 

We are now going to multi party democracy. I think the issue of term limits do not need to arise, because the parties will fill candidates of their choice during the regular, free and fair elections.  But as a reminder, how many of our Parties have changed Party leadership since independence? Obote has been in power as UPC president for 43 years; Kawanga Ssemogerere has been DP president for so many years. Who has changed them? Why then do you want to change Museveni?  

What matters to my people of Dodoth is good governance in the country and development, not term limits.  My people do not care about term limits; they want development in the country.  My people have said, that God gives us leaders; it is God who knows how long one leader can be in power and when he will go.  The same to us Members of Parliament; we are Members of Parliament now, tomorrow we shall not be here and though some of us may be here, that still is God’s making. You cannot come and impose yourself.  

I am really flabbergasted by the debates by some of our colleagues; they debate with emotions.  When we are trying to correct our country, we do not need emotions; some of us are unnecessarily emotional.  

On the issue of rebels; many people have been arguing about rebels. But if you believe in ghosts and demons like what has been happening in Gulu, you need to change your mind.  If you know that they are your own people, go and talk to Kony because Kony believes in demons, go and talk to him to change his mind.  

In Karamoja we say adoweegile; that means the man has failed, so when Museveni fails we shall tell him that is enough for you.  But as for now, we cannot. Thank you.

MR AHMED AWONGO (Koboko County, Arua): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, and hon. Members.  I would like to take this opportunity to thank you for giving me the opportunity to speak on behalf of the people of Koboko whose views fortunately tally with my own.

Mr Speaker, aware of the need for harmony and peace in this country and the need for prosperity in this country, I would like to support the proposed removal of presidential term limits, which is in Article 105(2).

Mr Speaker, I have been carefully listening to very many speakers who have been talking in this House and very many of them have referred to the advantages of term limits as follows: 

One is that term limits create certainty in the leader who is in power.  But I do not think this is true, because if you knew that you were going to lead for two terms, what plans would you have, other than looting the country.  Yet if it is left open, you will have no time to plan ill motives because you will know that as long as you are performing well, you will be left in office to do your work; that will give you peace of mind.  So, it is not correct that you do not have enough time to plan if the term is limited.

Then there are some, who say that term limits provide order and succession.  Mr Speaker, there are very many countries where term limits are yet the leaders there have not done the best because they know that any time they will be leaving; and therefore they have been planning for their own families and lives, which we should not allow in this country.  

There is one who said that term limits could give a popular President chance to be an advisor.  If our people do not listen to the reigning President, what makes us think that they will listen to him when he is out office? That will never happen.  So these things, which they have termed as merits for term limits are not actually merits but demerits for term limits.

As you are aware, our friends here have mentioned Africa’s problems.  There are those who say, it is because of this and that. But in my view, Africa’s major problems, is leadership; apart from the effects of colonialism and Africa being besieged by HIV/AIDS, where over 25 million people have perished and over 16,000 children are orphans.  The biggest problem is leadership, because while it is easy to get bad leaders, because they are always readily available, it is not easy to get a good leader.  

I want to refer you to Matthew Chapter 13, for those of you who are Christians.  Matthew Chapter 13 says that, “it is easier for a camel to go through the eye of a needle than for the rich to enter the kingdom of God.” This is true.  While it is easy for us to get these bad leaders, getting good ones is as difficult as it is for a camel to enter through the eye of the needle.  That is here in this country.  

Mr Speaker, I want to advise our brothers and sisters who want us to change our leaders as if we are changing panties to understand that it is a very bad practice and we must not allow this to happen because it is not going to take us anywhere. Let us allow our people to benefit from the wisdom of our good leaders.  Let us allow our people to take advantage of the experiences that our good leaders have. After all, what is leadership?  Leadership is influence; it is not manipulation.  If you are a leader, without influence, you are not a leader but you are just walking alone, and if you are walking alone, then you are not a leader.  

So I want to advise those of you who think that somebody is trying to manipulate things in his favour that is not true. That is just influence and it is a right for one to influence so that they may be able to lead.  After all, you also had to influence people, before you came to Parliament; you had to talk to people and that is how you came here; and that must happen to the President. He must be able to influence. Members of Parliament must be able to influence the population in order to lead.  So leadership is nothing but influence.  So I want to thank you, Mr Speaker, and urge the Members of Parliament here to support this motion. We should ensure that these term limits are opened for whoever is going to be there.  Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you.

MR SAMUEL BITANGARO (Bufumbira County South, Kisoro): I would like to thank the Committee for this excellent report. I would also like to thank my colleagues on both sides of the divide, for the vigour and depth of arguments you have put in this debate.

From the onset, I would like to register my support for the three main issues, which are in the Bill.  That is, support for the dual citizenship, grant of a special status for Kampala as a capital of Uganda, and lifting term limits under Article 105(2) of the Constitution.  I will however, limit my arguments and support to Article 105 of the Constitution because I feel that other issues have been adequately covered and they have not generated as much controversy as Article 105.

The views I present today are not only mine; but they are also the views of the people of Bufumbira South, whom I have the privilege to represent in this House. Following the Constitutional Review Commission or the Sempebwa report, Government generated the White Paper and following the White Paper, we were mandated to consult our people and it is the views of those consultations that I present today.  

The reasons for supporting the lifting of term limits are two mainly.  One, I support the amendment of Article 105(2) to lift the term limits so that people can exercise full empowerment under the Constitution to choose leaders of their choice.  In my view, it is a contradiction in that people are empowered under Article 1 to choose leaders of their choice and yet they are given limited freedom to choose these leaders in the same Constitution. It is a contradiction, and this is the correct time to rectify it.

The second is that, in the new political dispensation, we are moving to a place where political space has been open.  Therefore, people are free to form organisations of their choice.  I suggest that they do it in their respective organisations to choose the best candidates to contest for the office of presidency.  

In this era where competition for political space is stiff, each party will choose its best.  It is only the best that can be sought to the populous. Therefore, the wisdom in this is that the parties will definitely file their best candidates.  For those two reasons, I will support the amendment of Article 105(2), to lift term limits.  

Mr Speaker, it would be intellectually dishonest if I did not address the fears and anxieties of those colleagues who are against lifting of term limits. 

 One the arguments I have heard in this House, is that given our turbulent political history and past fraud electoral process and the fact that some leaders may influence the institutions that carry out elections, it is be unwise to have indefinite presidential term limits.  I am afraid the answer to this influence would be to strengthen the capacity of the Electoral Commission that they may conduct free and fair elections, and not to limit people’s constitutional rights to choose the leaders they desire. (Applause)

I would also hasten to add that you should go ahead and build strong institutions, like the Police, the Civil Society, the Civil Service that should not bend to the whims of the leaders of the day.  On this, I concur with those who argue that there should be investment in building strong institutions.

The second reason I have heard from those opposed to lifting term limits is that the Constituent Assembly felt that this was one of the ways to check dictatorship; and secondly, that since it is a constitutional provision, it should not be easily changed.  

Mr Speaker, I wish to say that nothing could be far from the truth. One; there are safeguards under the Constitution to limit excesses of abuse of power by a person holding the Office of the President.  These are well elaborated under Article 107 of the Constitution.  If you want, you can strengthen it further under Article 3(4)(b) of the Constitution.  It enjoins and obligates the people of Uganda to do all in their power to prevent the abrogation or breach of this Constitution.  I do not doubt the capacity of Ugandans to exercise this power.  

It was also argued that in instances where there were no term limits for the Office of the President, then those circumstances breed dictatorship.  This argument is not borne out by empirical evidence. President Nyerere led our neighbours in Tanzania for 27 years. Yet you will agree with me that he is one of the best Presidents this Continent has had.  They had no term limits.  

The most baffling argument I have heard, however, is that because Article 105(2) of the Constitution has not been tested and found wanted, then it should be left intact, as the Constituent Assembly wanted it.  I want to reiterate that laws, and indeed good laws at that, are a product of the feelings and aspirations of people at the time the law is made; in 1995 those may have been the feelings and aspirations of Ugandans.  But 10 years down the road, the people have become wiser and they wish to change.  Who are we to deny them the right? Indeed, even the framers of the Constitution envisaged that people may one time wish to change, and that is why there is Chapter 18 in the Constitution.

Now, I will summarize my argument with an analogy.  This reminds me of an interview I watched on CNN some time back.  The person being interviewed was Dr. Boutrous Boutrous Ghali; he was the former Secretary General of the United Nations (UN).  I can see Prof. Kiwanuka nodding, because he was there.  When Dr. Boutrous Boutrous Ghali was the Foreign Minister of Egypt, he campaigned to become Secretary General of the UN.  In his campaign, he asked for one term, and indeed he won and became the Secretary General.  At the end of his term he sought to have a second term.  Journalists challenged him and told him that he was not principled because he was changing his stance.  In reply, Dr. Ghali clearly said that it was only those who are not wise who do not change their minds; and this is what he asked, “You mean if I made a mistake and I realise later that I made a mistake, I should stick by the mistake to be called principled?  You should not.”  

The wisdom in this reasoning is that Ugandans now have realised that probably at that time they made a mistake, now they have become wiser and they want to change; that is why Chapter 18 is there.  Let us give them a chance to change.  

I am ending by posing a question; if the term limit is successfully limited, will the President, namely, Yoweri Museveni, be eligible to stand?  If the answer is in affirmative, so be it.  

Mr Speaker, I would like to thank you so much for giving me an opportunity to contribute to this historic debate.  Thank you.

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (INVESTMENT)(Prof. Semakula Kiwanuka): Mr Speaker, honourable members, let me first thank the Committee, which produced this report, and I thank all honourable members who have contributed to this debate.  I rise to support the lifting of term limits, and I do so from an ideological, political and philosophical standpoint.  

Mr Speaker, this is a historic debate in the constitutional transition of our country.  But while I support the lifting of term limits, I would like to be fair and acknowledge the misgivings held by many who oppose the lifting of term limits, the misgivings and the fears, which the framers of our current Constitution had.  All of us are old enough; the framers of this Constitution did so because of the tyrannical experience, which we had with the past dictators. That experience was a milestone around the necks of the framers of our Constitution.  

Let me also acknowledge that not only in this country, but also in other countries as well, in the so-called new and emerging democracies, which had political experience like ours, they have craved for term limits.  

Mr Speaker, during the current debate, I have heard in this House and in some quarters outside this House that if we remove term limits, that will be a recipe for disaster, that it will open the floodgates of tyranny.  

Mr Speaker, these arguments are based on speculation, because experience has shown that you do not need one, two, three, four, five terms in order to be a dictator.  If there are people who appreciate that, it should be Ugandans; Amin did not need two or three years to show his true colours.  

It has also been argued that to amend Article 105(2) would breach the sanctity of the Constitution.  That, Mr Speaker, is a dishonest argument because the very people, who clamour for amending Article 269 in order to open up political space for political parties, are the ones who say that amending Article 105(2) is a cause for disaster.  

Other speakers have even called it an overthrow of the Constitution, which I disallowed because that was a reference to treason.

We have also had arguments that the Constitution should stand the test of time.  This argument lacks logic and merit because circumstances change.  I would like to give a few examples here. The French Constitution of the 5th Republic of 1958 has been amended 32; that is on an average of 2.2 years.  The Indian Constitution of 1947 has been amended 70 times; that is 1 and half years, so the question of test of time –(Interruption)

MR. LUKYAMUZI: Point of procedure.  Mr Speaker, I am raising on a point of procedure.  We have a code of conduct here in Parliament, which we follow; is it procedurally correct for the Hon. Professor to directly read the speech as if he is addressing a lecture hall?

THE SPEAKER:  Well, in the first place, it is out of order to read a speech, but it is in order for somebody to refer to brief notes and expand his contributions while looking at brief notes.  I do not know whether this is a long speech but it would be that is how he looks at his notes.

PROF. SEMAKULA:  I thank you, Mr Speaker, for your protection. Indeed I am consulting my notes, as I should.  Article number 1 of our Constitution invokes the will of the people and I would like to say that term limits do not stop dictators the essence of democracy and democratic governance is to trust the people.  

The Movement, of which President Museveni is the leader, is the first political regime in the history of this country to freely subject itself to the will of the people. How many presidents ever presented themselves to the electorate? None. By putting trust in the people, the Movement is building durable institutions based on trust.  

We have also had arguments; people have confused the principle of lifting term limits with the incumbency of President Museveni.  We who advocate for the lifting of term limits do so on principle so that indefinite eligibility is open to every ambitious Ugandan.  Honorable colleague here, Aggrey Awori, former presidential candidate, Mayanja the leader of JEMA, the leaders of UPC, all of them would benefit from the lifting of this term limits. 

Let me quote a few examples, two from the founding fathers of the American Republic. In 1789, when the Americans were debating their current Constitution in Fravedia, James Adams argued that there is no right clearly and few of more importance than that the people should be at liberty to choose the ablest and best men and women available to them. The lifting of term limits is saying Ugandans should choose the best men and women available.  Alexander Hamilton wrote that nothing appears more possible at first sight than the whole concept –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honorable Professor Kiwanuka, you have run out of your time. 

PROF. SEMAKULA: Than the whole concept of term limitation.  As you have asked me to wind up, Mr Speaker, I would like to say to honorable members and to this country that the Movement under President Museveni are the guardians of democracy. Not only are we the founders of democracy, we are the guardians of the democracy we enjoy which everybody is talking about. (Applause) Mr Speaker, honorable colleagues, it cannot be we the founders of this democracy to be the first people to kill it.  President Museveni has spent a good part of his life fighting for democracy until Ugandans today can stand up and speak freely and enjoy the freedom of speech.  I would like to assure our colleagues, in spite of their fears that the democracy which we brought, which you have guarded up to this time we shall continue to protect it and to guide and we are its guarantee.

MR JOHN KAWANGA (Masaka Municipality, Masaka): Thank you, Mr Speaker.  I wish to remind honorable members of Parliament that there is life before Parliament for a politician and there is also life after Parliament for a politician. I am talking about politicians; therefore, what we do in this particular place should be selfless and it’s for the service of this country, always knowing that it will always be there even when we are not there. 

It is unfortunate that what we are doing now is actually rewriting a Constitution, which we enacted less than 10 years ago. We did that within the context of the history of this country that we thought that we should have a durable Constitution for this country. Something, which charts out the course of – we, did not think at that time that we would require virtually the whole Constitution in order to pass only one article in that Constitution. We have had to look at so many articles of this Constitution; given it various names - Omnibus Amendment Bill, whatever amendment Bill, in order at the end of the day to discuss only one article of the Constitution.  

It appears that it was covered in there cleverly to divert us but end up with one thing and that is what has made this amendment most unfortunate. So, we are now ending up discussing only one article of the Constitution; I have been listening to everybody and it appears all the others do not matter except that one. I wish we had only moved that one and the reason it has become this it is because it is being done in a conspiratorial manner; it is not transparent and it is cause suspicion in society. Otherwise, if it had been brought in a broad daylight manner, everything would have come out; but here we are limiting ourselves to this one and creating all kinds of reasons. 

There is a reason why it had been put in the Constitution and I want to ask, nobody has told me; since when did it become necessary to look at it? Who invented it? Why did it have to come the way it did? Then it has now transgressed the whole country.  It is that spirit which has actually killed even the good intention that should have been behind this thing. That is why religious leaders - everybody has advised against it and yet we are pressing it. That is why we are advocating it in one of the most despicable manners of wearing esanja to sell it.  It is a bad reflection on the history of this country, it should have been considered on its merits but the way it has been brought and as a consequence, it is going to cause us unnecessary problems.  

For those of you who read the report of the Legal Committee and remember what they said on page 27, I beg you to read that part again. At the end of the day, we should understand that Ugandans are watching us and that they comprehend what we are doing. 

So, what are the real reasons for this amendment and what are the fears of the population? These are issues that we are not addressing. We are simply covering up and giving all kinds of reasons and I am afraid they are going to cause us problems. I do not normally read the Red Pepper in detail but today I did, and those who do not normally read this newspaper should read it today. The articles in this paper, today, point at the kind of deep-seated suspicions that this country has about its leadership. 

The problem we have is that we think leadership in this country is the President. The President should not be the only leader in this country because he leads with everybody else. The problem is that we think governments belong to presidents yet they do not. One of the reasons why there is need to change the leadership is because even a good President can saddle himself with despicable people who can cause problems to the country. Leaders tend to recycle people they can get along with, and because of this, sometimes these people may tie down the President. 

Therefore, the deep-seated issues are, with whom is the incumbent President leading and what is happening? That is the reason why everybody who looks at the economy and the running of this country has fears about that article. It is for these very reasons that I oppose the lifting of term limits. We are opening up a Pandora’s box and giving opportunity to leaders, who have been referred to as mafia, to run this country. I wish you good luck.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Now honourable members, the problem I see is that people who had registered themselves the previous day never turn up and when they turn up today, it becomes unfair to those who were supposed to speak today. However, I think we have to come to the end, but before we do, I want to go through my list of those interested in contributing. 

I have seen the honourable member for Kyenjojo District, honourable member for –(Interjection)- hold on, let me read what I really have then later we can add. I have seen the member for Kumi County, honourable member for Jonam County, honourable member for Kumi District, member for Busiki, member for Bulisa, member for Kyotera, member for Makindye East, member for Bunya West, member for Kayunga district, member for Pallisa County, member for Sembabule District, member for Rukungiri requisitioned, member for Ruhama requisitioned for tomorrow and I have also seen member for Bushenyi. 

This is what I have –(Interjection)- no, I will record your name. I am just informing you that for purposes of updating my list, this is the position. We shall have a debate, so you can record the names of those people. We shall continue with the debate until next week, but tomorrow we shall have only three hours debate and if you come in time, I will be able to cover these members whose names I have taken - they are about 18. This will be from 10.00 a.m. to 1.00 p.m. then we will go for the weekend. On Monday, we shall have a session in the afternoon and then Tuesday is when we intend to end the debate. 

I have also recorded honourable member for Kibaale District, honourable member for Gomba, member for Kalungu East, member for Kabale District, members for Arua, Kapchorwa, Nakifuma, Ntungamo, Mwenge Districts, Persons with Disability, Western, honourable Nandala, honourable Mulindwa, honourable Apuun, the honourable minister, honourable for Bundibugyo. 

That is the complete list and I do not think I have left anybody. But the first list is the one I will start with. Should you be there and there are people on the first list who are not there then I will slot you in. But if we start on time, at exactly 10.00 a.m., then I will definitely be able to cover all of you because in an afternoon session, I can cover 20 people. (Interjection) Monday we will meet in the afternoon –(Interjection)- yes, there will be a debate. 

Tomorrow we shall have a meeting in the morning from 10.00 a.m. to 1.00 p.m. so that members can go for the weekend. So, honourable members, I want to take this opportunity again to thank you for your contributions on the bill. The House is adjourned until tomorrow 10.00 a.m. 

(The House rose at 6.05 p.m. and adjourned until Friday, 24 June 2005 at 10.00 a.m.)


