Wednesday, 24 June 2015

Parliament met at 2.56 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this afternoon sitting and as I indicated yesterday, this session is short in terms of concentration. I would like to appeal to those committees that have pending work other than the Bills for instance petitions to expeditiously handle them. If we could finish them by the end of July, we would have served the population who brought the petitions here. Therefore, please find time to do the needful.

Again I would like to remind the members who have not registered for the electronic voting to do so for the rest of this week, so that we can be fully compliant in our move from analogue to digital. We need to migrate officially. Thank you. 

LAYING OF PAPERS

    I) OVERVIEW OF ASEOWA ACTIVITIES AND ACHIEVEMENTS IN THE EBOLA EMERGENCY RESPONSE OPERATIONS IN WEST AFRICA (GUINEA, LIBERIA AND SIERRA LEONE)

2.09
MAJ. GEN. JULIUS OKETTA (UPDF Representative): Madam Speaker, I am here to lay on the Table the report of the African Union Support to Ebola Outbreak in West Africa (ASEOWA) achievement in West Africa titled, “Report on the joint civil military humanitarian emergency medical and non-medical response operations in West Africa Ebola operation.”

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, on your behalf, we would like to welcome back Maj. Gen. Oketta - (Laughter) - no, honourable members, all those are our seats. Order, Members. We would like to welcome back Maj. Gen. Oketta who has been heading the African Union Mission on the Ebola crisis. He has spent the last 10 months in West Africa and they have done a very wonderful job. We congratulate them and the report will be debated on a date to be given. We welcome you back and thank you so much. (Applause)

3.01
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, in line with the Public Finance Management Act section 11(2)(g), I beg to lay on the Table a list of the updated accounting officers. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: The list is sent to the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development for perusal and report back.
 
PRIME MINISTER’S QUESTION TIME

3.02
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Serere): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have a matter of public importance.  We know very well that we are doing very good work in Somalia but our sisters and sons or officers and men who are serving in Somalia have had some challenges especially those who are meant to return after serving the term that they were supposed to. They are about 1,450 who are supposed to come back home. 

In the last three days, I have been bombarded by calls that they are supposed to come back but they have not been facilitated to come to Uganda despite the fact that the African Union or UN Mission has paid for them to be brought back. Only 90 of them have been brought by air cargo that is faulty to the extent that they almost strayed and found themselves in Soroti instead of Entebbe.

The officers and men serving are asking this Parliament to ask the Prime Minister to ensure that they are brought back home. The challenge that they have – you read in the papers yesterday - are the attack they get from the Al-shabab. Once they get injured or killed, they cannot be compensated because they are in transit. 

The last call I received was about 30 minutes ago. Therefore, can the Prime Minister assure the relatives, the parents and Ugandans that those officers and men who are serving will be brought back as soon as possible?

3.04
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Madam Speaker, I thank my brother, hon. Okupa, for raising the issue concerning our sons and daughters who are on a Pan African mission in Somalia. From what hon. Okupa says, it appears there are some relatively simple logistical issues being sorted to ensure that our brothers and sisters come back.
 
Fortunately, the Minister of Defence, who is in charge, has had articulation on the matter. I have no doubt that he will deal with the matter effectively to ensure that our daughters and sons come back home safely after this exemplary service in Somalia.

3.05
MR REAGAN OKUMU (FDC, Aswa County, Gulu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to ask the Prime Minister; there is a wave of recruitment of people called “Crime preventers”. In the areas of Gulu at least and some parts of Acholi sub region, these crime preventers are actually turning into crime creators. They are aligned to a political party called NRM and they are intimidating people who belong to other political parties.

They are also aligned with the groups that are being trained under the arrangement of patriotism clubs. All these groups are campaigning for the NRM party. What I would like to know, hon. Prime Minister, is, whether taxpayer’s money is being used in the name of crime preventers to support a particular political party or this programme is meant for the state of Uganda to protect everybody equally irrespective of the political party they belong because it has become a menace and continues to be a problem and a source of insecurity. Can we be made to understand, hon. Prime Minister?

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, the issue raised by my brother, hon. Reagan Okumu, is important. It is true that crime preventers are volunteers to help the state fight against and prevent crime. However, if the information given by hon. Reagan Okumu is accurate - and indeed we are going to follow it up - they are not supposed to be playing partisan roles; they are supposed to be concentrating on prevention of crime.

Nevertheless, we will follow-up the information from my brother hon. Reagan Okumu and ensure that if there are errors in that respect, they are quickly and urgently corrected to ensure that they concentrate on prevention of crime and play a non-partisan role to protect all Ugandans.

3.07
MS KEVINAH TAAKA (FDC, Busia Municipality, Busia): Thank you, Madam Speaker. On Saturday, the police conducted an operation in Busia near the market and there was a 14-year old school girl called Namirimu Shabua. She was returning home but the police started shooting and a bullet hit her from the back through to her lower abdomen. This girl is undergoing an operation in Mbale Hospital. Her mother is a single parent; the girl is an orphan and has no help. She is in S.2 at St John. 

I would like to know from the Prime Minister how they can help this girl get treatment and meet the medical bills in hospital so that she can continue with her studies. What will happen to the person who shot her?

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, if this young girl was shot by the police by accident, the police have an obligation to ensure that she is properly treated and given some support after.
However, the case will be again looked at by the Minister of Internal Affairs and followed up to make sure that this young girl is properly treated and looked after by the police.

3.09
COL (RTD.) FRED MWESIGYE (NRM, Nyabushozi County, Kiruhura): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Yesterday, a very sad situation took place. A five year old boy was travelling to Buganda Road Primary School and was killed by a truck which rammed into a boda boda.

However, according to the traffic officer, he stopped the boda boda but he could not stop; so, we lost this child. Can the government, through the Prime Minister, try to do something? 

Madam Speaker, through you, can the government try to control the death traps of these boda bodas. I would like the Prime Minister to assure this country that these massacres on the roads are going to be controlled –(Interjections)– school buses can be introduced; I have no problem and I support that. School buses can be organised from every location and to transport these kids to the schools. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, I join my brother, Col. Mwesigye, in highlighting the seriousness of accidents that we are confronted with. Today it is a child, tomorrow it is an adult; all of us are candidates and it is true that boda bodas are leading in this respect.

I know the police have been doing substantial work to ensure that boda bodas are under control. The critical point is to heighten vigilance in the police among the boda bodas and the population to ensure that accidents are controlled.

On the question of school buses, as you very well know, a number of school buses are available on private arrangement. I do not consider it realistic for Government now to suddenly introduce a school bus programme.

Nevertheless, this is a matter that the Ministry of Education can look at more closely but at the moment, the urgent matter is vigilance by the population, the police, the boda bodas and car owners to ensure that accidents are prevented because most accidents are brought about by carelessness and not following the law.

The case of boda bodas accidents by some of the boda boda riders just learning to ride without licences, the police are called upon to be more vigilant on this matter.

3.13
MR XAVIER KYOOMA (NRM, Ibanda County North, Ibanda): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, the President in 2008 made a pledge to give part of Bihanga Barracks land to the traders in Kanyarugiri Trading Centre in Nyamarebe Sub County, Ibanda District, for expansion of their trading centre. Several follow-ups have been made but up to now the pledge has not been fulfilled.

Likewise, the people of Kiburara Trading Centre in Ishongororo Town council in Ibanda District received a similar pledge and the President promised to give them part of the land belonging to Kiburara Prisons. Equally, several follow-ups have been made but up to now the pledge has not been fulfilled. Therefore, when will the President’s pledge be fulfilled?

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, on the question raised by hon. Kyooma concerning presidential pledges, the pledges are normally taken on and are fulfilled by line ministries. Therefore, I propose to my brother, hon. Kyooma, to link up with the Minister in charge of the Presidency to ensure that if this pledge has not been fulfilled, it is followed up by the line ministry for implementation and fulfilment.

3.15
MR MICHAEL MAWANDA (NRM, Igara County East, Bushenyi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Hon. Prime Minister, there are some former workers of UPTC who were placed under the Uganda Communications Employees Contributory Pensions Scheme to receive their monthly payment.

For the last six months, these former workers of Uganda Posts and Telecommunications Corporation (UPTC), who are very old and some sick, have not received their monthly pension. They have been moving to Privatisation Unit (PU) for intervention but it has not helped. They have requested me to ask you whether you can be able to intervene so that they can start getting their monthly pension.

DR RUGUNDA: If the former workers of UPTC have not got their payments, there are arrangements that were made after privatisation under PUD and under the Ministry of Finance to cater for the workers that were involved in the privatised institutions and UPTC workers should fall in this category. The Ministry of Finance and PUD should be able to sort out this matter.

3.16
MR SULAIMAN BALYEJJUSA (NRM, Budiope County East, Buyende): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Hon. Prime Minister, a few months back, the media carried information to the effect that Government was going to establish government-aided secondary schools in the sub counties where they did not exist and this caused a lot of excitement among the population. Kagulu Sub County, which is in my constituency, happens to be one of the beneficiaries of that scheme. May we know the timelines when Government is implementing that scheme?

Secondly, the people of Budiope East constituency have asked me to find out from you when the power that was promised to them by the government will be extended in Budiope East in Buyende District. I thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, the issue of fulfilment of Government policy with regard to secondary schools and health centres is a common question in this House. I know that the Ministry of Education is implementing this programme of ensuring that every sub county has a public secondary school. It is true there are some sub counties like yours but the programme is on course and for details as to when your secondary school will be taken on or constructed, you need to liaise with the minister responsible for education.

I have just received additional information that as of today, 273 sub counties still have not got Government secondary schools and this is the number that is gradually being worked on so that at the end of day, we will have every sub county with a Government secondary school. 

Concerning power lines, we are doing very well in as far as extending power to the people is concerned. This is one of the great achievements of Government. As I speak, about 15 per cent of Ugandans have access to electricity and no wonder my colleagues on the other side are very surprised; you will get more surprises, with the aggressive implementation of Government programmes and manifesto that is on-going. Power will be extended and for detailed timing, you can check with the Rural Electricity Agency. They will be able to tell when the power will be connected to your sub county.

3.19
MR JULIUS BIGIRWA (NRM, Buhaguzi County, Hoima): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, this is a common question but it came up over the weekend when I was holding a meeting of some local leaders in my constituency and I seemed to be lying to them but I would like to get assurance from the Prime Minister. Hoima District happens to be one of the few remaining districts in the whole country which has not received bicycles for LCI chairpersons and yet we are almost getting into elections.

The LC chairpersons are asking their leaders what is happening with this programme; whether they were lied to or not. Hon. Prime Minister, I am afraid that as we get into elections, this could be a big factor that we need to consider having a critical answer for.

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, I took advantage of good neighbourliness with the Minister for Local Government and he has given me the latest information on the matter raised by hon. Junjura; that so far, 53 districts have received bicycles and 59 districts have yet to receive the bicycles and they will be able to receive them when money is available.

THE SPEAKER: That is a very serious political problem even for me, a Speaker of the Uganda Parliament, who cannot deliver bicycles to Kamuli –(Laughter). It is a serious matter and these people are worried that they are going for elections and if they are replaced, they will not receive the bicycles. It is quite serious. It may be small but to them it is a very important thing.

3.22
MS EMMA BOONA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mbarara): Thank you, Madam Speaker. My question concerns the natural disasters that we have in our constituencies. Recently, we wrote to the Office of the Prime Minister concerning villages that had been ruined by thunderstorms and hailstones. Although we have not received the requested assistance, we would at least have loved to get a response and be told that the stores are empty or awaiting provisions or we wait so that the people remain hopeful. They have no food and seeds and when we write, we would love to get answers please. 

May I know when we will get these responses and when the sub counties of Bugamba and Rugando in Mbarara District that suffered these hailstorms - and this is connected also to the thunder arrestors we had promised in the Eighth Parliament, to provide to schools. We are still suffering these natural disasters of thunder striking schools. We would like to know when the Ministry of Education will be in position to help our schools and protect our children against thunder and lightning. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, on the question about disasters, thunderstorms and landslides, these have affected a number of areas in the country and the Office of the Prime Minister, in liaison with the district authorities, have sent, in some cases, teams to assess the damage so that appropriate response by Government can be made. One would need to check the stage at which the case of Rugando in Mbarara District has gone but the OPM, especially the disaster relief department, is actively following this with different districts headquarters.

I was talking yesterday with the honourable Member of Parliament who represents the area of Busolwe; we were talking with somebody who represents Kabale and there are many areas that are affected and these are being followed up by the OPM and the local district administration.

3.25
MS FRANCA AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Agago): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to ask the Prime Minister to tell this nation when Government is going to roll out the programme for paying ex-combatants because this process was started over five years ago, and quite a number of ex-combatants have died before receiving their money. The bereaved families are hoping to receive this money. I wonder when Government is really - for example, in my district, so far I know less than 50 people have received out of the thousands. When is Government going to roll out given the fact that the five-year term of this Government is ending very soon? Thank you very much. 

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, I am glad my sister has raised the point that a number of people in her constituency have already been paid. The number may be small but it is evidence that the process of payment is now on-going and it is going to be expanded as more resources become available. 

It is true that we would like this programme expedited so that these compatriots who served our country can indeed get their gratuity and monies that are due to them. It is an on-going programme and the Ministry of Defence is executing it with diligence and is putting in as much effort as possible to cover it.

As to when it will be completed, since it is on-going, it will be determined by the availability of resources. If we had resources, we would have wanted to have paid them by this time but it is an on-going programme.

3.27
MS ROSEMARY NYAKIKONGORO (Independent, Woman Representative Sheema): I thank you, Madam Speaker. Hon. Prime Minister, there is too much anxiety out there; the population would like to know when Government is passing out the counties and municipalities in preparation for the next coming elections because these are the questions that people, including the people of Sheema Municipality, keep asking us. When is this programme coming out so that the anxiety is really handled before it goes out of control? I thank you. 

DR RUGUNDA: The question raised by my sister, hon. Nyakikongoro, was actually asked to me over the weekend while I was in the countryside. People would indeed like to know and it is a legitimate question.

The minister responsible for local government is coming to Cabinet to present the proposals. This is actually expected next week and when Cabinet has gone through and approved the proposals, then the minister will straight away come to this august House so that the House can pronounce itself on the matter.

3.29
MR SAM OKUONZI (Independent, Vurra County, Arua): Rt Hon. Prime Minister, on 8th June, a group of youth from the DR Congo attacked Vurra customs. They were accompanied by militia, the DRC army and the police. In summary, they actually invaded Uganda and people are quite afraid that the invasion may go very far. We have had several meetings as local leaders but we have not seen much that the government is doing here.

We have been told that the central government is playing diplomacy with the central government of DRC although the tension is local. Can you reassure the people of Vurra and the West Nile about what the government is doing to diffuse the on-going tension at the border?

DR RUGUNDA: I am glad that Dr Okuonzi has raised this important matter because it is true that for quite some time, there has been tension especially in the Vurra area. 

It is also true that the local officials on the Ugandan and the DR Congo side have been interacting but the matter has not been resolved as quickly as we wanted and so, the centre is in contact with Kinshasa.

Secondly, there has been deployment by Uganda to ensure that the property and the people of Uganda are protected in this situation. Nevertheless, Government is doing everything possible to ensure that we resolve this matter as amicably as possible.

3.31
MR KENNETH LUBOGO (Independent, Bulamogi County, Kaliro): In 2011, the people of Kaliro overwhelmingly voted for and supported Government on the basis of four promises. However, as I speak, not even one has been fulfilled –(Laughter). Electricity has not been extended to Kaliro, Nawaikoke and Gadumire and the tarmacking of the road has not been done. The hospital has not been granted and money for the elderly has also not been granted.    

Hon. Prime Minister, I would like for you to guide the people of Kaliro as to what their voting pattern should be in the next elections considering that the four major promises have not been fulfilled. I thank you.     

DR RUGUNDA: I salute the people of Kaliro because they voted wisely. Secondly, I thought the honourable member would also say that the NRM promised a ferry and that the ferry is in operation.

For the remaining issues that you are talking about like roads and power is just a question of limited time. There is no doubt that if we can, as the President said the other day, reach every corner of Uganda with a tarmac road, how about Kaliro? Therefore, if there are any road works that are not addressed, they will be addressed because it is just a question of time.

On power, as we had earlier said, the determination of Government is to ensure that every corner of Uganda has power and that is why we are building all these dams. Where is this power going to go? It is going to go to the population. 

Lastly, what should the people of Kaliro do in February next year? Vote wisely, as usual. (Laughter)

3.34
MS BETTY NAMBOOZE (DP, Mukono Municipality, Mukono): I thank you, Madam Speaker. One Ugandan last week came out and declared that he intends to run for the presidency in this country and so many people were excited including some of my constituents. May I now know why the police are arresting hon. Amama Mbabazi’s supporters?

DR RUGUNDA: The role of the Police is simple and straight; to enforce the law irrespective of who may be affected; be it my sister, hon. Nambooze, hon. Amama Mbabazi or I. The critical point is that the police should carry out its duties of enforcing the law and it should not discriminate against anybody. They should just enforce the law as it is.

3.35
MS BETTY ANYWAR (FDC, Woman Representative, Kitgum): I thank you, Madam Speaker. Is the Prime Minister aware of the outbreak of malaria in Kitgum, Lamwo and Gulu? As we speak, the sick school children are being treated from their schools because the hospitals are full with four patients admitted to a bed. 

I talked to the hospital superintendent and I understand that the drugs have run out. Are you aware of this situation? What are you doing to salvage this situation?

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, the Ministry of Health has a team that tackles medical emergencies and I hope my sister, hon. Beatrice Anywar, has already communicated with the ministry.

Secondly, there is a district health officer whose responsibility is to ensure that he or she deals with a problem there and then and in case he or she cannot, they communicate to the headquarters of the Ministry of Health for reinforcement.

Therefore, since this is now public information and the health sector is represented by none other than the honourable Minister of Health, I have no doubt that effective measures will be taken under his charge.

3.37
MR ROLAND MUGUME (FDC, Rukungiri Municipality, Rukungiri): Thank you, Madam Speaker, during the LOP’s visit to prisons in Eastern and Western Uganda, there were complaints that some prisoners take more than a year before being committed and after committal, others take more than five years before trial and judgement largely because of lack of judges.
Justice delayed is justice denied. Right now the country has 57 High Court Judges instead of 80 and 52 in active service. When is Government going to appoint all the judges to dispense justice to Ugandans?

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, Government is as concerned about the inmates as the leader of the delegation and his team. It is true that our prisons are really congested and we are aware of the shortage of judges but Government is doing everything possible to increase the number of judges, and to improve the conditions of work of the judges so that they can carry out their duties of dealing with these cases and decongesting our prisons.

3.39
MR AMOS OKOT (NRM, Agago County, Agago): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Hon. Prime Minister, Agago is the only district in Acholi sub region without any plan for a tarmac road but the road coming from Adilang to Corner Kilak in Pader District has been contracted by a company that is supposed to work for three years. They have so far concluded about one and half years. Who is responsible for monitoring these people’s work because even this company, which is owned by some Indians, has left the road worse than before it was given to them.

How are they being paid? Is it after every month or after ascertaining the quality of work that is done on the road?

Finally, Adwari in Otuke is neighbouring Agago and the sub counties of Kot-omor, Omot and Arum are very close to them.  There is a plan to extend an electricity grid from Adwari Otuke to Odokomit. As we talk, the works on that power line have been stopped before reaching Odokomit yet I have seen the plan and the money has been allocated such that the works reach even Odokomit, which is Agago District. Why have they stopped in that place and when are they going to continue?

MR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, as we tarmac most of the major roads and we continue to give substantial amount of money to the road sector, it means more and more money will be available for the roads that are not yet upgraded or are not yet improved as murram roads.

There is no way a road may be done and is stopped halfway. It must connect to different areas. I am sure it is just a temporary delay but the road will be completed and the Ministry of Works, together with UNRA, are increasing their vigilance in ensuring that contractors do the work for which they have been contracted and that it is done both on time and it is of good quality. 

3.49
MR WILSON ASUPASA ISIKO (NRM, Busiki County, Namutumba): I thank you, Madam Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, there are planned works to improve and expand the Iganga-Tirinyi-Mbale Road. Sometime back, UNRA put mark stones on the roadside to mark where the road reserve stops but they did not compensate anybody along that line.

The people are living in fear about the fate of their houses which are within those mark stones that somehow indicates that they are in a road reserve. The people were not compensated; what will be their fate?

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, the mark stones that have recently been put by UNRA on the main road are a mere reminder to the public as to the margins or boundaries of the road reserve. I do not expect compensation to be paid to people who have built in a road reserve. My advice to them would be that they should shift and look for plots that are not in the road reserve.
Government is not expected to compensate people who have put up their houses in a road reserve especially on a trunk road like the Iganga-Tirinyi- Mbale Road.

3.44
MS LYDIA CHEKWEL (NRM, Woman Representative, Kween): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. Hon. Prime Minister, Kween District which I represent can be categorised into three regions geographically. We have the mountainous area which neighbours Mt Elgon, we have the middle part which has the road that joins Kapchorwa to Bukwo and the lower base which is plain.

In this country, this is a district that is completely inaccessible and civil servants have a serious accommodation problem.

We have districts that benefit from hard-to-reach allowance. I would like to know from you, hon. Prime Minister, what criteria was used in the selection. The President has promised Kween District on several occasions that it will be included among the places to benefit from the hard-to-reach allowances. When will it be included to benefit?

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, the point raised about hard-to-reach areas is a valid point. It is true that there is some Government allowance for people - public servants - who serve in these difficult areas. The Ministry of Public Service would be the best to handle that or to follow up that matter or for that matter, a line ministry if there are health workers or if they are in education, there is an office that deals with the section of hard-to-reach areas. They will be able to give you more specific information on the subject matter.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have used the 45 minutes as provided under Rule 34 of our Rules of Procedure. I am proposing that members who have not had an opportunity today to ask questions can bring them up next Wednesday. Those who have spoken will not be allowed next Wednesday; we shall have a different set of members to ask questions, for equity. 

I am aware about the law it is also under Rule 34. I was saying that the team that has asked today will not ask next week. I am calling upon the Clerk to publish those names and give them both to the Deputy Speaker and to myself so that we do not have any overlap. Does the Leader of the Opposition have something to say?

3.47
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Phillip Wafula Oguttu): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I thought you had forgotten that I was supposed to say something. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, thank you very much for answering our questions but there are some issues that I really think Government should come out a little a bit more clearly on.

On the issue of the police, it is pushing the people who do not agree with Government harder against the wall. I think the police are taking sides in the coming political competition and it is very clear. I will give two examples: in the media, the Inspector General of Police is quoted saying that they will not allow, as revolutionary fighters, anybody to defeat their Government. As a police officer, that is not required of him. He is an officer of the state of Uganda, he is not an officer of Government and there is a clear distinction and hon.  Prime Minister, you know that.

The other example is a report in the media from Soroti that the police were forcing its officers to register in the NRM yellow book as members. Again Government did not say anything; they did not clarify that. We would like to know from you, hon. Prime Minister, why the police are behaving this way and why the IGP should make such statements and you do not issue a statement clarifying and why the media should write that the police are being forced to register as members of the NRM and again, there is no clarification.

On the issue of prisoners, I think it is a serious matter that citizens who have committed small cases, actually there are suspects who we know, should stay in prison for five years without being tried. In Soroti and Lira, we found a family of five - a husband and a wife and children. They have been in prison for three years without trial because of a land conflict. That is justice denied. 

We do not know, hon. Prime Minister, why we increase budgets every year but we cannot increase money for the Judiciary to employ judges so that there is justice for Ugandans. We need you to clarify on that.

Recently, you talked about secondary schools. During the reading of the Budget, the President said that Government has built 569 state of the art secondary schools only comparable to Serena Hotel. We would like Government to give us the list of those schools; we do not know where they are. The President went ahead to talk about it again that he has built 569 state of the art secondary schools in this country. We do not know where the schools are. There could be some few but we do not know whether they are 569. You could give us the list.

Mr Prime Minister, you are very proud of saying that, “We have extended power.” You found it and five per cent now it is 15 per cent for the whole country. After 30 years of being in power, you are very proud to say that you have extended power to 15 per cent of Ugandans - and by the way, only seven per cent of that goes to the whole country. The other seven per cent is for towns. Therefore, can you tell us the plan of your Government to extend power to various places instead of telling us that you have 15 per cent and you are proud of having done that for 30 complete years?

I think we need further clarification on the issue of electoral areas. Who creates electoral areas? It is the Electoral Commission but the President has been going around creating or offering people constituencies and exciting the public. We do not know exactly whether these constituencies are going to be considered in the coming elections, because from the time table or the roadmap that was issued by the Electoral Commission, the creation of constituencies or electoral areas was supposed to have been done and ended by November 2013. This must be clarified by Government whether these new constituencies, which people are excited about - and actually people are already campaigning in some of these constituencies - are they going to be considered in these next elections?

Finally, the issue of Sebei; I have heard about Sebei being inaccessible. Every time the people from Sebei talk, they say their area is inaccessible. Last week, it was the Speaker talking about Sebei being inaccessible. After 50 years of independence and after 30 years of NRM - and Sebei supports NRM almost 100 per cent - why is it that Sebei cannot be given priority so that it connected to Kampala without going through Kenya? Thank you very much.

3.52
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Madam Speaker, on the question of the police being partial, all of us know that the police just like UPDF and the public service is one of the national institutions to serve all the people of Uganda. Any departure from that position is wrong and, therefore, I advise that all disciplinary measures should be taken. Therefore, I ask my brother, the Leader of the Opposition, to share with us all the information that he has and we will follow up the matter to ensure that we continue building national institutions that serve all the people of Uganda irrespective of their political affiliations.

Secondly, that in Soroti policemen were being told to register in the yellow book; first of all, as you very well know, the Secretary General of the National Resistance Movement, hon. Justine Lumumba, did give guidelines on registration of NRM members. These guidelines automatically exclude public servants or civil servants. Therefore, anybody trying to recruit civil servants or policemen and women would be the one going against guidelines of our secretary general and would be making a mistake and actually contradicting the law. Those who make those mistakes need to be guided by the Leader of the Opposition who saw them, and we will without any doubt address the issue because we think they made a mistake.

The third issue you raised is something we have already talked about - people being in prison for two, three, four, five years. As I had said earlier in answering this question, it is a national problem we must collectively and urgently deal with. In fact, that is why JLOS is an organisation of several ministries that deal with issues of justice, law and order. 

Also with our development partners, we have been doing a lot in that respect to decongest the prisons, increase number of judges and ensure that this problem which has been chronic is dealt with and solved.

The 569 “Sheraton” schools that the H.E the President talked about, this is really public information and it is a question of me asking the Minister of Education to make available a list to all honourable members, of these grandiose secondary schools that have been built in the country. The Minister of Education will make the list available as it is public information.

With regard to power, really, my brother the Leader of the Opposition should be one of those that are very happy about the major achievements made in the energy sector. Load shedding in Kampala, for example, was the order of the day. However, you know that, that is now part of the history of Kampala because of the achievements being made in increasing energy supply in this country. 

Karuma is going to add another 600MW. Isimba is going to add another 183MW and there are many other smaller projects. So, if the country has scored anywhere, it has scored in the energy sector and we are poised to score even more in this sector. This is part of the preparations for implementation of our vision and also for definitely becoming a middle-income country. 

With regard to the constituencies, this has already been answered. As you all know, there is no constituency in this country that can be created without the approval of Parliament. Therefore, colleagues are called upon to be patient and wait. An appropriate report on the matter will be coming soon.

Regarding accessibility, or the lack of it, in Sebei, I would like to say that Sebei is one of the areas in Uganda that has not only a difficult terrain but actually scarcity of road construction materials like murrum, for example. It is true that the whole of Sebei used to be inaccessible. However, as you know, fortunately now there is a tarmac road from Kampala up to Kapchorwa. 

Regarding the remaining bit of about 43 miles from Kapchorwa Suam, a contract is in the offing and the minister responsible for works will be giving us a progress report on the matter. Therefore, my brother, Ndugu Wafula Oguttu, the Leader of the Opposition, give credit where it is due. On the road sector, we have scored immensely and in the energy sector we are making tremendous progress. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, I would like to amend the Order Paper to permit the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to present a statement on the payment of salaries, which we requested for yesterday. 

In the same vein, I would like to know who is going to speak to us on the issue of discrimination of women and the disabled in the recruitment, which we talked about yesterday. I have not seen any statement from any ministry. This morning I tried to talk to officials in the Ministry of Internal Affairs and they said they did not set those conditions. They added that it was Ministry of Public Service. We would like to know who is responsible because it is a very serious matter and we want answers. 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON PAYMENT OF SALARIES

4.00
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Thank you, Madam Speaker and colleagues. Copies of my statement have been uploaded on the iPads and it is very short.

Hon. Milton Muwuma raised the question of non-payment of salaries for some civil servants in some districts. Madam Speaker, you directed that I come with a statement to give the House the status on this issue. The following is how we stand in terms of salaries for civil servants:

You will recall, colleagues, that it is government policy to pay salaries by 28th of every month. What this means is that funds should reach employees’ accounts by the 28th day of the month. However, some accounting officers have not adhered to that policy hence delaying the crediting of employees’ accounts. 

During the month of May 2015, most of the votes either paid before or on the 28th day of May. Thirteen votes paid in June for various reasons, as per the details below. There are only 13 votes, which did not pay salaries on time for the month of May and these include:
    a) The Ministry of Internal Affairs, which paid on the 1st of June because they needed a supplementary for that.
    b) Ministry of Education and Sports paid salaries of May on 1st June because they also needed additional funds. 
    c) The Electoral Commission paid on 2nd June because they delayed to request for additional funds.
    d) Kampala Capital City Authority paid on 17th June because they needed supplementary funding. 
    e) The Health Service Commission paid on 22nd June as they needed supplementary funding.
    f) As a coincidence, Iganga District paid on 23rd June – I do not know whether that was after hon. Milton Muwuma had raised this question but they paid yesterday. This was because they delayed to request for additional funding.
    g) Kapchorwa paid on 3rd June. They delayed to request for funds. 
    h) Kumi paid on 1st June because they delayed to request for additional funds.
    i) Masindi paid on 1st June. They delayed to request for additional funds. 
    j) Sironko had a shortfall for their wages due to reconciliation issues. 
    k) Zombo paid on 23rd June because they needed supplementary funding.

As regards June 2015 salaries, 160 out of 206 votes on the government payroll have paid as of today, 24 June 2015, representing 78 per cent. The remaining 46 votes are expected to pay by end of business today. However, the following votes may not pay on time due to some reasons: 
    a) Wakiso District Local Government has some issues that we are still investigating. 
    b) Sironko District Local Government may not pay on time because they overpaid URA and they are still reconciling the overpayment with URA.
    c) For Nakasongola Local Government, we have instituted an audit because of some irregularities.

Honourable members, I wish to confirm that the policy shift to decentralisation of payment of salaries has been a success, save for a few anomalies that still exist like some “ghosts”, over and under-payments as has been in the case of Wakiso, and some other irregularities.

Colleagues, any other cases of non-payment, especially in the month of May, must be due to other factors like staff who are not on the payroll and unapplied electronic fund transfers due to wrong bank accounts information. However, we are following up on every district.

Madam Speaker and honourable members, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and the Ministry of Public Service are committed to cleaning the government payroll and taking disciplinary action, where necessary, against accounting officers with identified irregularities on their payrolls. I will ask the Auditor-General to carry out a special audit on votes that requested for more funding for the fourth quarter as well as those with multiple submissions of salary arrears requests. 

This is the status of how we stand in terms of salaries. I must say, Madam Speaker, that the government payroll is doing very well. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Let us have a few clarifications.

THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Phillip Wafula Oguttu): Madam Speaker, I need clarification from the minister. I am an employer and I cannot understand how salaries can have shortages and need supplementaries. I know how many workers I have and I know the new workers and when they are supposed to get salaries. Under what circumstances would you have shortage of salaries as an employer to need a supplementary?

DR BITEKYEREZO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. This country will not be killed by anybody from outside. If we are to get problems, they will come from within us. 

Like hon. Wafula Oguttu is saying, we know the number of Ugandans who are employed. We saw the nurses and doctors of Iganga Hospital not working and yet people were dying there. I am very sure that the ministers in charge of health and public service, MPs and everybody in Government watch television. When you see people fighting because they have not been paid their salaries, do you just go to the office the next morning, sit, take tea and put on the air conditioning?

Madam Speaker, the other time when I was causing chaos, the interns of Mbarara Hospital had not received their salaries for five months. These are children who are looking after patients and they have nowhere else to get money. Secondly, the medical workers in Mbarara Hospital were seen in the newspapers looking at patients dying in the hospital just because they had not been paid. 

I want to assure everybody here that when we have CAOs that are accounting officers and permanent secretaries who refuse to submit returns so that they can be given money and you keep giving them promotions, do you - Madam Speaker, I have a very big question: Is there any chance that the Ugandan Government can sack non-performing accounting officers? They have electricity, cards for fuel, drivers and people to guard, so they can make some adjustments within the departments and survive. What about these civil servants who are working for Government and are depending entirely on salaries? What do you think these people are eating? Why are we trying to pretend that these things are not happening? 

What is the explanation from the Government side? What do we do? What is happening? Madam Speaker, I was a civil servant and we want explanations. 

MR MUWUMA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. First of all, I want to appreciate the minister for coming up to clarify and shed some light on the issues that you raised.

However, Madam Speaker, I wonder why it took this long for Government to come up and explain this. If we have a challenge as Government, why can’t we reach out to these people? We have lost lives, like hon. Bitekyerezo has observed. That day there was a crisis in Iganga when we had 49 casualties, including those who were suffering from the usual illnesses. We lost so many people but no one came up to explain this or to sort out this challenge. What mechanism is in place to ensure that we avert similar occurrences?

THE SPEAKER: Minister, please response.

MR BAHATI: Thank you. On the issue raised by the Leader of the Opposition on supplementary budgets on salaries, there are a number of factors that can contribute to this and one of them is recruitment in the middle of a financial year and the second could be promotion. However, the most important thing that we have seen is that the government payroll has been dirty and we have been cleaning it up. We are making progress and during the cleaning up, we have discovered additional funds and some other areas are reduced.

The second point is the issue raised by hon. Muwuma and partly by hon. Bitekyerezo. It is now government policy, and I think beginning with the next financial year that starts in July, that any accounting officer who does not pay civil servants on time by the 28th of every month will be disciplined. If they have money and they refuse to pay because of inefficiencies, disciplinary actions will be taken.

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE ANTI-CORRUPTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2013

4.12
MR JOHN SSIMBWA (NRM, Makindye Division East, Kampala): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. By the time we moved from this item, the report of the committee had been read and there was a minority report that had been presented by hon. Sseggona. Therefore, what I had to do, as the mover and the chairperson of the committee, is to respond to the minority report and thereafter, we have general debate.

THE SPEAKER: No, I think we had debated and we adjourned so that you could harmonise one or two sections. 

MR SSIMBWA: Madam Speaker, it was the minority report that we had not responded to. We had to harmonise between the mover and the chairperson to ensure that we come up with a harmonised position in response to the minority report so that the House can move. Therefore, Madam Speaker -

THE SPEAKER: What are you reporting?

MR SSIMBWA: I am responding to the minority report, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Didn’t we have a debate on this matter? We had a debate on this.

MR SSIMBWA: Madam Speaker, we did not debate.

THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and colleagues. Given the fact that the mover of the motion has issues to harmonise, I would like to request that we deal with the Local Government (Amendment) Bill, 2014, which is quite urgent. Both the chairperson and the minister are present and this would give hon. Ssimbwa time to harmonise the issues. I beg to request, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Are you also skipping item No. 6 on the PPP?

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Yes, Madam Speaker. I would like to request that we skip item No. 6. Thank you very much.

MR OTADA: Madam Speaker, for the record, if there is a minority report, usually that is dealt with together with the majority report and it is debated by all of us on the Floor. An impression has been created that since there is a minority report, there is a move by the mover of the motion on the Bill to try and harmonise that report, more or less behind the back of this House. I do not think that is a correct way of doing business in this House. 

Therefore, since the chairperson of the committee, hon. Tashobya, has come, I would like to request that this shabby state of affairs be harmonised so that we can proceed as we normally do with business of this nature on this Floor. Madam Speaker, I beg for your indulgence.

THE SPEAKER: Members, I do not want an impression to be created that I am also flouting the rules. I was chairing the session that day; the report was presented, we had a debate but before going to committee stage, the mover and I do not know who else, said there is something they wanted to consult over before we went to committee stage. We had had a debate. There is something they wanted to agree on before going to committee stage but we had had a debate. 

If you are not ready today, you will be put on the Order Paper tomorrow because you have had several months. 

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE LOCAL GOVERNMENTS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2014

4.17
THE MINISTER OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Mr Adolf Mwesige): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I beg to move that the Local Government (Amendment) Bill, 2014 be read the second time. 

THE SPEAKER: Is it seconded? It is seconded by the minister of defence, finance, environment and the Government Chief Whip. 

MR MWESIGE: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The Local Governments (Amendment) Bill, 2014, now before the House, which the Committee on Public Service and Local Government has considered and scrutinised, seeks to introduce two major reforms in the local government system. The first reform is related to the cost and expenditure of holding Local Council I and II administrative unit level elections. 

Madam Speaker and honourable members, you will recall that the last time Uganda had this important election was in 2002. Since then, we have not had another election of LC I and II leaders. The reason for this is very simple and we have been on the Floor of this House to explain it; it is the cost. 

In 2013, Government brought a Bill to this Parliament to make some reforms in the law to reduce the cost. Due to the amendments, which were made on the Floor, instead of the cost going down to Shs 48 billion as we had estimated, it went up to Shs 500 billion. The reason for this huge astronomic cost, in our view, is that according to the current law in section 111, clause 1, all local government and administrative unit level elections are supposed to be held by secret ballot using one ballot box for all candidates. 

Madam Speaker, we now have over 60,000 villages and over 7000 parishes. If we have to do this, it means that every village will definitely be a polling station. Because we are in a multiparty political system, we will allow political parties to nominate candidates for the position of LC I chairpersons. The pictures and names of all these candidates across the 60,000 polling stations will have to be captured on the ballot papers. It does not matter whether 30, 20 or 10 political parties and Independents vie for these positions; the Electoral Commission has got to contend with all these logistics, which in the costing of the current law would come to Shs 500 billion. 

Clearly, the country cannot afford this cost. That is why we propose in the Bill that we amend clause 111, basing on the provisions of Article 68(6) of the Constitution, which empower this Parliament to exempt any election other than the presidential and parliamentary elections from the requirement that that election shall be held by secret ballot. If there is a clear case for exemption, which this Parliament should be inclined to grant, it is this one.  

My prayer, therefore, is that we exempt the coming LC I and II elections from the requirement that they should be held by secret ballot. The remedy which I propose, therefore - the mode of election, which I propose in this Bill, is the long, transparent, democratic and time-tested method of lining up. This involves lining up behind the candidates, lining up behind the representatives of candidates appointed by the candidates themselves, lining up behind portraits of candidates and lining up behind symbols of candidates who may wish to use those symbols. (Interjections) Madam Speaker, I beg that Members take cognisance of the reality of our country –(Interjections)

THE SPEAKER: Order, Members! The minister is moving for the second reading. 

MR MWESIGE: The reality of our country is that the resource envelope that this Parliament appropriates and continues to appropriate simply cannot accommodate the astronomical cost of holding this election by secret ballot. 

Apart from that reform, there are other reforms, which this Bill seeks to introduce, following the amendment of the Public Finance and Management Act, to align the amendments of the new Act with the Local Governments Act as far as management and audit of public funds are concerned in local governments. Madam Speaker, I beg to move. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Before I invite the chairperson of the committee, join me in welcoming pupils and teachers of New Generation Standard Primary School, Sheema. They are represented by hon. Elioda Tumwesigye and hon. Rosemary Nyakikongoro. I think they are the ones up there; you are welcome. (Applause)

4.24
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC SERVICE AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Ms Grace Kwiyucwiny): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Before I give the details of the report, I would like to lay on the Table the minutes of the consultations we have made on the Local Governments (Amendment) Bill. 

I also want to lay on the Table a report of an oversight visit to Kenya and to the Electoral Commission as well as the main report of the committee on the Local Governments (Amendment) Bill, 2014. I beg to lay.  

Madam Speaker, the Local Governments (Amendment) Bill, 2014 was read for the first time on 20 November, 2014 by the Minister of Local Government. It was referred to the sectoral Committee on Public Service and Local Government in accordance with rule 118 (1) of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament. 

The object of the Bill is to amend the Local Governments Act by providing for the procedure of elections for administrative unit councils and committees, to harmonise and reconcile the provisions relating to public finance with the reforms made in public finance, and for related matters. 

Section 101 of the Local Governments Act mandates the Electoral Commission to organise, conduct and supervise elections of local councils. Section 111 (1) provides that all elections at local government and administrative unit levels shall be by secret ballot using one ballot box for all candidates. However, since 2002 and despite efforts to conduct elections at village or cell and parish or ward level, the very huge cost of conducting these elections has made the elections impracticable.

In addition, in 2013 Parliament enacted the Local Governments (Amendment) Act, 2013, which requires the Electoral Commission to transmit an electronic version of the voters’ register to registered political parties and organisations and to publish the voters’ register in the Gazette and post it on notice boards in every parish in Uganda. The implementation of this requirement has further increased the cost of holding elections at the LC I and II levels. There is need, therefore, to find a more economically realistic and practicable means to enable the LC I and II elections to take place.

The Public Finance Management Act, 2014 has also introduced several reforms, which impact on the appropriation of funds, budgetary powers and procedures for the management of grants from Government by local governments. These reforms need to be harmonised and reflected in the Local Governments Act.

The methodology is there but I do not think that I should read it. I will go straight to findings, observations and recommendations:

1. Electoral Levels 

Uganda is known to have a deep and wide democratic process that reaches up to the village level. This process is comparable to that of the Republic of China, among others. Uganda is the only country, among the East African countries, that carries out elections based on multi-party representation up to the village level. This has been enforced by the constitutional court ruling of Rubaramira Ruranga v. the Electoral Commission and the Attorney-General, Petition No. 21, 2006. 

Kenya, Tanzania and Ghana carry out multi-party elections up to what would be the sub-county level in Uganda. In Kenya, village elders that manage the affairs of the village are elected by the community through consensus while in Tanzania, the Balozi wa nyumba kumi are appointed administratively. The major reason for this is to avoid the political interference in the socio-economic affairs at the lower levels, ensure cohesion of the traditional and cultural settings, and avoid exorbitant and unsustainable costs of the would-be elections.

In general, Kenya has only six positions for election; these include the President, governor, senator, woman representative to Parliament, Member of Parliament and County Assembly member. Uganda has 11 positions that attract huge numbers of candidates for elections; these include the President, mayor, city councillors, Member of Parliament, woman Member of Parliament, chairman of the district local council, district councillors, chairman of the sub-county, sub-county councillors, chairman of LC I and chairman of LC II, all of which have huge numbers of participants. These are reflected in the table below. You could look at that table.

Such a deep and wide democratic process is expensive and requires well planned finances, human resource and logistics. We are giving a recommendation straightaway. The committee recommends that due to the high costs involved, the Local Council I and II elections should be held after 10 years. This will give ample time for planning. The committee recommends that this proposal should be considered during the constitutional amendment process.

2. Local Council Elections 

The committee observed that for the last 15 years, elections at the Local Council I at village or cell level and Local Council II at parish or ward level have not taken place. Many of the LC I and II offices have become vacant as a result of relocation and death of some of the officials. This has presented serious constitutional and administrative challenges, including poor administration of local justice, insecurity and poor service delivery to the people.

The committee further observes that the Local Governments (Amendment) Act, 2013 was never implemented due to the consequent increased cost of holding LC I and II elections. The increased cost is as a result of the provision requiring the Electoral Commission to publish voters’ registers in the Gazette and post the same on the notice boards of all parishes in Uganda, among others.

Before the 2013 amendment, the Electoral Commission had planned to use Shs 48,094,885,882 for the LC I and II elections but Government could only provide Shs 19 billion. However, the cost shot up to Shs 505,576,793,455 thus requiring an additional Shs 457,481,907,573 after the Local Governments (Amendment) Act of 2013, which Government could not readily provide. The exorbitant amount has therefore necessitated the review of the Act to further reduce the cost of conducting the LC I and II elections.

We looked at three different modes of elections, and we analysed the characteristics, the cost, requirements, advantages and disadvantages as below:

Scenario One - Secret Ballot as per the Constitution 

The secret ballot method is deemed democratic and fair because it gives freedom of expression and protects the interests of the citizens. While this is democratic and well desired, the cost is too high for the country at the moment. This would be Shs 505 billion, as I have already stated, according to the Local Governments (Amendment) Act of 2013 to cater for human resource, logistics and ballot papers for 7,409 LC IIs and 57,792 LC Is.

The management of the ballot paper in this multi-party dispensation can be complicated since there are likely to be many party and independent symbols. This will require adequate professional expertise and human resource to provide effective supervision. 

However, this would cost Shs 72,099,212,300 after removing the requirement for the Electoral Commission to publish voters’ registers in the Gazette and post the same on the notice boards of all parishes in Uganda.

Scenario Two - Lining Up 

This is deemed a very transparent mode of voting that would also be far cheaper. This is because the costs would only involve the human resource and logistics cost, excluding the ballot paper. However, the timing and place of voting needs to be convenient to the voters, and not oblige them to remain within the vicinity of the polling venue for a long time since some of them may be of working class, others may want to go to their gardens and others may want to return home for a meal and other activities.

It is also argued that in lining up, voters’ preference may be influenced at the last moment by intimidating elements. This may cause fear and disenfranchisement of many people, hence infringing on their voting rights.

Contesting candidates and community leaders may not vote for fear of causing disunity and sheer hatred. This may also cause hatred and conflict among the voters and families because their preference may be challenged by other voters and family members.

Madam Speaker, I just wanted to highlight what we had brought out in Annex 2 - an extract from the Electoral Commission report on local government council elections in 1997/1998: 

“Voting by lining constituted the major single cause of failed and repeated elections. Voters and an overwhelming number of candidates complained about time wastage, manipulation and fraud, intimidation and the high financial burden borne by the candidates. 

Furthermore, the Electoral Commission reported that these elections were the most difficult to organise, conduct and supervise and also the most expensive and time consuming. The elections also generated the biggest number of election complaints and disgruntlement among voters and the general public. The procedure of voting by lining did not provide ideal grounds for free and fair elections in a number of cases.

The Electoral Commission subsequently recommended that the mode of voting for councillors to local government councils, including women councillors, should be by secret ballot. Voting by lining at the local council level should be repealed.”

That was an extract from the report of the Electoral Commission. Here, I continue to say that voting by lining up would cost only Shs 35,719,291,600. However, there are costs resulting from socio-political conflicts that would be difficult to redress, as I had already highlighted.  

Scenario Three - E-voting

This requires a well-established ICT system, IT elite, human resource, electricity and power connection in all villages, internet connection in the whole country, computers at all polling stations, data backup systems, among others. As was the experience in Kenya, Uganda is not ready for e-elections. The cost of e-elections has also not been projected.

We have given the following recommendation: The Electoral Commission should hold the LCI and LCII elections in 2016, including in the newly created administrative units in the country, without fail. This will ensure leadership, justice, security and strengthen local democracy and governance in the country.

Secondly, elections of LCs I and II should be by secret ballot as in scenario one above. That is after removing the requirement of the Electoral Commission to publish voters’ registers in the Gazette and posting the same on the notice boards of all parishes in Uganda. This will make the elections more affordable and democratic. 

Thirdly, the Electoral Commission should include LC I and II elections in the programme for the upcoming general elections in 2016. The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should plan accordingly and provide funds for these elections in Financial Year 2015/2016.

Fourthly, the Electoral Commission should hold the elections in two phases during the general elections. One phase should comprise of election for the President, constituency Members of Parliament, woman Members of Parliament, district chairpersons and district councillors. The other phase should comprise of the chairpersons LC III and sub county councillors, LC II and LC I. This would reduce on administrative and supervisory costs.

Composition of Local Councils

Section 2 of the Older Person’s Act, 2013 has never been put in effect and therefore, the two older persons have not been elected on the district councils. Likewise, the workers have never been represented on the district councils.

We recommend that the older persons and workers’ representatives should be elected to the district council level so that the council is fully constituted. (Applause)

The Audit Function of the Local Government

The committee commends the efforts by Government to strengthen the internal audit department. However, the committee noted that while section 90 subsection (2) of the Local Governments Act is very clear on whom the internal auditors report to, the practice has been different. In some districts, internal auditors report to the district chairpersons instead of the district council. In other districts, there was lack of independence of internal auditors as they worked under the department of finance. This compromises their work.

The committee also noted that the district public accounts committees are ineffectual and less independent and need to be reinforced alongside the internal audit departments. This will lead to more effectiveness and efficiency of districts and enhance ability to check on abuse and misuse of funds.

Recommendation

The minister should ensure that section 90 of the Local Governments Act is adhered to. Internal auditors should report to the council and not to the district chairperson. The office of the internal auditors should be a standalone office. This will make it more efficient and effective. It is further recommended that the Minister of Local Government should ensure that the Local Government Internal Audit Manual is harmonised with the principle law.

We have other general observations and recommendations:
1. 	The Local Governments Act is very fragmented as a result of several amendments, which have made reference to the Act a difficult and tedious process. We recommend that the Local Governments Act be assembled together for ease of reference.

2. 	There are several conflicts in the local governments among elected leaders and between elected leaders and technocrats that have led to delays in approving plans and budgets. These conflicts are affecting service delivery. We recommend that the Minister of Local Government establishes mechanisms for resolving the above conflicts and ensures that the conflicts are resolved.

3. 	Parliament abolished all county councils across the country under the Local Governments (Amendment) Bill, 2013. However, some counties are still operational. In Mpigi District, for example, some counties continue to be allocated funds by the district and it is not clear who operates the accounts and for what purpose the funds are used. The Ministry of Local Government should ensure that the provisions of the Local Governments (Amendment) Act, 2013, in respect of county councils are adhered to.

In conclusion, the committee recommends that the Local Governments (Amendment) Bill, 2014 be passed into law, subject to the amendments which I will present later. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable chairperson and members of the Committee on Public Service and Local Government. The report has been signed by at least 10 of the 16 members. Therefore, it is eligible for debate. 

Honourable members, I think the crux of the matter is lining up or secret ballot. Do we really need to debate or we can go to committee stage?

4.44
MR KASSIANO WADRI (FDC, Terego County, Arua): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. You may recall that before we went into multi-partyism, under the Movement system there used to be this system of lining up. You are also aware about the animosities and breakage of families and beating up of women. If I offer myself to stand and my own family members, for reasons best known to them, go on to support Prof. Kamuntu, you will then wait to see the results when I get back home. (Laughter) 

With such animosity, I think we need to appreciate that democracy is very expensive. Now that we took that path, so be it. Let us go through the whole exercise so that people are able to cast their votes freely without fear or favour.

Secondly, we also have civil servants who are supposed to be apolitical. How will they indicate their support for a candidate? Assuming staff from Prof. Kamuntu’s ministry go to the same polling area and decide to line up against Prof. Kamuntu, how will he treat them in the office? We need to be very conscious. In order to avoid animosity and problems in society, let us go for the secret ballot system so that we are able to maintain harmony for everybody in our communities. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, for the record let us have four contributions.

4.46
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Women Representative, Serere): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to agree with the committee, especially when they point out the issue raised by hon. Wadri, the issue of domestic violence. We are in a time where domestic violence is very rampant in this country. After that election 20 years ago, we had reports, which we have been privy to study, particularly four reports from Uganda Women’s Network, Forum for Women in Democracy, Action for Development (ACFODE) and Isis-WICCE, documenting step by step, the violence that happened after that election, particularly meted out against the women of this country. The option is really telling the women at that level that they are not going to vote and that is what is going to happen.

The second thing, which has been touched on, is that the past political parties, after the return to multi-partyism, went to court and asked for this election to be held on a multi-party arrangement. This is because Government then wanted to conduct it as though we had not gone back to a political multi-party dispensation.

Madam Speaker, everybody knows the political tensions that are ravaging this country. However, most importantly, at that level you may not have the back to withstand the prying eyes of the GISO and PISO. We have a report that we were given, and I am happy that at the launch of that report, which was authored by Konrad-Adenauer-Stiftung on the performance of local governments, the person who presided over the launch was my good friend, the hon. Adolf Mwesige. He was told, in Hotel Protea, that in Uganda at the local government level, it is very hard to benefit from NAADS if you do not subscribe to the ruling party. Therefore, people carry two cards in order to –(Interjection)

MR OLANYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank hon. Alaso for giving way. Honourable members, regarding the on-going registration, especially for NRM party members in the villages, people are being informed that if their name does not appear on the list, they will miss out on government services. This is what is going on in our area of Amuru –(Interruption)

MS NANTUME EGUNYU: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. May I know whether hon. Olanya is in order to debate what he does not know and where he does not belong? How did he get to know that? Is he really in order?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, the matter you are bringing up is not before this House. Hon. Alaso, resume the Floor. 

MS ALASO: Madam Speaker, it is said that democracy does not come cheap and I am happy with the middle ground that is proposed by our committee, which middle ground is informed by the Electoral Commission of this country. 

I would like to advise the honourable minister; just yesterday in this House, we were thinking of shifting from analogue to digital technology. How come you want to take the country back to analogue? (Laughter) We would like to go digital. Therefore, please allow this country and particularly the women of this country, to exercise their right to vote and secondly, to vote by secret ballot. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

4.50
MS HELLEN GRACE ASAMO (NRM, PWD Representative, Eastern): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I support the committee but I would like to bring in an issue similar to the elections of the local councils, and that is, the election of the women councils. These elections have also not been around for the last 15 years. The chairperson of the women council at the village is the one who joins the LCIs and the chairperson at parish level joins the LC IIs.

Madam Speaker, I read the report and I appreciate that my friends, the workers and the older people, are coming in. However, it is not very clear; where are the women, who constitute over 50 per cent of the population of Uganda? As we talk about amendments, they will still lack a certain category of members to that local council.

Therefore, I think there is need to be very clear as we bring out - (Interruption)

MR MAGYEZI: Thank you, hon. Asamo, for giving way. The information I want to give you is that this is amending an existing law and in the existing law, there is representation of women on the local councils. So, it is catered for.

MS ASAMO: I am aware of what you are saying but I know that there is no budget for that election as well. I am a member of the executive and I know what I am talking about. Thank you for the information.

Madam Speaker, as we talk, the women will again be left in a lacuna as we pass this using whatever method we shall agree upon. Thank you.

4.52
MR IDDI ISABIRYE (NRM, Bunya County South, Mayuge): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand here to oppose the report of the committee by supporting the amendments by Government.

We are aware that democracy is expensive. However, in a situation where we do not have money - Parliament is mandated to appropriate and we need to look at how much we have given to the Ministry of Local Government and Ministry of Public Service to enable them include this in the election of LC Is and IIs.

Madam Speaker, since 2002, we have not had these elections and if we say that we need Shs 500 billion to hold these elections, we shall not have this money and this means that we shall not have these elections. (Interruption) I may not need information. (Interruption)

MS NAMBOOZE: Madam Speaker, I would like to thank hon. Isabirye for giving way. I am so happy that he is wearing a yellow tie to demonstrate his conviction for his party. 

The information I would like to give him is that the NRM party recently, and I have reliable information, debated this issue in as far as internal elections in their party is concerned. They eventually resolved that they should have secret voting in the party. If a mere political party in the country, like DP or NRM, can afford to have secret voting at every village, how can a whole country, where those political parties exist, fail to find money to finance elections at village level? That is the information I was giving him, that even his own party has disallowed voting by lining up behind candidates. 

MS KABAALE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Regardless of the fact that hon. Nambooze was adamant about you allowing me to raise the point of order, since you are still there I will raise it.

Madam Speaker, is it in order for hon. Nambooze, who is imputing that I raised a procedural matter, to start insinuating and even allege that we hold secret meetings when she does not belong to the NRM party? Is she in order to come here and talk for the NRM party when she clearly knows that she belongs to DP?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, she is out of order. I would like to remind members that the issues of parties whether it is NRM or DP are not legitimate before this House. Let us concentrate on the work of the House.

MR ISABIRYE: Madam Speaker, I therefore, propose and support the amendment by the minister that these elections of LCs I and II in the country should be carried out by lining up. After all, these are going to be elections at –(Member timed out.)

4.57
MS MARGARET KOMUHANGI (NRM, Woman Representative, Nakasongola): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. The chairperson of the committee articulated very well the amendments brought forward to the House and she emphasised elections of LC I and II chairpersons. I would like this House to be vigilant on the elections of the women councils too.

Madam Speaker, these are not only lower local council elections, but upper because it is up to the district level. The EC road map allowed elections by secret ballot for all the interest groups like the youths and persons with disability councils. However, they left out women councils and for all that time - since 2007, these councils have been expired. The youth councils also expired recently. Now, we are speaking for the LC II elections, how about the women council elections which go up to the national level?

I think this Parliament has relegated the role of women in democratic process in this country and this is not fair because given the population of women in this country, we need to address ourselves to this issue. It is very pertinent, the women and Parliament are not happy; our caucus of UWOPA is not happy either; even the civil society is not happy. 

Madam Speaker, why does EC leave out the election of women councils at the national level? They even suggest that they should be the only interest group to line up. Lining up is a suggestion because there is no budget for it. If the country can prepare for national elections, why not prepare for these ones? We have not been voting for a long time and now there is a suggestion for seven or 10 years - we should prepare adequately and move forward democratically as a country.

5.00
MS ROSE AKOL (NRM, Woman Representative, Bukedea): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand here to support the report of the committee, but with a few concerns as follows: First is that one on women councils that this election must also provide for without fail because they are elected just like others so why not and they have expired anyway.

Secondly, Madam Speaker, the audit function at the district level leaves a lot to be desired. The Public Finance and Management Act established the office of the Internal Auditor-General; I believe this should be the office that the district internal auditors report to not to the appointing authority which is the council. 

In fact the appointment of internal auditors should be handled by the internal Auditor-General’s office, not the district. How do you appoint me and again I audit you? What kind of report do you expect? No wonder we are losing a lot of money at the district level because of these appointments where the district internal auditors report to the council, which appoints them. There is a lot of compromise and lack of control in that. I propose an amendment to ensure that the anomaly is addressed. 

Composition of the Local Government; I would like to support the introduction of the elderly and workers - this should be effected at the district local government. After all, at Parliament level, they are represented, why not at the district level?

I also call for review of the functions, especially LC I vis-a-vis LC II councils. Is it still necessary to have that structure, especially the LC II level? When I go to the village, I just see the functions of LC I and LC III levels. What is the function of the LC II councils? I believe there is need to review it so that we stop wastage of resources at that level. 

I beg to conclude and would like to thank the chairperson once more for this very good report. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

5.03
MS EMMA BOONA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mbarara): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I wish to thank the chairperson and the minister for the report that was presented this afternoon about the Local Government Amendment Bill. 

My concern is about whether we should line up and expensively meet the LC I council elections. I wish to bring to the attention of this House the fact that the LC I councils are the mother and chief law makers in this country in that if you look at the amendments concerning the powers of the LCs I as far as adhering and listening to the cases is concerned. We need a council that is very powerful.

If we choose to line up that means many of our powers to vote, as women, will be curtailed. As a Member of Parliament, I would find it very difficult to stand behind a man or woman in my village to make him chairperson because I am supposed to be nonpartisan representing everybody in my area. If I am going to show that I do not support “A” or “B” by lining up, it is going to jeopardise my vote. I would therefore propose that we accept to spend and vote wisely and democratically. 

Secondly, I have a middle line; if we are talking about the expenses involved in this voting, why don’t we use our local pieces of paper and secretly vote the person we want so that we have it cheaply and effectively. It would still be secret; nobody would know who has voted who and which clan, wife or girlfriend of so and so in the cell. That way, we can quietly vote in our boxes on secret papers and still have an effective leader. That is the middle way I am proposing. It is cheap and effective and still remains secret. That is my proposal, Madam Speaker.

5.06
MR AMOS OKOT (NRM, Agago County, Agago): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker and chairperson for the committee. I have three issues to raise: first, the committee recommended that if elections can be put into two parts, it would save us the money and other things. However, I think that is going to be so tedious. I think we make elections if we are to amend into three parts: the President, members of Parliament and the local governments. Then the mayor and city councils can have their own unit. Then there is the lower local government comprised of LC III, LC II and LC I to have their own unit so that they are three and not two as recommended in the report.

Secondly, on the issues about the internal auditors and the district public accounts committees – the internal auditors in my experience, are after paper accountability and there are times when they go to coach the implementers on accounting systems and how they should write their reports. 

However, the District Public Accounts Committees are interested in both the physical and paper accountability. In most cases, especially in Agago, when they went out to the field and found some dubious work, the finance officers decided to use some other people to cover up their evils.

In my opinion, we should go for the district public accounts committees that are after the physical accountability which show value-for-money.

Finally, there is an argument about the minimum education requirements for the election of people at the sub-county level. For example, for the sub-county chairperson and their councillors, it can be brought on board so that they can at least come with an O’level certificate to be in a position to analyse and work together with the sub-county chief. I thank you very much.  

5.08
MR MILTON MUWUMA (NRM, Kigulu County South, Iganga): I thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise to support the position of Government.

I would like for us to recall where we are coming from. For some time, Parliament has been demanding from Government to organise these elections. To date, Government has been trying to figure out procedures or the best way of getting this process out of the way.

In 2010, when the road map came out, I recall that some of the local council chairpersons in my constituency were selling off their land and animals to facilitate the process. It is a public secret that politics in Uganda is so commercialised.

The only way of eradicating corruption from the villages is by going transparent because it is one way of our people knowing that if they ate somebody’s things, they know the implications. (Applause)

One way of the chairpersons stopping these tendencies is by – because if I know that I would not give hon. Isabirye or hon. Khainza my vote, I will not test the pot like our friends who normally sit at the pots. If I know that I will not comply, I will back off and not show up. The one way of us having this problem sorted once and for all is by supporting Government – we go and line up and have this process concluded once and for all. 

I have held “Barazas” in my constituency. I have consulted over this process and that is why I am speaking authoritatively. I met my sub-county leaders from LC I and they were asking why we have taken that long. They told me that we should carry on and if it was possible, I should support the amendment. I am speaking authoritatively on behalf of the people of Kigulu South who are anxious to have this process done. I rest my case.

5.11
THE MINISTER FOR GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (Mr Wilson Muruli Mukasa): I thank you very much, Madam Speaker. From a practical point of view, I would like –

THE SPEAKER: Order, members. Order!

MR MURULI MUKASA: I would like to support the proposal by the Minister for Local Government that we have these elections conducted and done by lining up. (Applause)

It may not be perfect but we are really looking – [MS ALASO: “Order.”]

THE SPEAKER: On what rule?

MS ALASO: Madam Speaker, my heart is bleeding as I listen to my minister, the custodian of the National Gender Policy, supporting a position – we always call him the honourable “Namukasa” – which undermines the National Gender Policy of this country and whose pillars include empowering the women of this country politically. 

Is my minister in order to go away from the mandate of defending our interests as the women of Uganda which we faithfully believe he can execute? Is honourable “Namukasa” in order?

THE SPEAKER: But honourable members, does the National Gender Policy rule out lining up in elections? Please take the Floor. 

MR MURULI MUKASA: I thank you very much. Yes, it may not be a perfect thing and there may be some imperfections but the essence of the matter is that we need an election and it is far better to have an election than not to have one at all. 

It is common knowledge that the absence of the LC I elections has constrained service delivery in a number of ways including security. Now, we would obviously like the ideal which today is the secret ballot but where our budget cannot afford, we are going to make unnecessary sacrifices. If we are going to have these billions, then we shall not have a road or water somewhere. We would rather have the lining up for the election and have our service delivery and we then kneel down and pray to God that things improve and then we can have the ideal that we want.

There has been concern raised by the non-election of the women councils. It is for practically the same reason - the budget is astronomical and quite forbidding. So the elections have had to be put off but you can see the pain that it is causing. In the end, we have ended up with a lame council.

I would like to propose that we go with this; have an election and when we have this lining up, we can as well adopt the lining up for the women councils and therefore now have the full councils. Our committees will now be fully constituted notwithstanding the method that could have been used to have these councils in place. I think it is better to have a system in place and operating instead of having nothing on the ground.  

5.16
MR TONNY AYOO (NRM, Kwania County, Apac): I thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand to support the position of Government because when you look at the roles and functions of LCs I, they are majorly almost at the level of service delivery and implementation of Government programmes and projects. They are supposed to mobilise the community for so many issues including immunisation, health and education. 

First of all, the LC I and LC II sit at the LC courts to decide on conflicts among people. They even sit and decide on land conflicts within the communities –(Interjections)- I am informed about what I am saying.

I think we should move an amendment to have the LC I and LC II elections outside the multiparty arrangement because the multiparty politics can start from LC III, districts and parliamentary candidates so that LCs I are left down to mobilise people and implement programmes.

For that matter, I think it would be better for us to allow these people to stand behind the candidates. The people have community based organisations where they decide matters by raising hands.

We fear this because of multiparty elections but it is making life difficult at LC level. I think these people should line up; they know the people they want because at the end of the day their work is not politics but mobilising people for development programmes and projects. The Electoral Commission has given a report here saying that this lining up is a problem but you know Shs 600 billion is set out for them to monitor the election. Do you think they would want to leave this allowance out? They want the allowance to come and the LC election to come under secret ballot so that they are in business. This report from EC has some motive.

The interim councils - I would want to support this position. At the moment, even some administrative officers have put off the work of the councils so that the technical people remain there at the council and they do what they want. We support the proposal to have the interim councils so that there will be some technical people overseeing the work of the technical people at the district level because we are talking about the budget which will be passed in May. 

The councils will be out, so who is going to run this budget at the district level? Who is going to oversee the work of the councils? This is why I support this amendment to have interim councils so that within the time that we are going for campaigns, there are some people overseeing -(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: But, hon. Members, I wish you could address the proposals by the committee because there is no doubt that we want to have those elections. The question is whether to go lining which will cost Shs 35 billion or to go for secret ballot without the requirement to publish in the gazette. That will cost Shs 72 billion. 

5.20
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR THE ELDRELY AND THE DISBALED (Mr Suleiman Madada): Madam Speaker, one of the cardinal principles of good law making is looking at the practicability and the cost implication of implementation and enforcement of a law. If a law is for the good of the country, you should look at how possible it can be implemented for the good of that country. 

Having said this, I would like to go for the position moved by Government and that is lining up instead of secret ballot. I say this because in order for you to have a complete executive LC I or LC II, you must have the all interest groups represented. By law, for you to have a secretary for persons with disability, you must have carried out elections for councils of PWDs at that level and even for women and elderly persons.

If we went for secret ballot for all these including the councils for persons with disability, the youth councils, the elderly persons, that will cause a very big cost. As we struggle to have these elections, we did consultation and I just got a letter from the Electoral Commission looking at the modes of carrying out elections for elderly persons. They did suggest that if we went for secret ballot, we would go for Shs 70 billion. If we use lining up, it would be 48 billion, saving about 22 billion in that activity of elderly persons.

Why I like this argument is that you cannot have councils complete without putting in place all these councils for special interest groups. You would rather have elections for women councils in a way you can afford as a country than ignoring it at all because you cannot afford it.

It is not gender sensitive for you to say that we leave out electing women because they cannot line up. I don’t see you advocating for the rights of women and participation if they are ignored in politics because of costs. We would rather go for lining up and have better costs then have women and youths elected to complete the councils. 

Even the makers of the Constitution saw this and said that one could use another method for electing except during parliamentary and presidential elections. That spirit must be carried on.

5.26
DR FRANCIS EPETAIT (FDC, Ngora County, Ngora): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. It is a matter of fact and concern on the part of Government that holding these elections required a lot of money. What the committee has done is a meticulous job trying to cure that very fear.

I stand to support the position of the committee but with further amendment. I would not be comfortable to support a catalyst for further domestic violence. I am aware of what happened in the past during this lining up process and indeed the Electoral Commission, which is mandated to conduct these elections has also expressed their fears in black and white. The documents are there for public consumption.

I, therefore, would like to propose and I hope the chair will also buy it that in order to bring down the cost further, we should rename these councils and not use the numerical naming of LC I, II and III. 

Like hon. Akol observed, I do not see very serious activity on the part of the LC II. We would rename them and call them village council, sub-county council then we go the district council. It is a pity and it is news to me that county councils are still operational. We do not know what they are doing. We would go by having village councils then move straight to sub-county councils and to the district councils all by secret ballot in which case the amount that the committee envisaged in scenario two would even come down further. This would also address the fears of Government of having a limited resource envelop. I beg to move.

5.26
MS ROSEMARY NYAKIKONGORO (Independent, Woman Representative Sheema): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I appreciate Government position where it is saying that it is very expensive to run these elections. However, there are implications within the community that this business of lining up will leave – it will leave wounds within the community after the whole process. Even with secret ballot, men dictate on who is going to vote for whom. You hear women saying that since it is secret ballot, they know who to vote for. But when we bring this business of lining up –(Interruption) 

MR ASUPASA: I am very perturbed when the honourable member begins generalising all men and depicting men as animalistic brutes and barbarian. Madam Speaker, men have long moved away from the practice of brutalising women. They are now living with women amicably, discussing issues in the family and many of you are here because men have voted you. 

Madam Speaker, is it in order for the honourable member to continue brutalising men, portraying men as brutes who cannot allow women to do something? Is she in order?

THE SPEAKER: Uh, honourable members, she was talking about some not all –(Laughter)– she only talked about some.

MS NAKIKONGORO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. He even knows what has been running in the papers, which I am not going to repeat. So the situation is that we need to respect the rights of people to vote for the people of their choice not by standing in lines. If we could use the cheapest method of secret ballot; the simplest method, I think it would actually exonerate our people.

Madam speaker, I want to tell you that we are going to create domestic violence that will remain in the society - (Interjections) – yes, do not pretend. 

THE SPEAKER: Order. 

MS NAKIKONGORO: I want to tell you not to pretend. We live in our societies and we know how they behave - (Interjections) -actually this is going to deny women an opportunity to participate in the elections. They will stay at home. Even more men and the youth by the way because why should I line up for someone - I remember before elections became so contentious like to day where people put their money in campaigns – LC contestants put in money; they slaughter cows and goats and tomorrow you are looking at someone who ate your meat, lining up in the back of your opponent - (Applause) - what is going to happen? That is why I believe Government does not have money -

THE SPEAKER: Order. 

MS NAKIKONGORO: Government may not have money; we appreciate that, but let us go for the cheapest means of voting. We have exercise books. Our people can write the names as they have been doing such that they vote the people of their choice rather than denying them the right to vote the people they want to vote for.

THE SPEAKER: There is no one on the Floor. What is your problem?

MR KAKOOZA: Madam Speaker, I listened to the minister when he was presenting the Bill here and he said that holding LC I and II elections is very astronomical; it will cost Government Shs 500 billion. The procedural matter I am seeking is, if you look at Article 93 of the Constitution, let me read it verbatim: “Restriction on financial matters; Parliament shall not unless the Bill or the motion is introduced on behalf of Government –
    a) Proceed upon a Bill, including an amendment Bill, that makes provision for any of the following…”

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, sorry but I do not think you listened to the report. In 2013, this House made an amendment to the Local Government Act. The result of that is the cost of Shs 505 billion. That is why the minister has failed to conduct the elections. He has come back for us to review it. That was the result of our decision of 2013. That is what he was saying.

5.32
MR KENNETH LUBOGO (Independent, Bulamogi County, Kaliro): Thank you, Madam Speaker and the committee chairperson for the report. In 1995, when the new Constitution for Uganda was promulgated, these people who drafted the Constitution foresaw that it is impossible all the time to have all the voting by secret ballot and they provided for that. I think we should also ask ourselves; how did they think about this? There should be a reason - at that time they thought that it is impossible at every other time to have every election conducted by secret ballot. And for that reason, I want us to put this provision in practice if we have not employed it anywhere before.

From the report, the chairperson tells us that in the whole of East Africa, it is only Uganda which is doing this. Actually she is only likening it to China; the hugest economy in the world and we know that Uganda is not the biggest economy in East Africa. Yet we are the only ones who are shouldering this bigger and expensive exercise - only Uganda. I think we need to look at this and say we can have an election conducted cheaply and we have our people in these positions. (Applause)

I do not know what happens in other villages in this country but I want to speak about what happens in Kaliro, Bulamogi County. Besides the offices of the chairperson LC I, we also have other elections which are not for Government but we call them Omukulu wa bataka (the leader of the bataka). They are conducted by voting. People vote; men and women come and vote for that person. But you know it is not really such a chaotic situation. 

So I want to say that these elections we are talking about can be conducted cheaply and these people know each other and we can have LCs without going through the secret ballot.

From the report, we see that we shall need Shs 72 billon to conduct this election. Sincerely, if we asked ourselves, do we need to spend a whole Shs 72 billion to conduct this election? We might even not have it and fail to conduct the elections next year. So I would like to invite my colleagues that let us really consider this matter seriously and look at the Constitution and know that we can have this election without going through the hustles of secret ballot and we shall have office bearers in their positions.

5.34
MS BETTY AOL (FDC, Woman Representative, Gulu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to first of all go by secret ballot. When we talk about democracy, it is very expensive and so maybe we have to make some amendments. This Shs 72 billion is when LC I and II elections are done separately. My feeling is that we should have elections done at once; from President to LC I – (Interjections) - and this is my proposal -

THE SPEAKER: Order.

MS AOL: It is my proposal that we have eight positions and we should only consider for LC I and II, the chairperson. My thinking is that chairpersons are very important and there is no way we can close our eyes on the parishes. This is very important because that is where planning starts. We have parish development committees which are at parish levels. We cannot say that LC I is important and LC II is not important; both are very important. We need the chairpersons of these levels elected but other members of LC I as well. For example, when we talk of women, we have the women councils - this council is not a political structure, it is a developmental structure. The youth council and maybe the older persons’ council may bring in theirs later. There should be some way of bringing in the remaining ones.

Otherwise, chairpersons LC I and LC II are very important positions for our development. If we need to do the election –(Interruption)

MS ANN NANKABIRWA: Thank you, honourable, for giving way. The information I would like to give you is that the chairpersons of women councils, youth councils and PWDs directly sit on the LC executives. The LC executive committee can never be complete without their representation.

I would also like to give information that save for that, the Local Council Court Act provides that the members of the executive of the LC will form a local council court. In lieu of the above, what if you elect these people by lining and by virtue of their positions they comprise the LC court?

MS AOL: Thank you for that information. I have not disagreed with women, youth, older persons and people with disabilities coming in. Those people are elected under the council arrangement. We have women council arrangement, youth council arrangement, people with disability arrangement and probably older persons’ arrangement. Therefore, all those can actually come on board in LC I and LC II councils.

It is important that we should know that the chairpersons LC II and LC I should be elected by secret ballot –(Member timed out.)

5.39
MR SAM OTADA (Independent, Kibanda County, Masindi): Madam Speaker and honourable members, I would like to submit that we have become victims of our own political engineering. The committee helped us by reminding us that the Local Government (Amendment) Act, 2013, which this House legislated actually aggravated the problem. I would like to thank you for helping us see that point.

What we are grappling with here - will be terribly surprising for any Member of Parliament to probably think that this consequence would not occur – that we could not actually foresee that this consequence would occur, it would be terribly shocking. I do not believe that anybody can say that -

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, they were foreseen. We spoke about them. In fact, I remember telling the House that we had a problem with the Land Act because of the courts of the tribunals but Members insisted that they wanted it the way it was. I warned them.

MR OTADA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for that clarification. It is extremely important and that goes to show us that the majority are not always right and that we should listen to each other. You can see now where we have come to.

I would like to take Members down memory lane. This thing of LCs – if we remember the history of LCs, they were actually RCs at the time that we adopted the Movement system and that put the other political parties in abeyance. It was a method of governance to take government down to the villages and that sufficed for 20 years.

When I see the justification of the committee – and I would like to actually support your report – that this constraint brought about constitutional, administrative, local justice, insecurity and poor service delivery challenges - I agree. However, I do not see lack of elections of LC I and LC II causing a political problem. I do not see that. It causes these other problems. Therefore, we are over politicising this country by having 11 electioneering cycles and standing out tall in the whole region and actually ranking probably second in the world.

Honourable members, is this the situation that we would want to continue with or is this a situation that we would want to change by beginning to tone down our appetite in terms of making progressive legislations, which should be in tune with our resources and with what works in the 21st Century?

Having said that, I would like to concur with the committee that we should remove the requirement for publishing the voter register in the gazette as required so that we tone down the cost of electioneering.

Madam Speaker, I would probably say that we need to benchmark a little more with a view of reviewing election as it is understood from LC I all the way and find more of consensus leaders. After all, these people down in the LC I and LC II are there for service delivery and service delivery has never been partisan; it is always bipartisan.

5.43
MR HASSAN FUNGAROO (FDC, Obongi County, Moyo): Madam Speaker and honourable members, I would like to take this opportunity first to thank the chairperson of the committee. 

However, let me ask this; who are the voters in the LC I elections? Are they registered like the other voters in the other elections for presidential, Members of Parliament, etcetera? If we have the list of all these people who are voters as the same voters for parliamentary and presidential, why don’t you organise on the same day the elections for LC V or at least from LC III to LC I since you use the same database of voters’ register?

Secondly, Madam Speaker, you are crying about the cost of the elections. If you save money by lining up and you create chaos which chaos will result in injuries and fighting which will need courts, do you want to save money to spend in courts for solving disputes which result from fights as a result of bad elections? One way or the other, you cannot run away from spending money. You may save money during the elections, but you will have to spend it in solving cases which arise as a result of the disputes. Uganda is moving in the right direction in the sense of consciousness of the people. Politics is not in Parliament only; it is up to the village. The way people struggle for LC I elections is the same way you struggle to come to this House.

We have a problem in our neighbourhood, South Sudan – our UPDF is there. However, the problem is South Sudan started from a meeting about the way to vote in a party called SPLM. Some wanted to vote by secret ballots while others wanted lining up. When they disagreed on the method of voting, today South Sudan has spent more money trying to calm down a situation which came from a dispute of how to vote. Save Uganda. Let us go by secret ballot and we shall move well. Thank you.

MR EKANYA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: No, it is hon. Carter.

5.46
MR JOSHUA ANYWARACH (Independent, Padyere County, Nebbi): Madam Speaker, hon. Ekanya is my lost brother from Budama, so we call them our brothers anyway. (Laughter) He was trying to usurp my chance.

Madam Speaker, from my experience, I grew up through the system of the village leadership. I was the chairman for the youth in Naguru Go-down, Ongon Village and I was elected by lining up. Then, we went to the Local Council II, in Nakawa, I became the secretary for finance and it was by lining up. However, the election of the Local Council I chairman, of course, was by secret ballots and I served as secretary for youth affairs on that executive.

The issue here was the people I defeated; in any meeting that we had for the youth, they would harass me properly. For all I saw did not line behind me, I had permanent hatred for them. One of them failed to welcome me, when I joined you and Minister Ruhindi for his function in Naguru. It was raining and the man saw me but he could not even welcome me. The man is still carrying that bitterness since 2002. (Laughter)

Now, I went back to Nebbi and I was elected to the district council as the youth councillor for Nebbi. Madam Speaker and the House, I would think the recommendation of the committee on the alternative cheaper option of Shs 77 billion is really ideal.

The reasons are: let us save this social hatred that will grow up in someone. Imagine you have two wives and one lines up behind someone else, will you take the same kilos of meat to the two wives?

We will have a progressive correction interfacing with the electoral officials for further elections. Assuming we had done the elections of the Local Council I and II in 2006 and then 2011, at the costs of Shs 35 billion and Shs 35 billion respectively. That is already Shs 70 billion saved. If you are to conduct another election in 2016 at the cost of Shs 35 billion that is already Shs 105 billion saved.

Now, for the three progressive elections, let us spend Shs 77 billion and put it to a try and see whether this can work. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, you know our colleagues are fasting and I think the arguments are really the same. Therefore, after hon. Sabiiti, I will have hon. Oleru, hon. Kabakumba and we go to committee stage.

5.49
MR JACK SABIITI (FDC, Rukiga County, Kabale):  Madam Speaker, the reason we are saying we should review this system is because of the cost and it is true it will be a lot of money. The reason we changed from lining up was because of associated problems. Now, you cannot move from the first one we refused, go to the second and then come back. This causes a problem. 

I agree with hon. Otada by saying that at LC I and LC II, the problems we have are developmental. We are interested in people living together and having income and whatever. I do not see why we should be having this election at LC I and LC II. I would have expected by now - if the committee did benchmark in some other countries, they probably found that those countries start at the upper level. They do not go to LC I and LC II. I do not see why we do not start at LC III and when we develop and become rich and richer; maybe we can start going down.

I would suggest that, with due respect to the chairperson and the good report they have produced, we just start at LC III and forget about these lower elections and then gradually come back when we have the money –(Member timed out.)

5.52
MS HUDA OLERU (NRM, Woman Representative, Yumbe): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to support the committee that we have to organise the Local Council I and II elections in the cheapest way possible. They are very important that we must have these people because they are doing a lot of work.

Madam Speaker, I would also propose that in this amendment that we are going to put, we should look at issues of enumeration because I am aware the LC I chairpersons are paid Shs 120,000 per year, but the committee members have become a problem. Wherever you go, the first question they ask is: Is it only the LC I chairpersons that work? Can you call the LC I chairperson a committee? I think we need to consider those members who sit on the Local Council. The issues of bicycles should also be handled.

Lastly, Madam Speaker, can I now move a motion that we go to committee stage so that we handle this Bill today and we finish it? (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Kabakumba and hon. Sebunya. Yes, it is time for her to go.

5.53
MS KABAKUMBA MASIKO (NRM, Bujenje County, Masindi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Both systems have advantages and disadvantages and I am a product of both lining up during those days but also secret ballots. The challenges you have through lining up will still appear even when you go for secret ballots. I did contest as Woman MP in 1996 and it was by secret ballot. There are some people who are still hated up to today because they supported me and the people who followed me still do not feel safe with the people who did not support me much as it was through secret ballot.

Madam Speaker, I think if you weigh the expenses, the merits and the demerits - I would really plead to Members that it will do no harm for us to elect LC I and II through lining up. This issue is being taken too far and the issues that Members are raising that if I give this one - if you don’t want to support someone, why do you go ahead and eat their things? We have to bring integrity in this politics and elections. I would not mind electing through lining up. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

5.55
MR ROBERT KASULE (NRM, Kyadondo County North, Wakiso): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I think we should not hide our heads in the sands. We know that currently, there are no polling stations of Electoral Commission in villages. That means the polling stations shall be taken to the villages, which we cannot afford.

Secondly, when we elect a chairperson without electing a council, we will have problems because most of these chairpersons elect their relatives. Imagine a chairman is appointing a defence person. If the defence person - [MR SSEWUNGU: Order!] - what is wrong with you, please?

MR SSEWUNGU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have heard my friend hon. Kasule saying that there are no polling stations in villages. I, Ssewungu Joseph Gonzaga, was voted from Kaliiro Village Polling Station. So, is the honourable member in order to tell us that there are no polling stations in the villages?

THE SPEAKER: No, honourable member, was it a polling station located in that village, or it was a polling station for every village? That is what we want to know.
 
MR SSEWUNGU: That is my village, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Yes, but how many other villages vote from there? No, you are out of order. (Laughter)

MR KASULE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. You have imparted some knowledge to that member. The Electoral Commission cannot afford that exorbitant cost. What we need in villages is almost a choice by consensus. People vote the leaders that they think will serve them, not the kind of campaigns, which bring in money and so many other things.  So, we are going to preserve the culture and void taking this critical division to the village level. We must vote our people with almost consensus. We must also vote all the nine positions at LC council by consensus so we need - (Interruption)

MS NAMBOOZE: Madam Speaker, I did not intend to interrupt hon. Robert Kasule. Members have consistently been making contributions to this debate on misinformation. It has taken this country 15 years since we last had these elections. It seems that colleagues need to be reminded about what we are talking about exactly. For example, on the issue of registers, members need to be reminded that the register for the village elections is different from that one of the national election. This is because when it comes to village elections, the voters are only residents of that village and we cannot combine the register. 

The other issue is that hon. Robert Kasule said we cannot have a polling station per village. The feeling is that when you go to vote by lining, there is no polling station yet by lining up behind some candidate at some lace, that is a polling station in itself; only the voting style changes. 

The procedural matter I would like to raise is that wouldn’t it be procedurally okay if this House reminds itself on the procedure and the system on how the LCs are elected? For example we do not elect a whole council -

THE SPEAKER: No, honourable member, I think you are now doing a contribution. Please, hon. Robert Kasule, conclude. 

MR KASULE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. What I was going to say is that the committee benchmarked Tanzania, which is a peaceful country. There are marriages; domestic violence is not as much as it is in Uganda despite spending 15 years without such elections. The benchmarked places can give us a fair view. We are among the least developed countries in Africa. We need to save this money to do some infrastructural development; not until we get to that level where we can afford E-electioneering, this kind of election can still work for us. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, 23 members have contributed. I want to put the question that the Local Government (Amendment) Bill, 2014 be read for the second time. 

(Question put, agreed to.)

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE LOCAL GOVERNMENT (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2014

Clause 1

MS KWIYUCWINY: We are amending section 10 (1) of the principal Act by inserting a new paragraph immediately after paragraph (f) to read as follows: “(f) (a) two members representing workers, one of whom shall be a female elected in accordance with the Labour Union Act, 2006.” 

The justification is to provide for representation of workers as an interest group to create linkage between local and central government and also to promote education about workers’ rights. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 1 be amended as proposed.

(Question put, and agreed to.)

Clause 1, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 2, agreed to.

Clause 3

MS KWIYUCWINY: We would like to substitute the words, “as Chief Administrative Officer” with the word “Magistrate” in paragraph (e), (f), (g) and (h). 

The justification is that this is to ensure fair hearing and justice because this is not just an administrative function. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Members, I put the question that clause 3 be amended as - Honourable members, if you disrupt the work of this House today, I am going to publish your names; I am serious. 

MR WAFULA OGUTTU: This is a very serious matter concerning the amendments we are making. We are compelled to evoke again our rules that we are not fully constituted. We do not have quorum in the House. We would like to appeal to you that before you proceed with voting, you establish and ascertain that we have quorum in the House, Madam Chairperson. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Leader of Opposition, you have a responsibility to bring the Members of Opposition here to do work for the country.  I reminded you last week that it is only that this House which can make laws for this county. If you are failing to do that and then using quorum to deny work for the people of Uganda, we shall name and shame you. Let us proceed-(Applause)- I put the question that clause 3 as amended stand part of the Bill.

(Question put, and agreed to.)

Clause 3, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 4

MS KWIYUCWINY: We would like to insert the words, “as applicable” after the words “town board.”The justification is to cater for discretion. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 4 be amended as proposed. 

(Question put, and agreed to.)

Clause 4, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 5, agreed to.

Clause 6
MS KWIYUCWINY: In this clause, we would like to substitute Section 5 with the following: “A local government budget for the coming financial year shall always take into account the approved development plan of the local government, the Charter of Fiscal Responsibility and the National Framework Paper for that year;” and in (b) by inserting immediately after sub-section (5), the following: “The Chairperson of a local government shall, not later than the first day of April, cause to be prepared and lay before the council, the estimates of revenue and the expenditure of the council for the next financial year; (7) the Council shall not later than, the 31 May, consider and approve the budget and work plan of the council; (8) the council may revise the development plan where necessary to harmonise it with approved budget; and (9) the approved budget shall take effect on the 1 July in each year.” 

The Justification is to logically fit under section 77 of the principal Act, which provides for local governments budgetary powers and procedure.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 6 be amended as proposed - Are you going to talk about clause 6? 
MR MAGYEZI: Yes, Madam Chair.

THE CHAIRPERSON: But we have already voted. Are you a member of the committee? 

MR MAGYEZI: Yes, I am but I would like to raise an issue on a typing error. Under (a), between the word, “national” and “framework” the word budget is missing; it should read as, National Budget Framework Paper, not National Framework Paper. Thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: That is grammatical, it can be corrected. The Hansard should take note of that.I put the question that clause 6 as amended do stand as part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 6, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 7

MS KWIYUCWINY: We are replacing clause 7 with following: “Section 82 of the principal Act is amended by repealing sub-section 4.” The justification is that it is a consequential amendment arising out of the amendments to clause 6; the one we have just read, not clause 4.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 7 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRPERSON: Let us go to clause 8; it was just repealing the previous one. Let us go to clause 8.

Clause 8

MS KWIYUCWINY: In clause 8, we would like to substitute it with the following: “Section 83 of the principal Act: grants from the Government. The principal Act is amended by inserting immediately after sub-section 1 (c) with the following: “revenue from royalties arising from petroleum production in accordance with Section 75 of the Public Finance Management Act.”

The justification is that this is to clearly define all the sources of funding from central government to local government and in order to be in conformity with the Public Finance Management Act, 2015.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 8 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 8, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 9

MS KWIYUCWINY: In clause 9 we would like to propose an insertion of a new amendment to section 90 (2) as follows: replace the word “council” with the word “speaker.” The justification is that this is for better functioning of the internal audit.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Members, I do put the question that clause 9, be amended as -
MS AKOL: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. As I had already indicated, on this clause, I would like to introduce a new amendment to ensure there are controls even at the district level and also to align it to the Public Finance Management Act.

The new amendment I would like to introduce is that the internal auditors at district level shall be appointed by the office of the Internal Auditor General and shall report to that office.

This is because in the Public Finance Management Act, we created the office of the Internal Auditor General.  This is exactly to match it to the office of the Auditor-General, which is for the external audit – now this is internal audit. Thank you, Madam Chairperson.

THE CHAIRPERSON: What does the Chairperson of the committee say?

MR EKANYA: Madam Chairperson, that has a constitutional problem because internal audit’s work is basically for system improvement. If they report to the Internal Auditor General in Kampala, how shall we help the accounting officers at the district to do system improvement? We can have the appointment and transfer but they should report to the CAO for the purposes of system improvement.

MR MWESIGE: But even for appointment, Madam Chairperson, the Constitution says that the staff of the district is appointed by the District Service Commission. So how do you transfer this appointment to the office of the Internal Auditor General without amending the Constitution?

MR KASULE: I think what is lacking at the districts is proper oversight. Those technical people at the district – it becomes a conflict of interest - I have appointed you and then you report to me about the financial impropriation at the district and by yourself?  So the most probable thing we can do, according to the new Public Finance Management Act, is to make sure the Internal Auditor General, who is the oversight person on all monies expended by Government takes charge. So, it is consistent with that law that we make them be appointed by that office and they can be rotated in different districts because as of now they are not rotated. They stay in one place and do the same mess over and over again. So, for us to have oversight on that matter, they should be under the Internal Auditor General.

THE CHAIRPERSON: But honourable members, I do not know where you are going. Clause 9 was about substituting the word “speaker” with the word “council.” Isn’t it?

MS KWIYUCWINY: Madam Chairperson, the reason why we suggested to replace the word “council” with the word “speaker” is because the practice in the district has been that, when the reports of the audit is given to the Chairperson, they are not discussed in the council. We think that if it is given to the speaker, it will be discussed in the council.

THE CHAIRPERSON: That is what I am saying that why don’t we deal with that because hon. Rose Akol is taking us to a different direction. Let us first deal with proposal. I put the question that clause 9 be amended as proposed by the Chairperson.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 9, as amended, agreed to

MS AKOL: Yes, we have finished but I am introducing a new amendment; the one I had talked about, Madam Chairperson. This is the point at which I would like that amendment to come in.

THE CHAIRPERSON: What is your amendment?

MS AKOL: The amendment is – this is a new clause, a new sub-clause 9(1). It is to cater for the appointment and the reporting of the internal auditor at the district level.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Please stick to the proposal, say what you would like us to consider.

MS AKOL: The proposal is that the internal auditor at the district level shall report to the office of the Internal Auditor General and will also be appointed by the same office.

THE CHAIPERSON: Are you not interfering with the National Audit Act?

MS AKOL: There is the National Audit Act, which caters for the office of the Auditor-General who is to do with external audit but the internal audit is about the continuous appraisal of the systems and controls in place at the district level. Currently the appointment is by the officers to be audited. You appoint me but I also report to you? That does not work and that is where the conflict of interest is as the Chairperson had pointed out. 

In this proposal we are trying to cure the issues of corruption at the district level because if we do not provide for this – you appoint me and I report to you? what will I report? I cannot report your corruption. In the proposal, we are saying that let the Office of the Internal Auditor-General be the appointing authority for all the internal auditors at the district level.

THE CHAIRPERSON: What does the Minister say about the proposal?

MR MWESIGE: My view, Madam Chairperson, is that this is a constitutional matter. The internal audit department serves the district local government and Article 200 of the Constitution clearly says that “The power to appoint persons to hold or act in any office in the service of a district, including the power to confirm appointments to exercise disciplinary control over persons holding or acting in such office and to remove those persons from office, is vested in the district service commission”. The only exceptions are contained in Article 204 which deals with the chief accounting officer and the town clerk in case of a municipality.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 9, as amended, do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 9, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 10, agreed to.

Clause 11

MS KWIYUCWINY: Clause 11, the committee would like to amend section 101 (b) of the principal Act by repealing subsection (a). This subsection provides thus: “Notwithstanding Section 33 of the Electoral Commission Act, in the case of local council election, the Electoral Commission shall publish the voters register in the Gazette.” We would like to delete this so that the cost of the election by secret ballot is reduced.

MR EKANYA: Madam Chair, I agree with the committee chair’s proposal but I am just seeking clarification. If we conducted this election of LCI after the presidential and parliamentary elections - because you see, we are going to use the same register – when Electoral Commission is printing registers, it prints according to those LC I villages so that after it has been used for the presidential and parliamentary election, the same register can be used for local council elections. So, if we say it should not be published, don’t you think we shall loose such good initiative?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Yes. Honourable member, let us not go back. We took a decision in 2013, which has become impracticable. We have lost time and there is no local government at the – because of the decision we took a decision as a House. No, honorable member please, let us allow the local councils to have their elections by secret ballot but not with all the paraphernalia. 
Honourable members, I put the question that clause 11 - what do you want to say about this clause?

MR EKANYA: Madam Chair, I was saying that I agree with her position but I was just making an improvement that when we are going to do the presidential and parliamentary elections, Electoral commission prints the registers in village sets so that –(Interjection)- the same register because we have the national identity cards; the same people in those villages will be the ones who will vote me and you and later vote the LC I officials. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that Clause 11 be amended as proposed by the Chair

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 11, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 12

MS KWIYUCWINY: We would like to delete the entire clause and retain the provision in the principal Local Government Act, that section 111, which says thus: “All elections at local government and administrative unit levels shall be by secret ballot using one ballot box for all candidates at each polling station.”

The justification is that the proposed amendment, which was brought by the minister brings along with it intimidation, fear, intrigue, disenfranchisement of leaders and consequently denying many people their right to vote.

THE CHAIRPERSON: What? I thought you are proposing to delete it. Isn’t that clause 12? You are deleting clause 12, not so?

MR MWESIGE: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. I would like to invite the House and the committee to maintain this amendment as proposed in the Bill. I have passionately appealed to this House that we have an opportunity to help this country have LC I elections for the first time since 2002. The whole reason is that all that time has been the prohibitive cost of holding this election.

The arguments of intimidation, breakages of marriages, intrigue and fear do not hold water because I have participated in the conduct of election petitions and I know very well that even in the secret ballot we have had so many petitions. We have had violence in some cases even with secret ballots. 

Therefore, if we want to cure domestic violence, election violence, fear and intimidation, the solution is not refusing voting by lining up. That is not the solution. I would like to invite you, Madam Chair and honorable members, to appreciate the difficulty we have as a country in mobilising Shs 500 billion just to conduct an LC I election and therefore, I commend this clause to your approval. Thank you very much.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, we have just past a clause allowing universal adult suffrage but without the need to publish in the gazette. That is where the cost was coming from and this is in conformity with what we have past. We have agreed that we shall do secret ballot but we shall not Gazette. (Applause) Hon. minister, the provision we past, under clause 11, allows us to use only Shs 79 billion only to conduct the elections without having to go to the gazette and display of the register.

MR MWESIGE: But Madam Chair, when I came here in 2013 to request you to amend the law, at that time, the budget of Electoral Commission to conduct LC I elections was Shs 48 billion and the Ministry of Finance said they could only afford Shs 19 billion. That is why I came here. 

Now, the amendment of the committee is saying we can have Shs 72 billion. This Bill is accompanied by Certificate of Financial Implications and Government is simply saying even when you remove the gazetting of registers and we simply cannot afford Shs 72 billion for LC I elections. We cannot afford it and that is why we are inviting you to approve the method of lining up, which will just reduce the cost by only Shs 35 billion.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable minister, I think you want the support of this House. There is no unanimity on the issue of lining; many members are opposed to it.

MR EKANYA: Madam Chairperson, I would like to plead with the minister that when we do presidential and parliamentary elections - we have 6 thousand villages. If we just become fair to our LCIs and ask them to pay a nomination fee of Shs 5,000, Government will raise Shs 300 billion. Just Shs 5,000 alone as nomination fee - because the minister is talking about budget issues and we need Shs 72 billion –(Interjection)– kindly let me just make this point. 

Madam Chairperson, if the minister is worried about the budget - we have 57,000 villages. If one multiplied that with Shs 5,000 - just simple mathematics - or you set Shs 10,000, we will be able to subsidise – (Interruption)

MR PETER LOKERIS: Madam Chairperson, I would like to thank hon. Geoffrey Ekanya, for giving way. That money that you think is very small; I mean that Shs 5,000, which you would like Government to raise from people, will cut out poor people who would be good leaders.

So, to say let each pay Shs 5,000 - it is you who has it; some people do not have it. With us in Karamoja, though we have cows we do not want to sell any. No one will sell a cow in order to contest. So we wish that you should not think of raising money through nomination fees. That is why we need - I would also like to tell you that even now people are already divided - you do not have to pay anything. If you say stand behind people, those who support you will come; even when you go for secret ballot, those who do not want you will not vote you. So, why waste time?

MS AKELLO: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. The information I would like to give to the House - and to seek clarification about from the minister - is that NRM, as a party, is intending to conduct elections at village level through secret ballot voting. But as a party, where is NRM going to get money if Uganda a whole country, cannot afford to conduct elections at Shs 77 billion through secret ballot?

MR NSUBUGA: The honourable minister has said that we last held LC I elections in 2002. Can you tell us whether in 2002 we lined behind people? I am sure it was in 1989, under NRC, when we were lining behind people. In 2002, the last time we held LC I elections we used the secret ballot system.  So, how can you say that we cannot afford the secret ballot system now when we did that in 2002?

MS OKETAYOT: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. During the debate, I got a feeling that the general opinion was that we support Government - we come up with a system that will help Government carry out this election. To me a good number of members are agreeing that we go by the lining system. However - (Interruption) - yes, please protect me, Madam Chairperson.

THE CHAIRPERSON: You are protected.

MS OKETAYOT: However, as the chairperson was going through the amendments proposed by the committee - I have to tell you - because we used iPads and we cannot look at the Bill and the proposed amendments at the same time; we got confused when the chairperson proposed the amendment on clause 11. That is why we were waiting for where the issue of lining up that has been proposed in the Bill would come.So, Madam Chair, if we have already committed ourselves on clause 11, we will ask the minister to recommit so that we can go by the lining system.

Madam Chairperson, you have rightly said that Government’s hands have been tied for many years. We could not conduct these elections because of the costs. All these fears can be handled. We will even make life easy for the candidates because we can agree that there will be no prior nominations. Those nominations can be done that same day; the candidates can campaign there and then before voting takes place on the same day. This will help a lot. 

MR KAKOOZA: Madam Chairperson, this is a time we stand to be counted for what we speak every day. We have been telling people – I mean all of us both on Government and Opposition sides – that politics has been commercialised. 

This is because when we start running for campaigns, people make it a business. Somebody will want to eat from Kakooza but also from another person. When you stand to be counted, you will stop that method of running a campaign at the lowest level. (Applause) 

The moment you create that situation - that is why campaigns are becoming expensive and people are voting for leaders who cannot perform. They come here because they have money and they can win elections.

It is high time we indicated to the population that now there is integrity - they stand to be counted and chose the person they know will do the best; we can reduce that cost.

COL (RTD) MWESIGYE: Madam Chairperson, it is not right to forget our history. When we lose our history, we lose the picture. You vividly recall that when we were lining up, elections were very peaceful and everybody is yearning for that system. We should go back to our roots. The country is dynamic and laws are dynamic. When there is a change, change. We cannot remain static on this matter. I support that we go back to this system and see where it can take us. 

MR WERIKHE: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. Honourable colleagues, it is one thing to pass the law, it is another to have it implemented. I hate to see a situation where we pass a law but  Government fails to implement it.

The Executive is appealing to us that they can only manage to hold the elections when voters line behind the candidates. So, we are tying the Executive’s hands when we go out and fail to manage and hold these elections. That will be futile for this country. I support the lining up so that we implement it.

MR LUGOLOOBI: Thank you so much, Madam Chairperson. I thought this House should be reminded that we have just passed the Budget and in that Budget we are supposed to have a provision for the contingency fund, which would provide for supplementary expenditure. 

Our contingency fund is at zero because we made a zero provision. What that means is that it is going to be very difficult for us to raise money for this election if we make it so expensive. 

Therefore, I would like to move that we go for the most affordable election, which is the lining up. (Applause) I would like to add that we may want this democracy, but there is no direct correlation between democracy, service delivery and development. So, let us line up and have these elections done. We have waited for too long for this to happen; let us have it.

MR OGUTTU: Madam Chairperson, clearly the House is divided because the clause we are debating is controversial. Lining up is changing the method of voting in our Constitution. We are supposed to vote by secret ballots but we are making a law to beat that – (Interjection) – yes!

THE CHAIRPERSON: Which article?

MR OGUTTU: Madam Chairperson, lining behind candidates, as members have argued, will cause problems in families. It will not stop commercialization of politics. Indeed this is now going to be more serious because people who will have paid voters will sit at a line and see whether people are voting according to the money they were paid. 

So, this law we are passing this evening - I have already indicated to you that we are passing it illegally according to our rules. People are going to challenge this law in courts of law and it will be thrown on the wayside. We will have no law and no elections. That is what I would like members to see. It is upon you to do what you are doing, but it is totally wrong. We should do things according to the law because we made the laws ourselves. This House will be the last to break the laws because we make the laws. Thank you very much.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I would like to draw your attention to Article 68(6) of the Constitution and I want read it out: “Parliament may by law exempt any public election, other than a presidential or parliamentary election, from the requirements of clause (1) that shall be held by secret ballot.” That one has not been amended. (Applause). Honourable members, I put the question that clause 12 do stand as part of Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 12, agreed to.

Clause 13

MS KWIYUCWINY: Clause 13, the committee would like to substitute the words “new candidate” with the words “another candidate.” The justification is to ensure that nominations are open for the purpose of refilling that vacant position.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 13 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 13, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 14, agreed to.

Clause 15

MS KWIYUCWINY: Clause 15, the committee would like to replace the words “one voter” with the words “two voters.” The justification is that assisting two people is reasonable enough and more practicable, especially for people with special qualification to assist people with disabilities.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 15 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 15, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 16, agreed to.

Clause 17

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 17 be deleted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 17, deleted.

Clause 18, agreed to.

Clause 19, agreed to.

The title, agreed to.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

6.45
THE MINISTER OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT (MR Adolf Mwesige): Madam Chairperson, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports there to.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question to the motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed and the Speaker presiding)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

6.45
THE MINISTER OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Mr Adolf Mwesige): Madam Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered all the clauses of a Bill entitled, “The Local Government (Amendment) Bill, 2014” and passed them with amendments.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

6.46
THE MINISTER OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Mr Adolf Mwesige): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Report of the Committee of the whole House be adopted. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question to the motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

BILLS
 THIRD READING

THE LOCAL GOVERNMENT (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2014

6.46
THE MINISTER OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Mr Adolf Mwesige): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Local Governments (Amendment) Bill 2014” be read the third time and do pass.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question to the motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

A BILL FOR AN ACT ENTITLED “THE LOCAL GOVERNMENT (AMENDMENT) ACT, 2015

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I would like to thank you very much and to congratulate the minister for finally passing this law. (Applause) I am warning those who come and then absent themselves. I am going to start publishing your names starting tomorrow. Anyone who came and left before we concluded, their names will be published so that the country knows where you are working from. I would like to thank those who are here. It is those that are not here that we are going to deal with. The House is adjourned to tomorrow at 2.00p.m.

(The House rose at 6.47 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 25 June 2015 at 2.00 p.m.)
