Thursday, 5 June 2014

Parliament met at 2.47 p.m. at Serena Conference Centre, Kampala.

National Anthem

East African Community Anthem

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

PROCLAMATION 

THE SPEAKER: “WHEREAS under Article 95 (2) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, a Session of Parliament shall be held at such place within Uganda and shall commence at such time as the Speaker may by proclamation appoint;

AND WHEREAS the Fourth Session of the Ninth Parliament will commence on the 5th day of June 2014;

AND WHEREAS the President of the Republic of Uganda is required under Article 101 (1) of the Constitution to deliver to Parliament an address on the state of the nation at the beginning of each Session;

AWARE THAT it is expedient that Parliament receives the State of the Nation Address from the President at the K ampala Serena Conference Centre;

NOW, THEREFORE, in exercise of the powers conferred upon the Speaker by Article 95(2) of the Constitution, I hereby proclaim that Parliament shall sit at the Kampala Serena Conference Centre on the 5th day of June 2014 at 1400 hours to receive the State of the Nation Address from the President;

AND FURTHER, in exercise of the powers conferred upon the Speaker by the Constitution, the Parliament Powers and Privileges Act, cap 258 and the Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of Uganda, it is hereby proclaimed and declared that the said Kampala Serena Conference Centre, including its forecourts, the yard and the gardens be precincts of the Parliament for the aforementioned purposes.

Given under my hand at Parliament House, this 5th day of June 2014. 
Rebecca Kadaga, Speaker of Parliament.”

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Your Excellency the President, Mr Yoweri Museveni; Your Excellency the Vice-President, Mr Edward Ssekandi; My Lord, Justice Nshimye on behalf of the Judiciary; colleague Speakers from Kenya, Rwanda, Ethiopia and Somalia; the Rt Hon. Deputy Speaker, Jacob Oulanyah; the Rt Hon. Prime Minister and Leader of Government Business; the Deputy Prime Ministers; the honourable Leader of the Opposition in Parliament; Ministers and Ministers of State; Justices of the Supreme Court and of the Court of Appeal; Judges of the High Court; honourable Members of Parliament from the Duma of Russia; honourable Members of Uganda Parliament; members of the Diplomatic Corps; the Chief of Defence Forces; the Inspector-General of Police; the Commissioner-General of Prisons; leaders of political parties; religious leaders; distinguished invited guests; ladies and gentlemen.

Your Excellency, it is our great honour and pleasure to welcome you today to Parliament to perform your constitutional duty of delivering the State of the Nation Address, as you are directed by the Constitution under Article 101(1).

The Session, which has just ended, had some sad moments. We lost some of our colleagues: hon. Joy Kariisa Arinaitwe, the Woman MP for Buhweju and hon. Gregory Matovu, MP for Bukanga.  We also lost the honourable Dr Mallinga. We pray that they find room in the Almighty God’s palace. We are comforted that they carried out their duties to this country as leaders and left a legacy.

I also wish to report that some of our colleagues are not present today because they are indisposed and cannot be present. Let us continue to pray for their quick recovery. On behalf of Parliament, I would like to register our appreciation for the financial and material support that Government has extended for the medical treatment of all the concerned Members of Parliament.

Your Excellency, the Third Session, which we have just concluded, registered a better performance compared to the previous session. Nineteen Bills were passed  as against 16 in the Second Session; one Bill was considered and rejected; One Bill was withdrawn by the Government; four were presented and not concluded and have accordingly been saved for the Fourth Session. We considered 46 reports as against 44 in the Second Session; passed 49 motions as against 24 in the Second Session, and a number of these were to authorise Government to borrow for programmes of Government funding. We had 32 ministerial statements as against 15. We finalised 16 petitions as against six. The only area where we have not performed well relates to questions for oral answer where six questions were responded to as against nine in the Second Session. 

I wish to further report that during this Session, we actualised the provisions of rule 34 of the Rules of Procedure on Prime Minister’s Question Time; Members fielded various questions to the Prime Minister on matters of government policy or the general performance of Government and government agencies.

At the time we prorogued Parliament on the 16 May 2014, the following were the Bills that were not yet completed: 
    • The Marriage and Divorce Bill, 2009 was handled and not completed; 
    • The National Biotechnology and Biosafety Bill, 2012 was partially handled and not concluded; 
    • The Public Private Partnership Bill was partially handled; we hope to conclude it in the Fourth Session; and 
    • The Public Finance Bill, which was presented, will possibly be concluded early in the Fourth Session.

Your Excellency, I wish to report that the Anti-Counterfeiting Bill, 2011 was withdrawn by the Minister of Trade and Industry. A new Bill is awaited by Parliament. We would want to express our concern and inform you that our industries are being choked out of business by counterfeits, not to mention the health of our people, which is being affected.

Another matter we wanted to raise concerns the electoral laws. In the past Parliaments, the introduction of the electoral laws has been delayed, hampering other attendant processes, which would facilitate the holding of the general elections. I, therefore, urge the Government to submit these proposed laws well in time so that we do not face a similar challenge where Parliament is stampeded.

Many other important Bills are at various stages of processing in the committees and once disposed of, the Plenary will handle them. Therefore, the chairpersons of sectoral committees are urged to expedite work on the Bills. Equally, the chairpersons of the standing committees are urged to handle the areas under their mandate.

Your Excellency, a number of Bills had been included in the legislative calendar of Government but were not presented for the First Reading. Therefore, Parliament awaits them. I do hope that the Fourth Session will be able to record an even better performance. This will call for better teamwork on the part of all the stakeholders including the ministers, chairpersons, members of the committees and the party whips.

During the previous session, I exercised my powers under Article 83 of the Constitution and rule 101 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament relating to absence of Members of Parliament for more than 15 sittings without the permission, in writing, of the Speaker when the Parliament is continually meeting and one is not able to offer a satisfactory explanation about their absence. This initiative resulted into Members losing their seats. I, therefore, want to warn Members who have a habit of absenting themselves from the sittings that the same awaits them during the Fourth Session. (Laughter)

Let me also urge the Members of the Front Bench to come fully prepared to handle the business of the House and not to absent themselves without satisfactory explanation. The carefree approach to handling of business is counterproductive to the needs of the country. Your Excellency, I want to pledge our commitment as the presiding officer, on my behalf and on behalf of the Deputy Speaker, to handle all the work that we have got to the fulfilment of our legislative, oversight and representative roles.

At the international scene, Parliament of Uganda has done commendable work. We have sponsored some important motions in different fora within the Commonwealth Parliamentary Association, the Inter-Parliamentary Union, the European Union Joint Assembly and many others. A number of our Members have been able to, because of our performance, get positions of leadership in international organisations and we congratulate them.

At the regional level, Parliament of Uganda has supported and continues to support the work of the East African Community as well as the work of the African Union and the Pan African Parliament. However, Your Excellency, concern has been raised by the national parliaments on the African continent that there is no direct linkage between the work of the African Union and the national parliaments. This is a matter of concern because the national parliaments are supposed to implement the work of the African Union.

At the local level, district leaders have been engaged by the leadership of Parliament in our programme entitled “Parliamentary Outreach”, which is aimed at taking Parliament nearer to the people. During those visits, we received the concerns of the district leaders, which we have brought to the attention of the Executive and to the House. We are also planning to conduct trainings for the local government leaders at the Parliamentary Training Institute, which is now one year old.

The Ministry of Finance has supported the work of the Parliamentary Commission. They have supported us in completing the multi-storey parking yard, which Your Excellency commissioned last year. However, we would like to appeal for your indulgence so that the funds are availed to complete the security facilitation of that park so that we can use it.

I wish to report that the additional construction on the floors on the North, West and East wings of Parliament will create additional offices for us. Work is on-going and hopefully, it will be completed by early next year.

Your Excellency, the decision to go multi-party was taken in 2005 but the leaders and the population are still grappling with how to manage a multi-party democracy. At the parliamentary level, by and large, it is going on well. However, it is time for all the political actors to have a dialogue on some of the tenets. In Parliament, for instance, the Rules of Procedure were amended to determine how committees and their leadership are put in place. Your Excellency, there are inherent challenges and failures, which we have observed with this arrangement, which impede the handling of business of the House. 

There are other issues, which have been raised pertaining to this practice, which we shall address in a separate forum. However, I do believe that we need to start thinking of carrying out consultation with a view to further amending some laws and the Rules of Procedure of Parliament to improve efficiency and effectiveness in delivery. I would like the Government and all the political parties to think about this.

I want to extend our appreciation to you, Your Excellency, on behalf of Parliament for your personal support and that of the Government. You have provided the environment of peace, security and stability that has enabled us to have some socio-economic progress over the years. I also thank you for the financial support extended to Parliament without which we would not have been able to carry out our mandate or take on the visible development projects like the ones which are on-going in Parliament.

We want to thank the international organisations and bodies, which have collaborated with Parliament by supporting us. I wish to affirm our commitment to continue good working relationships and collaboration with those international bodies, civil society, academia and the general citizenry on all issues relating to our mandate.

Your Excellency, I am delighted to introduce various dignitaries from the parliamentary family. Within the region, we have agreed to collaborate much more visibly than we have done in the past. Therefore, Parliament of Uganda welcomes the following guests, and in no particular order I will invite them just to stand up for recognition: 

    • Rt Hon. Ethuro Ekwee, Speaker of the Senate of Kenya; 

    • Hon. Abdullah Gemeda Dago, the Speaker of the House of Representatives of the Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia. Your Excellency, we have a memorandum of co-operation between our two parliaments.

    • The hon. Mohamed Osman Jawali, Speaker of the Federal Parliament of Somalia. We also have a memorandum of co-operation between our two parliaments.
 
    • Rt Hon. Jeanne Uwimanimpaye, the Deputy Speaker in charge of Legal Affairs in the National Assembly of Rwanda. We want to thank the Speaker for delegating her to come. 

    • Hon. Sergey Kalashnikov, but he is not a gun. He is a coordinator of the group of parliaments of Central and Southern African countries and head of the Health Committee of the Duma, the Russian Parliament.

    • Hon. Vyacheslav Tetyokin, Member of the Committee on Defence of the Duma of Russia. Your Excellency, Uganda contributed to what he is. In the early 1970s, he was here as a translator at the Busitema Agricultural College. So, we have contributed to what he is today; we welcome him back.

Once again, we welcome you and we want to thank you very much for attending our function. We hope that you will find time to visit other parts of the country. There is much that you will see and enjoy in the time that you will be here.

Honourable members, you may recall that when we prorogued Parliament, business which was pending was saved. This means that there is work immediately available to be handled. In order to facilitate this, I wish to request all the whips concerned to assign members of the various committees as per the Rules of Procedure. As is the practice, the assignment of independent Members of Parliament is vested in my office and I request all those concerned to register with the Clerk indicating the choices for their committees. I would want to appeal to Members to respond expeditiously so that by the time we read the Budget, the committees have been constituted and are ready for the approval of Parliament so that business can commence.

Your Excellency Mr President, distinguished guests, honourable Members, ladies and gentlemen I thank you very much for coming and I thank you very much for your kind attention.

Your Excellency, it is now my singular honour and pleasure to invite you to perform a constitutional duty and address the nation, deliver the State of the Nation Address and open the Fourth Session of the Ninth Parliament. I thank you, Your Excellency. (Applause)

ADDRESS ON THE STATE OF THE NATION 

3.30
THE PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF UGANDA (Mr Yoweri K. Museveni): His Excellency the Vice-President; Rt Hon. Speaker of Parliament; Rt Hon. Prime Minister; Justice Nshimye representing the Judiciary; honourable Ministers; honourable Members of Parliament; distinguished guests and members of the diplomatic corps.

Madam Speaker –(Interjections)– okay, Rt Hon. Leader of the Opposition. (Applause) But he was already covered under distinguished ladies and gentlemen; -(Laughter)– unless you want to say that he is not a distinguished gentleman.

In fulfilment of the constitutional requirement stipulated in Article 101(1) of the Constitution of Uganda, I stand here to deliver the State of the Nation Address, 2014. This is not a mere constitutional ritual as some people may want to perceive it but accountability on particular government commitments since the last State of the Nation Address. 

On 12 June 2014, the Minister for Finance, Planning and Economic Development will present to this august House and the entire country the budget for the financial year 2014/2015. She will also detail what has been achieved and what we intend to achieve in the coming financial year. The State of the Nation Address I am delivering today, therefore, gives a broader picture concentrating on the basic priority sectors, which are agriculture, industry, services and ICT.

The Ugandan economy continues to be vibrant amidst economic challenges and reforms on the local, regional and international scene. I keep telling the audiences I address that there are four sectors for wealth creation and access to employment. Anybody wishing to generate wealth, create self-employment, employ others or access employment has no alternative but choose one of these four. The four sectors are: agriculture, industry, services and ICT. 

How are the four sectors performing? Agriculture is in two parts; there is commercial and plantation farming – that is one part - and then there is what we continue to call subsistence farming, which means people who have not yet entered the money economy. 

Commercial farming still has got challenges such as the high costs of inputs, the under-development of water for agriculture, the low use of fertilisers and poor management skills by the farmers themselves. What is decisive for any enterprise to prosper, apart from the entrepreneur, is the market - the buyer. If enough people do not buy from you, you cannot continue to produce. This is why I am always careful to recommend to the farmers only crops and livestock products that have got a big internal, regional and international market.  

I will give you some examples. The global demand for coffee today is 149 million bags at the value of US$ 13.6 billion when unprocessed and US$ 32 billion when processed. Now, this coffee is very interesting because only a few years ago – about five or six years ago - the global demand for coffee was 118 million bags but as you can see, it has now jumped to 149 million bags – 60 kilogramme bags. This is because of the Asian countries where people have become richer and are able to drink coffee while previously they were not doing so. Therefore, the demand for coffee is going up and that is why I continue to recommend it to our farmers because there is no danger of having no market. 

The value of tea is US$ 11.4 billion with a total demand of four million tonnes. The total value of milk and milk products is US$ 32.8 billion with total quantities of 730 million tonnes, etcetera. I am using these as examples to show you that what I recommend to the farmers is what I have checked and has got an internal, regional or international demand. These are values of these products when they are raw materials – some of them - not as finished products.

If something has got a low global demand, we should know the consequences of encouraging the farmers to flock into it. It will be a problem like vanilla was. When people flock into something that does not have big demand, within a short time there will be over production and, therefore, the prices will collapse. Leaders and the farmers should, therefore, know that these products of our agriculture must compete regionally and globally because that is where the big market is. In order to compete, our prices and quality must be comparatively competitive.  

Having looked at the global prices, we should then work backwards and see how we can reduce our costs and improve our yields in order to improve our profit margins within the market determined international prices. As a farmer, it is good enough for me that somebody is buying my milk and my beef. At one time, we had nobody buying our milk because the milk being consumed in the towns was coming from outside. We are now dominating the milk sales inside Uganda and also exporting to the entire East African region and to Nigeria, Mauritius, the Middle East and also India and the United States. (Applause) 

What I have said about coffee and milk applies to all the other crops, bananas etcetera. The relevant government department must, accordingly, firmly regulate these products. Otherwise, if our quality is compromised, we shall be ruined. We cannot afford a bad reputation within Uganda and outside because of poor quality products on account of poor government regulation. 

As you can see, infrastructure in many parts of the country is improving, such as the tarmac roads, the electricity, the telephones, etc. I am negotiating with Japanese International Cooperation Agency (JICA) to buy earth-moving equipment for both roads and water excavation on a big scale. (Applause) I like this Japanese equipment because it is really strong. (Interjections) I cannot hear what you are saying because you do not have a microphone. (Laughter) Once this deal goes through, it will help us with the roads, with water excavation for earth dams and even for bush clearing. The Japanese equipment is very good; I have seen its capacity on my own farms because I use it. 

Within our means, we are continuing to roll out irrigation schemes. Doho Irrigation Scheme has been repaired at a cost of Shs 19.7 billion. Mobuku Irrigation Scheme has also been repaired at a cost of Shs 19 billion. The Agoro Irrigation Scheme has been completed at a cost of Shs 27 billion. The rehabilitation of the Olweny Irrigation Scheme will commence in 2014/2015 and is estimated to cost a total of Shs 42 billion.

These are big irrigation schemes but the farmers should know that you can also have micro irrigation schemes. The Ministry of Agriculture, working with our brothers and sisters from Kenya, should avail affordable mini-irrigation equipment. I saw some good equipment in Mombasa, Kenya, which can be operated by individuals to provide micro irrigation, some of it operated manually. Working with Makerere University, we are also trying to develop a solar powered irrigation pump. The agricultural sector grew by 1.5 per cent per annum this financial year, in spite of these challenges.

As I keep telling you, agriculture of Uganda is still handicapped by the 68 per cent of the households that were still in subsistence farming according to the census of 2002. If all these homesteads were converted to commercial farming, the size of agriculture would be much bigger. 

In the manifesto of NRM of 1996, we put forward a four acres plan for these homesteads that have got that size of land. Using the yardstick of the financial returns – (Interjections)– For you, you are here in Parliament earning millions of money –(Interjections)– and I do not earn those millions  and I do not need them –(Interjections)– but when you sit here and get those millions and I tell you about your farmers who are still in subsistence farming and then you shout, then I feel sorry for you. (Applause)

If all these homesteads were converted to commercial farming, the size of agriculture would be much bigger. In the manifesto of 1996, the NRM put forward a four acres plan for these homesteads that have got that size of land. Using the yardstick of the financial returns per acre per annum and of sufficiently large global demand mentioned above, we recommended the following enterprises: one acre for coronal coffee; one acre for fruits, especially oranges, mangoes and pineapples; one acre for bananas or any other food crops like cassava, Irish potatoes or upland rice; and one acre for grass for zero-grazing Friesian cattle. On these, you should add poultry like layers for eggs and pigs as backyard activities.

In this House, there are people who listened to this advice; I know some MPs who have listened and I can tell you their future is bright. (Applause) But those who do not listen, I do not know about their future. (Laughter) My job is a simple one, to put everything in writing, read it, put it on a tape recorder so that it is kept. So, you can say what you want but I have also said what I want. 

These backyard activities do not require much land. Those near the swamps should engage in fish farming. Many can participate in apiary for honey. In some areas, they grow tea. With three acres of tea, one can get about Shs 13.5 million per annum. In the case of those with less land than the four acres, there is the option of mushroom growing as well as vegetable growing in addition to poultry and piggery. In the case of the latter two, poultry and piggery, you would use animal feeds bought from other people because you do not have enough land to grow your own.

With one room full of mushrooms using shelves - one on top of the other - you would earn Uganda Shs 20 million per annum. One acre of onions would give you Shs 24.8 million per annum; an acre of tomatoes would give you Shs 14 million per acre per annum; an acre of cabbages would give you Shs 20 million per acre per annum. I have now checked that the global demand of mushrooms is 3.5 million tonnes, valued at US$ 10 billion.

The political class, like the ones directly in front of me, -(Laughter)– the religious leaders, the cultural leaders and even the peasants themselves have been slow in grasping this issue of enterprise selection for the peasants with small pieces of land and for the need to convert from subsistence farming to commercial farming. The peasants that have woken up to this need have had the problem of planting and breeding materials. 

National Agricultural Advisory Services (NAADS), which has been given huge resources to do this, spends most of the Shs 203 billion which we give them each year on salaries and seminars. They only spend Shs 57 billion on buying materials for planting and breeding; the rest is spent on salaries and seminars. We are determined to totally restructure NAADS in the coming financial year. (Applause) Many farmers have woken up; when they get planting and breeding materials, they look after them well, for the majority of cases.

In this financial year, although starting late, I experimented with the deployment of UPDF officers in our former war zones –(Interjections)– Yes, in Luweero. There are 25 former war-zones. These are:  Bumbo – that is in Bugisu; Mayuge; Awere; Atiak; Birembo – these fellows do not know that we have been fighting for a very long time. Our fight did not start with Luweero; that was the second phase. (Laughter) So, I will repeat them for you: Bumbo – that is in Bugisu –(Interjections)– I do not know where you were; whether you were with Amin or not – Mayuge, Awere, Atiak, Birembo, Mukono─Namugongo; others are: Black bomber, that is, Matugga-Migadde; Mondlane, that is, Kalasa-Makulubita; Lutta, that is, Semuto area; Kabalega, Kapeeka─Kasiiso area; Nkrumah, Bukomero; Nkrumah, Lwamata; Nkrumah, Kiboga; Nkrumah, Kyankwanzi; Nkrumah, Kyamusisi; Luttamaguzi, Sekanyonyi; Ngoma; Mwanga, Bamunanika; Rwenzori, Kasese; Rwenzori, Kabarole; Rwenzori, Bundibugyo; etcetera.  

Using only a total of Shs 9 billion in the two rainy seasons of the last nine months, the commanders deployed in these areas have distributed 11 million seedlings of coffee, two million seedlings of tea, 464,000 seedlings of oranges and mangoes and 1,412 tonnes of maize and beans. If the soldiers can do this using so little money, why should NAADS and all those associated with it fail with these hundreds of billions? –(Interjections)– The NRM is not running you constituency; either by default or by omission, you are now the MP. (Laughter) So, if the NRM is a bad performer, you perform well in your constituency. (Applause) –(Interjections)– Bad policy? I developed my area under UPC in the 1960s. So, shut up, you do not know what you are talking about. (Laughter) 

It is really embarrassing for all those involved –(Interjections)– I like to engage these people because they have nothing to say. So, when I come here, they really give me a good platform to shut them up. It is really embarrassing for all those involved. The good news is that the money is there and has been there. It is just a question of getting the right channels for this money to reach the peasant farmers.  

Above, I have just talked about NAADS money; there is also the money of micro-finance. Every year, we provide Shs 16 billion for this. There is also the money of the youth. Every year, we provide Shs 32 billion for this. There is money for NUSAF and every year we provide Shs 53 billion for this. There is money for PRDP for which every year, we provide Shs 73.9 billion. There is the restocking money and every year, we provide money for that one also although they have not put a figure here.  

The problem, therefore, is not shortage of money; it is the shortage of reliable agents for conveying this money to the people. To show you the scale of this money, if we used only Shs 100 billion of this money in one year, at a cost of Shs 310 per coffee seedling including transport, we would plant 322 million new coffee trees of the clonal type, far in excess of the 220 million old coffee trees. 

By just planting new coffee trees, even without expanding the acreage, using the Shs 100 billion, which is less than 50 per cent of what we give NAADS each year, with good crop husbandry, our annual coffee production would go from the present four million bags of 60 kilogrammes each to, at least, more than 10 million bags. That would make Uganda second only to Brazil in global coffee production.

I have dwelt on agriculture because it is the sector that is most easily accessible to the majority of Ugandans. Even the ones without land can borrow or rent from the others. It takes a few months from planting to harvesting - 18 months for coffee, two months for tomatoes, etcetera. God has really favoured Africa, especially Uganda. (Applause)  However, many Africans are never keen to accept God’s blessings. Within two months, three months, four months, six months, 18 months, depending on the crops, a farmer can go from planting to harvesting. 

Yes, there are challenges such as drought, pests, fungi, etc. However, there is a solution for any of those challenges. We only have to do a bit of sweating. In the Book of Genesis, chapter 3, verse 19 – and I quote for the people sitting in front of me especially - it says, “By the sweat of your brow, you shall eat bread till you return to the ground. For out of it you were taken; for you are dust and to dust you will return.” –(Interjections)– Including myself; so, we must sweat. That is what God told us in the book of Genesis; eating free is not there.

Having said all that, however, it is necessary to remind ourselves that a modern economy cannot depend on agriculture alone. Gone are the days of the physiocrats in France who believed that all value came from agriculture; hence, we must go to the second sector ─ industries ─ manufacturing ─ big factories and small ones. 

Industry now employs 841,704 persons.  The annual rate of growth of the industrial sector has been 5.6 per cent. –(Interjection)– Now you can hear my wonderful people; one of them is saying “Indians”. Yes, if an Indian builds a factory in Uganda, that factory is Ugandan. (Applause) If you do not know it, in economics we call it part of GDP. If you go and build a factory in India, that factory will not be Ugandan; it will be Indian, if you do not know that.

With the commissioning of Bujagali, there has been alleviation of power shortage although the price of electricity is still high. We are determined to provide electricity for manufacturing at four US cents per unit whatever the challenges. (Applause) This is what I agreed with the coffee processor and the new textile manufacturers that are beginning to flock into the country as the factories migrate from China on account of the rising labour costs there. Factories are migrating from China because the labour costs in China are going up and one of the most favoured destinations is Uganda. As I said, this is what I agreed with the coffee processor and the new textile manufacturers that are beginning to flock into the country. Those who, out of context, agitate for higher salaries should bear this in mind. Uganda cannot miss this round of industrialisation for any reason.  

Apart from industries coming from outside, I want to inform the country that our young scientists graduating from universities are happily entering the manufacturing field. As you could see from the shows in Kumi on 8th March, Women’s Day; Rubaare, Ntungamo on 1st May, Labour Day; and only the other day at Namulanda for the youth, Ugandan scientists have the knowledge to produce anything from food processing, ceramics, herbal medicine, machine parts, light engineering, wood products, etc. 

Our scientists at Makerere have already produced electric automobiles – they have produced prototypes for this - and I tasked them to work on the solar water pumps. My office has collected all the names of the people involved. We shall fund them using these huge sums of money that go to waste in the hands of all sorts of actors. It is so pleasing to see that Ugandan scientists can manufacture almost anything provided they are funded. With the emphasis we have put on electricity, the roads and the railway, we shall be able to lower the costs of doing business in this economy and therefore make our products more competitive.

The third sector, which is services - meaning hotels, transport, banks, professional services, etc. - this year grew by 5.6 per cent. With peace, this sector has become very useful in our economy. It now employs 2,684,290 persons and accounts for 45.4 per cent of our GDP. Given the uniquely good climate of Uganda, very few countries in the world can compete with us in this area. We only need to control the problems of corruption, pollution and deforestation. It is only these three that can undermine our unrivalled advantage for services, especially tourism. 

In the year 2012, Uganda was declared the best tourism destination in the whole world. (Applause) Between 11th and 16th November 2014, we are going to host the conference of the World Association of Tourist Operators. However, when I look through the window of the plane when landing at Entebbe and I see the green algae on the water around Entebbe, I do not feel happy.  The Ministry of Environment must strive to find ways to stop the following:

i) 	The pollutants that go into the lake;  
ii) 	Cutting forests up to the edge of all the lakes- [Hon.  Members: “Sudhir”] - If Sudhir is the one doing it, they should stop him. –(Interjections)– Well, I can stop anybody and you know that, including you people. I am sure you have tested some of that. (Laughter) 
iii) 	Digging on the banks of the River Nile;   

It is high time that Ugandans remembered and appreciated these precious gifts from God. If they do not get the care they need and which they deserve, they can all disappear. We should remember what Jesus said in Mathew 7:6 - “Don’t give what is holy to the pigs because they don’t appreciate it, lest they trample them under their feet and turn and tear you in pieces.” When we destroy our God-given environment, we should be careful not to be like those pigs which were written about in the Bible.

I must salute the Director of the National Forestry Authority. It seems he has somewhat woken up. In the recent past, I have flown over Mabira Forest, Budongo Forest, the forest around Butiiti in Kabarole and Semliki Forest. It seems the encroachment has declined in those forests. I flew for dozens of minutes over this large area of thick forest and how beautiful it is. Why was I selling it? (Laughter) When Anywar was still a school girl, I am the one who chased the encroachers from Mabira Forest. (Laughter) Let the Minister of Environment similarly wake up in respect of the shores of Lake Victoria and the banks of River Nile. Our uniqueness in the service sector can only be enhanced by protecting these treasures ─ the lakes, the rivers, mountains, wetlands and the national parks.

The ICT sector has been growing at 15 per cent annually for the last two years. It has got the capacity to employ many people. Information communication technologies are crucial for communication among people, for data processing and for automation. It is crucial, therefore, for industrial production and communication. It will, therefore, create a lot of jobs. Already, about over one million people are employed in the ICT sector both directly and indirectly.

In the area of Business Processing Outsourcing (BPOs), we already have 54 companies operating in Uganda and they are already employing 4,250 persons. Given that our youth speak English well, a lot more youths can get employed in this sector.  This is where an accountant can work for a company in North America and convey the results of his or her work over the internet and be paid. Recently while in Europe, I discussed with some entrepreneurs who can help us expand this business of the BPOs. It is an area of great potential.

While talking about the industrial sector, I did not talk about minerals. You are aware of the petroleum and gas that we shall be able to start extracting from the ground by 2017. – (Interjections) - I can see some people are worried about 2017. (Laughter) As you may be aware, we have already found 3.5 billion barrels of petroleum in 40 per cent of the potential area. Exploration in the rest of the area is continuing. 

Our negotiations with the oil companies had delayed because there were contentious clauses. Happily, we have agreed with the oil companies on the MoU. We can, therefore, proceed to negotiate on the details. Our crude oil will be used in the refinery to produce final products, part of it will be exported as crude and part of it will be used for electricity generation. The gas will be used for electricity generation and for assisting in extracting the crude oil. If we have got enough quantities of gas, it will be used in steel manufacture, using our huge iron ore deposits in the Kabale-Kanungu areas and in the Sukuru Hills near Tororo. 

Apart from oil and gas, the Government conducted exploration in many parts of the country and discovered the following minerals in the following quantities: 

(i)	Iron ore	- more than 200 million metric tonnes of proven ore, mainly in Kabale and Kanungu areas;

(ii)	Phosphates - 230 million metric tonnes of proven ore in the Sukuru Hills, Tororo;

(iii)	Cement - more than 300 million tonnes of limestone in Karamoja areas in addition to the one in Hima;

(iv) 	Aluminium clays - more than three billion tonnes of ore in Makutu areas in Bugweri;

(v)	Copper - more than nine million tonnes in the Kilembe area;

(vi)	 Cobalt - more than 5.5 million tonnes in the Kilembe area;

(vii)	Wolfram - more than 800,000 tonnes, in some parts of Kabale;

(viii)	Tin - more than 1 million tonnes in Ruhaama - Ntungamo areas;

(ix)	Gold - more than 8.2 million ounces in the different parts of the country;

(x)	Vermiculite - this is a new mineral apparently used in a few places, including Uganda, in controlling heat, for insulation. More than 54.9 million tonnes have been found in the Bugisu area.  

(xi)	 Columbite-tantalite (Coltan) - 133 million tonnes. This is in the Kisoro area. 

(xiv)	Rock salt and brine - 22 million tonnes. So, you can see it is not just petroleum but also these other minerals.  

(xv)	Uranium – There is a lot Uranium in various parts of the country.

Pressure is already on for exporting these minerals in unprocessed form. I will never accept these pressures. (Applause) This is because even the traditional peasants in Uganda have enough economics in their heads to know that when you produce the mbiire (embidde) – this is the banana for brewing beer - you brew the beer yourself (tonto). You do not produce embiire and sell them to your neighbour who then brews the beer and sells it to you. At least the peasants know that economics; if the peasants know this economics, how about national leaders like the ones sitting in front of me? (Laughter) Most of these minerals will be processed here and will also be mixed with other minerals so as to produce intermediate products such as alloy steel and where the economics allows, final products.

Uranium, in the medium and long term, could rescue us in the field of energy. We have a lot of it and nobody is touching it now on my orders. Meanwhile, like we did for petroleum, we have sent out our scientists for more advanced training in nuclear physics. They will form a nuclear energy unit in the Ministry of Energy. Uganda does not have a lot of hydropower. Even if you add all the sites that are not yet exploited - Kalagala, Nsimba, Karuma, Ayago, Murchison Falls, Kiba, Koriang, Agago, Mujizi and over 40 small hydropower sites - their total output of electricity is about 8,000 megawatts of electricity. We shall also have some more energy from geo-thermal sources, maybe 1,000 or 2,000 megawatts or thereabouts and yet a developed Uganda needs a lot of energy - 50,000 megawatts or more. Where shall we get this level of energy? If the cost per unit for solar energy goes down, then solar energy will be the solution. Meanwhile, I prepare the country for the option of the nuclear energy because for that, we have got endless supply.

The composite economic growth of the whole economy has improved even before the bottlenecks have been removed. The size of the Ugandan economy is expected to increase to Shs 63.3 trillion, equivalent to US$ 25.3 billion. The size of the economy has increased by 5.7 per cent in the current financial year. This economic growth rate is comparable to 5.8 per cent growth achieved in the last financial year despite constraints outside Uganda’s control. These constraints included unfavourable weather conditions in many parts of the country in the second half of 2013, which negatively impacted agricultural production. In addition, the on-going instability in South Sudan, which had become one of Uganda’s export destinations, is also a factor impeding faster growth of the economy.

Despite these constraints, output growth during Financial Year 2013/2014 still presents a strong performance. Growth was largely driven by strong performances in mining and quarrying, cash crop production, informal manufacturing, wholesale and retail trade. Price inflation has also remained under control during most of the year and it is expected to be 7.9 per cent at the end of June 2014. This economic performance reveals the resilience of the Ugandan economy that has resulted from the consistently correct policies of the NRM Government over the last 28 years, and that is why some people want to hang themselves. When they hear of these 28 years, oh they really feel very annoyed. (Laughter)

Consequently, the proportion of people living below the poverty line has further declined from about 56 per cent in 1992 to 24.5 per cent in 2009 and now to 19.7 per cent in 2012/2013. Now, here if you do not agree with this, you have no alternative. These are just the figures, and that is why you may have to take radical action and do something for yourself. Uganda has therefore already surpassed the first MDG target of having the proportion of the population living in extreme poverty reduced by 2015. Some parts of the country have got even better performance figures. When the other areas catch up, Uganda will enter the middle-income status.

The share of the population with access to electricity, for instance, has risen from under three per cent in 1986 to 10 per cent in 2009 and to 14 per cent in 2013. In the rural areas, this has risen from zero to seven per cent over the same period. The NRM Government has set a target of 40 per cent for electricity access by 2022. Over the next 10 years, Government plans to increase access to electricity in rural areas to 26 per cent of the total rural households. Similar examples abound in areas such as access to water, primary, secondary and tertiary education. These indicators are, therefore, not mere talk but actual reality on the ground.

The above sectors of the economy cannot grow if we do not address the issue of infrastructure - the roads, electricity, the railway, the ICT backbone etc. I am very happy with the NRM Members of Parliament - [Hon Members: “Kyankwanzi”] - Kyankwanzi is a problem for you! They have rallied around my long-held view that infrastructure development and security are primary. That is why they supported me. I do not know whether you supported me; if you did not, it does not matter because you will not stop anything. (Laughter) 

That is why in the budget of 2013/2014, roads and energy account for Shs 4,186 billion, - that is, Shs 4 trillion - and defence and security account for Shs 1,000 billion. That will remain the orientation of our future plan. We are adding the development of the standard gauge railway from Mombasa to Kampala, Kigali and Juba, working with our Kenyan brothers and sisters, with the brothers and sisters from South Sudan and with the brothers and sisters from Rwanda as well as our Chinese friends.

Low costs of production will attract more manufacturers and service companies. We have already seen results of this type of prioritisation in budgeting. New areas that had no electricity do so now. Moroto has got electricity, Nakapiripirit, Amudat, Otuke, Moyo, Bibia, Bundibugyo. Now, I hear somebody saying, “not West Nile”; are you from West Nile or from Congo? (Laughter) If you are from Congo, you should say so but if you are from West Nile, you should have seen electricity or the preparations for the electricity. I was in Koboko and the wires are on the way to Koboko. – (Interjection) - So, I can see that there are some Congolese here –(Laughter) 

THE SPEAKER: Order, honourable Members. Order, please.

MR MUSEVENI: The same has happened with the roads. There is nothing that pleases me more than seeing new tarmac roads especially those done with the Uganda Government money such as the nearly finished Kampala–Masaka Road, Mbarara-Kikagati Road, Kampala-Mityana, the one of Moroto that they are working on now –(Applause)– the one of Bwaise-Kafu, Kafu-Karuma and Karuma-Gulu. 

I am also very grateful to our partners in development who have assisted us with some of the other roads. I thank them very much. (Applause) The World Bank assisted us with the Gulu-Atiak, the Japanese with Atiak-Bibia, the World Bank with Arua-Oraba, the ADB with the one through my area - I also live near a tarmac road now. The one for Rukungiri-Kiyi will be done and so if you were hoping to use that, then you are finished because it will be done. (Laughter) So, I am very sorry for you. I am really very sorry for these people –(Laughter)– because they go and bank on temporary things. Didn’t the Bible say that the other man who was not wise built his house on the sand? So, I am sorry for you because you are always constructing your positions on the sand and then I come and sweep away your sand and then you are finished. (Laughter) You will hear more about Luweero in the few weeks to come. 
    
The other area of emphasis is skills for the youth. Since some time ago, we have been emphasizing that science knowledge and technical skills are crucial. That is why since August 2006, we had decided that 70 per cent of Government scholarships for universities will go to science students. The Cabinet eventually approved 53 per cent. 

I have been interacting with the youth, especially the university graduates; a new awakening is apparent and three trends are noticeable. Trend one is that science graduates are going into starting manufacturing enterprises in association with others or singly.  Trend two is that those who did general Arts degrees are going into farming and other enterprises. It is really amazing that these young people, even the ones that do not have land, have their friends whose parents have land and so they go and get together and cultivate together. These are university graduates and I am very happy about this because they are waking up from the amnesia, which these people would like to put them in. They are awaking from slumber into actual life and I am very happy with these youth. Trend three is that some of the scientists are being absorbed into the new companies that are opening up. I was most pleased to see the young graduates of electrical engineering running the machines at the new Bujagali power station.

One of the greatest stimuli for our economy to continue growing, the global economic problems notwithstanding, is the regional market. It says in the Book of Galatians, chapter 6, verse 7, that whatever a man sows, that is what he will reap. When a nation has no vision, it perishes, it says in another portion of the Bible. Our emphasis, with our brothers and sisters in the region, on regional integration, has paid the Ugandans most handsomely. Uganda exports to the region goods and services to the tune of US$ 1.36 billion. We also buy from the region goods and services to the tune of US$ 671 million. So, our emphasis on regional integration has really helped us. 

The global economy was bad but our economy remains strong because of the region. That was because together with our colleagues in Tanzania, Kenya, Rwanda, Burundi, South Sudan and Congo, we have been working on uniting our region economically.

Finally, all this would not happen if Uganda was not peaceful. (Applause) I salute the UPDF, the Uganda Police, the intelligence services and the vigilance of the population of Uganda for the peace that is prevailing in every corner of Uganda, Karamoja included.  Everything else depends on this. 

In the coming session of Parliament, the Government will present to you for consideration the following Bills: 
1. 	The Landlord Tenant Bill; 
2. 	The Uganda Land Commission Bill; 
3. 	The Retirement’s Benefits Liberalisation Bill, 2013;
4. 	The National Legal Aid Bill, 2013; 
5. 	The Universities and other Tertiary Institutions Act (2011) Amendment Bill; 
6. 	The Physical Activity and Sports Bill, 2014; 
7. 	The Appropriation Bill, 2014; 
8. 	The Finance Bill, 2014; 
9. 	The Indigenous and Complimentary Medicine Bill; 
10. 	The Mental Health Bill; 
11. 	The National Health Institute Bill; 
12. 	The Uganda Heart Institute Bill; 
13. 	The National Health Laboratories Services Bill; 
14. 	The Toxic Chemical Prohibition and Control Bill; 
15. 	The Overseas Properties and Immunities Bill; the Foreign Service Bill – (Interjection) - That one will not go through Parliament. (Laughter) I can see hon. Lukyamuzi does not even remember how the Constitution works. (Laughter)
16. 	The Local Government (Amendment) Bill, 2014/15; 
17. 	Constitution (Amendment) Bill(s); 
18. 	Bills for amendment of electoral laws; 
19. 	Geneva Conventions (Amendment) Bill; 
20. 	The National Legal Aid Bill, 2013 and the one that the Speaker mentioned although I do not see it here. In her speech, she talked of the Counterfeit Bill. –(Interjections)– That one of marriage almost caused a civil war, you remember? (Laughter)– I do not want a civil war in Uganda. 

With these few words, it is my pleasure to declare the Fourth Session of Parliament open. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Your Excellency the President, on behalf of the Ninth Parliament and all our guests, we want to thank you very much for fulfilling the constitutional requirements to deliver the State of the Nation Address. We have noted the programmes, we have noted the achievements of the preceding year and the plans the government intends to undertake during this Fourth Session as well as the legislative programmes that you have just announced. As is the tradition, I want to confirm that once the text of the State of the Nation Address is availed to my office, it will be placed on the Order Paper for the Members to debate. 

Your Excellency, you have already indicated that it is your intention to present to the country the budget on 12th June. We shall duly comply and be here on 12th June to receive the budget. It will also be debated by Parliament in accordance with the Constitution. 

Your Excellency, as you have seen, this is one of the few occasions that we have the opportunity to interact with you. You have seen the level of excitement among the Members. As is our practice, we would like to invite you to the next stage of the function, which will take place in the gardens. So, we would like to invite Your Excellency and all our guests to proceed to the Serena Gardens for something very interesting. 

We shall leave the Chamber in the reverse order of arrival. His Excellency the President will leave first but because we need to have a record of this function, I am inviting you on the steps of the Serena Conference Centre at Parliament to take the traditional photograph. So, Members are invited to assemble for that purpose. 

Your Excellency, I want to thank you very much for completing this function and our guests for coming. 

Honourable members, you are invited to attend a prayer breakfast meeting organised by the Interreligious Council tomorrow at the Imperial Royale Hotel at 6.30 a.m. to 9.30 a.m. only. I also remind the members of the following committees: the Budget Committee, Committee on National Economy, Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development, Committee on Trade and Industry, Committee on Natural Resources, Committee on Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries that there is a workshop on bank loan utilisation and etiquette. I now adjourn the House to Thursday, 12th June at 14:00 hours at the same venue. Thank you very much. 

(The House rose at 4.48 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 12 June 2014 at 2.00 p.m.) 

