Disclaimer: The electronic version of the Official Report of the proceedings of Parliament (Hansard) is for information purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Office of the Clerk to Parliament.




Tuesday, 18 June 2019

Parliament met at 3.09 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this afternoon’s sitting. I apologise for the late start. We had a Business Committee meeting, which ended at 2.30 p.m., so we could not be here in time. However, we hope we will be able to catch up on what we had planned.

Honourable members, I hope that you had a good rest and that you were able to talk to the people. Thank you for attending the State of the Nation Address and the budget events. Again, I would like to place on record my commendation to the committees and Parliament for the good performance in the Third Session. I would like to reiterate my position by thanking all the chairpersons and Members for effective participation and good performance. Let us show the same commitment in this Fourth Session so that we register even better performance.

Honourable members, you may have learnt of the death of Mr Zonobio Tibeingana, the father of hon. Francis Mwijukye, MP for Buhweju and a member of the Parliamentary Commission. The deceased will be laid to rest at their ancestral home in Bwoga tomorrow, Wednesday 19 June 2019.
	
In the usual spirit, I ask you to give our colleague support during this difficult time. On behalf of Parliament and on my own behalf, I convey to him our heartfelt condolences. I would like to invite the Members to rise for a moment of silence. 

(Members rose and observed a moment of silence.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, as I indicated, the Business Committee convened this morning and we discussed the parliamentary calendar and the business to be handled. 

We noted and agreed that the First Meeting of the Fourth Session started on 6 June and we agreed that it will end on 3 October 2019. Thereafter, we shall break off for a recess. However, there are ongoing discussions about the nature of the recess. We shall come back to you with the other programmes, so for now we are only handling the First Meeting, from June to October.

We also noted that this is a year when honourable members need to visible in their constituencies. We, therefore, agreed that as much as possible, we should try to complete our work before October so that Members can do the other work and also be available for their constituencies. In particular, we note the failure by the Government to bring the electoral reforms and yet we have to synchronise the national road map for elections and the party road maps for elections, so that Members are able to do work here but also attend to their other proposed commitments.

We shall give you the details of the Second Meeting as well as the Third Meeting of the Fourth Session. Because of the importance of the work to be done, we have discussed and agreed that the chairpersons should convene meetings immediately and prioritise business with a view of submitting reports for early consideration. We therefore invite the Members to attend. We also discussed and agreed that within the committees, we may appoint subcommittees to deal with particular subjects so that the business is handled quickly and simultaneously. 

We also want to ask the ministers and the officials of agencies to cooperate. Sometimes, the committees sit and the agencies are not there. We would like you to cooperate so that the necessary information is given to the committees.

The Leader of Government Business should ensure rule 113 of the Rules of Procedure, which provides as follows: “For any Ministry, the Minister or at least the Minister of State shall attend sittings of the House; and where none of them is able to attend, a Minister shall request another Minister to represent that Ministry’s interests in the House and notify the Speaker accordingly.”

The Leader of Government Business should table all the business which he thinks is a priority by mid-August so as to give time to the committees to consider them. We have in mind the electoral reform Bills; I do not know how many times we should emphasise this but we need answers. 

The Minister of Health has informed me that Government designated every 2nd Sunday of July as a national day of physical activity. This is intended to increase awareness on the importance of physical activities as a preventive measure for non-communicable diseases and long-term prevention of premature mortality from lifestyle diseases. Therefore, on the 14th of July, we shall assemble at Kololo Independence Grounds to carry out that exercise. I invite Members and staff to attend so that our voters can know that it is important to do exercise.

Finally, on behalf of the citizens, I am seeking assurance from the Government that Murchison Falls is not going to be interfered with. (Applause) The country and hoteliers are on tension and our tourism industry is under threat. We would like an early assurance on this issue. Thank you very much. We have a few matters of national importance.

3.17
MS JESCA ABABIKU (NRM, Woman Representative, Adjumani): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity. I rise on a matter of national importance concerning the increased flooding that has affected Elegu and Maaji parishes. 

Merchandise has been lost, commodities have been destroyed in houses and people are displaced. I request that Government intervenes to support these communities by providing aid but more importantly, seeds because many of the crops planted have been washed away.

In addition, the road from Atiak to Afoji has been affected. On Friday, travellers spent a night along the road. I request that the Ministry of Works and Transport does routine maintenance of the road. However, we should also be informed why the contract that was supposed to be awarded for the tarmacking has been cancelled. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: We require the Prime Minister’s Office to handle the issue of relief to the citizens there but the Ministry of Works and Transport should come and explain to us the plan for Atiak-Afoji Road. That should be next week on Wednesday.

3.19
MR PATRICK NSAMBA (NRM, Kassanda County North, Kassanda): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to raise a matter of national concern about the Government employees in Kassanda District who have been missing salaries since Kassanda became a district. 

I was approached by about 40 teachers who visited me at my home and told me the ordeal they are going through, missing salaries for a year. They said some of them have missed salaries for six months while others have been on and off the payroll. They also explained to me the distress they go through as teachers who also have to take care of their families. I took the –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Are these primary or secondary school teachers?

MR PATRICK NSAMBA: Madam Speaker, those that came to me are primary school teachers. 

I spoke to the Chief Administrative Officer (CAO) who promised he was going to sort that out. Indeed, for those who came, it seems the problem was solved. However, the problem arose when these ones shared the information with the rest of the teachers in the district. So, I have been receiving distress calls. To them now, it is me who has the solution to the problem yet these people are supposed to be catered for like any other civil servant.

My prayer therefore is that since Kassanda District is a new district - I do not know what is going on in other new districts – these people – 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, let us just address the problem.

MR PATRICK NSAMBA: Madam Speaker, they told me the problem extends even to health workers and other district employees. I notice that Government took a step to decentralise payment of these salaries. I think that is where the problem arose–

THE SPEAKER: Do not provide answers. Let us find out from the Ministry of Public Service where the money for these people is. It is Government policy that by the 28th of every month, all public servants, including teachers, ought to have been paid.

MR PATRICK NSAMBA: Madam Speaker, to make matters worse, the CAO informed those teachers that all those with arrears should forget about them. She said that she is going to work on only those who recently missed salaries. It is really very unfortunate. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Our instruction to the Minister of Public Service is to come here and explain to Parliament, first, why some teachers have not been paid for more than a year and secondly, why others are being paid partially. That is the answer we want. 
The minister should come here on Wednesday next week to respond to that.

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, this may also help - I raised the same matter regarding Serere District and I told Parliament that 256 teachers had missed their salaries, some for a period of as long as three years, and that was in October last year. In December, after we raised that matter here, hon. Bahati, the Minister of State for Finance, Planning and Economic Development, released money from December. However, the arrears to a tune of now Shs 946 million for Serere District have not been released. 

This issue of arrears is a problem. There are a number of letters that have been written to the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development but it is the same story like hon. Nsamba is saying; they tell them to forget about the arrears. Therefore, I think the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development must come to explain something to Parliament. Further, I suggest that our Committee on Public Service and Local Government should summon the Minister of Public Service and that of finance to deal with this matter once and for all. 

I was even surprised that despite raising this matter here, the CAO of Serere decided to write to the Permanent Secretary of the Ministry of Local Government saying that hon. Adoa, hon. Okabe and I lied yet on 15 November we had met as the three leaders from Serere. I could not believe it. If these are the type of leaders and CAOs we have, how can such a problem be solved if they can write to the PS that we came here to lie to the world?

THE SPEAKER: Does the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development wish to say something about this money or the absence of it?

3.24
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. On the part of the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, we release money on time because we release money by the 10th of the first month of the quarter; for example, the money for this last quarter was released in April. 

Therefore, the problem is at the local level, which, together as Government, we will follow up with the ministries in charge of public service and local government. Otherwise, as far as we are concerned, as we speak now all the money that the districts are entitled to receive has been released to them.

THE SPEAKER: Let us wait for the Minister of Public Service who will answer; he will then supplement on Wednesday next week.

3.25
MR ISAAC MULINDWA (NRM, Lugazi Municipality, Buikwe): Thank you, Madam Speaker. A few months ago, you instituted a select committee to investigate the payment of Ugandans who were working in South Sudan and those who were trading with the Government of South Sudan. Yesterday, some other category of business people came to your office to personally hand over to you their petition. 

The select committee only looked into matters regarding the big companies or traders yet there are smaller Ugandan business people who used to be in the markets in South Sudan, in Konyo-Konyo, Gudele, Bol and other places in the ten states of South Sudan. These Ugandans were not considered yet they were also affected by the civil war in South Sudan between 2010 and 2017.

Much as these big companies are being considered for compensation - about $56 million has been considered for about ten of them - they are asking for your special consideration so that their SACCO is given an interest-free loan of Shs 900 million. They have formed a SACCO and they are over 300 in number. Their businesses collapsed and since there is now some relative peace in both Uganda and South Sudan, they would like to restore their businesses. We even submitted a copy to your office and to hon. Bahati’s office yesterday. Their prayer is that they be considered for a special interest-free loan to restore their businesses.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, before we closed the Third Session, I also received a similar request and passed it on to the President and the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. However, if there are additional names, let them please submit so that –

MR MULINDWA: Madam Speaker, I have a copy here. With your permission, let me lay it on the Table.

Madam Speaker, I will refer to Articles 8A, 21, 40 and 41 of the Constitution. Article 8A stipulates thus: “Uganda shall be governed based on principles of national interest and common good enshrined in the national objectives and directive principles of state policy…” –

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Ssozi Mulindwa, please lay the document on the Table.

MR MULINDWA: Madam Speaker, with your permission, I lay the document with the said names on the Table.

THE SPEAKER: Date and author?

MR MULINDWA: It is dated 17 June 2019, authored by me, as their chairperson. (Laughter)  Madam Speaker, let me clarify. I used to work with United Nations World Food Programme (UN-WFP) in South Sudan and I used to interact with them. So –

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, I think before you presented that issue, you ought to have declared your interests.

MR MULINDWA: Madam Speaker, I have no special interests in this matter apart from being part of the said affected business people because while I worked with the UN-WFP in South Sudan and I used to interact with them. So, being a Member of Parliament –

THE SPEAKER: Are you also one of those demanding?

MR MULINDWA: I am not part of the beneficiaries; I am only leading them. I beg to lay the document on the Table, Madam Speaker.  

3.29
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, as we said when we debated this matter, we are going to start with those private companies that dealt with Government. The joint verification committee was formed and we are sending our members to be part of that committee so that they start working on the verification. All those that supplied Government will go through the committee. 

We have a difficulty in giving false hopes that the companies that supplied private companies in South Sudan will be considered by Government; it will be a very tall order. So, we are beginning with private to Government; private to private is very difficult for Government to consider. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I still think the minister should look at the list and establish who those people are and give us a position. 

Honourable members, join me in welcoming pupils and teachers of Dream Africa School. They are up in the public gallery. I request them to stand up. They are represented by hon. Ibrahim Ssemujju and hon. Rosemary Seninde. They are from Wakiso. You are welcome. 

Honourable members – 

MS BETTY NAMBOOZE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I seek your guidance on a matter I brought to Parliament in 2016. I moved a motion here seeking leave of Parliament to allow me to move a private Member’s Bill to regulate consumption, advertisement and sale of alcohol in Uganda. The motion was properly seconded but as leave was about to be granted, the Ministry of Health requested Parliament to give them three months to harmonise the provisions of that Bill with me. Just like me, they were also thinking of moving a similar Bill and categorising alcohol regulation under public health laws. 

I have been waiting since then. Uganda today is the second highest consumer of alcohol in the world, with each person, on average, consuming one jerrycan of alcohol annually.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, there is no motion to which you are speaking. 

MS NAMBOOZE: Madam Speaker, I beg that you request the Ministry of Health to bring the Bill or if they cannot, Parliament should grant me leave. As you guided us earlier, we are about to end the term of this Parliament and I think this is one of the laws Uganda needs in relation to protecting our young people. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, I will ask the Clerk where the motion is and you are free to revive it.

Honourable members, earlier I informed you about the death of the father of one of our colleagues. I have also received information that hon. Muhanga, Member of Parliament for Burahya County, has lost her mother, Constance Muhanganzima. She will be buried on Friday in Kabarole. Let us stand up for a minute of silence. 

(Members rose and observed a moment of silence.)

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE EBOLA OUTBREAK IN UGANDA

3.35
THE MINISTER OF HEALTH (Dr Jane Aceng): Madam Speaker, first, allow me to apologise because I was informed that the statement has not been uploaded on the iPads. It is in the process of being uploaded and I believe you will get it soon. I was informed today at 10 O’clock that I have to make a statement. It took a bit of time to draft it because I am also hosting the first African Hepatitis Summit at Munyonyo. That is where the information got me. However, I have a written a statement that will soon be uploaded – (Interruption)

MS KIBALYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. This is a serious issue and as the minister presents her statement, we need to follow it word by word in the interest of this country. The minister, however, assured us that the statement is being uploaded. Could we, therefore, have a small adjustment and you allow the statement to be uploaded as we address another item? When the statement is uploaded, she can then present it. 

THE SPEAKER: Let us defer this matter for 20 minutes. Let us go to item No. 3.2.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON FLOODS IN KAMPALA AND ITS SUBURBS

THE SPEAKER: Minister for Kampala, has the statement been uploaded?

3.37
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR KAMPALA CAPITAL CITY AUTHORITY (Ms Benny Namugwanya): Madam Speaker, it has been uploaded. I have just looked at it on my iPad. 

Thank you very much for this opportunity. I would like to make a statement on flooding in Kampala. You may note that the ongoing rainy season has caused flooding in various parts of Kampala and the metropolitan area. The floods have led to widespread destruction of property and livelihoods, disruption of business and economic activities, and loss of lives. On Sunday, 26 May 2019, for instance, a number of areas flooded, roads were cut off and a lot of property was destroyed in Kampala and the surrounding areas. Eight people are believed to have lost their lives in the areas of Kikajjo, Lubowa and Lufuka all located in Masajja and Bunamwaya divisions. 

According to relief agencies, over 500 households were affected by the floods of 26 May 2019. The most affected villages include Lubowa, Lufuka, Kazinga, Wakulekana, Buzali, Masajja-Kibira-B, Lwasa Bridgeway Triangle, Kabuma, Katongo, Kikajjo, Katwe and Makindye-Ssabagabo. All these are in Wakiso but in the Greater Kampala Metropolitan Area (GKMA). 

In Kampala area, the floods have had a devastating effect on the lives of people, livestock, businesses, households and disrupted transport in areas like Bwaise, Nateete, Nalukolongo, Bugolobi, Nakawa industrial area and Kyambogo. Many people have been left homeless and others have had to move to neighbouring villages for shelter with relatives and friends. Schools, too, have been affected and this has had an impact on the education of children in the affected areas.

Madam Speaker, there is a risk of disease outbreaks due to poor hygiene and sanitation as heavy rains continue amidst compromised hygiene and sanitation situations in communities. Many latrines were washed away and faecal matter flows with flooding water into people's homes. Children are at most risk of contracting diseases like pneumonia, cholera and other viral and bacterial infections. 

Madam Speaker, according to the Uganda National Meteorological Authority, overall there is an increased likelihood of above normal rainfall over most parts of Uganda in the April-June 2019 season. From May 2019 to date, the Greater Kampala Metropolitan Area has experienced torrential rainfall. Overall, above normal rainfall is expected to prevail over this region. These rains, according to Uganda National Meteorological Authority, are expected to continue up to July 2019.

Kampala Drainage System 

The drainage network system of Kampala comprises of eight main watersheds, that is, Nakivubo, Lubigi, Nalukolongo, Kansanga, Mayanja/Kaliddubi, Kinawataka, Nalubaga, Walufumbe. This is as per the attachment showing those details.

In each basin, runoff water is drained by primary channels (main channels along the low-lying areas), by secondary channels, tertiary channels and small drains. All these drainage systems follow the natural flow of the terrain in Kampala and the metropolitan area up to the lowest point of the catchment. The hilly terrain of Kampala implies that water quickly flows from the catchment areas into primary and secondary channels located at the lowest points, that is, in the valleys.

Madam Speaker, the purpose of this statement is to:

1. 	Give Parliament a status report on the most flood-prone areas in Kampala; 
2. 	Inform Parliament about the causes of floods in Kampala and the metropolitan area; 
3. 	Appraise Parliament on the interventions by KCCA to address the flooding issues in the Kampala area; 
4. 	Inform Parliament that a comprehensive plan shall require land acquisition and resettlement of people; and 
5. 	Inform Parliament of the urgent need for a Greater Kampala metropolitan drainage master plan.

Madam Speaker, the problem I have at hand is that the torrential rains have caused flooding in this area. The floods have caused havoc, as I have indicated above. The problem is exacerbated by the fact that drainage catchment areas and associated impacts transcend beyond the KCCA areas of jurisdiction. The flooding issues hence require a holistic approach from the central Government and local governments.

Madam Speaker, I beg that you let me go to page 4 where I can take the House through the key flood spots in Kampala.

Bwaise Area 

Kiyanja Channel - Lumas Road

This is an earth channel and it is a secondary channel to the Lubigi Channel. It is located in Kawempe Division and it flows from Gayaza Road through Kanyanya and discharges in Lubigi Channel. It has an average width of 1.5 to 2.5 metres. The major flooding point along this channel is at Lumas Road, Kanyanya Quarter Zone and Kyebando.

Flooding in this area is caused by the small channel size and it also has small 600mm road culverts that were installed around 2005-2006. By the time of installation, these culverts were sufficient because there were fewer houses in the area and the volume of rainwater runoff was not much. Increased development has led to an increase in rainwater runoff and the existing culverts cannot accommodate this flow, hence creating flooding. 

As an immediate intervention, KCCA will continue to desilt the channel and crossings to remove garbage. Long-term interventions: KCCA completed new designs of this channel and the new box culverts will be fixed. Implementation is only awaiting funds to be availed under the Kampala Institutional and Infrastructure Development Project (KIIDP2) extra financing. Funds for purchasing the land and resettling people need to be availed too.

The second cause of flooding in this area is the encroachment on the channel reserves by the nearby communities. This has made it difficult for the KCCA maintenance crew to access, desilt and clean the channel.

As an immediate intervention, KCCA is ready to remove all illegal structures built within the channel reserves. However, we need political support from all leaders to effect these enforcement actions. Madam Speaker, if you can allow me to make some clarification here; enforcement in Kampala is a very big problem. When we try to enforce order in the city, we meet a lot of resistance from the general public and some colleagues – the political leaders. So, enforcement becomes a nightmare. Therefore, we are calling upon colleagues and all political leaders in this country to join hands and sensitise the communities to enable us enforce removal of illegal developments. 

Madam Speaker, the third cause is indiscriminate dumping of garbage in the channel, which prevents the easy flow of water hence causing flooding. Here, we are suffering with a lot of kaveera or polythene material, which is dumped in the channels. The people of Kampala dump everything in these channels especially at night. In the end, all the channels get blocked.

As an immediate intervention, KCCA shall intensify collection of garbage from these informal settlements, in line with the recent Government guidance on solid waste management. Recently, Government came up with a policy that Kampala Capital City Authority will be collecting garbage from the low income areas or informal settlements; it is only in the planned settlements where the concessionaires will be collecting garbage at a fee. Therefore, beginning next financial year, it is going to be the responsibility of Kampala Capital City Authority to collect garbage from informal settlements at no fee at all.

Nakamiro Channel
 
This is a secondary drain of Lubigi that flows from Kawempe Kutaano, Kazo-Angola to Bwaise. Its flooding point is at Nabweru Road next to Kawempe Division office. The cause of flooding here is the inadequate capacity of the channel, especially at the point where the channel terminates into Lubigi channel.

The immediate intervention we have as city managers is: KCCA redesigned this channel and construction is scheduled to commence in July 2019. This will address this problem. Funding for construction of this channel is available under the KIIDP 2. Government has also provided the funds for land acquisition and resettlement. I, therefore, thank Parliament for this kind of support because we have the money to work on this channel.

Kawaala-Bwaise Channel 

This channel is located in Lubaga Division and it is also a secondary channel to Lubigi Channel. It flows from Makerere Hill Road where it is 2.5 metres wide. However, in some downstream sections, the width has been reduced to less than one metre. The major flooding point along this channel is at Kawaala.

The causes of flooding are similar to those for the other channels I have talked about. It is about the size of the channel and culverts, and then the indiscriminate dumping of garbage.

The immediate intervention by KCCA: KCCA is ready to remove all illegal structures – As I said, as long as we get the necessary political support. The long-term intervention is that KCCA completed new designs of this channel where new box culverts will be fitted. Implementation is only awaiting funds for construction and land acquisition. We shall also desilt the small channel continuously to make sure that it is not clogged.

Before we get to Kyambogo-Banda area, we need to note that all the first three channels terminate in Lubigi Channel. Therefore, this indicates the importance of the channel to Kampala City and the metropolitan area drainage system. We, therefore, call upon all colleagues and representatives of this area to make sure that we try as much as possible to protect Lubigi Channel because it is very important when it comes to the drainage system of Kampala. 

Kyambogo-Banda Area

Channels in this area are part of the Kinawataka drainage system in Nakawa Division. The channel flows from Ntinda through Ntinda Industrial Area, Kyambogo, to Kasokoso and into Lake Victoria. It is an open channel with an average width of about 2.5 metres. The main flooding points along this channel are at Ntinda Industrial Area (Nakawa), Kyambogo, Banda Moil Petrol Station and at Banda Petrol (Kawooya Channel).

The cause of flooding here is that Meera Investments backfilled about 75 per cent of Kinawataka swamp, which is a discharge area of the channel, thereby reducing the speed of water upstream, hence the flooding at Jinja Road stretches. We need to note that Meera Investments has a title in this wetland area and was given an approval by the National Environment Management Authority (NEMA) around 2010. By the time KCCA was born, this error had already been made. 

Another main cause of flooding is the industries in Kyambogo that constructed screens, perimeter walls and a permanent structure in the channel between 2004 and 2008. Prior to this, this area was a flood plain. These constructions reduced the width of the channel and hence reduced the channel water carrying capacity. 

The third cause is culvert crossings along Jinja Road, which are small, dilapidated and under capacity.

The immediate intervention for this is that in order to increase the capacity of flow of the culvert crossings on Jinja Road, KCCA intends to construct four new box culvert crossings on Jinja Road at Kyambogo and Banda areas. Kampala City Council Authority completed designs for these crossings and we plan to construct them under KIIDP2 extra financing. Works are scheduled to commence around February 2020.

The long term interventions we have for this include the following: Government should fast-track the process of cancelling all land titles in wetlands. Therefore, KCCA shall compel Meera Investments and other developers to restore the wetland.

Nalukolongo Area

Nalukolongo Channel is located in Lubaga Division. The channel flows from Ndeeba, Kibuye to Masaka Road. It has an average width of about 2.5 metres and it is an earth channel. The major flooding points along this channel are at Wankulukuku/Sembule, Nalukolongo Road and Samona, Natete.

Encroachment is a major cause of flooding along the Nalukolongo Channel. Many factories illegally backfilled sections along the channel and constructed permanent structures in the “reclaimed” area. This reduced the width of the channel and hence created a backflow upstream, which causes flooding. In addition, there are many temporary structures such as makeshift bridges, kiosks, among others, that blocked access for the KCCA maintenance team; KCCA cannot therefore clean the channel effectively. 

Another cause of flooding is that initial efforts by KCCA to remove the illegal encroachments on the channel, widen and reconstruct it were frustrated by politicians - (Interjections) – I am sorry I do not want to mention names with your permission, Madam Speaker. During that time, the area Member of Parliament, the hon. Ken Lukyamuzi, mobilised people and resisted KCCA efforts to clean this channel. Money had been already earmarked for the channel but it was reallocated to clean another channel. 

This channel is also relatively shallow; some of its sections are less than a metre deep. The channel lacks the capacity to carry water during heavy rains, hence water overtops the channel’s banks, causing flooding in the nearby areas.

The residents in the informal settlements along its banks dump garbage in this channel. This is a common problem in Kampala. Besides, inadequate sizes of the culvert crossings along Nalukolongo and Sembule roads also cause flooding in this area.

Mandela Miller Limited backfilled Busega swamp after clearance by NEMA. This swamp is the final discharge point for Nalukolongo Channel and further backfilling shall exacerbate the flooding problem in Nalukolongo and Nateete areas.

As an immediate intervention, the process of compensating people in preparation for construction is ongoing. The Resettlement Action Plan report was submitted to the Chief Government Valuer for approval in May 2019. The funds for compensation are also available. We intend to complete the compensation by December 2019. After compensation, KCCA will have enough space for maintenance of this channel.

The long-term intervention: KCCA completed new designs for Nalukolongo Channel with new box culverts at Sembule and other critical locations. New designs have addressed the issue of the shallow channel depths. At reconstruction, the sections along the channel shall be widened to increase the water carrying capacity and prevent overspills.

Nateete Channel 

Nateete Channel is located in Rubaga Division and is a secondary drain to Nalukolongo Channel. It is an earth channel with an average width of one metre. It is a roadside drain. The key flooding point along this channel is at Samona where the road gets flooded.

One of the causes of flooding is that there are developments or buildings and temporary structures along the channel edges. This has left no space for access to carry out maintenance hence accumulation of solid waste and silt.
 
Nateete Police Station was also constructed in the flood plain. There is, therefore, no space for temporary storage and flow of the storm water. The existing temporary bridge crossing does not have capacity to convey the water. Furthermore, the channel is narrow in some sections and hence does not have capacity to carry the entire volume of water.

The immediate interventions by KCCA include the following: KCCA is ready to remove all illegal structures built within the channel reserves. However, political support from local leaders is needed to effect these enforcement actions. In case the illegal developments are removed, KCCA shall easily maintain this channel as we await for funds to be availed for construction.

In the long-term, KCCA has designed channels and bridge crossings in this area. The work shall involve widening of the channel and new box culverts. However, funds for the Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) and construction need to be availed.

Madam Speaker, we have the plans and the designs but we do not have the money for that particular channel as yet.

Kamwokya Drain

Kamwokya Drain flows through Nakawa, Central Division, to Kawempe Division. It is an earth channel with an average width of 2.0 metres. The major flooding point along this channel is at Kamwokya close to the Northern Bypass.

The causes for the flooding are: The original channel in Kisenyi, Kawempe Zone was blocked between 2005 and 2009 by illegal encroachers who built structures along the channel, hence water that was draining into the channel was redirected to the Kamwokya Drain, thereby overwhelming it and causing floods. 

Another major cause is solid waste management, which I have explained.

The immediate intervention on garbage collection is that KCCA shall intensify collection as per the new Government guidance that we do it in those informal settlements. The long term intervention is: KCCA completed designs for the Kamwokya secondary channel to Nsooba primary drain. This will relieve the heavy flow into the Kamwokya Channel. Construction is planned to commence in 2020 under the KDIIP2 extra financing. However, funding for land acquisition shall be needed from the Government of Uganda.

Clock Tower, Nsambya and Mukwano Areas

These are located in Central Division and are closed tertiary drains that flow from the Katwe (Kinyoro) community drain, Nsambya Barracks and Kibuli area. The main flooding point along this channel is along Nsambya Road near the Post Office and at Mukwano Road.

One of the causes of flooding is that the drain was blocked by the developments in the area such as Mukwano Industries. The crossings are also small and under capacity.

The immediate intervention is that KCCA teams will continue to desilt these areas. We stationed emergency teams in the areas that are responsible for removing garbage during the rains.

The long-term intervention is that new designs for the drainage system in this area have been included in the Kampala Flyover Project. After construction, which is scheduled to start in July 2019, this flooding problem will not exist anymore.

Shell Bugolobi (Luthuli-Bandali Rise) 

This is located in the Nakawa Division. The major flooding point along this channel is at Bandali Rise where the road floods.

The major causes of flooding here are the two developments (Village Mall and Shell Bugolobi) that were constructed on the original drainage. The small diversion drains that were constructed by the two developers are insufficient for the storm-water flow in this area. As city managers, we do not have an immediate intervention here. However, the long-term intervention is that KCCA has redesigned a drainage network in this area. New proposals include a new box culvert network on Port Bell Road at Shell Bugolobi. The construction shall be financed through a new project to be funded by the African Development Bank. Kampala City Council Authority is in advanced stages of securing this loan.

Other Flood Spots in the Greater Kampala Metropolitan Area

Some areas that continuously flood in the GKMA include Namasuba and Zana areas on Entebbe Road, Kikajjo, Lubowa and Lufuka all located in Masajja and Bunamwaya divisions in Makindye-Ssabagabo. Interestingly, these areas are drained by the Mayanja-Kaliddubi catchment that forms the boundary with KCCA in Makindye Division.

Other areas are Kireka, Bweyogerere and Namanve areas in Kira Municipality. We have observed that flooding in these areas is caused by similar elements of inadequate drainage infrastructure, illegal developments, reclamation of wetlands and flood plains and poor solid waste management practices.

Madam Speaker, this is a summary of major causes of flooding in Kampala:

    1. Illegal developments and encroachments on drainage reserves;
    2. Filling of wetlands and low-lying areas/flood plains with soil;
    3. Poor solid waste management practices by communities; and
    4. Inadequate drainage infrastructure.

Madam Speaker, we have ongoing efforts to address the issues, especially in Kampala City:

Kampala Drainage Master Plan

A new Kampala Drainage Master Plan (KDMP) was completed in December 2017. This master plan entails details of all flow constrictions in the Kampala drainage system. The master plan recommends structural measures such as construction of new drains and crossings and non-structural measures such as improving solid waste management and promoting use of green/ pervious compounds for new developments.

The KDMP recommended to expand, re-direct or extend the drainage system along the primary or secondary channels. This shall require obtaining land and relocating households in areas designated for expansion. In the community consultations, 94 per cent of the respondent landlords were willing to provide land for the project, provided they are compensated. So far, the implementation of the KDMP is at less than five per cent. However, with the implementation of the projects enumerated in sections 6.4 and 6.5, the implementation shall be at about 20 per cent.

Table 1 shows the future investments recommended in the Kampala Drainage Master Plan. Madam Speaker, I request that I skip this; Members can study the details at their own time.

On page 18, we indicate that one of the efforts we are doing is routine maintenance of the channels. Allow me not to read the details. In 6.3, we indicate the drainage improvement projects, which were carried out between 2017 and 2019 by KCCA. We indicate, in 6.4., the upcoming projects starting in July/August 2019. Members can read about them. In 6.5, we indicate the upcoming projects starting in 2020. These are part of the master drainage plan.

Madam Speaker, in conclusion, I request Parliament to –

    i. Note the most flood prone areas in Kampala and the Metropolitan Area;

    ii. Note that inadequate drainage infrastructure, encroachment on the channels, building in wetlands and waterways, and poor behavioural practices for garbage management are the main causes of floods in Kampala and the metropolitan area;

    iii. Note the KCCA interventions being undertaken to address the drainage challenges and floods in Kampala;

    iv. Note that the above interventions, or constructing drainage systems, shall require land acquisition in the drainage corridors and resettlement of affected persons;

    v. Note that drainage challenges transcend the KCCA area of jurisdiction and that investments in KCCA area only will not address flooding problems in the metropolitan area.

Madam Speaker, if you can allow me to make a comment here; when you look at how this water flows, it either starts from Wakiso and ends in Mukono through Kampala, or it starts from Wakiso and ends in Kampala, or starts from Kampala and ends in Mpigi.  Therefore, this means that as managers of Kampala Capital City, we cannot handle this problem in an isolated manner. It needs a metropolitan approach to make a comprehensive plan.

vi. 	We request Parliament to note the need for a Greater Kampala Metropolitan Drainage Master Plan, which requires the support and involvement of the Ministry of Local Government.

vii. 	Allow me to add the seventh; it was skipped here. Parliament notes the need by all leaders at all levels to sensitise the communities on solid waste and garbage disposal. I beg to report, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable minister, for that statement. Just before I bring in the Members, by coincidence, yesterday I received a petition from one of the urban councils in Rubaga complaining about the lack of consultation between the divisions and KCCA. They were also complaining about the abdication by KCCA of their responsibility to collect garbage, among other things. I also received a petition from the hawkers and the vendors - I am going to invite you but Kampala issues need to be discussed thoroughly and resolved.

3.48
MR ABDULATIF SEBAGGALA (Independent, Kawempe Division North, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The issue of drainage in Kampala needs a holistic approach. Whenever it rains, all the major roads leading to Kampala are blocked. While on Jinja Road, one cannot move from around Kyambogo; Bwaise and Clock Tower are worse, including Nalukolongo. 

Some years back, when we borrowed money from the World Bank to work on the Nakivubo drainage, we thought that almost 60 per cent of the water drainage challenges would be addressed but that was not the case. If it rained in town here for three days, nobody can access the city. 

The minister has talked about the master drainage plan and I think all of us should – because Kampala belongs to all of us since it is the capital city. If there is a master plan that requires a lot of funds to ensure the drainage in Kampala is worked on once and for all – when one goes to places like Kawempe and Nalukolongo, they will find that the drainage channels in those areas cannot afford to drain the waters because of the compensation element; they cannot widen the drainage without compensation for the people near there. Therefore, if we can look at the issue of compensating those people to move away and pave way for expansion of the drainage system, it would be better.

Finally, Madam Speaker, is the issue of garbage or solid waste management. In most divisions, our people cannot afford to pay for garbage collection. Now, the system is, “pay as you throw.” That means that when one does not pay for garbage, it is not collected. So, what people do at night is to collect that garbage and throw it in the drainage. Until Kampala Capital City Authority (KCCA) addresses the issue of garbage collection, however much we try to improve our drainage system, that system will be blocked. 

Therefore, I would like to pledge that as leaders in Kampala, we are all united to ensure that any effort geared towards ensuring having a city free of floods, we are more than ready to support it. Thank you very much. (Applause) 

4.12
MR ANDREW KALUYA (Independent, Kigulu County South, Iganga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to take this opportunity to thank the minister for that wonderful report about the drainage in Kampala. 

However, I would like to re-echo hon. Sebaggala’s words that the issue of drainage requires a holistic approach; a comprehensive approach in terms of design. We need to go back to the drawing board and look at the plan of Kampala city; let us not only look at the drainage aspect. 

It is terrible to take three hours driving from Kireka to Parliament. That means we also need to holistically look at the transport system of Kampala. We need to look at the buildings that are being constructed in Kampala because everyone constructs the way they want and where they want to. The issues of where the road will pass are for another day. 

Kampala is growing at a very fast rate but we are doing it the wrong way. We need to come up with a plan that will establish a very clear system where a bicycle rider, for example, can ride peacefully; where someone who wants to jog in the morning can do it peacefully; and where a vehicle can be driven on Kampala roads with ease; we need to address the issue of traffic jam. 

Hon. Sebaggala has just told us that – and of course we have all witnessed it – when it rains, all the roads are impassable. I must say that this is a good thing that these floods are happening because it is a wakeup call. We need to look at Kampala beyond 30 to 50 years from now. What will Kampala look like if everybody is constructing the way they want? For example, some people are constructing on top of drainage channels. 

We have just been told that Meera Investments caused the silting of the drainage in Kinawataka and no one has come up to even revoke that title. Let all the titles that were given to the so called investors at a time when Kampala thought it was ending probably in 10 years, be revoked. We are here for another 100 years and we have to plan Kampala for the people who will be here after us. Therefore, let us take action and start with those who have already constructed in wrong areas by looking at these issues collectively. 

Lastly, Madam Speaker, we need to look at the laws governing Kampala City. We have people throwing garbage in a manner that one cannot understand - someone in a taxi keeps throwing banana peelings after eating - we need to arrest such people and bring them to book. 

We also need to sensitise the community and ensure that everyone is responsible. This is not just the work of the leaders at KCCA but the community itself; all the people in Kampala are responsible. They are the ones throwing the garbage in the drainage and when the water does not flow, we all suffer. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, you know this is a question of discipline. One day I was coming through Kigali and our people at the Mission told me that in the buses that come from Kigali to Kampala, no one drops anything on the Rwanda side. However, as soon as they cross to Uganda, then they throw garbage. 

4.16
MS NABILAH NAGGAYI (FDC, Woman Representative, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for presenting this report. I would also like to say that Kampala has existed since the colonial times and there were original plans for drainage. Therefore, KCCA cannot disregard the original drainage systems that have largely been encroached upon during the last 20 years. So, I think we need to own the responsibility of the destruction of the drainage systems and the plans. 

We also need to talk about the up-bottom approach by KCCA. Madam Speaker, I think you noted that. There are parishes or wards in Kampala that have councillors. There are parish or ward officers and parish development committees everywhere. Where is this? How come KCCA is acting like a “Lord” over all these areas, without involving the leadership from the LCIs? 

When we talk about all these drainage areas, they exist in parishes and local council areas where they have leadership. I would like to say that our people are law abiding but where are the consultations that call upon their commitment to their areas? We do not see that. When that happens, the parish development committees, largely in Kampala, are in abeyance. They do not work because KCCA takes the responsibility on behalf of all the leadership at the grassroots. No wonder when they are complaining to us, it is like Kampala is devoid of all these lower councils and responsible leadership at the grass root.

I think Kampala Capital City Authority has a problem with working with the lower administrative units and that is causing major problems Kampala. 

The other issue is the minister presenting to us about National Environment Management Authority (NEMA) and other agencies that do not work together; the Local Government and KCCA are all represented in Cabinet. Why isn’t this issue handled in Cabinet before it comes to Parliament? As if – (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Minister, I did not hear you propose any sanctions - NEMA cleared this - why don’t the people who build the big malls pay for the reconstruction? I hope you will let us know.

4.19
MR WAIRA KYEWALABYE (Independent, Bunya County East, Mayuge): Thank you, Madam Speaker. We all want to be in a clean city. We would not love to be in a city where you jump over the garbage and after jumping over the garbage, you get waste and floods. Ironically, the minister is pleading with the politicians for help yet when they are giving away these wetlands, they do not call us. 

Banda is just on the highway but people are building in that wetland yet NEMA bypasses it and goes to our wetlands down in the villages. They leave the wetland here in Banda and drive to Kibuku and Mayuge. In Lubigi even the Government has built there serious buildings near Nansana roundabout and they are now crying. Busega, Nateete; they are filling up all that wetland and KCCA is just “crying.”

Another issue concerns NEMA and its mandate. I belong to the Committee on Physical Infrastructure and we asked NEMA to give us the total acreage of the wetlands in Uganda. They cannot provide that information because they want to use that advantage to keep on giving out titles. Let NEMA give us the total acreage of the wetland so that we know how much of it is being reduced.

Madam Speaker, I would like to suggest that KCCA and NEMA should work hand in hand. When you ask NEMA, they say that that mandate remains with the Ministry of Water and Environment because it has got a department for wetlands. When you ask them, they deny that responsibility. When you ask the Ministry of Water and Environment, they say that the responsibility is with NEMA. Therefore, the ministry needs to clarify whose mandate it is. Is it NEMA or is it the Ministry of Water and Environment? Thank you.

4.22
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Serere): Thank you, Madam Speaker. We would not even be wasting time discussing this matter if those responsible had done their work. Before, Ms Jennifer Musisi left, she had earmarked some houses for demolition to be broken because they were built in wrong places. What happened is that everybody fought Musisi until Musisi threw up the towel. This starts with us because Madam Musisi had wanted to recognise the city but they are those who think that they are untouchable and they know where to go and everything came to a standstill. 

If we do not address that matter, it will be similar to the problem we have with the boda bodas. Up to tomorrow, we have failed to sort out the problem of the boda bodas in Kampala because people have vested interests in them. There are plans for this city but you will even find the leaders building outside the plans. If asked in this House how many people have built in a planned settlement or if I asked which street, road and plot number your house is; how many people can give that information? 

Colleagues have hosted parties and directions to their places are a problem. For example, “Can you go to this MTN kiosk and turn to the left to the Airtel kiosk, to arrive to their place, use this jackfruit tree” – (Laughter) – how can you allow that type of haphazard – we are few who are in organised settlement. Therefore, it should start with us. How do those responsible for planning allow plans to be approved and put in such places?

Madam Speaker, it is very disappointing that it has come to this. I stay in Ntinda and Nakawa Division put for us drainage along Ssemawata Road and Muteesa II Road where I stay and along Spear Motors in Ntinda. To date, every weekend, the workers come and try to desilt but they do not remove the garbage. When it rains, it pours back to the drainage and that is where the flooding in our area starts because Nakawa Division has also failed to do its part. 

There are individuals and I pity people who have been asking for cities. With this level of disorganisation, there should have been a condition that if you want to be a city, can we have a clean city. Everyone is saying that they want a city when we have failed to organise the main city – (Member timed out.)

4.25
MR FRANCIS GONAHASA (FDC, Kabweri County, Kibuku): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The issue of drainage continues to be a headache to all of us. Kampala is a growing city, when the original drainage system was put in place, we had very few, tarmac roads and concrete pavements. At that time, we had maybe one-metre wide drainage systems carrying all the water. When we had no concrete and tarmac roads, the rains that fell sank in the ground and they did not have to run to where they run today. 

My opinion is that we should start thinking about developing the drainage system based on the amount of concrete we have built because the more concrete we build, the less ability for the rain waters to sink into the ground. Therefore, we have a lot of surface runoff water which we must take care of. To think that the old drainage system cannot be overlooked, I agree with you, it should not be over overlooked but widened to take care of the amount of water that we have running over the surfaces.

You cannot talk about improving drainage in Kampala without talking about the plastics we have. As long as the waste we have does not rot, it means that it is going to block the drainage systems. Our neighbours in Kenya, Rwanda and Tanzania have banned plastics. However, whenever we talk about plastics, we say, oh yeah, it is banned and it is now this millimetres. Let us make a decision to ban plastics completely and get them out of the drainage systems wherever they are and be like our neighbours. We know that this is one of the biggest problems. As long as we have plastic bottles, be assured that we are not going to drain this city because we have too much rain and plastics blocking the drainage systems however wide they may be. My prayer is that we make a final decision on plastics.

Recently, I was in Kenya and they do not allow people to carry plastics but here – like you said, Madam Speaker, the Rwandese do not throw rubbish on their roadsides but as soon as they get on our side, it is okay. Let us get these plastics out of the way and widen the drainage systems. With that, I believe we may be able to have better drainage in Kampala. Thank you very much.

4.28
MS ELIZABETH KARUNGI (NRM, Woman Representative, Kanungu): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I also want to thank the minister for giving us this report.

The issue of floods in Kampala has built up for a long time. It is not only in Kampala but also in Wakiso District because many people in Kampala reside in Wakiso. When NEMA was created, we thought that the problem of floods was a thing of the past but it is unfortunate that NEMA has not done its work as far as that area is concerned.

Madam Speaker, recently when I raised an issue concerning this, you assigned me to go and list down all developments that were built in swampy areas. I have been trying to do so but I have not yet completed.

Now I wonder; for these people who encroached on the swamps and NEMA granted them authority to do so, are we going to leave NEMA out or shall we need to amend the law to make sure that whichever officer that grants a land title in a wetland is personally responsible and not NEMA as a whole?

We need to come out as Parliament and look at it deeply; otherwise, in a few years to come, many people will not have where to stay because all these swamps will have been encroached on. Petrol stations, factories, rentals, among others, have been built everywhere you go; not only in Kampala but also the surrounding areas of Entebbe, Wakiso and others. 

It is a very serious issue and we should not look at how much we shall spend as a country to compensate these people because life and the environment are important; so, we should look at all things. Whatever needs to be compensated, we should compensate so that people leave these areas. Otherwise, our water will have nowhere to stay other than killing our children who are going to school, sweeping off vehicles and disorganising everything in the city –(Member timed out.)

4.31
MR JAMES WALUSWAKA (NRM, Bunyole County West, Butaleja): Thank you, Madam Speaker. As someone with water resources and engineering knowledge, I feel bothered because most of our engineers do not pay attention to hydrological parameters while designing the drainage system. I think they just employ highway engineers and they do not involve the hydrologists. This is where the problem is. You find someone who can design a pavement but cannot design a culvert. 

The biggest problem we have is the encroachment on the wetlands and the illegal structures. I propose that all these illegal structures be demolished. 

The National Environment Management Authority (NEMA) and KCCA officials should be immediately arrested because you cannot build without a KCCA engineer approving the plan. Where do you approve a plan and how do you supervise? We cannot only heap the blame on NEMA. Even KCCA officers are highly involved. Whoever appended their signature on either the plan or the land title should be arrested immediately.

On the issue of garbage, let KCCA collect the garbage because people cannot afford. Can’t we employ the National Water and Sewerage Corporation system? When you take water, they say 80 per cent or 100 per cent of the water you have consumed goes to management of sewage. So, KCCA, put a fee such that you collect. Otherwise, if we leave it, it shall be a problem.

On the issue of political support, Madam Minister, why do we come here as Parliament? Kampala is not only for people in Kampala. Our voters come and they get stranded. I propose that the UPDF and the police should come and evict these people. (Interjections) Why should we stop people here? A politician comes and because of votes he says, “Don’t build here; don’t make a culvert here.” The UPDF should come in and do enforcement. 

Madam Speaker, I think the issue of compensation; this is where people will steal money. Why should we compensate someone who encroached? This is robbery. I will not allow the issue of compensation - we are tired of this foolery within Kampala. Our voters are dying in the village and money is within Kampala being stolen. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: I think the State should be courageous. In Rwanda, if you build in a wetland, they will leave you to build and as soon as you complete the house, they will come and break it down. They do not allow you to occupy it.

4.35
MS AGNES AMEEDE (NRM, Woman Representative, Butebo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to add my voice to support a holistic approach to the issue of management of the drainage system. 

One of the key goals of the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) is building sustainable cities. One of the problems you have highlighted is the dumping of rubbish from the informal settlements. 

There is a ripe market for low-cost housing. How far and how much is Government investing in low-cost housing? Why hasn’t a loan come to this House for such a cause? Why don’t we empower National Housing for the cause of low-cost housing because it impacts on the general outlook and cleanliness of the city? 

The other is through the institutional framework of networking. How much has KCCA tried to build cohesion with the other systems like the LCs, the Police and NEMA? There is a gap there. For example, the other day I was going to Munyonyo and just as you descend to Bunga, that place was originally a swamp but it is now all built up and right in the swamp, there are informal settlements coming up. They are about five or six and someone is watching. 

In the developed countries, the local council cannot permit that but somehow an LCI is looking on. This is perhaps because their mandate is not clear. Can you please fill that gap? Thank you very much.

4.37
MR ROBERT MIGADDE (NRM, Buvuma Islands County, Buvuma): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Kampala once had a master plan – not a political master plan but a physical master plan. There was a time when builders were actually following that specific master plan. 

We should ask ourselves; who constitute the physical planning committee? We have the executive director, the engineer, the environmental officer and the public health officer. There is a reason such people constitute that committee. So, it is not NEMA; NEMA does not surface anywhere in approving a building plan. 

I am a physical planner by profession and I know what should be done. We have heard lamentations - even when these rich people were quarrelling over the closure of buildings, I remember the minister noting that one of the developers had not sought permission from KCCA but the construction of his building was at third floor and the building was within the city centre.

Therefore, the big people are able to build where they should not build, yet the poor people find it difficult to build even where they should build. This calls for vigilance. Why do we go for a 10-year drainage master plan – the one we have was last updated in 2016 and is supposed to run for 10 years – while the traffic master plan is supposed to run for 30 years? Why are we more interested in traffic, forgetting that the drainage channels are actually along the roads? The traffic master plan should go along with the drainage master plan.

I have also heard that Village Mall is among those structures to be demolished. Who approved the mall’s construction plan? By the time it was constructed, we had a drainage masterplan of 2003, which was running for 10 years? These are some of the questions we should ask ourselves.

The other issue, Madam Speaker, is that KCCA has not done enough. This Chamber was planned for a specific number of people and that is why we are constructing another Chamber the other side because the number has increased –(Member timed out.)

4.40
MS JACQUELINE AOL (NRM, Woman Representative, Nebbi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Whatever has been said, we would like to echo and re-echo it because some of us travel very many kilometres and hours away from Kampala. A colleague was saying that other people want cities yet Kampala has failed. I think we would like Kampala to learn from us in terms of how we plan things upcountry. That is why we want those cities to go where we are.

Some of us travel and sometimes we sit in taxis and listen to what people say. Somebody rightly talked about vigilance – it should begin with us. Instead of pointing fingers at somebody else, we should be the ones to talk to our own people. If our people cannot listen to us, it means we are not leading them but we are forcing ourselves on them. There was a place around Kikaya and during day time, you would see nothing happening there but at night you would find a lot of business going on there. Sometimes we leave Parliament very late and I could find police guarding the place, which is being refilled – the same place where children had been playing or spending their time. 

Who sends these people? Many times I emphasise – and I will re-emphasise – the six journalistic questions: the 5Ws and H – who, what, when, where, why and how. We have to ask these questions because the answers are with us and the people are also waiting for answers from us. If we also try to blame the other person – “I think it is KCCA, I think it is NEMA…” As a leader, what have you done?
  
For my part, I have my people in Arua Park and Nebbi Park. Sometimes they soil the place. However, when I go and talk to them – because I am their leader – they listen to me and explain to me why they do the things the way they do them. When, as leaders, we do not reach out to our people that is where the problem begins. I think we need to begin from there. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

4.43
MR TOM ALERO (NRM, West Moyo County, Moyo): Madam Speaker, I thank the minister for the statement on floods in Kampala. As alluded to by Members, there are upcoming cities and I would like to send a very serious warning to these upcoming cities that we have seen how Kampala is suffering. 

Arua, Gulu, Mbarara, Jinja and others, please, get us loud and clear. These areas are coming up as cities and certainly there are investors who will want to invest in those areas. For Arua, for example, there are going to be investors from the Congo, the Sudan and others. Please, let us plan so that we do not have a repeat of what is happening in Kampala.

Madam Speaker, the other example is that Tanzania had failed in planning for its cities of Dar-es-Salaam and others. However, they have decided to have a new city of Dodoma, which is properly planned. Our new cities, please, get me loud and clear on this issue.

Madam Speaker, I stay in Kitintale near Bugolobi. Once upon a time, we had a very big piece of land, which contained a swamp around Bugolobi but that land is gone. You would find somebody digging up a foundation on a Friday evening because the officers are not there and by Monday morning there would already be a roof. By the time the city council officers come, it would be too late and the rest would be history. Money exchanges hand: “I have already built the structure; what next? Let us talk.” They talk and the plans are approved. This must really stop.

There has also been the issue of building houses on the road reserves and other areas that have been planned for communication, drainage channels, sewage system and maybe pipes for water. How can we make Kampala have sanity when these issues have not been worked on?

4.46
MS MARGARET BABA DIRI (NRM, Woman Representative, Koboko): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for giving us information on Kampala. 

Madam Speaker, Kampala is actually not a city but a very big slum containing houses of different sizes, heights and uses. Kampala was not meant for a city. I think it was meant to be a small town but it found itself like a city. How do you plan a city? When you are planning a town or city, the first thing is to plan the place without buildings: you plan the road; you plan the drainage system; you plan the sewage system and others. You go ahead to divide the plots, according to their sizes: senior quarters, junior quarters, etc. 

However, in Kampala somebody just dreams and puts an industry anywhere. If you want to put a hotel, you can put it anywhere. How do you really expect this to be a smart city?

Let us go back and plan our cities first before we put the buildings. No one should get a land title. The Government and the city councils must first plan the kind of plots people should buy and the type of houses they should build so that those with small amounts of money go for smaller houses and those with bigger amounts of money go for bigger houses so that these houses are planned right from the beginning. Otherwise, changing Kampala to a better state may not work very well.

Madam Speaker, I would like to talk about the sewerage system. In Kampala, the big houses, which use lagoons, are in the centre but in the outskirts of Kampala, each person digs his or her own septic tank. These septic tanks are everywhere. What will happen if an earthquake occurs? The septic tanks will collapse and the whole place will be flooded with faeces. Please, let us also develop the sewerage system so that sewerage goes to the right place rather than being emptied every now and then, which sometimes floods.

Madam Speaker - (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Half a minute to conclude.

MS BABA DIRI: Thank you very much. If you move around the hotels along Lake Victoria, they open their sewerage direct into Lake Victoria. The water we are getting is very dirty. I would like to, therefore, request the National Environment Management Authority (NEMA) to inspect these hotels to find out where their sewerage goes. Otherwise, it is not fair for sewerage to go directly into Lake Victoria. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

4.50
MR HENRY KIBALYA (NRM, Bugabula County South, Kamuli): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I join colleagues in thanking the minister for performing her ceremonial duty of presenting a statement.

The people we entrusted power with should do something beyond what we expect them to be doing. Madam Speaker, Kampala has been the Capital City of Uganda since before we were born but we have continued to cry about Kampala. Actually, the greatest problem of Kampala is politics. Who has power to take a decision on Kampala? Who is commanding who? Who is telling who to do what? It is always powers from above, orders from above, this one is untouchable, the other one works in State House. Everyone has the wish and will to do whatever he or she wishes in Kampala. That is why I said the minister has just come here to do the ceremonial work of presenting a statement.

The minister said we need to acquire land and demolish houses. The master plan was approved in 2017 but two years down the road, the master plan is at just 5 per cent. Are we serious? If we do not acquire the land that they wish to utilise, what shall we do? Do we have a short, medium and long term plan? They say it cannot be handled by Kampala alone; it must be metropolitan and all encompassing. It is the same Government; the Government that runs Kampala is the same Government running Wakiso and Mukono. Where are we failing?

Madam Speaker, the other day, National Water and Sewerage Cooperation (NWSC) came and got a loan to tame the smell at the sewage corporation in Bugolobi. It was actually one of the first loans we gave when I had just joined Parliament but to date, the same smell is still felt in Bugolobi. 

The boda boda men are dying because of manholes, especially when it rains. The other day, I heard that someone fell in a manhole and it is the same story. Sewage keeps on passing here and there and after one or two years, the minister will come here and present a statement and it is the same leaders. Therefore, can we know whether Kampala should be handed over to Parliament so that the Speaker can manage it and maybe we will see some sanity?

4.53
MR MICHAEL TIMUZIGU (NRM, Kajara County, Ntungamo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to join colleagues to thank the minister for the statement. 

Whatever we are talking about is just symptoms but the real cause is corruption. Madam Speaker, you may remember that Africans managed to sell their brothers and sisters because their minds were corrupt and corruption has been growing. As other continents get civilised, for us that is the way we get civilised; by getting more corrupt year in, year out. That is why people are building in wetlands when we have authorities in charge. NEMA has been there but every year, we lose about 2 per cent of the wetlands in Uganda. I think at a certain point, we shall have a desert.

That aside, I have a proposal. We have a lot of water in Kampala because we have a lot of buildings. We had no buildings when they started the drainage channels. Actually, the buildings were very few and the vegetation was there. Even the ground was there to take the water. Now that we have many people who want water, I propose that we encourage the dwellers of Kampala City to harvest water. Instead of buying and using other water sources when we still expect more population, we should use the water we are harvesting so that people can solve two problems at a go; they will solve the problem of water because it is expensive and the problem of floods. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

4.56
MR RICHARD GAFABUSA (NRM, Bwamba County, Bundibugyo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. When we talk about floods in Kampala and we do not talk about other issues like traffic jam and physical planning then we are not doing anything. That is why I agree with colleagues who talked about the need for a comprehensive plan to manage these challenges.

To begin with, what we are talking about are not only in Kampala but in the whole country, except that the problem is bigger in Kampala. These issues are a function of corruption, impunity and inaction. We talk and plan a lot but we do too little or even nothing. I was shocked to hear the minister, in her statement, talk about limited enforcement because of leaders who feel they are untouchable. What happens in other countries? If you are the minister and you cannot enforce then we are not going anywhere. This is because of impunity and corruption. All these things are happening because we are failing to manage our own affairs. The common saying is ‘powers from above’.

People have built in wetlands with titles from the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development. The plan is approved by KCCA. How do you begin demolishing these houses whose plans you approved as KCCA? 

Secondly, there is a bigger problem of climate change. Many people think that the biggest effect of climate change is draught. That is not true. The biggest effect of climate change, especially in tropical Africa, is that we are going to increasingly have too many erratic rains –(Member timed out.)

4.59
COL (Rtd) FRED MWESIGYE (NRM, Nyabushozi County, Kiruhura): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to say that we are now paying for our sins and I have said this before. I have listed some of the sins as corruption and impunity, as said by my colleagues; unplanned human settlements in Kampala, settlement in wetlands with impunity and haphazard dumping of garbage in all areas.

There is also the failure to ban plastics. Why have we failed to ban plastics in this House? Indiscipline by citizens themselves is another issue. Even when KCCA demarcates where to pass and what to do, people continue violating those regulations, which is indiscipline by our society. Therefore, in addition to what the minister has said, I would like her to assure us that all these plans are budgeted for in the medium and long term plans. 

Secondly, I would have been happier of the minister gave us a plan to decongest the city by building other satellite cities like other countries have done. In Kenya, they have built satellite cities to decongest Nairobi. Why can’t we do that? There is Mukono, Wakiso - why can’t we develop those towns into cities to decongest Kampala?

We also need to evacuate all people who have settled in these wetlands and forests by force and without compensation. Open up all the channels, restore all the wetlands and all the illegal developments must be demolished.

Parliament has powers to give those orders and they are followed but we are also failing on our part. We only lament. Otherwise, if we gave orders - the constitution gives us authority to make laws and orders on anything apart from turning a human being into another sex. 

We are polluting Lake Victoria. Even the water we are taking is poisonous because all the channels have nothing to filter what is going into Lake Victoria because of our indiscipline. 

Madam Speaker, I also agree with my honourable colleague that we must mandatorily make sure that all houses have water harvesting tanks. If that law can be made it will solve some of the flooding issues. Thank you.

5.01
MR GORDON ARINDA (NRM, Bushenyi-Ishaka Municipality, Bushenyi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. When one reads Article 237 (2) (b) of the Constitution, they realise that it clearly stipulates that the Government or a local government as determined by Parliament by law shall hold in trust, for the people and protect natural lakes, rivers wetlands, forests reserves, game reserves, national parks and any land to be reserved for ecological and touristic purposes for the common good of all the citizens.

Madam Speaker, it is within the mandate of KCCA; Parliament did its work and gave the mandate to KCCA to hold in trust, to make sure all the wetlands within Kampala are well protected. It amazes me to see the honourable minister coming here to lament. I would expect the honourable minister to be coming here to show the actions that she has taken.

I know she might be seeking for political support but the honourable ministers in KCCA were appointed by the President. So, which political support do they want and from who when they hold it within themselves? The KCCA Act gives you powers and the Constitution gives you the mandate. 

I think it is not fair for the honourable minister to come here and just lament. We need to see action from KCCA because that is the reason the President appointed these ministers there; can we see action! I heard the honourable minister referring to Meera Investments getting a title in a wetland in 2010. We are all aware that anybody with a title in wetland after the promulgation of this Constitution in 1995, that title is null and void. Why can’t KCCA come up and take them to court so that these land titles are cancelled?

It is also within their mandate to go and demolish those buildings that were put up there. It is very sad for the honourable ministers to come here and lament. I feel that it is very embarrassing; they need to take up their action. Thank you.

5.04
MR JAMES KABERUKA (NRM, Kinkizi County West, Kanungu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the honourable minister for giving us information on how the Kampala City Council Authority has failed to do its work. There are two books in the Bible, Lamentations in the Old Testament and Acts in the New Testament. (Laughter)

It is very sad that we are still in the Old Testament yet we are in the 21st Century. The lamentation of the minister is that NEMA approves - NEEMA does not approve building plans; it is KCCA. The minister is directly telling us that they are superintending over a system that has failed. 

Madam Speaker, I would like you to guide me, in case a person fails in their duty, what do we do, as Parliament? I am saying this because KCCA has been coming here and the chairperson of the committee - when we were reviewing the policy statements - gave a lot of information to this House. KCCA has only been dealing in dubious deals - corruption, impunity and many others.

There is nothing that we have stopped you from doing and maybe you tell us the politicians that have stopped you - if it is I, Kaberuka, then we reprimand me. Otherwise, I do not have the audacity to construct in a wetland under your watch and then you start blaming me after approving my building plan. It is important that we start biting as Parliament.

When the minister comes to report herself that she has failed, what do we do? We should reprimand because I am constrained. For example, in Kyanja there is a septic tank they are constructing in the tarmac road. Somebody is building a septic tank in a public road, which is done by KCCA. Do you want to tell the builder - because if he has given you money, you cannot eat your cake and have it again?

I would like to request you to guide us and we reprimand these people who are failing on their duty. I salute you, Madam Speaker. 

5.07
MR ISAAC MULINDWA (NRM, Lugazi Municipality, Buikwe): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the honourable minister for the report. I partly agree with the honourable minister that we need a holistic approach to solve the crisis in Kampala but I would like to know what happened to the greater Kampala Metropolitan plan that was stretching from Mukono to Mpigi and to Nansana. 

In 2015/2016, I remember the state minister concerned presented a very clear plan for Greater Kampala Metropolitan Plan. What happened to the implementation? We need to implement because I remember that in 2015/2016, you had a very good plan but we are still talking of the problem while we have the plan. Why don’t we instead look for another loan and push this?

Madam Speaker, the major problem with Kampala city is nothing other than leaving what they are supposed to have done to concentrate on what they are not supposed to do. The technocrats in Kampala city are busy politicking instead of concentrating on what they should do, right from the top to the least person down. Whatever they do is political instead of doing technical work.

If I remember very well, in the handover report by the former KCCA Executive Director, she properly quoted that it is political influence that failed her. Unless we put this properly, we shall have a major problem in our Kampala capital city.

Because of this poor physical planning, instead of travelling a distance of 40 kilometres from Kampala to Jinja or Lugazi for between 30 minutes to one hour, it takes Ugandans between three to five hours. Imagine people are stranded between Kampala and Jinja and Lugazi for three to five hours. You need a plane because we no longer need you in the traffic jam because of this poor planning.

It takes a minimum of three hours to reach Lugazi which is 44 kilometres between three to five hours. What are we doing as leaders about this poor physical planning? We need to be seen – as the honourable member has mentioned – implementing other than lamenting every other day. People are complaining there. The traffic jam is too much because of this poor planning. 

If there is no plan for Kampala city, let us shift the city from here to Nakasongola or even Karamoja and then we know that we are moving in that –(Member timed out)

5.10
MS BETTY NAMBOOZE (DP, Mukono Municipality, Mukono): Madam Speaker, the ministers who sit on that side are answerable to the President while we the ministers who sit here are answerable to you. I would like to give you a report as your minister for Kampala.

Kampala has become a battleground. Everybody there - from the minister to the LC1- has mastered the art of antagonistic politics, at the expense of development. We gave Kampala people a law. They have failed to sit down and internalise it. In that law, there are all the solutions for what we are talking about here, including the traffic jam that extends up to Jinja.

Under section 21, we gave the minister an obligation to constitute what is called the Kampala Metropolitan Physical Planning Authority. Since 2010 to date, they have constituted that committee. We gave them councillors who are well paid. The Kampala Capital City councillors are like MPs. We pay them handsomely but we even gave them professional councillors to assist them with issues like the one we are discussing right here.

A report like this one would not have come to Parliament. This would have been handled in Kampala Capital City Authority but when they hold their councils there, these ministers do not attend. Instead, they choose to run to Parliament and bring here even the smallest issues which would have been handled by the Kampala Capital City Authority.

Madam Speaker, you have noticed that increasingly, Kampala people are coming to you, even for small things like the issue of hawkers who are being arrested without a law. People are being sent to jail without a law but they do not make ordinances. When they make them, they refuse to sign and gazette them because they are fighting.

Madam Speaker, in a way, you are now the Lord Mayor in action because people have started running to you. They come to you because they do not have anywhere else to go. Let me tell you what is happening in Kampala. What is being talked about as floods are not God-sent. You know, God gave us – (Member timed out)

THE SPEAKER: Just two more minutes.

MS NAMBOOZE: Madam Speaker, God has been true to Uganda. God promised that He will never bring any other flood after Noah’s Ark. We do not have floods in Kampala; we have mismanaged drainages. We have failed to control storm water.

We were given money to construct drainage channels under Kampala Institutional and Infrastructure Development Project (KIIDP-2). The project is expiring in December 2019. Uganda was supposed to bring money for co-funding to compensate the victims but December is almost here and the money is going to be lost. The minister has not even come here to tell Parliament that there is a project where we have money that we are going to lose this December lying on an account.

The Kampala Drainage Masterplan needs $200 million to implement. They assisted us to make it but there is no implementation. Even when you go to the Ministerial Policy Statement, you will not find it there among the unfunded priorities. Shs 2.8 billion was released to a company called Spencon to construct the Lubigi Channel. Up to now, they have not constructed the Lubigi channel. The funders are asking for accountability but there is no accountability.

People have shared land that is supposed to be for drainage, including this Nakivubo Channel. They have shared plots of land there. Other people go to the minister; others claim that they have been in State House. When it comes to enforcement, it is selective. You want to grab the urban poor woman but you leave Meera Investment which has reclaimed the whole swamp around Kinawataka here, which is the cause of floods in Kinawataka.

We gave these people a law that gives them a metropolitan police. They have not sat down to internalise that; that we equipped them with a special police of their own under the law called the Metropolitan Police. They instead use the law enforcement department that has no law or statutory instrument governing it.

So, Madam Speaker, what should we do as Parliament? I think Parliament should call the leaders of Kampala to order. Parliament should request this minister to go back to her council and sit with those councillors who are highly paid. If they do not measure up to the work, then –

THE SPEAKER: I gave her five minutes, which I did not give other Members. I gave her more than the others because of her position as Shadow Minister. One minute to conclude.

MS NAMBOOZE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am proposing that this Parliament instructs the minister to constitute the Metropolitan Physical Planning Authority that will coordinate plans between Mukono, Wakiso, Mpigi and Kampala.

They should also constitute the Kampala Metropolitan Police to deal with enforcement so that they stop selective enforcement of the law. National Water and Sewerage Corporation charges more money from a person who has a water-borne toilet. I think this should be changed. People should be facilitated. Those people who are using water-borne toilets should be facilitated – it should be made cheaper for them. The issue of pit latrines in the capital city is primitive. I would like to, through you, call upon the Ministry of Health to start off immediately with public health sensitisation programmes for this idea. We are going to have a cholera outbreak. So, let us not wait for it to happen. All the signs are very clear that we shall have cholera in the next few days. 

Madam Speaker, I call for an investigation, specifically on the issue of Lubigi Channel where Shs 2.8 billion was released. I also call upon Parliament to consider a supplementary for Kampala as soon as we start on the Budget because we need this $200 million quickly to implement the Kampala Drainage Master Plan.

Lastly, Madam Speaker, this minister should be instructed to go back and sit with their local leaders to stop running to Parliament for things that should be handled by the city council of Kampala. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, hon. Nambooze, for your well researched information. Honourable minister, you did not ask us for anything and some of the things you want, we cannot give you. For instance, you want to acquire more land. Under Article 93 of the Constitution, we cannot give it to you. So, you must come to us and make a proposal. You want to compensate the people; we cannot give you authority to do so under the same Article. 

I think you just came to tell us. (Laughter) I would like to know your actual plans. When are you bringing the budget relating to this issue? I think that is what we want to hear. 

Then, there is an issue raised by hon. Sebaggala that there was a loan which was passed for Kampala under KIIDP I; we do not know what has happened to it. Also, there is the issue of Lubigi Channel. There is much - 

5.20
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR KAMPALA CAPITAL CITY (Ms Benny Namugwanya): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Before I go into answering specific questions, I would like to make it clear why we decided to report to this House. First of all, floods in Kampala have raised a lot of unrest amongst the population. So, as managers of the city, we know what causes the floods. As I indicated in our report, we have the immediate interventions we are carrying out and long-term plans. 

Therefore, we thought it prudent to inform this House about what is happening such that even when an individual Member is confronted by a resident of Kampala, she or he knows what is happening and has the answer. 

Madam Speaker, I articulated very well here the issue of Lubigi Channel. It is among those projects which are starting in July. I have even indicated the reasons for those delays.  Most of the delays are about failure to raise money for Resettlement Action Plan (RAP). Whereas Kampala Institutional and Infrastructure Development Project (KIIDP) gave us the money, the Government of Uganda could not raise the money for RAP.

Even during the presentation of the ministerial policy statement, I was very clear on this; I said we have the money for KIIDP II but we do not have the money for RAP. Of course some money was found. That is why I indicated that we are starting on Lubigi Channel. However, for Nalukolongo Channel, we have the money for KIIDP II but the money for RAP is not yet there.

Madam Speaker, I did not come here to lament because I have given you the when, the why and the how. I am giving solutions to the problem –(Interruption)– Can you allow me –(Interruption)

MR KABERUKA: Thank you, honourable minister, for giving way. The clarification I am seeking from you is; you have continued to say Government and politicians are somehow hindering you from performing. What Government do you mean in this case that is hindering you? Which politician do you mean? It is because you are also a politician. What are those politicians in KCCA? Thank you.

MS NAMUGWANYA: Madam Speaker, I have not said anywhere that Government is failing us to enforce – we said fellow leaders are failing us. I do not want to quote but there are even people in this House who when they are constructing their houses, they call us saying, “Please talk to the KCCA engineer; I want to start constructing my house but they want me to go through the process of approval of plans.” There is even a colleague here who when we were trying to enforce something, he came out and said, “Do not touch my people.” You know, some of them even stood in front of a grader and stopped enforcement. Apart from the Members of this House, -

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, a Member resisting a lawful order should be arrested.

The Leader of the Opposition wants to say something small. Let us finish this matter because we need to handle the Ebola issue. 

MS BETTY AOL: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The minister pointed accusing fingers at leaders while making reference to some Members of this House and acting selectively. Is it in order for the minister to lie, if at all, they were using laws to penalise a person? Is it in order to point fingers at leaders generally without mentioning names? We are hurt. Is it in order for the minister to do that? Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, can you substantiate?

MS NAMUGWANYA: Madam Speaker, I said we get issues from leaders at all levels; from the national level to the lowest level. Honestly, we are all Ugandans and we all witnessed this happening. Wherever we try to enforce laws, there are people who come up and resist. What we are requesting today is the support of everybody to make sure that we are able to carry out enforcement in every area. 

Madam Speaker, when we are trying to bring trade order in the city, you see what happens. We cannot be allowed to implement trade order in the city. Maybe, at a later stage, I would request that I prepare and present a paper on the challenges of enforcement in Kampala –(Interruption)

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, the minister said a colleague from this House – she was pointing to our side. Consequently, we are all suspects from this side. (Laughter) Her statement cannot go unchallenged if she cannot name the colleague from the Opposition. If it is me, say it is hon. Okupa who blocked the drainage system or who built in the wetland in Kyambogo. If she cannot, then she should withdraw her statement. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, let us know which Member of this House made shortcuts on planning.

MS NAMUGWANYA: Madam Speaker, much as I was facing that side; I did not point at anybody. I am facing that side but I did not point to that side. In my report, however, I mentioned one of the former leaders and I would not wish to mention the colleague in this House. Maybe, Madam Speaker, if I can be allowed, I can come and discuss this with you in your office -(Interruption)

MS NAMBOOZE: Madam Speaker, hon. Ken Lukyamuzi was here in the Ninth Parliament and hon. Namugwanya was not a Minister of Kampala then -(Interjection)- yeah, whichever Parliament. You became a minister after 2016. How could it have been that a person who is not in this House by the time you are minister, is the person you are referring to as a colleague who failed you from performing your duties? Is it in order for the honourable to use the absence of hon. Lukyamuzi to justify a statement she has failed to substantiate, Madam Speaker?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the minister was elaborating the difficulties they have had in enforcing the law and order in the city. She gave an example of one of the former Members. Please conclude.  However, she is standing facing - I do not know what we can do because she is facing that side. She used her hands when talking. 

MS NAMUGWANYA: Madam Speaker, thank you very much for your wise ruling. I am now going to strictly look at this script I am reading to avoid pointing at people. From my heart, I would like to thank the Members for their contribution.

Honestly, they are ready to give us a lot of support and they have given us a number of strategies which we can use. We do appreciate a comprehensive planning for the Greater Kampala Metropolitan Area and this is the way to go. We buy this but at an appropriate time, we shall come to this House to request for the requisite funding because we shall need it.

Madam Speaker, allow me to explain the issue of payment for garbage. In my statement, I said that beginning next financial year, Kampala Capital City Authority will be collecting garbage, free of charge from the informal settlements -

THE SPEAKER: Is it this financial year? Because this is a new financial year or do you mean the 2020/2021?

MS NAMUGWANYA: 2019- 

THE SPEAKER: This one we are almost in the new financial year.

MS NAMUGWANYA: The one beginning in July. We shall be collecting garbage from those settlements. However, people who are staying in upscale residents will continue paying for garbage. This will help us because those who cannot afford will be served by Government.

Madam Speaker, about the up-bottom planning for Kampala, there is a problem with the KCCA Act which we are amending now. We tried as much as possible to talk to the authority council and the Lord Mayor to make sure that they involve the lower local leaders, but it has not been very successful.

However, I am glad to report to this House that beginning next financial year which is next month in July, we are implementing the devolution of functions. We have devolved a number of functions to the division councils and this goes with the budget. We have already submitted this budget so once the financial year begins, we shall be implementing the devolution of functions and it will be incumbent on the authority council –(Interruption)

MS OGWAL: Madam Speaker, it appears that the minister is winding up and I am aware that floods are one of the natural disasters which Uganda is faced with right now. However, these disasters can also be human induced. I would like the minister to give us the way forward; what initiative has Kampala Capital City Authority been able to come up with to manage the flood?

We know this Parliament passed a law banning the use of polythene bags -

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, were you here when the minister was presenting? The honourable members should - did you listen to her presentation?

MS OGWAL: Everything.

THE SPEAKER: Including the interventions?

MS OGWAL: No not the kaveera.

THE SPEAKER: No. honourable members, she gave the short term and the long term interventions. It is here in the paper. Please conclude.

MS NAMUGWANYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. On the issue of planning, devolution is going to handle that bit of it. I would like to also inform the House that Ministry of Water and Environment is working on an anti-litter policy for this country. They informed us yesterday that they are in the advance stages. Therefore, when it is in place, then issues of littering will be handled by that policy.

Madam Speaker, there was a question about what happened to the Greater Kampala Metropolitan Plan. The plan is in place but of course it was frustrated due to a lot of politicking. However, I am glad to report that the politicking has been sorted out now and very soon we shall embark on sensitisation and awareness rising in the Greater Kampala and implementation will start.

On the issue of the Metropolitan Physical Planning Authority, we could not institute a committee reason being the KCCA Act 2018 is faulty. It created a board of the authority but it did not go ahead to operationalise the authority. It just created a hanging board without supporting technical officers or a structure below that. That is one of the reasons why we are amending the KCCA Act.

However, when there was a decision by Government to regularise these agencies and stop creating authorities again we could not go ahead and put a committee in place. What we presented to this House, which is in the report which we agreed on with the Committee on Presidential Affairs - we are not creating an authority but we are creating a unit in the Ministry of Kampala to coordinate the physical planning function in the metropolitan area. Therefore, we cannot go ahead to create that board of the authority.

Madam Speaker, about attending council meetings; I would like to inform my colleague hon. Nambooze that I am not a councillor in KCCA and I am not supposed to attend those meetings. If am to attend them, I attend them on request. I go there, make a statement and give them information which I do when it is necessary. At times, when the Lord Mayor feels it fit, he can invite us to go and address the council. Therefore, this we do as and when we feel it is necessary.

Our coming here is not running away from the council. We wanted this House to know what is happening in Kampala because flooding is a real problem; people have died and lost property in these floods. We thought it imperative that this House should know and have an explanation just in case one needs to know.

Lastly, Madam Speaker, is about the Metropolitan Police. Yes the KCCA Act 2010 creates a metropolitan police. We have had a series of meetings and discussions on this but there are issues of command. 

You know Uganda Police is a force and it must have a unit of command. Therefore, this Act is not very clear on the command. What we agreed on is for Uganda Police to give us a dedicated force of between 200 and 300 police men and women. Unfortunately, that could not be implemented because they too have very small numbers. They requested us to wait until they grow the numbers to make sure that we get a dedicated police.

However, right now, we just request them as and when we need police men and women. Therefore, the numbers they have are still very small. However, we work hand in hand with them and wherever we need them, if many of them have not been deployed for other missions, we get what we want.

Thank you, Madam Speaker, and members for listening to me.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister. Can we ask the Committee on Presidential Affairs to take greater interest in the affairs of Kampala Capital City Authority, especially the activation of the different parts of the Act? How can you say that they cannot recruit for Kampala city so you must borrow those who are not on duty? It is a laissez faire way of running the city.

Anyway, take note and follow it up during the Budget session. Let us go to the next item.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON EBOLA OUTBREAK IN UGANDA
 
THE SPEAKER: I trust members now have the statements on their iPads.

5.38
THE MINISTER OF HEALTH (Dr Ruth Aceng): Thank you, Madam Speaker. As I began my statement, I was apologising that I was only given information to make this statement today.

We are also running the first African Hepatitis Summit at Munyonyo. We are hosting a number of ministers and members of Parliament from other countries. Unfortunately, I have not seen our honourable members there. It is a very big summit –

THE SPEAKER: Did you send cards to the members?

DR ACENG: I invited members publicly –(Interjections)– because you need to register and give me some money –

THE SPEAKER: To register?

DR ACENG: Yes, but the members of the Committee on Health and the Committee on Budget were invited and they were not supposed to register but they have not come - 

THE SPEAKER: Proceed, honourable minister.

DR ACENG: It is a very important summit that you have missed.
 
On Tuesday, 11 June 2019, I declared an outbreak of Ebola Virus Disease (EVD) in Kasese District, western Uganda. The confirmed index case was a five year old boy who travelled from the Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC) with his mother on 10 June 2019. 

The mother is of Congolese origin but married to a Ugandan and they reside in Kasese District. However, she had travelled back to DRC to nurse her father who succumbed to Ebola. Her father was a pastor and he had many people who went to him for purposes of laying hands.

The mother and child were accompanied to Uganda by four other family members. That means that six people of Ugandan origin crossed over to Uganda because they are her children and the grandmother who is of Congolese origin. 

The child and his family entered the country through Bwera at an undesignated border post; through the market at about 7.30 p.m. They sought medical treatment at Kagando Hospital as the child was not feeling well by the time they came into Uganda. The child presented with the following symptoms: vomiting blood, bloody diarrhoea, muscle pain, headache, fatigue and abdominal pain.

Madam Speaker, the same night that the family entered Uganda, teams from DRC sent an alert to me. It consisted of names of the six people who had crossed into the country, where they crossed from and their telephone contacts. They expressed their worry and requested for a cross border meeting with us to further address the frequent crossing of contacts into Uganda. It was not the first time that we were getting contacts of Ebola crossing into Uganda; they have done so a number of times. As you are aware, our borders are very porous.

Upon receiving this information, we alerted all our health facilities in Kasese and informed them to be on alert. We also provided information of these contacts to the health workers.

The child was detected by a health worker at Kagando Hospital with signs and symptoms of Ebola, transferred and isolated at Bwera Hospital where we have the Ebola Treatment Unit. We immediately took off blood from the child and brought it that same night to the Universal Biomedical Research Laboratory (UBRL). By six o’clock in the evening, we had the results. As you are all aware, at nine o’clock that same day, we declared the outbreak.

At the same time, we dispatched a Rapid Response Team to Kasese District to support the district teams and continue with the various response activities.

Madam Speaker, following the declaration, our teams from the Ministry of Health, World Health Organisation (WHO) Uganda and Centre for Disease Control (CDC) led by myself travelled to Bwera on 12 June 2019 and joined the District Task Force chaired by the Resident District Commissioner of Kasese District. 

Allow me to state that since August last year, we categorised Uganda into three: High Risk, Moderate Risk and Low Risk areas. The High Risk districts are 20, including Kampala. All the High Risk districts have active district task forces that meet every week to evaluate the situation in their districts. Therefore, when this happened, Kasese District was ready.

In this meeting, a situation report was discussed and further strategies laid down on how to improve screening at border points of entry, especially the non-official ones. 

Financial support to the district was also discussed and the meeting resolved that the district should immediately prepare a work plan, including a budget and submit it to the Ministry of Health for urgent consideration. This work plan was submitted yesterday and it is currently under review by the National Task Force chaired by the RDC, not myself.

Madam Speaker, under my invitation, a team from the Ministry of Health of DRC led by a one, Dr Tshapenda Gaston, joined the meeting that we had in Kasese. A team of 26 people came from the DRC. 

We invited them so that we can harmonise ideas on how to strengthen border screening at the points of entry, sharing of information and conclude the signing of the Memorandum of Understanding with DRC that we started six months ago. 

Honourable members, allow me to inform you that when the Ebola outbreak started in the DRC, we mapped out all the entry points, including the non-official ones. The well designated entry points are manned by the Uganda People’s Defence Forces, the police and health workers. Screening goes on until 7.00p.m.

For the unofficial points of entry, screening was only going on until 5.00p.m. because for the people to remain there, they also need security. However, we have now got reinforcement and security is there with them so they also extend until 8.00p.m. 

However, regarding the Memorandum of Understanding, there has been a delay on the side of the DRC. We concluded the memorandum and sent it back six months ago. We do not know whether there was a challenge of language that was not enabling them to conclude quickly quickly but they have indicated that they are done with reading and interpreting and they are ready to come back to sign.

During the meeting at Bwera, the teams from DRC requested for the possibility of Uganda accepting the repatriation of the family that came in with Ebola that we were managing at the Ebola Treatment Unit.

They requested us to repatriate six persons including the confirmed cases and their relatives back to DRC for two reasons: for them to access medicines for therapeutic treatment. As you are aware, since the West African outbreak, there has been a trail on treatment that has been made available by different companies and it is still under trial not yet concluded. Therefore, we refer to it as Monitored Emergency Use of Unregistered and Investigational Interventions. We do not give it as clinical trial; it is given on compassionate basis. DRC has this medicine and it has been giving it to people who are confirmed positive. Therefore, they requested that we repatriate these people so that those who are confirmed positive could benefit.

In addition, the same family that crossed into Uganda had other members. They were 12 before they crossed - six crossed and the other six remained in the DRC. After this family had buried their father, the pastor, the community where they were staying turned against them and wanted to beat them up. 
Therefore, the lady who is married to the Ugandan told her relatives that let us go to Uganda where people are receptive; they will not beat us up and so they crossed but six others stayed behind. Unfortunately out of the six that stayed behind, five also turned positive. Therefore, the Congolese felt it was better to keep the family together for psychosocial support and treatment.

However, we agreed that the repatriation would be on condition that the patients and their relatives themselves give informed consent and willingly accept to go back to the DRC while those not willing would be retained and managed in Uganda.

On 12 June, the 50-year old grandmother of the deceased index case, a Congolese who had traveled from DRC with the daughter and the grandchildren, tested positive for Ebola and died at 4.00pm the same day. She was accorded a safe burial at a public cemetery in Kasese District; she was not able to go back to DRC.

On the 13th June, at 10.00a.m. the DRC team successfully repatriated five people who included the mother of the deceased index case, her three-year old son, who was confirmed the following day to have Ebola and was very ill at that time, her six-month old baby and her maid. Her husband, who is a Ugandan also accepted to be repatriated with his family and so all the six people who came into the country are accounted for.

Unfortunately, upon arriving in DRC, the three-year old brother of the deceased also passed away before he could reach the treatment unit. 

The total confirmed cases we have had in Uganda to date are three. That includes the five-year old, the grandmother and the three-year old.

The father was screened twice and found to be negative. He was vaccinated today. He had developed only a headache. Allow me to inform you that the mother was vaccinated and that is why she was not contracting Ebola. The vaccine is 97 per cent effective though it only lasts one year.

As of today, we have not registered any new confirmed cases since the last registered case four days ago in Kasese and there is no Ebola in other parts of Uganda.

Madam Speaker, I request you to disregard statements being issued by various people including the media of Ebola outbreaks. We only confirm Ebola after we have screened a blood sample three times; not just once but twice. That means when we are extremely sure that is when we say there is Ebola.

Today afternoon, I watched the NBS declaring Ebola in Mbarara and I was extremely disappointed because we have been having cases of bleeding before and even before Ebola, people used to bleed but it is only when we have confirmed that we can comfortably say, “There is Ebola.”

As of 17th June, and today as well, we have only two new suspects’ cases under isolation at Bwera. We have removed blood samples. The ones of yesterday tested negative and the ones of today, the results are pending. All these suspected cases are not linked to the index case. Currently, we have 92 contacts to the confirmed Ebola case that are being followed up.

Madam Speaker, allow me also say - by the way let me apologize. When I was informed, I was not in office. I was at the summit and so I did not prepare this statement myself. Therefore, there are many missing things, reason I am inserting. I beg that you understand my challenge.

THE SPEAKER: Minister, there are also many repetitions.

DR ACENG: Yes, Madam Speaker. Anyhow, what I want to say is that we cannot say Uganda does not have Ebola because we have 92 contacts to the initial index case who have to be followed up for 21 days. Even after we have followed them up for 21 days, if none of them turns positive, we shall remains in a response mode because of the free movement of the Congolese into Uganda; the treatment units will remain active.

Madam Speaker, the Ministry of Health and partners had undertaken a number of preparedness activities in the high-risk districts for the past 10 months, following the declaration of Ebola in DRC in August 2018. As part of the preparedness activities, the ministry together with partners built capacity of staff on case management, surveillance, contact tracing, risk communication and community engagement and on Ebola virus disease, logistics management and vaccination.

During the preparedness phase, we vaccinated over 4240 health workers - those are the frontline health workers and other workers who are support staff in the high-risk districts.

Ebola treatment units and isolation facilities were also constructed especially in the high-risk districts; there are majorly five high-risk districts. The operationalisation of these units included provision of personal protective equipment and infection prevention and control materials.

Madam Speaker, surveillance has been strengthened through the installation of thermal scanners at Entebbe International Airport and at Mpondwe Border point. Usually at Mpondwe Border point, we get over 35,000 people crossing on the market days - Tuesdays and Fridays. You can imagine the situation the health workers there have to go through to screen 35,000 people. In a month, over 9 million people that cross in and out through that border.

Screening at the high volume points of entry using handheld infrared thermometers continues. This is the mechanism we use for those who cross through the porous borders because we do not have the thermal scanners at the porous borders. The thermal scanners need well-built infrastructure. 

We have distributed information, education and communication materials which have also been translated into the local languages.

There is on-going community engagement and risk communication. In the high risk districts, we had trained Uganda Red Cross people moving door to door sensitising people on Ebola. We have also done so on radio and television talk shows, school drama, sports and media sensitisation, including traditional and social media. We also sensitised leaders in that area including traditional leaders, church leaders and other opinion leaders. 

Our partners supported us with 10 ambulances, two multipurpose vehicles and 40 motorbikes for us to use for purposes of surveillance but also movement of patients and materials.  

Ebola, as you are very much aware, is a hemorrhagic fever. It is very deadly. The strain we have in the DRC that crossed into Uganda is the most virulent; it is the most deadly strain called Ebola Zaire.  

Ebola causes bleeding from all body openings and kills up to 90 per cent of those infected. The incubation period is between two to 21 days after contact. That is why we follow up for 21 days. 

It can be spread through direct contact such as broken skin or mucous membranes; somebody sneezes next to you and it sprays into your eyes. That is also a source of infection. It is spread through the nose or mouth, or any other body fluids such as blood, urine, saliva, sweat, faeces, vomit, breast milk and semen of a person who is sick of Ebola or died from Ebola. This is especially for men. If they are treated and they improve, we discourage sex for at least one year because the virus remains alive in the semen for up to six months to one year. Therefore, they remain a source of infection. That is why we had a lot of challenge in West Africa with recurring Ebola. It would go down and then it comes up somewhere else because of men who carry it in the semen.

The Ebola Virus Disease can present with several other symptoms including: sudden onset of high-grade fever, bloody diarrhea and bleeding. 

Upon declaration of the Ebola outbreak in Kasese District, the Ministry of Health transitioned from preparedness phase that we had been in for over 10 months into a response mode. We are currently undertaking the following interventions:

Coordination by our National Task Force who hold daily meetings. The meetings discuss how we are responding and also information that comes in from Kasese on a daily basis but also alerts that are coming from the various other districts. We receive them, take blood samples, analyse and report back accordingly. We are continuing with surveillance and contact tracing. We are following up the contacts but also surveillance in all other parts of the country. 

We have set up laboratories in the field at Bwera Hospital to reduce the turnaround time of samples. It has been very expensive transporting samples all the way from Kasese and the other districts to Uganda Virus Research Institute (UVRI) on a daily basis. We transport about four samples on a daily basis so our partners from the US Government have now supported us with a laboratory at Bwera. 

We established an Ebola Treatment Unit at Bwera Hospital with a capacity of 12 patients but we also have a specialised treatment area, specifically for treatment in Fort Portal Hospital, where we can keep patients and give them the therapeutic treatment. 

We have heightened our risk communication and social mobilisation sensitising the communities about the on-going Ebola.  

As I mentioned before, we are continuing with vaccination. When the teams from DRC came, they brought for us 400 doses of the vaccine.  

Honourable members, this vaccine is stored at minus 80 degrees centigrade. When we bring it into the country, it cannot last long. After two weeks, it gets spoilt because of that challenge and so what we had brought in during the preparedness phase got spoilt and we needed more. Therefore, the DRC brought for us 400 as an emergency but also the following day, the World Health Organisation brought in 3,000 doses and so we have 3,400 doses and we are continuing to vaccinate.  

To date, we have vaccinated 128 people. Out of the 128, 68 are contacts of the first index case. We are continuing to vaccinate the contacts as we also observe them. Once they develop symptoms, we cannot vaccinate them.

There is a lot of challenge of wash facilities in the areas in Kasese; lack of safe water and lack of water at the border points. We have a lot of support from UNICEF but ferrying water on a daily basis using the water bowsers is not cheap.

Madam Speaker, as part of our response, we also provided support to the Kingdom of Rwenzururu. We developed guidelines for use by the kingdom during the burial of the late Queen Mother. We sent a team of four senior epidemiologists to support them to organise the burial so that we could prevent infection among the mourners.

During that time, we had a great opportunity to sensitise all the kingdom executives – the organising committee members and residents of the palace on Ebola prior to the burial of the late Queen Mother and also to encourage them to disseminate information to the entire kingdom.

I am also pleased to inform this august House that yesterday, we hosted the World Health Organization Director General, Dr Tedros Ghebreyesus, who has been coming to Uganda and this is his third visit. He came to assess our response to the current Ebola outbreak in Kasese District.

He also pledged to continue mobilising both global and regional support to help us contain this outbreak. 

He had the opportunity to meet His Excellency, the President, and discuss the Ebola in the DRC. He appreciated the efforts of the President and the health workers. 

His Excellency, the President, also appreciated the efforts of the health workers for the last 10 months and also with the on-going outbreak. 

Madam Speaker, allow me to say, when I went to Kasese, I was extremely impressed and happy. I actually had very little work to do. I found that the health workers had taken charge of the situation and everything was running smoothly. (Applause)

They were confident, one, because they have all been vaccinated. They were not afraid to go there and you did not hear about health workers running away from the facilities. They knew the protocols to follow and how to treat the patients very well. The district was in charge of the entire situation. Therefore, my going there was just to reinforce them and give them confidence that we are with them.

This is the same for all the other five districts along the border. They have been trained and retrained. Even without Ebola, we do what we call “dry runs.” We pretend there is an Ebola in a district and then we see how they will respond. Unfortunately, sometimes, the press picks up our dry run and they alert the population that there is Ebola outbreak when we are actually carrying out a dry run. A dry run is a practice that if Ebola appears, what do you do? 

Madam Speaker, due to that, I would like to inform you that Uganda shines as a country in handling Ebola. When Dr Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus came in, he told His Excellency, the President that Uganda is the least of his worries. He is more worried about the countries surrounding Uganda, who have never had Ebola before but also may not be as well prepared as Uganda. 

Furthermore, there are countries with very weak systems in handling Ebola. We have had five outbreaks before. This is our sixth outbreak and so, we have developed a lot of skills and confidence. 

I would like to also inform you that within the next two weeks, Uganda will be bringing in the therapeutic treatment; the trial drug. Mbarara University developed a protocol, which has been approved by the National Council of Science and Technology and the National Drug Authority. They have been allowed to bring in the therapeutic treatment. Therefore, there will be no need for us to send our patients to the DRC whenever we get Ebola patients. 

However, I would like to state here that managing or controlling an Ebola outbreak is extremely expensive. Unfortunately, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development has never given me money to respond to an Ebola outbreak. For the 10 months of preparedness, I mobilised money from partners who were willing to support. We mobilised up to $8.6 million and that is what we have been using in our preparedness as well as maintaining our health workers at all the borders for these 10 months. We are now in a response mode but I do not have any money. It is only the partners who are catering for people at the borders. The Uganda Peoples’ Defence Forces have never been facilitated to stay at the border. The health workers at the borders have gone unpaid for the last four months but they are still there.

I have been talking to the partners and some of them are beginning to remobilise resources, again to support us. Honourable members, Ebola kills. When you hear the word “Ebola”, it means death and we need to respond urgently. Also, the availability of resources is a motivation to the response. When the resources are not there, it becomes extremely difficult.

I would like to reassure you that the Ministry of Health and partners are in position to contain the spread of the Ebola outbreak and ensure that the people of Uganda are protected. There should be no cause for alarm or fear but we would like to request you to remain vigilant and continue to sensitise the people in your constituencies. Please, tell them that Ebola is real. The challenge we have with the DRC is that up to now, they do not believe that Ebola exists. They think that it was a political making but they also think that it is a myth. A few of them are now beginning to appreciate after over 1,500 deaths have happened. Ebola exists and we should not mix it with politics. We should rise up and respond to Ebola whenever it strikes our country. 

As I conclude, I urge all of us to avoid handshaking. People have been asking me, “Why are you telling the entire nation to avoid handshaking?” Madam Speaker, as I said before, we have been mapping the porous borders, especially along the western border. When the Congolese come in, they move. We have mapped their movements into Kampala and all the other districts. They move everywhere. On Sunday, I was in my church and there were a group of them there. When you hear me saying, “Please, do not shake hands,” I am not being mean but I am trying as much as possible to have you protected.

Please, pass on the information to your various constituencies. Let us avoid hugging, we have limited mass gatherings, especially in the 20 high risk districts surrounding the borders. We also continue to appeal to all of you to observe hygiene and sanitation. Washing hands with soap and clean water is extremely helpful because you reduce the quantity of the virus and then you leave your body to respond. Where available, please, us Jik immediately you touch any body fluids. It is very helpful. Madam Speaker, I beg to submit. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable minister. I must also add the Parliament’s commendation of the ministry. Since we lost Dr Matthew Lukwiya and the other doctors in Kasese, you have really worked hard to contain the spread of Ebola in this country. We must commend the ministry on this issue.

In your statement, you said there was an outbreak. In my mind, “outbreak” means maybe the whole village is sick. A total of five people coming in from outside - not even Bakonjo – they have come from outside. I do not know whether that is an outbreak in Uganda for purposes of our – it is frightening. The word “outbreak” is frightening. I do not know whether you can find a better word to describe this. Maybe, let us hear from the Members as well.

DR ACENG: Madam Speaker, according to our guidelines developed by the World Health Organisation (WHO), there are certain disease categories where, if you have only one case, you declare an outbreak and Ebola is one of them. When it crosses over from DRC into Uganda, it becomes Uganda’s case and so, we have an outbreak in Uganda. If we got one case of Marburg it is an outbreak. All the viral hemorrhagic fevers, just one case is an outbreak. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Okay.

6.15
MR MICHAEL AYEPA (NRM, Labwor County, Abim): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the Minister of Health and her team - our brothers and sisters in the frontline fighting this disease. I would like to also thank the WHO and our partners from Congo for fighting this disease. This is a difficult disease to fight. I had the experience of putting on these gowns that the doctors put on while fighting this deadly disease. It is very hot inside there and our brothers and sisters bear this for our own sake. Therefore, they deserve our appreciation.

It hurt me very much when the Minister of Health said that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development has never given them any money. It is a very big shame when we are fighting an emergency like this. We are proud that we are very good at responding to situations. I would like to ask Parliament to direct the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to get money and give to the Ministry of Health. They cannot fail to get money to give to the Ministry of Health.

I remember when there was Kony insurgency; there used to be diversion of funds from one ministry to another in order to help to fight Kony. Why are we not diverting money from other ministries to give to the Ministry of Health to fight this disease? It is a very big shame if the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Social Development is not providing money to the Ministry of Health to fight the Ebola outbreak.

Madam Speaker, I would like to find out from the Minister of Health, the preparedness in public places like on the buses. How do we handle such a situation? For example, if we are in the bus and somebody enters – what do we do in such places where people cannot avoid sitting near each other? How do we prepare in that situation?

Then the testing; I saw in the news when they are checking people with some kind of machine, how effective is that machine? For a little child, a blood sample was taken and tested. Is it also not possible that this machine alone, without taking the blood sample can be able to tell someone that they have Ebola? How effective is the machine, Madam Minister? Thank you, Madam Speaker.

6.15
MS JALIA BINTU (NRM, Woman Representative, Masindi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for explicitly assuring the country and the entire world that Uganda Government and Ministry of Health are in control and that there are no new cases reported. Thank you, honourable minister. 

I am saying this because I know that when there was that alarming headline in papers, we received calls from the international communities since Uganda is a tourist destination. We are going to host very many meetings and conferences of international nature. People were wondering whether Uganda is safe. 

I know that at one time, we had an Ebola outbreak when a doctor passed on and Masindi had severe cases where people lost lives. The Ministry of Health managed to contain the situation and I do not doubt the capacity of our technical people. I know they are in control.

However, I would only like to inform and request the minister that whenever there are such cases reported – you have categorised and classified them – let us communicate to the public so that we do not cause alarm among the communities. Let us hold press conferences, talk to them and make sure that they report the reality and not just alarm the entire country.
We saw on television other countries making statements and assuring their country men and women on their safety; we were waiting for our minister to come and assure us as citizens because when you assure us, we feel secure. 

I wonder whether we could raise the budget for Ministry of Health and get citizens who are residing in those districts near our sister country vaccinated? These diseases have got seasons. For example, it has been in DRC for eight months now. 

I know we have been monitoring it but if we could rush – this is a sort of disaster. We would put money for Ministry of Health and whenever they sense that there is going to be such an incidence, they would go ahead and vaccinate those people so that we mitigate the situation before it gets bad. 

The same for hepatitis B; I know we have been vaccinating people but I think this Parliament will do more good if we can ask the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to allocate more funding to Ministry of Health. It would help Ugandans and all of us especially since we are moving to another level of economic development.

Otherwise, I would like to thank the minister. I wish she could go ahead and address a press conference like what our sister countries in East Africa did; let her assure Ugandans and the international community that Uganda is safe. Thank you. 

6.21
MS JESCA ABABIKU (NRM, Woman Representative, Adjumani): Thank you, Madam Speaker for the opportunity. I would like to thank the ministry for the very good work. 

The lack of a financial response from Government is something that we should handle with urgency. It is very embarrassing that with all the credit that we have been given by other countries because of our responses, we do not have any financial input on this. I am of the view that since tomorrow we have plenary, Government should come and make a statement pertaining to this so that we understand why they are not responding to this area financially.

I heard the minister saying that because of other challenges including security, the team that screens at the entry point stays up to 8.00 p.m.; I am amazed, because people will continue to cross into the country after 8.00 p.m.; what will happen then? 

I, therefore, have a proposal that as long as people continue crossing into our country beyond 8.00 p.m., we should post people there to work in shifts. What if the people who cross after 8.00 p.m. have got the infection earlier and they successfully enter the country? That is very risky.

On the issue of the vaccination, prevention is better than cure. It is not the first time that this outbreak is heard of in this country. I am of the view that we should have a proactive way by budgeting annually to manage this case. In case it does not happen, this money will go back to the Consolidated Fund and we will all be witnesses. Since we have this history, what will be the problem of annually budgeting for this money?

Lastly, I heard the minister say that there is a budget being sought, chaired by the director. This incident did not happen this week; people have died; people are being repatriated peacefully and the budget is still sought? This, to me, is not a proactive way of managing the disaster. Why don’t we plan for these things in advance instead of sitting for budget meetings and yet this is a disaster? We have been experiencing this - emergencies should be handled within minimal time. I still have a concern on this. The process is too slow.

Despite the fact that we have not heard about any deaths from yesterday, we should not sit down. When you look at the borders, now our main concern is at the western corridor, but the Congolese border is from different angles. What are we doing there? For example in Koboko; let us keep the candle burning. We would rather spend money to prevent than waiting to burry people. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I would like to know whether the Minister of Health is not allowed to access the contingency fund. Is it only for food and tents? 

6.26
MS LUCY AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Amuru): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. Allow me to also add my voice in thanking the minister for her effort so far. 

Madam Speaker, when we speak about Ebola, as somebody who comes from Acholi, the trauma is still fresh and we would not like this to go beyond what it already is. It is my prayer that we manage this now and we do not get any more deaths. 

It is upon this background that I would like to agree that prevention is better than cure. It would be good if we could come up with policies, starting with Parliament here, that at every entrance, we should have some sanitizers so that as someone comes in, he or she washes his or her hands or one could have their hands sprayed with something. That would be one way of preventing the Ebola infection.

On Saturday, I went for the burial of my uncle. When I reached, there was one thing that was missing; the hand washing point. I immediately mobilised for Jik and about four hand washing points and I made sure that everyone who accessed the burial place washed their hands. 

This is something that we can all promote. At first, they did not know why I was doing it but I had to explain to them that Ebola is real and because they know what Ebola is, they adjusted and all of them washed their hands. Even as they were leaving to return to their homes, they washed their hands. This is something that all of us, as leaders, can promote to help the minister as she also struggles to look for money.

Madam Speaker, I would also like to add my voice in appealing to the Government, especially the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development – even if the concerned ministers are not in the House – to urgently look for the money. I do not know what would have happened to us if these donors were not there. What would have happened to those emergencies if donors were not there?

I remember at one time, I raised a funny question here that we have got a very stubborn United States of America President, Mr Donald Trump. With his policies on Africa, supposing he wakes up one day and says, “There is no more funding to Africa”? The HIV sector and the health sector in general would be affected. This is really about us. Let us prioritise. I would even appeal to the President of this country that since we have an Ebola outbreak, the regional tours can be halted so that we can push some of the money for the regional tours to help the Ministry of Health.

Madam Speaker, this is my humble appeal to the President of Uganda. Thank you.

6.30
MS SANDRA SANTA ALUM (UPC, Woman Representative, Oyam): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Allow me to thank the minister and her team for the interventions they have made. As citizens of this country, we were very worried but this afternoon, the minister has given me confidence. I would like to believe that many Ugandans in this country and the world at large are very happy with what the minister has done. I would like to thank the minister very much and I urge her to go back and thank her team, on our behalf, for the job well done.

Madam Speaker, as Parliament, it is very sad and shameful to find out that we have not allocated any financial support to the Ministry of Health toward the fight against Ebola. In our language, there is a saying that, “Borrowed salt does not prepare sauce for the visitors in a family.” I would like to believe that the money we are getting from donors is just borrowed salt and sooner or later, it is not going to help us to address the problems we have. 

It is, therefore, my humble appeal that we do our work to make sure that we bring the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to order and make sure that we find money to face this problem.

Secondly, in her submission, the minister made mention that there are 20 high risk districts, which I would like to believe stretch right from the north to the south. She also mentioned that there are laboratories in some of these areas. 
The clarification I am seeking is, when are we going to have laboratories in areas such as Arua where we have many people crossing into Uganda? I think it would be good to have laboratory services in all the high risk districts.

Madam Speaker, the minister also talked about the UPDF team working up to 8.00 p.m. I would like to interest the minister in finding out whether it is necessary for us to use local personnel, just like we use the village health teams. This is because local people have a good way of monitoring the communities and this can be in addition to the UPDF and they can even work beyond 8.00 p.m.

Finally, I would like to add to what hon. Bintu said, that the minister should find it useful to hold a press conference. As a citizen, I was very scared and I did not know what to do because I thought the whole country was affected by Ebola. In addition to what the minister has given the country in this House, I think that she needs to give confidence to the country that we should stay safe and happy – (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: I heard the Minister of Health in Kenya speaking and she was assuring people that there is no Ebola in Kenya. It was either on Sunday or Monday.

6.34
MS ROSEMARY NAUWAT (Independent, Woman Representative, Amudat): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank the minister for the statement. I would also like to thank the Ministry of Health and the medical personnel for helping us. Each time we get an outbreak in this country – this is not the first time we have had a disease outbreak. At one time, we had Marburg and we have also had cholera outbreaks but our health teams have been working hard to contain the outbreaks. Even when we have lost people, during those outbreaks, we have not lost a very big number.

In her statement, the minister told us that there are 20 districts, which border other countries. For us, in Karamoja, we have three districts bordering other countries. For example, Kaabong borders South Sudan while Moroto and Amudat border Kenya. Whereas the minister has tried her best to pass on information about this disease in terms of symptoms and how to prevent it, some districts such as Amudat cannot get that information.

Honourable minister, I remember that about a year or two ago, there was an outbreak of Marburg in Kween District and we were told that one of the victims was from Amudat but he went to Kween. However, the ministry contained the outbreak. 

In Amudat, we were able to contain the outbreak because development partners such as Unicef, WHO Save the Children and others went there and facilitated the district to move around physically. In Amudat, if you want information to reach the people, you have to move physically. 

Therefore, I call upon the ministry to also help us and ensure that for such a district that cannot access information on radio or talk shows, the ministry reaches physically through the medical teams.

Madam Speaker, we should not only rely on support from development partners. It is good for them to come in as a top-up but as Government, we should have resources for the ministry to be prepared for such outbreaks. As Government, we should have resources for the ministry to be prepared for such outbreaks.

Finally, I would like to find out from the minister whether the 35,000 people, who she said keep crossing the border – and with health workers and the UPDF working for long hours - cannot be controlled. When we have outbreaks of animal diseases, there is always some quarantine. Can’t we for some few weeks try to control these movements as a way of preventing Ebola? I thank you.

6.37
MS JANE NABULINDO (Independent, Woman Representative, Busia): I also thank the minister for the statement, which will allay the fears of people of Busia. I have about 20 non-official entry points in Busia and we have been very worried when they said there was an outbreak of Ebola.

Honourable minister, you said the screening ends at 8.00 p.m. but the last bus from Kasese to Mombasa crosses the border at midnight, that caused a lot of worries amongst us.

Madam Speaker, the Minister of Health from Kenya mentioned that there is no Ebola in Kenya and I would like to confirm that it is true. This is owing to the fact that for them, you cannot cross before being screened unlike us in Uganda, where we move and there is nothing like screening.

The people of Busia were calling me asking for the screening machines to be installed at the border and the sterilizer used for washing hands. Sincerely speaking, the people of Busia were worried but I would like to thank you very much for allaying those fears. Thank you. 

6.38
MR HOOD KATURAMU (Independent, PWDs Representative, Western): Thank you, Madam Speaker for the opportunity. I wish to join my colleagues to thank the Minister of Health and her team for the timely response they have made after confirmation of Ebola in Uganda.

Uganda’s open policy in making timely interventions on such diseases is highly commendable. We have not only handled Ebola; we have handled other diseases too. We have been very open at our airports so that that our population remains healthy. However, our confession that we have the disease and making such mitigations should not make Ugandans to be victimised while on foreign travels.

It may be embarrassing to some Ugandans who would need to travel or would be travelling for their daily activities only to be embarrassed on the pretext that there is Ebola in Uganda. 

I would, therefore, like to request the Minister of Health that since the WHO Executive Director is in this country, his office should frequently be informed about the progress and achievements so that so his global voice can allay fears of any host country where Ugandans will be travelling.
	
Secondly, I was looking at the support given by our development partners, particularly the provision of makeshift laboratories at the borders or districts where there has been this disease outbreak. This has driven me to reconsider how equipped our medical laboratories are in our regional referral hospitals. It is imperative that we ensure that we have medical equipment in our laboratories to handle more serious disease like Ebola, in case there is any threat for its outbreak.

As Parliament, we need to reconsider the budget of the Ministry of Health particularly to handle emergencies –(Member timed out.)

6.41
MR JACOB OPOLOT (Independent, Pallisa County, Pallisa): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I also join the rest of my colleagues in commending the minister for the statement made here but more so, for allaying our fears. I hope the message has sunk into the minds of our population because the level of fear, and if you followed the WhatsApp’s comments, you could see that the whole country was scared. Thank you for that.

I also would like to thank the staff of the Ministry of Health especially those at the borders for their courageous contribution and the ministry, for the deliberate efforts to build their capacity because if it was not for the capacity built, it would have been worse. People would have taken off from the patients and the suspected patients would have melted into the population making us register more cases.

However, Madam Speaker, it is quite embarrassing to stand and commend them for the good job when the minister said that they have not been paid for four months, yet, we are commending them for their level of preparedness and capacity to handle. I do not know what constitutes capacity and the high level of preparedness in this case, as per the definition of the minister, when people are not paid and when there is no allocation to Ebola intervention.

I am actually asking myself: must it be the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to give you money for Ebola intervention or as the ministry, you should be able to provide something to start with, so that the country always has something to respond to Ebola before we can urge the ministry under emergency situations, to add more money. 

Madam Speaker, the Ministry of Health is just complaining about the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development yet they have their allocation. How much have they allocated to Ebola before they complain about Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development doing nothing. 

I would like to believe that by the time you are building the capacity of your people –(Member timed out.)

6.44
MR PAUL AKAMBA (Independent, Busiki County, Namutumba): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Allow me to commend the minister for the statement she has just made and the effort the ministry has put in to fight the outbreak.

Until we include in our Constitution a provision on the right to health as one of the rights, we may not achieve adequate funding for the health sector. I do not know whether it is deliberate. Otherwise, we cannot say we are investing much into security and infrastructure, when we do not care about the lives of the people who would enjoy that infrastructure. It is very unfortunate that the minister is lamenting that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development has done nothing to support this emergency. 

I would like to request the minister to qualify the statement of Ebola outbreak because in the literal sense, it appears like Ebola is everywhere in Uganda. To an ordinary person, that statement should be qualified to all Ugandans and to the entire world. From her explanation, it appears like we do not have Ebola in Uganda and we are making all effort to prevent any further outbreak. I request that the minister be very clear.

We are known for being hospitable to whoever comes to the country, which is a good thing, but we should have some limits.

I have had the opportunity of being at the border –(Member timed out.)

6.47
MR HENRY KIBALYA (NRM, Bugabula County South, Kamuli): Thank you, Madam Speaker.  We thank the minister for the good work done.

I came here to make use of the statement that the US Mission wrote on the 12th and I would like to read it verbatim because the battle we have is to have media disseminate this information to the rest of Ugandans that are not in this House and cannot access the information that the minister has, so that they can have confidence and know that Ebola is not as is alleged.

Outside this House, it is as if Ebola is everywhere and we are at a high risk yet it is tamed. I think there are around one or two cases whereby it is not at a level that should cause alarm. The US Mission wrote this statement:

“As of June 12th, the Uganda Ministry of Health has confirmed three cases of Ebola in Western Uganda near the border with the Democratic Republic of Congo. 

The United States has strong confidence in the Government of Uganda’s ability to respond to the outbreak in coordination with the partners.

The US Government has invested heavily in Uganda in preparation to manage Ebola through both technical and financial assistance and we will continue to provide assistance to prevent the spread of the disease.

For an update on the situation, we encourage you to follow the Uganda Ministry of Health as well as the World Health Organisation Ebola situation report.”

This means that the US has confidence that Uganda can handle this in whichever formula and there is no cause for worry. My only request is that the Ministry of Health should use the media as much as possible so that this information can reach the last person.

Secondly, I would request the Ministry of Health to equally request the President to address the nation because this is something that - When they listen and he tells them that everything is clear, this is the information we have. There are people in the country that can only get the confidence after listening to such communication.
	
We should use all possible means to restore confidence on Ugandans as the minister said that since that case we have not had any other case but tomorrow, you will hear radio stations saying that there is Ebola in Kampala. 

We need to take advantage of that and make sure that everything is put right.

THE SPEAKER: While we are allying those fears, the minister should launch a hand washing campaign for the country. The President launched this sometime back in Kamuli but I think we need to remind people.

6.52
MS VIOLET AKURUT (NRM, Woman Representative, Katakwi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minster for the statement but above all thank her and her team for being vigilant in their response to Ebola.

I have just come back from my constituency; although people know how deadly Ebola is, the biggest challenge is for them to know how it is contracted. We have a culture of greeting through shaking of hands and hugging which is still going on. We have not utilised the people whom we think would be used to pass the message to the local people on how Ebola is contracted. I am a Catholic and there is a section where they tell you to greet your neighbour and you are supposed to shake hands, others even hug.

I am happy to hear that the ministry has contained it. When you hear about the three cases that have been confirmed, it means that we have contained the disease but the message has to go down to the local community. Sometimes when you do not greet them, they consider you to be proud because in our culture people should see you shaking hands or hugging them.

I implore the minister and her team to use the religious leaders in this fight of Ebola so that they can be able to pass the message to the communities and also use the local leaders like the LCs. 

It is unfortunate that we are talking about the challenges of resources but to me Ebola is an emergency, it is a disaster to the country so it should also be treated as so. Other than just the Ministry of Health responding to this, the Ministry of Relief, Disaster Preparedness and Refugees should also come on board because we have funding there.

Disasters should not only be floods and famine but also Ebola so that the resources that we have for disaster management should also manage Ebola outbreak in the country. With this, we will be able to sort out the challenge that we have in terms of the limited resources for proper response especially facilitating the doctors that are helping us in this response. For us to have them and they are not motivated, is quiet unfortunate for this country. Thank you very much.

6.55
DR MICHEAL BUKENYA (NRM, Bukuya County, Kassanda): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Allow me to first thank the minster for the statement. As medical workers, we are not much different from soldiers. I would like to thank the minister because she was leading the battle from the front. She has been to Kasese, everywhere and if we were to give ranks, she would become a General today.

Secondly, I would like to appeal to the media; there has been news on NBS that there is an Ebola outbreak in Mbarara. Let the media be more responsible. There are people they are supposed to ask before they declare. Even in the hospital, I am not allowed to declare. There are standard ways of declaring and Ebola outbreak but not to alarm Ugandans. The media should be more responsible. 

I would also like to appeal to other Ugandans on social media. The other day, they said there was an outbreak in Wakiso; another one said it was in Kanungu. It is very irresponsible posting on social media and these things have far reaching implications but people do them in an exciting way.

However, as we move to urge Ugandans to be more responsible, I would like to request the minister that whereas she has been releasing written statements daily, she needs to start now calling press conferences, maybe daily, to update Ugandans, for instance, that, “since Friday, this is what we have heard.” Update people every day because they look for the news but they cannot get it; they start publishing gossip. 

However, if there is an official channel, they call the press in their Situation Room in the ministry. (Interjections) It does not need to be her; someone else can sit in and update the nation on what is taking place such that everyone appreciates, both locally and internationally, about what is taking place.

Madam Speaker, there is the issue of financial support. When we had the Congo Crimean Haemorrhagic Fever in Nakaseke, we came up with an idea of having an emergency fund for the Ministry of Health. However, we were discouraged and told that there is an emergency fund in the Office of the Prime Minister to handle disasters. 

So, I would like to appeal to this House that since we have different challenging health issues every year, to allow us in the next financial year, when we are planning, to put a budget of Shs 50 billion as a start-up for emergency response and we see how they handle that one. It can respond to the cholera outbreak hon. Nambooze was talking about and many other issues.
Finally, as the minister emphasised hand washing –(Member timed out.)

6.58
MR TOM ALERO (NRM, Moyo County West, Moyo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Thank you very much, honourable minister, for the statement. My sincere condolences go to the family of the pastor who died of Ebola and all those who are affected in Kasese. I feel that this is tantamount to disaster. It is a disaster and therefore, the Ministry of Relief, Disaster Preparedness and Refugees should also be co-opted to help in this situation. 

We have three hospitals in West Nile, which I feel should be equipped and facilitated. These are Adjumani District Referral Hospital, Arua Regional Referral Hospital and Moyo General Hospital. These three should be equipped and facilitated because Adjumani, Arua, Moyo and Yumbe districts all host refugees. You can imagine the population in those refugee settlements. The population is so high that there is need for facilitation and equipment.

It is not only that. I would like to re-echo what my colleagues have already talked about; sensitisation, mobilisation and education of everybody in the communities along the borders and in the refugee-hosting districts. As my sister said, I am also a very serious, practising Catholic where we must greet. I do not know how we shall extend that message to our people because we are supposed to exchange a sign of peace. Peace must flow and we should, therefore, be able to give this message to the people who greet in the churches. Can the ministry continue monitoring and having surveillance in all those areas that are affected? 

Lastly, the minister talked about the areas that are affected. She did not mention the districts that are affected or suspected to be affected. I do not know whether you can mention some of those districts so that we can put measures in place. The buses that ply the West Nile route like Gaaga Coach and KK Coach carry Congolese from –(Member timed out.)

7.01
MR GEORGE KUMAMA (NRM, Bbaale County, Kayunga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I must add my voice to thank the ministry for their interventions and rapid responses that they have given to this disease. I must also thank the partners that have come in to invest and give us a big hand, despite the fact that our Government has not yet put in any money towards these cases. 

I would also like to request the minister - She has told us, with a lot of confidence that they are in control but do not relax. Much as you are trying to contain the situation, please do it harder. This is indeed a deadly disease that can kill within 2 to 21 days; we cannot undermine this.

I would also like to request the ministry that as we look at the partners that are coming in, have you also looked at interacting with your Ministry of Health counterparts the other side of the Government of the Democratic Republic of Congo? It looks like Ebola is born and grown in DRC. From time to time, you find Ebola cases coming from DRC. Have you taken the initiative to interact with the minister on the other side and what are the responses on collaboration so that you can know that where Ebola is grown, they are also taking similar steps like we are doing in Uganda?

I would also request the ministry to intensify sensitisation on local radios and televisions, all other media, schools and other areas. I think that one should be taken on seriously, if we are to fight together to curb this disease forever.

I was a bit touched when you said the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development has not given you any money. Indeed, as the owners of this country, we should urge the ministry to look for money for this to put into this task because this is one of the deadliest diseases on earth. 
I also request the ministry that if there is a way you can introduce hand washing at Parliament, like you did the other day on Budget Day. Our hands were washed. There is something –

THE SPEAKER: The Commission to introduce hand washing here and sanitisers?

MR KUMAMA: Yes, if it could be introduced at Parliament every day as we monitor this. When Members or people who enter Parliament come, we should have handwashing out there. It will help us a great deal to allay all these fears.

7.04
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Ms Betty Aol): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for the statement. When Ebola first broke out in Uganda, it was in Gulu and it killed very many people. People remember the late Dr Lukwiya but there were very many medical workers who died of Ebola.

I would like to ask the minister that if there is any way that they can vaccinate all the medical workers who follow up on these Ebola cases, that would be good. Even if it is the lowest medical worker, it is life and they are the people who get into contact with Ebola patients. So, let these medical workers be vaccinated.

Secondly, on Education, Information and Communication (EIC) - you talked about EIC materials, which will enable me not to give my message differently from my colleagues. The message should be standard and the bell that we ring should speak the same message. 

Today morning, a Presidential advisor said something negative about the medical workers. He said there was no Ebola in Kasese and that the declaration of Ebola outbreak in Kasese is a way of medical workers or Ministry of Health extorting money at the expense of the country. That was on NBS, a programme called “One on One with Tamale Mirundi”. Maybe it was done because there is no EIC material. 

If one Ebola case is discovered and it is declared as an outbreak, don’t you think it can scare people everywhere? Right now, we are preparing an international conference. That declaration can scare people. Is there any way of making it –(Interjections)– yes, we are to prevent but not to cause any alarm. Is there any way the Ministry of Health can come up with something, which will not scare everybody. Ebola is bad and it is the worst killer I have ever known on earth. I saw with my own eyes what happened in Gulu. Raise the alarm but let it be contained for us to work. 

The sanitation measure should not only be for Ebola. It should be for all diseases. If we have a good practice of washing every time, it will also help us prevent other diseases. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable minister, for the information. Members are now better informed. However, on the issue of mobilisation, there is this Ministry of Information, Communication and National Guidance. I think it is the national guidance part, which is asleep. It has to come out and guide the population; “wash your hands, do not hug” – because they have the capacity. Of course, they are not here as usual.

MS NAMBOOZE: Information, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Are you giving me information? (Laughter)

MS NAMBOOZE: I am giving information to us, Madam Speaker. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: How can it be general information? No. I want the members of the Cabinet to assist us wake up that portion of the Ministry of National Guidance. This is when they should be guiding the population. They are on ICT, OTT, scratch cards but they are not giving messages that should go out to the population. 

Thank you very much, honourable members. I hope you take into account our proposals and keep us posted. 

LAYING OF PAPERS

TABLING THE LIST OF ACCOUNTING OFFICERS FOR FINANCIAL YEAR 2019/2020

7.10
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR KAMPALA CAPITAL CITY AUTHORITY (Ms Benny Namugwanya): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on Table a list of appointed or designated Accounting Officers for the Financial Year 2019/2020. I beg to lay.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, this is just for your information.

TREASURY MEMORANDUM ON THE PARLIAMENTARY RESOLUTIONS ON THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC ACCOUNTS – CENTRAL GOVERNMENT ON THE REPORT OF THE AUDITOR-GENERAL FOR FINANCIAL YEAR 2014/2015

7.11
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR KAMPALA CAPITAL CITY AUTHORITY (Ms Benny Namugwanya): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay the submission of the Treasury Memorandum on the Parliamentary Resolutions on the Report of the Public Accounts Committee – Central Government on the Report of the Auditor-General for Financial Year 2014/2015. I beg to lay.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, it is submitted to the Committee on Public Accounts - Central Government for review and report back.

THE PUBLIC PROCUREMENT AND DISPOSAL OF PUBLIC ASSETS AUTHORITY ANNUAL PERFORMANCE REPORT FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2017/2018

7.11
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR KAMPALA CAPITAL CITY AUTHORITY (Ms Benny Namugwanya): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay the Public Procurement and Disposal of Public Assets Authority Annual Performance Report for the Financial Year 2017/2018. I beg to lay.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, it is sent to the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development for perusal and report back.

THE UGANDA POLICE ANNUAL CRIME REPORT 2018

7.12
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR KAMPALA CAPITAL CITY AUTHORITY (Ms Benny Namugwanya): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay the Uganda Police Annual Crime Report 2018. I beg to lay.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable members. It is for your information. You could, in your free time, read through it. 

So, honourable members, I would like to thank you very much for the work done today. House adjourned to tomorrow at 2 p.m. 

(House rose at 7.12 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 19 June 2019 at 2.00p.m.) 

