Thursday, 19 June 2014

(Parliament met at 2. 22 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.)

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order. 

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR
	
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this sitting. As we agreed yesterday, today we should start the debate on the State of the Nation Address by H.E the President. I see that on item eight, we will be moving upwards so that we accommodate the response of the Leader of the Opposition on the State of the Nation Address. That should be done immediately. The movers and seconders of the motion are here. We will be ready to proceed like that. 

I would like also to alter the order paper to allow the Minister of Finance to lay two papers, whose details – I think there is a brief to Parliament on the parliamentary resolution seeking authority to finance supplementary expenditure and revenue shortfalls through domestic borrowing. I think that is one of the papers to be laid. And the second one is on the proposal to amend the resolution to borrow $12 million equivalent to SDR 8.1 million from the International Development Association IDA to finance the Uganda Energy for Rural Transformation (ERT) phase II project. I therefore alter the order paper to accommodate the laying of papers on the Table. The clerk should take care of that. Thank you. 

Honourable members, this afternoon, in the Public Gallery, we have pupils and teachers from Ebenezer Junior School Kawempe, Kampala District represented by hon. Latif Ssebagala, the Imam himself and hon. Nabila Ssempala. They have come to observe the proceedings. Please join me in welcoming them. (Applause)

LAYING OF PAPERS

2.25
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (PLANNING) (Mr Matia Kasaija): Mr Speaker and honourable members, I beg to lay on Table the following documents: A brief to Parliament on the resolution seeking authority to finance the supplementary expenditure and revenue shortfalls through domestic borrowing. I beg to lay. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

MR MATIA KASAIJA: I beg to lay on Table a brief to Parliament on the proposal to amend the resolution to borrow $12 million equivalent to SDR 801,000 from the International Development Association (IDA) to finance the Uganda Energy for Rural Electrification Phase No.2 project. I beg to lay. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture those two documents and they stand committed to the Committee on Finance to handle expeditiously and get back to the House and advise on how to proceed with them. 

PRESENTATION OF A PETITION BY THE FORMER PRISONS OFFICERS OF KASESE DISTRICT LOCAL GOVERNMENT

MR SSEBAGALA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a procedural issue. As my colleague is about to present a petition, under our rules of procedure, petitions are given 45 days. Two and half years ago, I came to your office with a petition from Kawempe and another petition. It is now close to three years and these petitions have not been handled. I have tried my best but I have not found any convincing answer as to why it is taking too long. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, you make it sound like I am the one holding the petition in my office. The rule on 45 days starts counting from the day you present it in Parliament and not from the day you brought it to the Deputy Speaker. You should have actually raised it properly because it is a matter of concern. When you presented that petition to the House, it was sent to the committee responsible for that sector –(Members rose_)– the Speaker is speaking, so I expect honourable members to take their places and listen. 

I keep urging the committee to make sure they apply their energies and knowledge on these matters within the time frame provided within the rules, and if they cannot finish it within that time frame, it is necessary for them to come back and seek further authority to extend it so that we can know that from the 45 days, they require two more weeks to finish this. 

But certainly, two years is a bit too long. This petition was referred to a committee of this House and I expect some responses from the chairs of these committees. We did this last year and I should be doing that again to have an update from the committee as to what business is still pending especially those petitions. They should be handled expeditiously. 

MS NAMBOOZE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a point of procedure. As I was coming in, I read through the attendance book, and I found out that over 100 of us had already signed as being in attendance in Parliament. But when I look here - and I also fear when those young children keep seeing just a handful of us here –(Interruption)

MR MATIA KASAIJA: Mr Speaker, I was the last person to sign in and this was about 10 minutes ago. My recollection is that we must have been about 10 to 15 Members. So, my point of order is: Is it correct for the honourable member to say there were more than 100 Members registered. Mr Speaker, I would like to demand that the book is brought before Parliament to establish how many have signed and how many we are in the House now.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, there is a way we handle privileged matters in the House and we all owe it to this House. We should not bring in incidences that damage the image of the House. So, for that matter I am going to ask for the books to be brought here - Sergeant-at-Arms, please – and we determine whether the honourable member is right in saying that over 100 Members had signed. In the meantime, let us have the petition presented to save on time.

PRESENTATION OF A PETITION BY THE FORMER PRISONS OFFICERS OF KASESE DISTRICT LOCAL GOVERNMENT

2.23
MR JAMES MBAHIMBA (NRM, Kasese Municipality, Kasese): Thank you, Mr Speaker. This is a petition signed by 44 former prison officers of Kasese District Local Administration. The petition is addressed to the Parliament of the Republic of Uganda and drafted under Rule 29 of the Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of Uganda.

The humble petition by the former prisons officers of Kasese District Local Government whose employment was unlawfully terminated by the Uganda Prisons Service Administration, is hereby presented by I, Mbahimba James, MP for Kasese District reads thus:

“Your humble petitioners served as prisons officers at various ranks and positions in Kasese District Local Government Prisons until 14 July 2006 when their administration was taken over by the central Government and brought under the Uganda Prisons Service in accordance with the Prisons Act No. 17 of 2006;

In May 2007, a head count was conducted by the Uganda Prisons Service officials in all former local government prisons stations of Kasese District and subsequently your petitioners were on various dates, between the Month of July 2007 and February 2008, sent away from the service without being informed of any reasons for doing so;

Your humble petitioners were never issued with certificates of termination of service neither were they relieved of their instruments of service, including uniforms, warrant cards and other government equipment previously in their possession;

Your petitioners were never accorded a right to be heard before being sent away from the service and as such, your petitioners do consent that they are still officers of the Uganda Prisons Service by law since they have never formerly retired neither have their service contracts been legally terminated;

Your petitioners today suffer immense inconvenience, financial hardships and embarrassment as their due entitlements from the Uganda Prisons Service has never been extended to them since 2008;

Whereof, by this petition, your humble petitioners pray that:
    a) Parliament investigates this matter of your petitioners’ stoppage of service with a view to ascertain the circumstances under which the prisons officers were irregularly sent away from prisons service without any lawful cause; 
    b) Parliament orders that the perpetrators of the injustice meted on your petitioners be administratively held responsible for the loss, injury and inconveniences, financial hardships and embarrassment caused to your petitioners. Your petitioners as duty bound will ever pray.”

Mr Speaker, I have a file here containing copies of the appointment letters, warrant cards and a list of names onto which they have appended their signatures. I beg that you allow me lay the petition on Table.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please lay them.

MR MBAHIMBA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I now lay on Table a petition by 44 local administration prisons officers from various prisons stations of Kasese.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

MR MBAHIMBA: Mr Speaker, I also beg to lay the attachments to the petition. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that too. The petition stands referred to the appropriate committee on Internal Affairs for expeditious handling. The period is 45 days and if they want an extension, it should be sought from the House or the directly from the Speaker. It is so referred to that committee. Thank you.

Honourable members, there was a point of procedure raised, but which attracted a point of order on the number of members who had signed in the attendance register before we started the sitting. The honourable member for Mukono Municipality, hon. Betty Nambooze, stated that over 100 Members had signed the register yet they were not in the Chamber of Parliament. But a point of order was raised by the Minister of State for Finance, hon. Matia Kasaija, which prompted the Speaker to call for the books to be brought into the Chamber. 

The clerks have carried out a count on the register and these are the results of what they established from the registers. In book one, there were 17 Members who had signed in. In book two, there were nine Members who had signed in. This gives us a total number of 26 members who had signed in before we started the sitting.

The hon. Betty Nambooze is therefore ruled out of order and she must apologise to this House for bringing the image of this House in disrepute yet she is also a member.
Honourable members, this is becoming a bad habit for us that Members can just stand and make statements without even imagining that they are also members of this same House, which brings the image of this House in disrepute. There is also a matter still under investigation about the involvement of Members of Parliament in certain activities that are further bringing disrepute to the image of this House. This is unfortunate and should not be repeated. Hon. Betty Nambooze, given the heart of God that moves with me all the time, I will not suspend you from the House today; I should have suspended you.

MS NAMBOOZE: Mr Speaker, I do wish to apologise for having stated that Members in this House sign the attendance book but eventually do not attend Parliament.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is not what you said, honourable. If you are withdrawing, withdraw what you said. You said over 100 members had signed the book and they are not in the House.

MS NAMBOOZE: Mr Speaker, I am very sorry and I am withdrawing that statement.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: On what point do you rise, Member for Dokolo? 

MRS CECILIA OGWAL: I want to thank the Speaker and the hon. Member for having honourably withdrawn the statement. I wanted to thank her that she has behaved honourably to have withdrawn and apologised. However, I want to say that on record there are over 370 members of Parliament and it is also true that when you look at your own record –
 
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, please resume your seat. Hon. Members, I directed that the papers laid by the minister be sent to the committee on Finance but actually the appropriate committee is the committee on National Economy. Let the records reflect that correctly.

QUESTIONS FOR ORAL ANSWER

QUESTION NO. 82/1/09 TO THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT

2.42
MR SSALI BAKER (NRM, Buikwe County West, Buikwe): i) Why have Kawolo and Itojo Hospitals not been rehabilitated, yet this activity was provided for in the budget for financial year 2013/2014?

ii)	 The above notwithstanding, why has Government not provided for the rehabilitation of the above hospitals in the National Budget Framework Paper for financial year 2014/2015?

2.44
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr Matia Kasaija): Hon. Speaker and colleagues, this is a question for oral answer. The money that was meant to rehabilitate these hospitals in the 2013/2014 financial year was supposed to be provided by the Spanish people but for unexplained reasons, they withdrew that financing. What I can assure this House is that we are going to look at this matter afresh and we will provide money using our own resources to ensure that this hospital is rehabilitated.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I have not got confirmation that this matter has been closed and ready for handling so let’s defer it.

BILLS 
SECOND READING

THE PUBLIC FINANCE BILL, 2012

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I am told that the motion for second reading was moved and the report from the committee was presented and the debate on the general principles of the Bill should have commenced. Is the chairperson here?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. This is a fourth session of Parliament and every session we have sessional committees. The procedural issue I am raising is; is it procedurally right to continue when we do not have sessional committees in place, because the chairman you are asking for does not exist?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is a legitimate issue. I have received the full list of members for constitution, I am waiting for the leadership from NRM whose names have not yet been submitted. That committee should have been constituted today.

I am advised that the NRM have taken a decision and they would be changing membership of sectoral committees every two years; so they will not have to do it every two years. But they will be changing leadership which they have not communicated to the Speaker. That is a valid matter which has been raised by the member for Budadiri West. So we defer the discussion on the Bill.

DEBATE IN REPLY TO THE ADRESS ON THE STATE OF THE NATION DELIVERED TO PARLIAMENT BY HIS EXCELLENCY THE PRESIDENT OF UGANDA ON THURSDAY, 5 JUNE 2014

MOTION THAT THANKS OF PARLIAMENT BE RECORDED FOR THE CLEAR AND PRECISE EXPOSITION OF GOVERNMENT POLICY CONTAINED IN THE ADDRESS ON THE STATE OF THE NATION BY HIS EXCELLENCY, THE PRESIDENT OF UGANDA

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the mover of the motion ready with the motion. Hon. Adong Lilly. 

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR MINERALS (Mr Peter Lokeris): Hon. Speaker, the mover of the motion is not in yet and we are still in the caucus, we shall be coming tomorrow.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion is on the Floor but it has not been substantially moved but I have a substantive responsibility from the Leader of the Opposition. I will ask him to discharge that responsibility now.

2.49
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Wafula Oguttu): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker, for giving me the opportunity to make my comments on the State of the Nation Address. 

Article 101(1) of the Constitution provides that “The President shall, at the beginning of each session of Parliament, deliver an address to Parliament on the state of the nation”. 

In this address, the President is commanded by the Constitution to inform the country about the state of the nation since his last address the previous year, including what he or his government did during the year, what he plans to do this year and the enabling policies and laws that he is going to pursue and/ or propose to Parliament and the country in the year ushered in by his address. 

Unfortunately, in the long tenure of President Museveni, he has not managed to fulfill this duty, even though every year he duly makes a speech at the beginning of every session of Parliament saying anything he likes. This could explain why many of his assistants in this House, technocrats, and invited guests go into a slumber mode when he is delivering his address. They know he is going to repeat what they have heard many times over and over again. 

Members of the public too no longer switch on their radios or Television sets to listen to the President’s annual address; they don’t expect anything new and exciting.

As always, the President makes a sort of campaign speech, with the same aspirational statements on roads, electricity, health, education, agriculture and so forth which he knows will not be fulfilled and this is spiced with abuses sometimes and insults to those leaders in the Opposition he considers to be his enemies. 

Mr Speaker, the President does not show, and we have observed this over a period of time, any respect and does not hide his dislike for those who dare question his ideas, policies, style of leadership and quality of governance. He has failed to embrace our political diversities.

We are not in the Opposition for the sake of opposing anything that Government does or that we dislike any individual leader in Government. No, we are opposed to personal rule, impunity, patronage, militarism, corruption, injustice and the system that perpetuates these evils.

It may perhaps be prudent in future for Parliament to agree with the President on a proper format for the State of the Nation Address to enable him adequately fulfil his duty as commanded by the Constitution. It wastes a lot of time for so many people to listen to almost the same speech every year and then listen to its variation when the Minister of Finance, on his behalf and in his presence, reads the Budget a few days later, followed by his long explanatory comments.

On behalf of the Opposition in Parliament and all Ugandans, let me extend our condolences and sympathies to all the families which lost their loved ones, some in avoidable circumstances, especially our soldiers who died or were injured in Somalia, South Sudan and elsewhere on duty. 

Our condolences also go to those who lost children under the age of five due to avoidable causes and mothers who were needlessly lost in childbirth. We wish also to extend our condolences and sympathies to those who have lost loved ones in or have been displaced by natural disasters like those in Kasese, Sironko, Bududa, Kaabong, Bulambuli and many other places.

We take this opportunity to send our condolences to the people of Kenya on the loss of so many lives of their dear ones to terrorism in the recent past.

Defence 

Our soldiers have been in Somalia for many years now and we commend the work they have done on behalf of our country and thank them for enduring the sacrifices their service requires of them. However, we do not think they should still be in that country because by now, they should have trained more than enough Somali soldiers to protect their own country. If Somalis do not fight for themselves, then it does not make sense for our soldiers to stay for so long whereby they eventually may be regarded as a sort of occupation army. 

Already, some of our officers are under trial for alleged criminal offences committed in Somalia. What capacity is there to properly investigate activities so far away in order to avoid miscarriage of justice?  Secondly, there is no specific law that allows alleged criminal offences committed in Somalia to be tried in Uganda. Is there any? We do not know it.

The country wants to know the time table for bringing back home our troops from Somalia. They cannot be a permanent substitute for a Somali National Army. It is not a desirable development as it may prove detrimental to the security of the country and the people of Uganda and the region.

Similarly, our troops continue to die in South Sudan in a senseless war long after fulfilling the initial mission for provision of a safe passage for our nationals who were trapped in South Sudan when the war began. 

Mr Speaker, what is the current mission of our troops in South Sudan? Who is footing the bills of that mission? Why should Ugandans take sides with one protagonist in what is essentially an intra SPLM struggle, an intervention that is proving to be a stumbling block in the peace negotiations between the belligerent sides?

Ugandans and the world at large need to know the time table for withdrawal of our troops from South Sudan. We want to know whether President Yoweri Museveni would welcome a similar open intervention by another country giving support to a side against him in the on-going internal NRM power struggle. That is exactly what his current belligerent intervention in South Sudan amounts to. 

State of Governance

Mr Speaker, allow me to make a few comments on the state of governance in our country which the President omitted in his address. The major failure of the President is not that he just makes ritualistic aspirations and he referred to this himself in the speech instead of a State of the Nation Address. His major failure is his refusal to effect the transition to a democratic multi-party system based on good faith, tolerance, trust and dialogue among the various political forces and actors and building national consensus.

Whereas Uganda is by law supposed to be in a multi-party system, the facts are to the contrary as on one hand, there is the NRM Party fused with the State and Government and on the other hand, the Opposition parties strangled by the Police and security agencies and whose members are classified as enemies of the State and their political party activities regarded as enemy activities. Persecution of political parties and their leaders is getting more intensified.

The driving force behind whatever the regime is doing is the pursuance of a narrow political agenda focused on regime survival rather than nation building. Regime survival has led to undisciplined patterns of expenditure of taxpayers’ money such as the President’s permanent and continuous election campaigns, huge public administration costs, patronage, corruption, fraud, wastage and mismanagement of public resources. 

The only solution to this question is the separation of the NRM Party or any other party that will come to power in future, from the State so that it is a normal political party campaigning fairly with other political parties. A party that is dependent on state funds, institutions and structures is a total sham. History has shown that such parties never survive long after they lose state power. In the region, the examples are there.

Judiciary

Mr Speaker, administration of justice has been adversely affected by a number of undesirable developments. There has been a failure or rather a refusal by the President to appoint a substantive Chief Justice after the retirement of the former Chief Justice on attainment of the mandatory retirement age. There is also no substantive Deputy Chief Justice. We now have a situation where a person not substantively appointed is acting in both positions as Chief Justice and Deputy Chief Justice. This situation has affected morale in the Judiciary and the public thereby affecting the quality of administration of justice.

How long can this August House effectively function as an example, without a substantive Speaker or without a substantive Deputy Speaker? This is the situation in the Judiciary for almost two years. 

Secondly, there has been a progressive appointment of political cadres, former NRM Secretariat officials, former ministers and politicians who lost elections, to judicial positions in the High Court, Court of Appeal and Supreme Court. Whereas there is nothing that bars NRM cadres from being appointed as judicial officers, it becomes worrying when it is part of a general policy of turning all facets of public life into a political tool for the ruling party. What will happen to our Judiciary system and indeed other state institutions when this Government is gone because this idea of appointing people who are attached and have allegiance to only one party is dangerous for this country? Civil servants should be people who serve the country and not their parties.

The Judiciary must be seen to administer justice impartially, but it is becoming impossible when appointments are made with political partisan activism and bias as one of the primary qualifications.   

Political parties

The role of political parties is fundamental to the building of democracy, as they are the means through which citizens aggregate their political preferences, participate in the governance of the country and voice their concerns. 

For political parties to operate effectively, there must be freedom of speech, the right to assemble and organize; there must be respect for human rights and the rule of law and there must be a level playing field for all political players. If our country had moved to a true multi-party system, institutions of the state should have disengaged from the ruling party. This has not yet happened, but it needs to happen, even in the interests of the NRM’s survival when out of power. 

In a normal democratic multi-party system, there are three essential conditions:
            1. Meaningful competition for political power among individuals and organised political parties; 
            2. Inclusive participation in the election of leaders at various levels and choice of policies through free and fair elections; 
            3. A level of civil and political liberties sufficient to ensure competition and participation.

Mr Speaker, allow me, at this juncture to congratulate hon. Brenda Nabukenya, a gallant young lady, who despite all obstacles put forward by the state machinery and the Head of State himself, won the Luwero by-election. (Applause) Congratulations hon. Brenda Nabukenya. Welcome back to Parliament to continue your resourceful service to our country.

It is sad to note that the President after so many years in power has still failed to embrace all the people of this country in their diversities, including political diversity and continues partisan activities even when he is expected to behave as the Fountain of Honour and President of all Ugandans.

While democracy can take many forms, no system can be called democratic without a meaningful level of competition, participation and civil and political liberties. These three conditions are largely absent in Uganda. Instead, we now have a system of personal patrimonial rule and impunity based on a mixture of fear, intimidation, repression, gagging and patronage. Power is exercised without restraint, un-encumbered by rules, regulations or the law or the Constitution. What matters is what the President wants, not what the country needs. The ongoing humiliation of the Lord Mayor of Kampala Capital City Authority (KCCA) despite a High Court ruling in his favour is good example of this government’s impunity

Mr Speaker, a supposedly multi-party system is super-imposed on a Movement system superstructure or at best, running side by side with the Movement system, where the government, the presidency and the ruling party are one and the same thing.  

Herein, lies the major failure of the President. Thirty years in power is enough time to have put in place and consolidated the necessary robust institutions and systems for a truly democratic order. Instead the President is often heard lamenting and complaining that there are not enough cadres and trusted agents to do his work or takeover from him as if he is not the one who has been in charge and failed to create enough cadres even for his party. Now, he has resorted to handing over civilian government work to soldiers, including agricultural extension services and the compilation of a voters’ register.

Calls for inclusive national conference

Behind every well-functioning democratic system lie not only just constitutions, institutions and systems but also a series of unwritten rules. For example:
    (i) That the army, security agencies and civil servants do not get involved in politics; they remain neutral and impartial. 
    (ii) That a certain level of social justice must be preserved so that those who are in power must govern for the good of the country and keep personal enrichment within constant checks.
    (iii) There must be clear rules about the use of force by the armed forces and security agencies. 

Once these unwritten rules are agreed upon, they will not be easily torn up as they are based on mutual trust. The most important unwritten rules actually relate to abuse of trust. Trust is required concerning both the basics of the Constitution – how power is distributed and how it is restrained – and about the operation of individual organs of the state. So long as this confidence and trust are not abused, the rules are capable of surviving many storms. Our country needs the unwritten rules for peace, national unity and a smooth transition. That is why there are numerous demands for a national consultation conference to agree on how to move our country forward.

Like the Rt hon. Speaker did at the opening of this Session of this august House, we too have been calling for a national dialogue and national healing and forgiveness. This is the best way Uganda can realise a well-functioning democracy in which politicians live in mutual respect and peaceful co-existence. If this is done, public officials will not think of taking bribes, judges will not contemplate giving way to government pressure and politicians will not plan going in exile when they lose power.

Once enough of these elements are established, then the system of governance as a whole can sustain and develop trust among the members of the public. This is what is known as “Soft power” and democracy is upheld by soft power, not by obnoxious public order management laws and patronage. (Applause)

Mr Speaker, we just took the liberty to dream, as the reality facing us is an authoritarian system, which is the easier route those who control the regime have taken; to retain power through personalising the army, police and security agencies, which use force, violence and fear to maintain a relatively stable and self-sustaining system but built on the sand. That is what we call “Hard power” and what we have is hard power and not soft power.

Militarism is a serious problem in our country. Militarism in this country comprises the following: 
    1. Use of the military, police and other security agencies to solve political issues.
    2. Regimentation of society (cadre formation through “chakamchaka”; every thorny political issue is referred to Kyankwanzi for deliberation under military discipline by privates (MPs are turned into privates), chaired by a General cum President and proliferation of security organisations.
    3. Use of confrontational methods and lack of compromise since political disputes and differences are regarded as enemy acts.
    4. Use of absolute, final or terminal violent solutions instead of dialogue.
    5. The concept of security being based on maximum armament; and
    6. Security being considered first national priority.

Proof that this country is under militarism is found in the priorities in the Budget Framework Paper 2014 in Part 2 titled, “Programmes for Social and Economic Development and Indicative Expenditure Framework”, which indicates “Maintenance of National Security and Defence” as the number one priority for allocation of funds in the financial year 2014/15 Budget. This should not be the case for a country which for 30 years has never been invaded by any neighbours.

Mr Speaker, the solution for the situation we have outlined above demands the holding of an all-inclusive national conference bringing together representatives of Government, political parties, the civil society, faith-based organisations, business community, academia, youth, women and other actors of society to agree on the way forward for the country. 

We sincerely and firmly believe that the time to talk is now, not when the regime is crumbling as the signs of decay and inevitable disintegration are already accelerating and evident to everyone. The responsibility of dialogue largely lies on the President to take the initiative as long as he agrees to moderation by a neutral, independent mediator(s); or to accept an opposition or civil society initiative as long as it is also inclusive and mediated by an independent person(s). 

Electoral Laws

Mr Speaker, elections involve high stakes which may precipitate violence in a country. Kenya 2008/2009 is a recent example. Though the winning or losing of elections is tied to a political party, ultimately the credibility of elections is linked to national stability. Elections must exhibit an over-riding concern for the greater good of the country and the people as opposed to the good of special interest groups or party interests. Essentially, elections must be a nation-building exercise other than a divisive one. Indeed regular elections are held in our country but like they used to be in, say, Egypt or Iraq or Tunisia, by design the state party and its leader must win them, thus ensuring that candidate choices whether at primaries – and I am sure my friends on the opposite side know what happens in Namboole - or general elections are hardly reflective of genuine preferences.  

Mr Speaker, electoral and other attendant laws in our country are designed to deny political space and funding to the opposition parties. That is why the government has refused to implement the law on funding political parties passed by this august House several years ago – and without any explanation. Elections, therefore, are for the purpose of window dressed democracy and legitimisation of flawed processes. 

Mr Speaker, this is why most of our people, especially the youth unfortunately, now believe that there are no chances of changing government in Uganda through elections. They are instead asking for guns to fight the regime. We have been involved in the “Free and Fair Elections” exercise and we have been going around the country and everywhere we have gone, youth have told us that we are wasting their time and we should instead give them guns. This situation is dangerous and it must be addressed and changed, otherwise the country could be plunged into a catastrophe in the not-so-distant future. 

Independent Electoral Commission (EC)

Mr Speaker, this is why the Electoral Commission becomes an important institution to review and reform as the commission makes and implements important decisions that influence the outcome of elections. Thus the EC must be seen to be impartial and independent of Government and other influences, including opposition parties, which is not the case now. The composition and formation of the Electoral Commission affects the credibility of an electoral process. Therefore, it is important to get consensus of government, political parties, civil society, media and the public about the formation, composition, functions, jurisdiction and operation of the Electoral Commission. If the electoral process is not cleaned up, voter apathy will set in and participation in elections will be greatly reduced further.

New Electoral System

Mr Speaker, all the electoral reform proposals being made are predicated on the existing electoral system of the individual member constituency, “First Past the Post” or “winner takes it all” system that is prevalent in the former British colonies and the United States of America, remaining in place. 

Whereas the institutional and legal frameworks may have problems, most of the elections and problems in Uganda including monetisation, rigging, violence, tribalism, religious bias etc. which we experience during elections – and hon. Members, you know what you go through – are associated with our electoral system. We have the single-member constituency, “First Past the Post” in which the winner is the one with most votes but not necessarily the majority of votes. No electoral system is perfect but in a transitional phase in which Uganda currently is, the most important requirement for an electoral system is that it should maximise inclusiveness and present minimal areas for potential pre-election and post-election conflicts.

The most suitable electoral system for Uganda where elections have been so monetised may be the “Least–Proportional Representation System” in which voters vote for a party rather than an individual candidate and parties receive seats in proportion to their overall share of the total votes cast. Each party presents a list of candidates at the time of nomination and the winning candidates are taken from the list in order of their respective position on the list. 

Mr Speaker, we wish to propose that we could start with the women special interest group so that women seats are allocated to parties according to the proportion of votes received by each party. Once the country gets used to the new system, then it could be expanded to cover all electoral offices. This system is used in continental Europe, Latin America, Southern Africa and all former African French, Spanish and Portuguese colonies. In East Africa it is used with variations in Burundi and Rwanda and in Kenya and Tanzania only for special interest seats.

Federo     

Mr Speaker, we wish to commend Government for returning to Buganda recently some of their properties, they have demanded for so long. However, rectification of past errors is a necessary national matter which should be in good faith handled without political calculations in mind. We appreciate that Buganda could not refuse to receive what is theirs but for this to be irreversible, there is need for retrospective national consensus on the matter; and similar restitution must be done for all areas of the country. It is not only Buganda or only areas with kings whose properties were appropriated by the central government. We believe it is time to start finding an answer to the persistent question whether there should not be a Buganda government or Bunyoro or Tooro government with real power in those kingdoms near to what was provided for in Schedule 1 of the 1962 Constitution.

The current situation that puts centrally and the strategically located Buganda in a perpetual struggle with the central government, cannot allow the Kabaka to stay aloof from politics because he still has to negotiate with politicians who hold power and money at the centre. Again, we must emphasise that a national conference is necessary for the proper conclusion of the “Buganda question” and all other issues related to the correction of past errors. 

The Economy

Mr Speaker, over the last 28 years, it is true that substantial resources have been invested to stimulate development, increase growth and reduce poverty. In spite of all this, virtually everyone, citizens, policy-makers and experts agree that the expected welfare dividends for the ordinary person have not materialised. Government programmes have largely remained unimplemented or poorly implemented despite large amounts of money expended on them. Official statistics show that chronic poverty levels remain high at about 12 million people. Our national economy remains largely a nature-based economy with prayers to God while progress to industrialisation remains marginal. The road infrastructure, especially rural feeder roads and urban roads in the suburbs, are in a sorry state. 

Mr Speaker, there has been no visible socio-economic transformation and improvements in the quality of life for the majority of Ugandans. There is therefore need for new national initiatives to reverse this no-change trend starting with economic, political and governance reforms. 

Agriculture

Mr Speaker, Government is ever boasting of having registered impressive achievements, such as macroeconomic stability, low inflation rates, stable Uganda Shilling, liberalization of domestic market and exchange rates, privatization of public enterprises, diversification of exports and elimination of state intervention in the economy. However, the situation on the ground is completely different. Take for example the following government programmes in Agriculture. Whereas it is true that there have been many well designed programmes, what have been their end results? Largely failure; what have been the outcomes of barter trade of the 80s, the Poverty Reduction Action Plan? What about the Plan for Modernization of Agriculture (PMA), NAADS, Environment Action Plan and the more recent Prosperity for All (Bonna Bagagawale of Shs 20 million per household)? These have largely been mere political slogans with minimal results. They all failed. Where are the six heifers per family which the President promised Ugandans in his last year’s State of the Nation Address?

Mr Speaker, the growth rate in agriculture has declined from about five percent in the late 80s to about 1.5 percent presently yet population growth is about 3.5 percent; that is a serious problem. Your agriculture which produces food has grown by 1.5 percent while your population is growing by 3.5 percent. Agricultural contribution to GDP has also declined to around 15-20 percent, which significantly accounts for the acute poverty situation in the country. 

Mr Speaker, it is a shame that a sector which accounts for over 70 percent of the population generally gets less than five percent of the national budget allocation. The challenge to achieve faster modernization, growth and higher productivity in the agricultural sector calls for the budget allocation to increase to 15 percent over the next 10 years.

Our agriculture is still primitive, characterized by using the hand hoe, low-yield seeds and relying on rainfall rather than irrigation and fertilizers despite the decades’ long song of modernisation of agriculture.

Over 50 years after Independence and for about 30 years under one stable government and one leader, Uganda is sadly still a subsistence farming country dependent on a few crops and a few domestic animals as acknowledged by the President himself. For transformation of our country to take place, there must be a transformation of the productivity of agriculture. Agriculture must move from the hand hoe to appropriate mechanisation oxen-ploughs, hand-held tractors and tractors. 

Government intervention must make available improved quality seeds, farming equipment, irrigation facilities, fertilizers, affordable finance and access to markets. There should be promotion of agro-processing to add value to agricultural produce and not just speech; these should be measurable and visible. 

Cooperatives, both producer and marketing cooperatives, should be seriously revived to enhance capacity to ensure quality control and to bargain for better prices. There should be agricultural banks or suitable agricultural products in commercial banks. Farm institutes should be revived and increased to district levels. 

The transformation of agriculture would create a huge market thus making it possible for attraction of investment into industries and the consequential general rising of living standards, and the creation of jobs for the millions of young people coming out of education institutions.

Mr Speaker, there is a saying that a rich powerful king, in this case a President, must be a king of rich and powerful people, not poor ones. The President of Uganda is not a powerful President because he is a President of poor people, with 70 percent of the people living on land and accessing only 15-20 percent of GDP while the rich 20 percent enjoy a share of 70 percent of the income of the country. This is a situation that must change.

Education	

Mr Speaker, education standards are deplorably depressing at all levels of the education system to the extent that lawyers have now to sit entry exams to LDC. All education programmes like UPE and USE have resulted into poor quality of education and the increasing abandonment of government schools for private ones, which you are now proposing to tax. 

To raise the standard of UPE, USE and thereby raise the quality of education requires raising remuneration and terms and conditions of teachers, start a school feeding programme, ensure that there are enough teachers, strict inspection and improved parent-teacher relationship.

At university level, all students should be eligible for a share of the government sponsorship fund and a loan to top up the difference for those who need it. Bursaries should replace automatic government sponsorship which benefits mostly the children of the rich.

Health

Mr Speaker, infant and maternal mortality rates have stagnated at high levels. At any one time about 43 percent of the population is sick, the proportion of the population with access to government health unit is about seven percent. About 40 percent of those seeking medical treatment have resorted to herbs and witchcraft. Public hospitals are sick themselves. Government has totally disregarded and disrespected the cry of the people to have the medical personnel well paid and facilitated and government hospitals revamped and well stocked with medicine. The quality of health services continue to deteriorate or is non-existent in most parts of the country.  

Environmental degradation 

Hon. Members, I am sure you are worried for your country, if you care. Everywhere you go but especially in parts of the East, degradation is a serious problem. The countryside is going through extensive de-vegetation, including degradation and clearance of wetlands, adversely affecting regularity and amount of rainfall. The situation is bad both in rural and urban areas. Kampala, the capital city that has spread into Mukono and Wakiso districts, is a sprawling slum with frequent fatal floods. The NRM programmes on environment have largely failed and there is need for policies to arrest the situation before desertification spreads to vast areas of the country. 

Industry 

The President has been proud that there has been structural change of the economy and that the service and industry sector are now bigger than agriculture, to him a sign of modernization. 

Industrialization calls for the introduction of a minimum wage and laws that protect workers while at work so that no “sweatshops” are transferred from other regions of the world to exploit the hardships of our people. Wages should frequently rise proportionate to inflation.

Mr Speaker, industrialisation can be spurred by Government insisting on big contracts, for example, hydropower or roads, having linkages to the national economy. It is known that the building of dams requires a lot of cement and steel but where will these materials be procured from? If there is no insistence that cement and steel will be procured from Ugandan sources, the linkages generated by the construction of a dam will be with cement and steel manufacturers in the country of origin of the contractor, say China, India, Italy or Israel.

Internal production would increase and create employment and generate more revenue for Government. Nothing of the sort is done and therefore the impact of these projects on the national economy is not maximised. This is what we would do if we were the government; we would also ensure that our industrialisation is largely linked to our agriculture and other natural resources. We need to examine the financing of those projects. 

When AES had been contracted to build Bujagali with Government borrowing the money, the cost was around US$500 million. But when it was later given to another contractor connected to the Aga Khan establishment with the task to raise the required funding, the eventual cost more than doubled the original AES cost thus making it one of the most expensive power dams in the world. Why doesn’t our country borrow to fund these projects and contract only the construction work? A sovereign country borrower is generally charged a lower interest rate than a company, which is considered to have a higher risk factor.

Mr Speaker, if we were in Government, we would borrow directly and hire technical skills for big projects but not borrow through a contractor like is the case of Bujagali where another scandal is unfolding and in the case of Karuma Power Dam.

There are many opportunities for linkages missed through bad policies. Go to supermarkets like Uchumi, Nakumatt, Game or Shoprite and check the goods sold there. They are mainly from the home countries of those supermarkets. Uganda is just an extension of the economies of those countries since those establishments are not linked to the Ugandan manufacturing or farming sector. Even such things as chicken, meat or milk are from the home countries of those companies. Can this be allowed by the home countries of those supermarkets? Most unlikely!

Many foreign companies are investing in this country without a requirement for local participation. Many of those companies are from countries, like Nigeria just to take one example for illustration, where local participation is mandatory. In most countries, a foreigner cannot invest there unless they have a local partner. Why doesn’t Government insist on similar conditions or arrangements as those pertaining in the countries of origin of companies or individuals who invest here? If Ugandans cannot freely engage in retail trade in India or China, for example, then Indian or Chinese nationals should not engage in retail trade in our country too. 

This is what is done all over the world. It will not in any way discourage foreign investment. What discourages foreign investment is lack of the rule of law, poor infrastructure, clear signs of instability as is the case now on the horizon and extortionate commissions for bribes being taken from investors.

Security

Security, peace and stability are a prerequisite for transformation, business growth and development to become durable. Therefore, it is important to ensure that we have a well-trained and motivated Police, Army and prisons services (not forces) properly remunerated and with improved welfare and housing.

Although the President has promised to modernize the Army, the Police and security forces, this has not been done and their welfare remains neglected, largely – you know we still have most of our soldiers sleeping in shacks - because by the nature of their service, they cannot complain. Policemen and soldiers cannot complain. You will keep them in those manyatas and they will not complain because if they do, you arrest them. It is therefore important that the welfare, with special emphasis on remuneration, housing, health care, dependents’ education and retirement benefits are attended to.

Social Protection 

There is need to protect the vulnerable members of society. We had promised in our manifesto to “Pay Shs 50,000, per person, to all persons over 65 years” without any formal retirement benefits. Government took this idea but they have failed to implement it. And the fee was reduced to Shs 25,000 instead of Shs 50,000. We think this matter should be re-addressed. 

Aspirations of the President

Mr Speaker, before I come to the conclusion of my reply, I wish to comment on some issues raised in the State of the Nation Address, which I would rather call a statement of the aspirations of the President.

Routine abuse of the Opposition 

I would like to thank the President for breaking from his tradition of abusing leaders in the political opposition, civil society and religious leaders. I hope this civility will continue throughout the session he opened and thereafter as a permanent feature of his speeches.

Misinformation to the public about MPs

Mr Speaker, in an apparent bid to attract sympathy from the public, the President accused us, Members of this august House, of earning a lot of money yet doing nothing to develop our constituencies. He was setting the voters against the Members of Parliament. He then misinformed the nation that he does not earn any more money than Members of Parliament and that in any case he does not need it, when in fact for the last 30 years his entire family and close relatives have lived on the taxpayers’ sweat and have been guarded by a whole division of the Army called Special Forces. Today, Uganda has one of the most expensive presidencies in the world. 

Budget Framework Paper 

The Budget Framework Paper seems to be a better indicator of what Government priorities are likely to be than what the President said in his State of the Nation Address. In some instances the two are contradictory. Mr Speaker, allow me to highlight some of these inconsistencies: 

The President declared government’s basic priorities to be: agriculture, industry, services and ICT and indeed he dwelt a great deal on the potential of agriculture in his address. However, the Budget Framework Paper 2014 on the other hand in part two titled “Programmes for Social and Economic Development and Indicative Expenditure Framework,” indicates that the following priorities underpin allocations in the FY 2014/2015 Budget:
            i. Maintenance of National Security and Defence;
            ii. Accelerating Infrastructure development in roads, railways, electricity, ICT and Industrial Parks;
            iii. Enhancement of Science, Technology and Innovation;
            iv. Enhancing Productivity in Agriculture; 
            v. Human Skills Development relevant to market labour demand; and
            vi. Public Sector Reforms for improved accountability and enhanced service delivery.

The Budget Framework Paper continues to elaborate that this “national security and defence” No. 1 priority will “continue to facilitate the Government on professionalization of the Army, consolidation of peace, defence, security and maintenance of high professional standards by all the security organizations.” Clearly, defence and security, which are not mentioned by the President, are a higher priority for the government than agriculture, industry, ICT and services, which he mentioned. 

With regard to agriculture, the President informs the country that after his three decades in power, commercial farming still has challenges such as high costs of inputs, underdevelopment of water for agriculture, the low use of fertilizers and poor management skills by the farmers themselves. He then goes on to state that agriculture grew by 1.5 percent, which is a disaster when considered in the context of 3.5 percent population growth and inflation rate in double digits. He wishes that if all homesteads were converted to commercial farming, the size of agriculture would be much bigger. Why has he not translated his wishes into reality?

Then he goes on his decades’ log song about the potential earnings from oranges, poultry, pigs, mushrooms and fish basing himself on global demand for these items which are in billions of dollars. Included in the wish list is that Uganda will soon produce 10 million bags of coffee, making Uganda “second only to Brazil in the global coffee production”. The President, however, keeps it a secret as to what his government will do to enable the people produce and export and earn the billions of dollars of global demand he tantalizingly mentions. 

His analysis of the rosy prospects for agriculture can be likened to that of the salesman from Europe who was sent to an African country in the 1960s to make a market study for shoes, and on visiting the capital and a few areas of the country, he sent a quick report that the market was so huge because most people were barefoot, ignoring the major factor of purchasing power. 

The President reports some successes in the agricultural sector. He reports that, “We are now dominating milk sales in Uganda and also exporting to the entire East African region, Nigeria, Mauritius, the Middle East and also India and the USA”. He however, found it unnecessary to substantiate this tremendous achievement which would have been helpful, as these huge exports are yet to be reflected in the domestic trade statistics and those of the countries mentioned. 

Uganda exports to the USA in 2013 were worth USD 47 million; it would be interesting to know how much of this were for milk or milk products. Ugandans might perhaps get the impression that Brookside branded milk products sold in supermarkets in Uganda and Kenya are Ugandan products or remain wondering which Ugandan milk brand is sold in Kenya, Tanzania, India or the USA. 
He reports another achievement in irrigation, “Within our own means we are continuing to roll out the irrigation schemes…” but surprisingly what is being rolled out happens to be the Obote era irrigation schemes such as Mobuku, Doho, Olweny, and Agoro irrigation schemes that were run down by his own Government. 

Mr Speaker, NAADS which has proved to be a failure, largely because it has been turned into a political slash fund, is slated to be made even worse if it is placed under UPDF officers as the President announced. He has since given some details about the deployment of soldiers in every constituency. Since when did agriculture become an area of military expertise and where did these officers train to perform extension services? The UPDF was involved in farming at Kisozi, Kiryandongo and Ibanda; how did they perform? They totally failed. They even tried to set up an industrial company and it also failed apart from now making bullets.

Instead of establishing army shops for the welfare of soldiers like all armies the world over, the country was further given evidence of the creeping militarisation of governance whereby everything is being placed under military control and management, the latest being voter registration camouflaged as National Identity Registration. 

We must point out here that militarisation makes two statements: that the President has failed to build robust national institutions and two; that the President now wants to rule by commands and decrees through the Army.

To the industrial sector, he promised electricity at 0.04 cents equivalent to about Shs 100 per unit and we would like to welcome this if it is not another unrealistic wishful thinking. Why not, for example, start with a special low tariff for areas near electricity generation plants, like Jinja and Njeru, where distribution costs are at a minimum? It seems the first to take advantage of cheap electricity will be young graduate scientists who are entering manufacturing and whom the President has tasked to work on solar water pumps but whose names are only known to him. Mr Speaker, these young graduate scientists, might perhaps remind Ugandans what happened to the presidential initiatives for growing of ginger, chillies in Butambala and elsewhere, the Masese fish factory, the grain silos to which many foreign dignitaries made conducted tours, the barter export of beans to Cuba, the AGOA girls - what happened to AGOA? The explained part of it is that actually AGOA was an initiative of President Museveni and it is us who have never benefited from AGOA. The AGOA girls bubble and many other similar highly advertised initiatives that had been touted as vehicles for the “leap forward” to a middle income country.

Service Sector

The President was lyrical about the service sector which he said contributes 45.4 percent of GDP. We are also informed that this sector employs about 2,700,000 workers, which is wonderful. But we are not informed about how many millions of tourists actually visited the so-called best tourist destination in the world.

For comparison purposes, during the week the President made his State of the Nation Address, Israel that has not been declared the best tourist destination announced that 382,000 tourists had visited the country in just the month of May. How many tourists visited Uganda in 2013? The biggest achievement in this sector is that Uganda was declared the best tourism destination in the world, and perhaps as proof of this a conference of the World Association of Tourist Operators would take place in Uganda. However, is it not true that our neighbours like Kenya and Tanzania actually still attract more tourists and earn much more than the best tourist destination?

The service sector includes banks, insurance companies and airlines but where are the Ugandan banks or insurance companies or airlines that are said to have grown at 5.6 percent? Then we are informed that the ICT sector employs one million workers which is most wonderful information, if only it were true. Surely even if you take those workers digging trenches for internet cables - and possibly this comprises the largest number - the country would be interested in substantiation of this claim. Besides, we do not believe that such a large number of highly trained people in ICT do exist in Uganda today.

Similarly the millions of tonnes of iron ore, phosphates, cement, copper, cobalt, wolfram, aluminium, clays, tin, gold, salt, uranium are interesting statistics of potential but what is more interesting is how much is being produced and exported. Setting up a phosphates industry in Tororo has been the President’s song for over 20 years. Instead we are given a rationalisation of why nothing has been done in this sector when the President postures by saying, “Pressure is already on for exporting these minerals in unprocessed form. I will not accept these pressures. Most of these minerals will be processed here.” Very good but let them be processed. But who stopped the President from having them processed in almost 30 years of his rule? Why was mining of copper, for instance, which used to be processed to almost 100 percent in Kasese stopped?

Then he goes rhetorical about going nuclear in order to generate 50,000 megawatts because there is not enough hydropower potential to generate that much electricity. True, but why has he not even developed all the potential hydroelectricity power there is? Was he really stopped doing so by the Opposition, his usual punching bag and scapegoat?

Mr Speaker, when one is in power, one does everything to turn dreams and aspirations into reality because he has the means within the limited time there is and stops articulating them as if he has eternity ahead of you. That sums up the State of the Nation Address; just a statement of aspirations and wishes of the President already heard innumerable times.

Mr Speaker, some of the things the President said with regard to the economy do not add up. Maybe the Minister of Finance will put some light on them. But even then, why should there be such inconsistencies considering that the whole of government is at the disposal of the President? For example, the President said that electricity coverage is around 14 percent and there is no quarrel with that but that the share of rural areas is seven percent is highly doubtful as this means that all the urban areas remain with a share of seven percent as well. Kampala and its environs alone consume more than 50 percent of all power distributed, which would account for all urban share of seven percent and thus leaving all other areas with zero power consumption. This obviously cannot be the correct state of the nation with regard to electricity coverage.

Similarly, if the proportion of people living below the poverty line is 24.5 percent, how would this be reconciled with the fact that 70 percent of the people who are in the subsistence agriculture sector have a share of less than 20 percent of GDP?

Secondly, how come that the absolute number of the chronically poor has risen to 12 million rather than fallen and that alone is about 30 percent of the population? 

Thirdly, the employment figures of 2,684,290 of the service sector, 841,704 - industry sector; 4,250 - business processing which is outrageous plus other formal sectors not included like civil service, civil society organisations, religious organisations, sugar and tea plantations – they do not add up. They do not look real. 

For a quick check, take a look at the figures of NSSF membership or PAYE taxpayers and they are nowhere near these figures of the President, which make employment in the formal sector probably as large as five million. If indeed the formal sector is so large, how do you reconcile this with a very large subsistence sector of 70 percent of the population and a very large proportion of the population that is under 15 years?

Mr Speaker, the 2013 Human Development Report, which probably is nearer the correct position of the affairs in our country, indicated Uganda to be in a low development category at number 161 out of 187 countries with a Human Development Index of 0.456, which is below the Sub-Saharan Africa average of 0.475 and below the world average of 0.466 for countries with low human development. This shows that Uganda is not doing very well contrary to what the President informed the country. 

Secondly, the income poverty measure, which the President uses, tells just part of the story. There is another measure, which reflects the Ugandan situation more accurately. That is the Multidimensional Poverty Index (MPI) that includes multiple deprivations of education, health and standard of living. 

In 2011, Uganda lived in a multidimensional poverty of 69.9 percent of the population, coincidentally equivalent to the subsistence sector plus an additional 19 percent vulnerable to multiple deprivations, adding to a disturbing 90 percent. The intensity of deprivation was at 52.5 percent and the percentage of population living below the income poverty line set at PPP of $1.25 per day was 51.5 percent.

Uganda Multidimensional Poverty Index of 2011 Percentage of Population. People:
    • Living in Multidimensional Poverty was 69.9 percent 
    • Intensity of Deprivation was 52.5 percent 
    • Vulnerable to Poverty was 19.0 percent  
    • In severe Poverty was 31.2 percent 
    • Below Poverty Income Line of US$ 1.25 per day was 51.5 percent 

The President said nothing about the debt yet it is becoming a big burden as debt servicing repayments are heavy on the budget and they affect adversely the capacity to deliver services. As of 31 December 2013, the external debt stood at US$ 6.40 billion, having doubled in the last five years from about US$3.2 billion in the Financial Year 2008/2009. It is now hovering around US$ 7 billion.

The external public debt is rising very fast and will soon reach the same level as a percentage of GDP – Actually it has surpassed the GDP before HIPC and MDRI relief initiatives. We had a very serious debt and we were excused and again it is back. It is not clear what the borrowed money has done, though there are reports of an unexplainable failure to utilise borrowed money that lies idle with the Bank of Uganda for long periods or remains undisbursed by the lenders while attracting interests. This week, a director of Bank of Uganda was complaining that Uganda Government borrows money and does not use it and yet we pay interest on this money.

If domestic debt, which is also growing at a fast rate than GDP but difficult to accurately estimate because it includes procurement (central and local governments) and pension arrears which are continuously incurred, is added to the external debt, then it becomes clear that the country is in a stressed financial situation. If the unofficial funding of the President’s continuous campaigns are factored into budgetary expenditure, then clearly the country’s financial prospects become terribly bleak. The next budget for the next financial year, which is about Shs 15 trillion, is tax-laden and clearly, it is an anti-poor people.

It is easy to foresee that the fiscal policy will be tighter and the GDP growth will be adversely affected. This is why the President steered clear of this subject and left it to the Minister of Finance to bear the responsibility of bad news. The country should therefore not be surprised if the people go to the streets to protest against the consequential adverse economic conditions. 

Conclusion

Mr Speaker, the President accepted his late friend, Gadhafi’s advice that revolutionaries do not retire. Let us also remind him that revolutionaries do not steal public funds, they do not misuse public assets and they do not personalise resources as they have done in Uganda.

Mr Speaker, this government destroyed the railway and now they are turning around to promise to revive the railway network. They destroyed the cooperative movement, now they are promising to restore it. They let roads deteriorate and then promise to rebuild them. They destroyed the public education and public health systems and then boast of achievements in these areas, which are largely attributed to the private sector that have arisen as a result of destruction of the public establishment.

The President talks of modernization of the economy by creation of a service-dominated economy. But where are those types of services outside the telecommunications companies?  They are boda-bodas, security guards, washing bays, markets, salons, street vendors, lodges, bars and nightclubs and sports betting. Which country has been developed by such activities?

They abolished UDC and now they propose to recreate it as their new innovation. They wound up Cooperative Bank and sold Uganda Commercial Bank and now propose to recreate them after the entry into the market by Kenya Cooperative Bank. They sold off Uganda Airlines while they travel first class in Kenya Airways and other foreign airlines.

They created the most corrupt system in the country’s history and now they promise to fight corruption with an empty slogan of “Zero tolerance to corruption”. They talk of women emancipation yet turn them into just clapping and kneeling human beings for crumbs. Where are economic empowerment programmes for our women? –(Interjections)– Where are they? The President endlessly talks of modernisation of the Army, the Police and security agencies and instead demoralises them by formation of kiboko squads and other informal security apparatuses. 

The President’s long stay in power with no end in sight has raised the issue of succession to be the most prominent and urgent matter in the country today, causing him sleepless nights, I guess, as intra NRM factions fight for advantage in the succession race. Going to Kyankwanzi was of no help. Our advice to the President and to the country is to initiate measures for the convening of a national conference for a dialogue that, among other things, would deal with the matter of succession, including guaranteeing the President immunity and a secure retirement in peace and free from retributive justice. 

For God and my Country. Mr Speaker, I thank you very much. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Leader of the Opposition, for fulfilling that responsibility. (Applause) I can see that you have got a standing ovation and I do not know why the Member for Dokolo is approaching the microphone without my knowledge of what is going to happen. However, permit me to say –

MRS OGWAL: Mr Speaker –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, permit me to say the following before we proceed. I am just being polite because I do not need any permission from you. 

Honourable members, as we were proceeding with this debate, there are Members who wanted to rise on a point of procedure as to whether the Leader of the Opposition would be able to speak in the absence of a substantially moved motion. That matter was raised; and all of you will remember that before I made a ruling here two years ago, the Leader of the Opposition’s reply to the State of the Nation Address was housed separately on the Order Paper. I had found that irregular and I still find it irregular for the following reasons:

The speech by the President on the state of the nation is housed under Article 101 (1) of the Constitution. It is a constitutional mandate, which is normally communicated at the opening of Parliament. The speech of the Leader of the Opposition is not housed in the Constitution. It is housed in the process of debating that statement by the President, which would be in this House. So, I ruled then, and I maintain that ruling today, that the proper housing for the reply by the Leader of the Opposition would be in a motion that is going to be debated in this House. That would be the proper housing for his statement; after a motion is moved, then he would give his facts and be the first to respond. It would then be properly housed along the lines that we proceed with in the Parliament.

What has happened today should therefore not be taken as a review of that ruling. What has taken place today is simply recognition of an actual situation and applying a pragmatic approach to a situation to allow the Leader of the Opposition to speak before the motion. The true housing or domicile of the Leader of the Opposition’s reply should be in a properly moved motion before the House. 

However, this has happened and creates the exception, which will never be the rule. It can only be an exception because of the reasons that were advanced here. It was because the movers of the motion were not ready, the seconders of the motion were not ready and they were only informed shortly before the House resumed; the Speaker had communicated on Tuesday that this debate will take place today. So, let us try to regularise this in the future so that we can see how to handle this in a proper way. 

However, this gives the people who are going to move the motion an advantage now to incorporate those issues that have been raised by the Leader of the Opposition, so that they can have a more balanced motion to deal with the situation. That means that the motion will now be substantially moved on Tuesday at 2 o’clock when the movers and seconders will be ready. That is when they will open the debate and deal with those issues. That is my guidance on this subject.

There was a substantive issue or statement from the Minister of Internal Affairs on the situation happening in Gulu, Lira and those parts. By the time it was called, the honourable minister was not in the House. He should start with an apology and then make his statement. 

Also, I have already corrected the issue of the movers of this motion. (Mrs Ogwal rose_)- Yes, honourable, can we have that procedural issue.

THE OPPOSITION CHIEF WHIP (Mrs Cecilia Ogwal): Mr Speaker, I rose to appreciate the dynamic approach that you have adopted today by allowing the Opposition to make a presentation before we have a general debate on the State of the Nation Address. I think this is something that needs to be recorded as very pragmatic. We are appreciative of the fact that we are in a multi-party dispensation and we must, therefore, recognise two sides of the House. I thank you for that. (Applause)

It so happens that when we will be debating on Tuesday, I may not be here but I just want to appreciate the fact that the President was able to address the nation in compliance with the Constitution. I also want to, as a citizen of this country –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, are you now proceeding to debate?

MRS OGWAL: I am laying the ground for procedure. (Laughter) Mr Speaker, you know that we still have a lot to learn and I think that in Parliament, we should not be very rigid. It is good to be human sometimes and treat each other like brothers and sisters. So, when I stand to speak, it means that I have something to say and most of the things that I am saying are not bad but for the good of us all.

So, for the procedure - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Member for Dokolo, you rose on a procedural point and so you restricted your submission to procedure. It was not me. So, however human that I may be, if you rise on a matter of procedure, you must respect the procedure you have risen on. So, please state the procedural point.

MRS OGWAL: Mr Speaker, you know, you had explained that procedurally, the Leader of the Opposition would not have made the statement the way he has done and so, I rose procedurally to appreciate that procedural –(Laughter)- 

I was just appreciating and saying that really, as a country, we should try to help the presidency to make strong and powerful messages. He should take that opportunity to address the nation on very serious, all-embracing and holistic issues that affect the country. I just wanted to sound that as a piece of advice because I will not be there when you are debating this thing. 

I thought that militarising agriculture would not give us a solution. We would have to go out there and teach our people how we can develop agriculture for the benefit of the 80 per cent of the population – the rural poor. Militarising it by taking the military to shoot down the hoe will not help us. So, I thank you, Mr Speaker, for the dynamic approach of allowing the Leader of the Opposition to make a statement.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. The hon. Member for Dokolo and the Opposition Chief Whip, it would have been smarter if you had passed through the Leader of the Opposition. He would have then said, “There is one point that I would like the Member for Dokolo to make in my speech.” In which case, you would have made it under his speech and it would have been okay. But now, you wanted to do it but you rose on a point of procedure and then you wanted to get out of procedure; it was very murky water. So, thank you, Members. We will deal with this debate from Tuesday. 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE INSECURITY IN ACHOLI AND LANGO DISTRICTS

4.13
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr James Baba): Thank you, Mr Speaker. An important question was raised on the Floor of the House by hon. Gilbert Olanya, Member for Kilak County, about the murders in Gulu, Amuru, Lira and generally, in the North and around the country. I am sorry that I was not in the House at that time the matter was raised but the issues that were raised were brought to my attention and I also followed the Hansard on what transpired at that time. I have tasked our investigation team – the Police – to come up with an up-to-date report. Mr Speaker, we are still in the process of preparing that report. I wish to seek the indulgence of the House that I bring this report on Tuesday so that we give a comprehensive report.

I did also interact with hon. Olanya, who said he was travelling upcountry and that he could also have requested that we make that statement while he is here. So, Mr Speaker, that is my request to the House. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, while you are preparing to do investigations, I think there are urgent steps you need to take. Yesterday, there was the burial of a lecturer who was shot and over 4,000 people came for that burial. That was a demonstration of something that is not good. When 4,000 people come to a funeral, you know that they are making a statement. 

So, what you need is not investigations; you need to strengthen deployment in that sub-region to stop these people in their tracks. While we are waiting for that statement, you need to take some remedial steps to deal with that situation with an iron fist because these people are even robbing others in broad daylight. So, you need to do something urgently while we wait for that statement. 

MR JAMES BABA: Mr Speaker, indeed, this is being done. The director of operations and the entire Police leadership is undertaking these operations in those areas while the investigations are going on. However, that action is being taken and I really regret all those deaths; my condolences to the families. The Police are trying to follow up on this and increasing operations in the Gulu and Lira areas. Thank you.

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: Mr Speaker, certain things that are despicable happen in this country. I would like to contend on this Floor that the matter at hand is quite urgent and touches on human life and protection of people’s property. These are the cardinal duties of a functioning state. 

A response of a casual nature like we got the other day and the one we are getting from the minister in a relaxed mood does not portray urgency of the matter and is not assuring. Part of the Government’s role is to assure people psychologically. A government worth its salt even assures the citizens psychological that something is being done. Anyway, I do not belong to that Government and we are not about to have one.

About 4,000 people going to attend a burial is akin to a demonstration. Now, for you, without any assurance, you are coming to tell Parliament that the director of operations is doing something, without any evidence to prove that a directive has been given. Sometime back, when I had just joined Parliament, I reported on this Floor about a number of Muslims who were being killed across this country – sheiks and prominent Muslims. They were being targeted but up to now I have never got a response. It just passed like that and some people continue to lose lives.

I would like this Parliament to sound a little more firm on this matter and task the minister – (Interjections) - I would not like to use the word “condemn” but on another day, I would have used it. I would like to beg the minister to become a little more firm. (Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, I thank my colleague for allowing me to give him information. In this country, when something happens to a big person, action is taken. We had a colleague who was a Member of Parliament who died in a car accident in Mabira. Immediately, they went and fixed the problem and yet many people had died because of that spot. Now, a lecturer has died in Gulu but the minister has not taken any action. Maybe if it was his brother, he would have acted. 

The information I want to give, therefore, is that this Government is only interested in the Opposition by spraying them with teargas. However, if it was a serious Government, after someone dies and 4,000 people attend his burial and no action is taken, it means that if those people carried 4,000 pangas they would kill 4,000 people. The whole Minister of Internal Affairs then comes here to say investigations are being carried out. You know that the people of Acholi sub-region have suffered for a long time and you are just here letting them to suffer the more. That bitterness is still in people’s hearts.

So, the information I want to give is that this Government can only act if a big person has died. God forbid, but I wish one of these ministers was shot; that way, we would see action from Government.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Muwanga, do you want to conclude or have you already exhausted your point?

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: Mr Speaker, today is Thursday; we cannot wait for Tuesday. I have seen the minister here for several hours, very relaxed as if he was in a living room somewhere. Tuesday is far. Can we give some few minutes - we are still around and this is an emergency - for him to come back and make a substantive statement to Parliament? 

The security minister is here smiling. I wish it was your brother who was killed; would you come here putting on that face? You must be concerned. You are the minister in charge of the security of this country and we pay you for that. This is the un-seriousness we have with the ministers here. 

On another day, a serious minister of security would even be helping the minister for internal affairs, but he is here relaxed. (Laughter) Therefore, my prayer is that you give him some time before Parliament closes so that he comes - he can call the director of operations - and explains to Parliament exactly what he is doing to mitigate the situation. 

He should not just tell us in general terms that the director is somewhere; he can go and make a phone call because we are in the modern age. He can make phone calls and give us concrete evidence of the action he is taking on the ground so that we can know that the people out there have their lives and property protected. 

MR JAMES BABA: Mr Speaker, I cannot do what is impossible. There is no way I can hurry up investigations, which need to be thorough and detailed. Secondly, this government is not up to using tear gas; this government is on record for security and stability of this country. This country has been very peaceful. Yes, there have been murders and killings but this happens in every other country. On the whole, this country is very peaceful. So, to masquerade around and say that this government is trigger-happy is off the record –(Interruption)

MR MWIRU: Mr Speaker, I was trying to restrain myself from rising on a procedural point. I thought we are looking for a solution because someone has died. I want to assume that the honourable minister is in a government, which is in charge. Is it procedurally right for the honourable minister to refer us to the end results of the investigations, yet what we are looking for as Parliament is a statement on what Government is doing immediately to deal with the situation? He seems to be focusing on the investigations, which the Police will do and we have no quarrel about that.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, what has happened so far? 

MR JAMES BABA: Mr Speaker, so far, the Police have intensified operations in the area where these murders have taken place; additional deployments have been made. That is the action taken immediately the matter was raised in Parliament. The Police are in charge of the matter and are addressing it. (Interruption)

MS ADONG: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The information I would like to give the minister is, if they are doing investigations, they should widen them and not only focus on Gulu Municipality. As I talk now, in Nwoya District, we have one parish where there is – I do not know whether to call it rebel kind of behaviour of some citizens. It started like land wrangles between the community members. When they sent the Police, these people exchanged fire with the Police. They actually chased away the Police. 

You therefore need to investigate more. There are a lot of guns in the hands of the people and the rest are terrorised and living in fear. It is not only in Gulu Municipality; you should widen your area of investigation. 

MR JAMES BABA: The matters that were raised related to Kilak, Gulu and Lira. If the honourable member now wants us to widen, that is the more reason I need more time for these investigations. Investigations are being carried out and I request that you let me come and report on Tuesday and I will do so dully. Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, that is it for now. 

Let me correct my earlier direction on two issues. Two documents were laid before the House; one was a brief to Parliament on a parliamentary resolution seeking authority to finance supplementary expenditure and revenue shortfalls through domestic borrowing. I had referred it to the Committee on National Economy but the committee that should be handling this is the budget committee. It is accordingly referred to the Committee on Budget. 

The other one remains with the Committee on National Economy; it is on the proposal to amend the resolution to borrow US$ 12 million, equivalent of SDR 8.1 million, from the International Development Association to finance the Uganda Energy and Rural Transformation Phase II Project. That one stands referred to the Committee on National Economy. 

Honourable members, in the public gallery this afternoon, we have pupils and teachers from Global Junior School, Mukono, represented by hon. Betty Nambooze and hon. Peace Kusasira, Mukono District. They have come to observe the proceedings. Please, join me in welcoming them. You are welcome. (Applause) 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, you have said that you referred the issue of borrowing US$ 12 million to the Committee on National Economy. Domestic borrowing is borrowing. Borrowing, which is domestically done, can indirectly look like domestic yet it is external borrowing. 

Supposing Bank of Uganda was issuing treasury bills and Stanbic is buying them but the customer who has requested to buy through Stanbic Bank is a Kenyan; that would be external borrowing being called domestic borrowing. Mr Speaker, wouldn’t it therefore be procedurally right, even if this is domestic borrowing, for this request to be looked at by the Committee on National Economy so that they make a decision for us other than referring this to the Committee on Budget?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable member. That had been my earlier guidance on this subject. However, I would advise it goes to the budget committee because this particular borrowing led to the budget that is going on right now. 

So, the borrowing is intended to deal with those issues which are budgetary in nature and the discussions are already before the budget committee. That is the advice I got from the technical team and that is why I made this change in referring it to the Committee on Budget. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, I am not objecting to that. I am even worried about the technical committee if that is how they are advising the Speaker. Borrowing is a borrowing, whether external or internal. The committee that deals with borrowing is that Committee on National Economy. Even if it is funding the budget – even the money we get externally funds the budget. 

I think we need to take this technical team for training. The committee which you had recommended in the first place is the right one – the Committee on National Economy. The committee would look at the following issues: What is the purpose of borrowing; does it meet the criteria; will it cause micro-economic problems; has it got a positive net present value, etc? That is the only committee that can do that for us and not the Budget Committee, which is doing other things. (Mr Mukitale rose_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let me have the former chairperson of the Committee on National Economy.

MR MUKITALE: Mr Speaker, I agree with the concerns being raised about the possibility of the national economy committee looking into the matters of domestic borrowing. However, in Article 159 of the Constitution, where the Committee on National Economy derives its mandate for Parliament to approve borrowing, it is only external borrowing that is provided for; it does not provide for domestic borrowing.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, borrowing is borrowing. I can even pretend that it is external. I can put my money in Kenya but I am Ugandan lending money to Uganda. So, I think the chairman of the Committee of National Economy may have read – (Interjections)- Yes, the late chairman of - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member -

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, I apologise for that. Of course, I am also the late Leader of the Opposition. Anyway –(Interruption)

MR MWIRU: Thank you, hon. Nandala-Mafabi, for giving way. The information I want to give to the House is that Article 159 (2) is to the effect that Government shall not borrow, guarantee or raise a loan on behalf of itself or any other public institution, authority or person except as authorised by or under an Act of Parliament.

The information I am giving is that even if it is a loan, which is internal borrowing, that loan must be dealt with and approved by Parliament. The need to quickly get money to finance a project does not surpass the constitutional provisions. Thank you.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, I am raising this matter because if we do not scrutinise this budget very well, if our committee on National Economy does not scrutinize this thing called domestic borrowing, we will end up in a disaster. 

Borrowing can be both local and international. Let me give you an example to illustrate my reasons. I am proposing that the Committee on National Economy looks at it because before a loan is approved by Parliament, the committee will have looked at it in detail and they will report to Parliament that according to the feasibility study that was carried out, the loan can be approved.

If we do not do that – Our borrowing from say the banks is at about one per cent or two per cent, but domestic borrowing means we are going to sell treasury bills. If treasury bills are going at 14 per cent, a man may have money in South Africa and the South African Government will ask Stanbic Bank, for example, to buy the treasury bills from Uganda. That means we have borrowed external money at 15 per cent instead of the normal rate of one per cent. This is because eventually, the money will be externalised and the people of Uganda will suffer.

That is the reason I am saying we should scrutinise the so-called domestic borrowing. The two committees can sit and discuss the matter, but the Committee of National Economy, which looks at borrowing, must also be involved. We shall appear before that committee and I can tell you we will give you very good technical advice that will help this country. I thank you. (Applause)

MR KAKOOZA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. When you read the Budget Speech and what is going to happen, I would like to understand the concerns of hon. Nathan Nandala-Mafabi. According to our rules, any Member of Parliament is privileged to go to any committee. However, also from the precedents that have been created by the chairpersons, when such matters arise, the two committees can sit and make a report for the House to debate. 

I would like to suggest that if that is the concern and it is necessary, in conjunction with the other committees, they can get information, they can get technical experts - (Mr Nandala-Mafabi rose_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, let me say this and then we can deal with the procedural point. If to the extent that this borrowing is a loan that is governed by Article 159 (7) - Let me read it: “For the purposes of this article, the expression ‘loan’ includes any money lent or given to or by the Government on condition of return or repayment and any other form of borrowing or lending in respect of which- (a) monies from the Consolidated Fund or any other public fund may be used for payment or repayment; or 

(b) monies from any fund by whatever name called, established for the purposes of payment or repayment whether in whole or in part and whether directly or indirectly, may be used for payment or repayment.”

This captures all those aspects, whatever the source of funding will be. However, the peculiarity with this kind of borrowing, and I think it is the first of its kind, is that if Members will recall, Government tabled Supplementary Schedule No. 1 for the financial year 2013/14 in which they were requesting for Shs 237.2 billion. The schedule was later sent to the budget committee by this Parliament, which tabled its report upon which Parliament stayed the approval of that supplementary on condition that Government should first table a resolution requesting for the authority to borrow, domestically, in accordance with Article 159 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda.

This matter was therefore handled. You recall the debate we had here previously – I think hon. Nandala-Mafabi will recall - where we had that issue of money that had been used before approval. A resolution was passed during the debate of the report of the Committee on Finance and that was the major recommendation which was approved. So, the Committee on National Economy was bound by the decision of what was approved by the House on the recommendation of the Committee of Finance.

It is the finance committee that reported this matter and Parliament approved that no other borrowing should be conducted until these issues are cleared. That also blocked what was proceeding before the Committee on National Economy but now remained with the Committee on Budget. That is why this matter went to the budget committee because it was pending there. 

That is why it is coming here and I am advised to send it to the budget committee, which is already handling this particular aspect, so that they can continue and finalise. That is the recommendation that I have got. Otherwise, ordinarily, under Article 159 (7), which I have just read, it is clear that any form of loan, for as long as the repayment is going to come from the Consolidated Fund, should follow those procedures and so must be housed in the Committee on National Economy. 

So, what is the situation now? My first ruling was that it goes to the Committee on National Economy but on guidance, I referred it to the Committee on Budget.

MR SABIITI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. When you read Article 152, you realise that we seem to be mixing up issues. The role of the budget committee is different from the role of the finance committee. If you try to mix them, like what I have seen this afternoon, we end up being ad hoc. 

This is Parliament and we must follow the rules and procedures of Parliament not because of convenience. Even if the Speaker has those powers, we must follow the Constitution and the rules. Mr Speaker, I find it strange to see you moving such a matter to a different committee when it supposed to go to the Committee on National Economy. It is extremely strange. Please, could you guide this Parliament? I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Member for Rukiga, that is exactly what I did, except that I do not what happened to your hearing abilities. (Laughter) 

What I said is that I first directed that this matter be sent to the Committee on National Economy. I was advised by the technical people that these matters are already before the budget committee and then I changed –(Interjections)- Please, for some moments try and exercise some restraint on the way you use your language, especially when you are addressing the Speaker and especially when in the House, which is in session. You need to mind how you frame your words, maybe because of lack of a variety but that should not affect how you respect the Chair.

MR MWIRU: Mr Speaker, I want to appreciate your first ruling on the subject matter and I want to assume that there is a ruling in this House. I want to address my mind to rule 78(2), which is to the effect that the decision of the Speaker or the chairperson upon any point shall not be open to appeal and shall not be reviewed by the House except upon a substantive motion made after notice.

Mr Speaker, there is a ruling which you made; so I am only wondering whether, without a motion moved, this House can try to review your ruling.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The Speaker is at liberty to rule, un-rule and change. The Speaker does not need a substantive motion because after all, that ruling was by the Speaker. If it is the Speaker giving guidance on the basis of new information that has arisen, that does not amount to what you are reading - moving a substantive motion. 

However, if a Member wishes to alter what the Speaker has said and the Speaker is reluctant to change, then that would require the decision of the whole House by vote. However, what we want now is a solution that is useful. The rules will not be a solution for now.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, that is why when you had directed initially, I was very excited that our Speaker really knows the rules very well.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: And I do.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Yes you do, Mr Speaker. However, these technical people are sometimes not technical and I can say this with confidence because they have misled us a lot. Even if this thing is before the budget committee, the committee which deals with borrowing is the Committee on National Economy.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Honourable members, this matter stands referred to the Committee on National Economy. (Applause) That does not require a two-thirds vote; only the vote of the Speaker is enough.

4.46
MR MILTON MUWUMA (NRM, Kigulu South, Iganga): Mr Speaker and honourable members, I rise on a matter of national importance. Like you guided last time that issues of national importance be handled last, I have been so patient and I was about to miss out.

On the 2nd of this month, at one of the secondary schools in my constituency, Bukoyo Secondary School, a girl’s dormitory got burnt to ashes under unknown circumstances. This was the first Muslim secondary school in Eastern Uganda. This school has never got any structure from Government since it was started. They have been writing and asking Government to come to their rescue. As if that was not enough, the only few structures, including one of the historical ones, got burnt. 

Mr Speaker, it is in that spirit that I call upon Government to come to the rescue of Bukoyo Secondary School. This dormitory was housing 78 girls and as we talk they are just squeezed in other dormitories –(Interjection)– No, they are not with boys; they have just been squeezed and there is a lot of congestion now at that school. 

The parents appeal to Government to come up with some form of support. I also request the Minister for Disaster Preparedness - not only the Minister for Education - to come to the rescue of our people and our children. I rest my case.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is a specific concern for the information of Parliament and for the action of members of the Front Bench.

4.48
THE MINISTER FOR RELIEF AND DISASTER PREPAREDNESS (Mr Hilary Onek): Thank you, Rt Hon. Speaker. This matter has been brought to my attention now when am here in Parliament. I would wish that it is forwarded formally so that I can look for ways of giving some relief. Unfortunately, our budget is so meagre that we are only able to provide posho and beans; we do not do more than that.

Recently, we asked that maybe they include building materials because these days there are hailstorms that destroy homes and people are left out in the rain. We thought we could also intervene in that direction. We hope that as you are approving the budget, you will consider that adjustment into relief. 

His case is tricky but we shall try to provide with whatever means available. However, you are also aware that this is a Muslim school and this poses another question that perhaps will be followed up by the Police. With what happened with Boko Haram abducting children, maybe they may not wish their girls to go to school. So, there are those elements that may also require political and other help. That is just a by-the-way, but I will try my best to give whatever relief I can. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Muwuma, please follow up with the Minister of Relief and Disaster Preparedness and see what assistance can be made available to these girls and the school.

Honourable members, there being no more pending business for today, this House stands adjourned to Tuesday at 2 O’clock.

(The House rose at 4.50 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 24 June 2014 at 2.00 p.m.) 
