Tuesday, 26 June 2012

Parliament met at 2.27 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

 (The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the chair.)

ADMINSTRATION OF OATHS

The oaths were administered to:

Mr Tayebwa Odo.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Rt hon. Deputy Prime Minister, the Leader of the Opposition, members of the Shadow Cabinet, Members of Parliament, ladies and gentlemen. I welcome you to the commencement of the Second Session of the Ninth Parliament, but I have the following to say before I make my communication: 

Absent from our midst is hon. Hussein Kyanjo, who is still hospitalised in Dubai. He has had three operations and his recovery may take between nine to twelve months. Consequently, I have given him the necessary medical leave; Hon. Joy Kariisa Arinaitwe is still indisposed and she was also hospitalised in India. I have given her leave and we wish her a speedy recovery;
Hon. Rusaniya is not here; as you may recall, before we closed the First Session, she was involved in an accident. She has also been operated on and I have accordingly given her leave of absence. Hon. Peter Omolo is also not with us; he is undergoing treatment. I want to wish them all a speedy recovery.

However, on a sad note, hon. Ahmed Awongo was on Sunday involved in a motor accident on his way from Nkozi. The accident took away the life of his driver. He has been discharged and he is out of danger, but I think we should pray for him. 

I also bring to your attention the disaster that occurred in Bududa yesterday, which claimed the lives of our citizens. I hope that the Government will be able to do something about it. 

In the gallery, we have teachers from Kibatsi Primary School in Kajara County in Ntungamo, represented by hon. Tashobya and hon. Naome Kabasharira. I also recognise hon. Betty Kamya, President of the Uganda Federal Alliance. As you know, she was a member of this House and she has come back to observe the proceedings. We also have in the VIP gallery, Mr Makumbi Imam, DP Vice President, Northern Uganda. The other people are those who have accompanied hon. Tayebwa from Ishaka, Bushenyi Municipality. 

Honourable members, I welcome you back from the brief recess after the reading of the Budget. I hope you had some rest and you have returned ready to work seriously during this session. On Monday, 18th June 2012, the business committee met and considered among others, the operations of the committees, management of the proceedings of the plenary and we took some decisions with a view to improving the efficiency and effectiveness of Parliament. 

In some cases, some remedies were proposed to address the concerns, others require some study. My office has noted the concerns and we shall handle appropriately and inform you. As regards the programmes of business of this session, the committee considered the business available at the close of the First Session and prioritised it according to the state of readiness for presentation to Parliament.

The Clerk has formulated the Parliamentary calendar which I will discuss further with the Business Committee before we return here for your approval. I also wanted to inform Members that we are working hard with the Parliamentary Commission to solve the issue of office accommodation, and I expect to give you an update in the middle of July about the progress made.

During this meeting, we shall handle the Vote-on-Account; we shall also handle the report of the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs on the National Security Information Systems.
We shall handle the Supplementary Schedule No.2; we shall also have the motion of thanks of Parliament on the State of the Nation Address, as well as the reply by the Leader of Opposition, and the subsequent Government business will be brought to us by the Prime Minister, but the Business Committee has received an update on the Bills and reports pending at the close of the First Session and they will be prioritised.

In particular, I have received grave concerns from the public about the issue of counterfeits, and without derogating from the importance of all the other Bills, I appeal to the relevant committee to expeditiously handle this Bill and report back to this House.

Thursday 28th and Friday 29th have been reserved following my request for the Ministry of Energy to conduct a two-day seminar for all the Members of Parliament on the proposed oil and gas laws which have already been presented for the first reading. Consequently, on Thursday, we shall not sit here; we will be at Munyonyo for the seminar and I want to urge all the Members to attend this important meeting, which will bring us abreast with the policies and positions on the oil and gas sector.

The other issue is on the attendance in plenary and committees. The Business Committee discussed matters of the management of the committees and we noted the poor attendance of committee meetings by Members, which impacts on our work and ultimately also on the plenary.

I am aware that members have a lot of work and they may not be available all the time to attend committee meetings and plenary, but it gives a very bad impression when a chair and two members of a committee are present and they are interviewing a ministry with 25 people in the committee room.

I also want to appeal to the civil society and all the parliamentary fora here, to schedule meetings, seminars and workshops during the weekend so that you do not interfere with the work of Parliament.

I have also agreed with chairpersons of the committees that they should provide a monthly attendance record of the committees. So, attendance of the proceedings of the plenary is also not satisfactory and I call upon you to improve.

I also want to remind Members about Article 83(1) of the Constitution, which provides as follows: “A Member of Parliament shall vacate his/her seat in Parliament if that person is absent for 15 sittings of Parliament without permission in writing to the Speaker during any period when Parliament is continuously meeting and is unable to offer satisfactory explanation to the relevant Parliament committee for his or her absence.”

Honourable members, sometimes when we have the State of the Nation Address, I am surprised to see some faces. I see strangers, but actually, they are Members of Parliament. I am just alerting you that during this session, I will invoke my powers under Article 83 to ensure that Members of Parliament are available.

I also want to remind the chairpersons and the committees about Rule 30 of our Rules of Procedure, which requires us to report for work in the committees within 45 days, and where you have not been able to dispose of the work in the allotted time, you are required to come back to the House and seek permission. So, I am appealing to you to observe the 45 days rule.

I also want to inform the House that we have enhanced security at Parliament. This is because terrorism has affected a number of Parliaments around the world. You must be aware of what happened to the Parliament of India, the Parliament of Iran and the UK, all of which are eye-openers.

So, the Government of Uganda, has assessed the current security threats to the institution of Parliament and we realise that the arrangements were not adequate. So, that is why there has been an enhancement.
 
Therefore, the Inspector General of Police, who is the Chair, National Security Committee, working with the Parliamentary Commission, agreed that the Police Station within Parliament be upgraded to a specialised unit to be known as Parliamentary Police Unit, which is at a level of a directorate headed by a Senior Commissioner of Police, and in this case, Mr Twinomugisha, to be deputised by Mr Kubai.

The directorate will have several departments, handling covert security, intelligence and so on. It will also have a fire and emergency rescue service as well as an enhanced CID department. All of these will be working closely with the Sergeant-at-Arms.
Taking into account the needs of the Members of Parliament, the Inspector General of Police will be coming here once a month to attend to MPs who may be having issues relating to the Police in their constituencies.

I want to appeal to Members to cooperate with the security people because of the large numbers of people that come here and most of them VIP. We are a prime target for terrorism, so, bear with the measures.

Finally, I want to advise on the presence of traditional leaders in the precincts of Parliament. Traditional leaders are very distinguished persons in this country and we should handle them with the necessary dignity and decorum. In this regard, I discourage committees from inviting traditional leaders to come here. I also discourage those Members who have enticed the traditional leaders to come to Parliament.

Because of the respect we have for traditional leaders, I am prepared to send the committees to go and visit the traditional leaders in their palaces to get their views from there rather than them coming here. So, I am just asking for your cooperation, honourable members and the committee chairpersons.

In my communication, I said that I am bringing the condolences of the House for our citizens who have perished in Bududa and that I was hoping Government will do something about it. I don’t know whether there is something they would like to say about it? 

2.48
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Thank you very much. Madam Speaker and honourable members, it is with regret that I rise to announce the tragedy in the form of a landslide, that occurred in Bududa District yesterday. I felt that it was important that we say something about it today and then tomorrow we should come with a comprehensive statement, which will give a much clear picture that we have so far.  

This disaster occurred at about 2.00 p.m. in four villages, namely: Bunakasala, Bunamulembwa, Mabaya and Walwanyi. These are in Bumwalukani Parish, Bulucheke Sub-County in the district of Bududa. It is feared that the landslides have buried many homes and many people may have lost their lives. We cannot as of now establish the exact number of homes or the people that may be buried under these landslides.  

Government reacted; we have sent there Police and the Military. Red Cross has moved in and we are doing everything possible since yesterday to try and rescue as many people as possible. 

The Office of the Prime Minister has dispatched some emergency aid in terms of tents, food and water and other implements that the people who have been affected will immediately require as we try to move them from the affected areas to lower grounds where they are safer. 

The tragedy happened following very heavy rainfall on the previous two nights and several weeks of rain in the area. We just want to sound a word of caution to all those people in mountainous areas, not only in Bugisu, but in all other areas, that with these heavy rains, it makes sense to take the necessary precautions to avoid a possible tragedy as we have experienced in Bududa, by moving to areas which are safer.  

It is a fact that warning signals usually appear before the tragedy actually happens; there are cracks on the ground. In the case of Bududa, there were creaking sounds which had been heard even on Sunday, 24 June 2012 when it was raining, but the danger was not close to the people until the landslides occurred at about 2.00 p.m. So, our call to the people in areas where there are mountains like Bududa, Mbale, Sironko, Manafwa, Kapchorwa, Bukwo, Bundibugyo, Kabarole, Kasese and Kyenjojo of Rwenzori Mountains, Kisoro, Kabale, Kanungu, Ntungamo and Rukungiri, please take extra precautions during this time when we are experiencing these heavy rains to avoid the tragedy that has occurred in Bududa. Tomorrow, Madam Speaker, we shall seek your permission to give a comprehensive statement on this matter. 

2.53
MR KASSIANO WADRI (FDC, Terego County, Arua): Thank you very much, Rt Hon. Speaker. I wish to associate myself with the sad story that has been narrated to us by the Rt Hon. Prime Minister. Before the Prime Minister took to the Floor, he did indicate that tomorrow he will be coming with a comprehensive report on this disaster, which took away lives from Bududa District. 

As he took to the Floor, he gave us some insights of what really happened, which, therefore - at least for myself, it leaves me in a dilemma as to whether to go ahead and debate this statement which he has made now or we wait for any additional information that he may bring tomorrow. I am just seeking your guidance, Madam Speaker, because the issue he has raised really touch our hearts and we feel that we must say something about. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think the debate is premature. First of all, I don’t have the statement; I don’t know whether the Members have it? And I think the Members from the affected area would like to do some research. So, let us defer the debate to tomorrow. 

2.55
MR WAIRA MAJEGERE (NRM, Bunya County East, Mayuge): Thank you, Madam Speaker. My issue is to do with preservation of Uganda’s history. Madam Speaker, you are aware that we have the Queen’s Way on which there is the Clock Tower, commonly known as “Sawa ya Queen.”  That Clock Tower is now in mere words. The clock itself was taken away one year ago and the information we have is that the clock is hanging in the house of one of the leaders of KCCA. (Laughter) So, it is important that we protect the history of Uganda. I am, therefore, suggesting that that clock should be brought back. Whatever beautification they do to the City, let them preserve the history of Uganda. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: I hope the Minister for the Presidency and Kampala will come and tell us where the clock has gone. 

MS NAGGAYI: The information I would like to give the House through you, Madam Speaker, is that the whole of Kampala is sad because when they are stuck in the traffic jam they cannot tell the time -(Laughter)- even when they are giving directions, they can no longer say, “It is Clock Tower” because someone would want to know what ‘Clock Tower’ is. Actually, now it is “Warid Tower.” I think we need clarification on historical sites in this country; when they are being shifted or transferred, who gives the mandate and where is the Clock, anyway? It is at least not in my home, Madam Speaker. 

2.57 
MS SYLVIA SSINABULYA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mityana): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am rising to raise an issue that needs very urgent attention from Government, and this is an issue concerning the deaths and road accidents that are happening on Mityana road. 

Madam Speaker, I rise on behalf of the people of Mityana who were happy that after a long period of time, Government was reconstructing the Mityana road, but of recent, our happiness has turned into tears because the road has become a death trap.

Madam Speaker, when this road was designed, the contractors made wide and deep trenches in all the trading centres along the road. Now, in the recent six months, over seven people have lost their lives. Three weeks ago, one Rev. Fr Alex Kibinga fell in the trenches in Zigoti Trading Centre and he lost his life. Last week, a primary school teacher called Mutyaba fell in the trenches and also lost his life.

Because of these trenches, the road is very narrow, to the extent that even the most careful drivers may find themselves falling in the trenches when they are trying to dodge an obstacle.

The other issue about the trenches on Mityana road is that they have denied people access to their houses because people have to jump over the trenches to reach their houses. Commercial buildings have lost value because the people are no longer conducting business. When you go to places like Wabigalo, which was a booming trading centre near Mityana, shops are closing because people cannot access them. People with vehicles have to find where to park because they cannot take their vehicles to their homes.

Another issue concerning the road is that the people –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: But we are not debating, honourable members. You are raising a matter, which you want the government to answer.

MR SSEGGONA: Thank you, Madam Speaker, now that my sister has accepted to give way and I am also grateful.

I think the problem is bigger than that. When you look at the size of these roads, the trenches and the U-turns in major towns along these highways, it is a bigger problem. On the Kampala-Masaka Road, for example, we have two U-turns in Kyengera Trading Centre, which is heavily congested. There are no signs to indicate that this is an allowable U-turn, and the same applies to Entebbe Road. 

If you go to Najjanankumbi-Namasuba, it is the same thing. There are many deaths especially in the evenings. So, I think my sister’s case is not different from the rest of us living along highways. Mityana Highway, which she is talking about goes through my constituency and we have the same problem in Buloba and Bulenga. I think the line minister must come up and do something, like putting humps along these roads, especially in trading centres; school children especially, are dying in big numbers. That is the information I wanted to give to complement my sister.

MS SSINABULYA: Thankyou very much for that information. So, Madam Speaker and honourable members, the entire stretch and all the trading centres are facing the same problem. We also have a problem of lack of compensation of the people who are living along the road. Actually, one of the reasons why people are not moving away from the roadside is because they have not yet been compensated yet UNRA has gone ahead to plant road boundary posts in front of their houses. So, it is a whole mess and my plea is that Government causes the Ministry of Works to come to Mityana.

Yesterday, the people of Mityana wanted to come and demonstrate in Kampala, but I promised that I would bring this issue before the minister and before Parliament so that the problem is addressed. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

3.03
MR TOM ALERO (NRM, West Moyo County, Moyo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and my dear colleagues. This is a matter of national importance and it is specifically for the attention of the Minister of Agriculture. The dry spell from January to June has done a lot of havoc in the whole country and specifically in West Nile, including Moyo District, where the cassava stalks, which we were supposed to use for planting have all dried up.

I remember we used to have cassava cuttings, which were being supplied by the Ministry of Agriculture, but up to now, we have not seen any cassava cuttings being supplied to our districts and as a result, we do not have cassava cuttings and, therefore, our farmers cannot plant this coming season.

Cassava is taking over from tobacco. It is actually becoming the gold of West Nile as I talk. We from West Nile and specifically Moyo District shall, therefore, be grateful if the Ministry of Agriculture could come out and supply us with cassava cuttings. Thank you very much.

3.04
MR SAMUEL ODONGA OTTO (FDC, Aruu County, Pader): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. My name is Odonga Otto, Member of Parliament, Aruu County. Madam Speaker, I rise on an issue of national importance and I want to direct it to the Deputy Prime Minister or the Minister in charge of the Presidency to explain to this Parliament what we have been hearing in the media on the attack of the head of this institution by His Excellency the President of the Republic of Uganda.

Madam Speaker, the position of the Speaker is constitutional and the Speaker is the thirdly ranked person in this country. The office is detached from the individual, but it is constitutional and we have been seeing on television, in newspapers - we have been answering questions we do not know because we do not sit in certain caucuses.

So, the reason I rise on an issue of national concern, is that the Leader of Government Business  - and in this particular case I would suggest Gen. Moses Ali, because the Prime Minister, hon. John Patrick Amama Mbabazi, is also involved and may not be the best person to give such a statement of national importance; or the Minister in charge of the Presidency - to come and give a formal statement to this Parliament that should be debated by this institution in any case, not later than two days, Madam Speaker.

These are very important issues. The moment the Speaker is attacked, even me as a Member of Parliament that falls under the Speaker, have also been attacked by default. So, Madam Speaker, I don’t want to urge that today’s business be stayed because we first need to see that statement, but to get a firm commitment from the Deputy Prime Minister or the Minister in charge of the Presidency, when this statement will be brought to this House so that we can correct the wrong party -(Interruption)

MS KINTU: Madam Speaker, the issue of attacking leaders in this country should not only stop being condemned when they attack the Speaker and the Prime Minister, but everybody including Members of Parliament. It is important that we respect the leadership in this country; it is important that we act as vanguards and it is important that we are all disciplined. I, therefore, want to add my voice to that of hon. Odonga Otto, who said that the Deputy Leader of Government Business comes up with a statement. This is something which has been in the open and everybody knows about it; let us hear what is actually happening. (Applause) Thank you, Madam Speaker.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Madam Speaker, before I accept one more person to give information, I also want the Minister of Internal Affairs to come and give a statement to this House to confirm whether the Speaker of Parliament is safe -(Laughter)– because the moment a General starts asking, “Who is Kadaga?” it becomes a serious issue. So, we want to be assured that the Speaker of this Parliament is safe regarding her security detail. We want a detailed explanation from the two ministers in relation to the recent statement made by the President so as not to give space to rumourmongers. 

We also want a statement on why church leaders are being attacked publicly and casually. At the level of the President, if you want to address a cultural or church leader, you can invite them to State House; you do not go to a function and start making statements about people who are ordained by God. (Laughter) Madam Speaker, through you, we need a comprehensive statement to be debated by this House so that we – (Interruption)

MS BETTY AMONGI: Thank you, hon. Otto, for giving way. Madam Speaker, I was also perturbed by especially the language used on two senior women leaders in this country, namely, Rt. Hon. Rebecca Kadaga and hon. Dora Byamukama. As chairperson UWOPA, we want a clarification –(Laughter)– yes, because there was something to do with a ‘girl’ – “This girl…” I worked with hon. Byamukama in the Seventh Parliament where she was the Vice Chairperson of UWOPA; she chaired a distinguished committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs. So, to call her a “girl” and to say that to become a Speaker, you do not jump from a disco hall, it is belittling of a woman who has left a legacy in this Parliament. (Applause) And Madam Speaker, we all know that at this point, in the history of Uganda, EALA was going to have a Ugandan Speaker. And for the Speaker of Uganda to have gone to Arusha should not be questioned since Uganda was going to take the speakership. (Applause) As a matter of fact, it is an extension of legislature because when EALA comes to sit in Uganda, they come through the Parliament, not the executive. So, Madam Speaker, it was not good to question why the Speaker or Members of Parliament went to EALA. We want a clear explanation and an apology if those statements were made. 

The Rt. Hon. Kadaga has been a distinguished Speaker in this Parliament and for anyone to make a statement that ridicules a person of your character and that of hon. Dora Byamukama is not acceptable, Madam Speaker. (Laughter)

MR PETER OGWANG: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank hon. Odonga Otto for raising this matter. This goes to all leaders in this country. I know some people went to the bush and fought for the rule of law, but it is important that they respect the institutions of Government. 

As a young person, I am concerned about the precedent we are setting for the millions of other young people who read this information on the Internet and print media. Yesterday, I read in one of the newspapers – you have a right to write your own opinion – but since we left Arusha, I have been keen on reading people’s opinions on what happened there, but I was disappointed, moreso yesterday when a senior minister also made a statement regarding some of us who went to Arusha; he said that some of us are undiplomatic and went to spend taxpayers’ money. I have questions to ask that minister - that is why I support the issue of a statement coming to the Floor of Parliament here. If I were to ask that minister a question – I know what he did there – between him and I, who wasted taxpayers’ money more? (Laughter) As I conclude, I want to – [HON. MEMBER: “Tell us.”] – We are going to name them here because everything is in the media. 

MR SSEGGONA: Madam Speaker, I can understand the restraint with which you are asking because this is a matter that touches you as a person. But it touches us as an institution too. If a Member is talking about a senior minister doing A, B, C, ministers have names and portfolios; are we procedurally right to move on without knowing who did what? 

I also understand that the President has all rights to discipline the Prime Minister if he wishes because he is the appointing authority, but when somebody swears in as a Prime Minister of this country, he becomes a national leader and you owe him all, including respect. Is it not better and procedurally correct to have a commission of inquiry to investigate this particular matter? (Laughter) 

MR OGWANG: Madam Speaker, without taking more time, I want to say that I cannot be intimidated. The Minister I was talking about is hon. Eriya Kategaya – it is there in the print media. He is the Minister for East African Affairs. So, I thank you, hon. Otto for bringing this up. 

MR ODONGA-OTTO: Madam Speaker, I just arrived from Gulu, five minutes before the plenary and people in Gulu are concerned. So, I do not want any person, especially those who are merchants of rumours, to start running around saying that what I have raised was pre-arranged. I have just parked there after coming back from Gulu, but because of the concerns this country is witnessing – and I want to thank the parliamentary commissioners for standing their ground. (Applause) These are our leaders who assist the Speaker in running this institution. They issued a press release and told off those who think they are more important than others. This country belongs to 33 million Ugandans  -(Interjections)-  35 million Ugandans and everyone is equal. 

So, Madam Speaker, I request for the minister to get up and tell us when they will bring a comprehensive statement, and to also caution those ministers who have been making statements like the one hon. Ogwang has raised that we can have you censured. So, you should be very careful about what you say in public. (Laughter) Thank you so much.  

3.18
MR LATIF SSEBAGALA (DP, Kawempe Division North, Kampala): Thank you very much. Your Excellency - sorry -(Laughter)- thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I beg your pardon.

THE SPEAKER: Order Members.

MR SSEBAGALA: Madam Speaker, that was unintended. I rise on a point of national importance. Last Friday, a prominent businessman, a prosperous Ugandan and a law-abiding citizen of this country, was gunned down and he died instantly along Ntinda-Kyanja Road, a few minutes towards the time of closure of his supermarket. I do not know what is really going on in our country in as far as security is concerned. The late Mohammed Abubakali Kiweewa, to the best of my understanding, was a law-abiding citizen. At 37 years of age he lost his life under such circumstances. 

The insecurity in our country, and Kampala in particular and other areas in general, is alarming and yet we have a Police post every after maybe 100 metres. The patrols are many. It is almost two months now since another senior citizen, Sheik Ssentamu, was gunned down on William Street. Up to now, the Police are telling us that they are still carrying out investigations, as usual. We have lost many Ugandans all over the country, but we are not getting reports. Another prominent businessman in Kikuubo was also gunned down. 

My question is, are we safe? A lot of people have guns illegally. I was talking to some of those people who wash vehicles at the washing bays and they told me that for every 15 vehicles that go to the washing bays, almost seven have guns. When we talk to those who use the boda-bodas they tell us that even the boda-boda cyclists have guns. The mushrooming private security firms are also a threat to our security.

I request that the Leader of Government Business clearly tells us whether they are in control because we cannot afford to lose prosperous Ugandans or to lose even a single Ugandan in that kind of situation. And we know that we have many cases. Twenty years ago, we lost a prominent businessman by the names of Edward Mugalu and up to now the Police are still investigating. The reports are not out -(Interjections)- they are many. 

In conclusion, I do not believe that as Ugandans, we are safe. You remember before we came to the end of our last Session, Madam Speaker, you instructed the Leader of Government Business to come with a report in as far as the fire outbreaks are concerned, including that of Kasubi Tombs, but up to now, nothing has happened. Are we safe, Madam Speaker?

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Now, honourable members, let us get some responses. We want to know where the Queen’s clock has gone; also about the cassava cuttings; Mityana Road accidents; and then the Internal Affairs minister will tell us about those - 

3.24
THE MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (Mr Tress Bucyanayandi): Madam Speaker, first of all, let me thank hon. Tom Aza of Moyo District for raising this issue on cassava. I want to inform him that his request on cassava cuttings is going to be met. The only thing I want from him are the specific details on how much he wants because we have these materials available.

But also, I want to use this opportunity to inform this august House that cassava is assuming an important function in our lives as food for our homes and as an industrial crop. Right now, the demand for cassava from the breweries, the pharmaceuticals and confectionaries is very high. 

Last week, we had the international community meeting in Kampala - as many as 400 scientists in Munyonyo - discussing cassava all the way from research, through commercialisation up to industrial output. That is the answer, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Can Members apply for the cuttings from you? Can you tell us since it is now a money spinner? 

MR BUCYANAYANDI: Well, right now, I cannot guarantee that we can supply everybody, but we are doing our best to multiply some of these materials in Namulonge, in Ngetta, in West Nile and all those agricultural centres. 

3.25
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WORKS AND TRANSPORT (WORKS) (Mr John Byabagambi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the Member who has raised this issue of Mityana and Masaka roads. From the word go, I want to also congratulate the government that these are the two roads, the first ever in the history of Uganda, to be constructed using taxpayers’ money -(Interjections)- others have been loans, but this is direct taxpayers’ money.

These two roads are still under construction. We have not yet completed the construction. Where the drains, especially in the towns, are open, we have not put the slabs for the people to cross to their houses and access roads because the process is still going on. These are going to be put in place. 

The U-turns; we have not put some signposts but we have got a problem. Even where we have put the signposts they cannot last for two days. They are stolen. That is a big problem we have, especially in the construction industry, whereby even people go to vandalise the gabions and take stones out and start hitting stones to get chippings to sell. But we are going to put the signposts on Masaka Road. I think you want it at Kyengera, yes; we remodelled Kyengera because of the traffic jams there. We had to reduce the crossings and I think those people who ply Masaka Road are now driving comfortably. You are no longer seeing the other jam where you used to spend three to four hours. But we are still constructing that road and we are going to put the signposts and the U-turns.

We usually resort to open drains. There are very many reasons why we go for open drains and where we put them really is not a narrow end. It is usually at the end of the shoulders. The drains are easy to clean because of the culture we have, especially in towns, where you find kaveras, plastic bottles and everything dumped there. So, that is why we have resorted to open drains. But even in some places where the population is so high, we usually put slabs which can be removed and these are the ones which we are going to put in Mityana where the town is big. So, be patient with us because the roads are still under construction. 

On these two roads, we shall provide special humps and if you moved on Kampala-Masaka-Mbarara Road, I think you may meet more than 100 rumble strips and humps, and mostly in the highly congested areas. We have expanded this road, it is wide, but people sometimes do not observe this. Even the signage on Masaka-Kampala Road is still in place; “Reduce the speed” even at corners, but many people do not observe this. Therefore, I appeal to the public that whereas we make roads in order to increase the flow of vehicles and the speed, and for people to move comfortably, we are compelled to put humps again to curtail the movement of the vehicles because of the indiscipline of our drivers. 

It is quite unfortunate that it is only in Uganda where we put rumble strips and humps on highways. Otherwise, highways are usually not supposed to be having all these humps. You can imagine somebody coming from Kenya or from Rwanda or from Europe; he is driving to Mbarara and he has not seen a signpost and he enters into that mountain on the road; he will automatically die. 

Recently, in my own constituency in Ibanda, at a place called Igorora, a vehicle came from Burundi and killed six women selling gonja by the side of the road after it hit the humps, overturned, rolled and smashed six people by the side of the road. Therefore, I call upon our drivers to be careful. We make these roads and put signage to be observed. They are not there for decoration; they have got a purpose and I appeal to the leaders, not to leave the work of road safety to only Ministry of Works and Transport. Wherever you go, help us also. On your talk shows, please let us educate our people so that they can use these facilities responsibly. I thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable minister, when you complete the Jinja-Kamuli Road, please put some humps at Buwenge, Kasambira Trading Centre, Namaira and Butabala.

MR BYABAGAMBI: Madam Speaker, humps are citizen-driven. The moment you ask for them, we go there and assess and we usually put the humps and that is not a problem.

THE SPEAKER: That is a request of my people from me.

MR SSEGGONA: Madam Speaker, he has not answered on compensation.

MR BYABAGAMBI: I am sorry, Madam Speaker. On compensation, it is still a very big challenge for us. In this compensation, we have got three types of people. There are those who hold genuine titles, and those usually have got no problem; we pay them on time. Then we have got those who are squatters on some people’s land. The moment we compensate that one then the owner of the land also comes back and we usually take time when we are compensating those people. The majority of those people who have not yet got compensation fall in that category. 

Then there is a category of those who died and they do not have anybody to collect their money. We have a lot of them, if you want to verify that, you can come to Ministry of Works and those are the people who are still by the sides of the roads.

But there is also a category of stubborn people who put even injunctions on a public utility because maybe he thinks he has not been adequately compensated, but these values are determined independently by a consultant and verified by the government Chief Valuer. So, those who have not yet been compensated may fall in that category; we shall handle it. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Deputy Prime Minister, on the Queen’s Clock and the other issues.

3.34
THE THIRD DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER (Lt Gen (Rtd) Moses Ali): Madam Speaker, I wanted to disagree with the honourable member who directed me to answer questions put to Government. To do so is overstepping your powers. (Laughter) Therefore, am not fearing, I am aware of the hierarchy which has been working smoothly until now when some people want to overturn it. So, for that matter, I am not answering that question although I am directed wrongly to do so. Thank you. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Can the Prime Minister answer that question.

3.35
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Mr AmamaMbabazi): Madam Speaker and colleagues, I rise to simply make a statement that in response to the point raised by hon. Odonga Otto, Government will come with a statement as soon as we are ready and my appeal to you all, colleagues, is that in the meantime, as hon. Odonga Otto said very correctly today, please do not go by rumours. Do not go by speculation - he talked of “merchants of rumourmongering” and I agree with him entirely. Wait for the statement then we can have a meaningful debate or discussion. Thank you.

3.36
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Nathan Nandala-Mafabi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I hope the Prime Minister will come up with a definite date when he is going to bring the statement.

I want to make a correction to the Minister of Transport and Works who said that the only roads which are being made by the taxpayer are two and others are by loans. When we borrow, we pay and when we pay, we use taxpayers’ money. That is the first correction I wanted to make.

We have opened this Session with bad news and good news. First, the bad news, especially for us from Bududa and from Bugisu. We have lost our people and we hope in Government there exists a Ministry for Disaster Preparedness. If it does not, then it is a different story because we should have told our people that you get ready for disaster.

The good news in this Session is to congratulate the people of Bushenyi-Ishaka -(Applause)- for taking a good decision to vote hon. Odo and that is a new MP in Ankole region, from a party which is opposite to NRM; Forum for Democratic Change. Now, Ankole is “One Uganda, One People”. (Applause)

That is a sign -(Interjections)- that Uganda is -[HON. MEMBER: “Democratic.”]- growing and is understanding. We want to tell our colleagues that the Opposition does not mean an enemy. Their principle job is to check Government. As Leader of the Opposition, I am happy that I have got another gun to assist me to check Government. I can tell my brother Amama Mbabazi that you are going to be checked very well now -(Laughter)- and be ready. 

(Expunged)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Leader of the Opposition -(Laughter)- I want to expunge that part of your statement from the Hansard.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. You can expunge that. Also, I want to thank the people of Rubaga. We forgot to thank them for voting hon. Kasibante. Thank you very much and we believe again - the hon. Leader of Government Business – we have got another gun called hon. Kasibante to check you. It will check you very well.

On that note, I want to thank all the Members of Parliament -[HON. MEMBER: “There is another one.”]- No, another one is coming in a few weeks. By 12th, he will be here. I want to thank all Members of Parliament and the people of Uganda and I ask for God’s blessings for all of you.

THE SPEAKER: Maybe the Leader of Government Business may want to say something in response.

3.40
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Madam Speaker, I rise to congratulate hon. Odo Tayebwa -(Applause)- for fairly and squarely winning the by-election in Bushenyi Municipality. I would like to register our appreciation of his statement that when he comes here, he will represent his people as they are and in so doing, he will not be partisan because he knows who voted for him. So, hon. Tayebwa -(Interjections)- I do not know about the election of Kasibante because I think he came through court -(Interjections)- I just want to assure them like we have assured the other colleagues that we will work with them very closely in the interest of Uganda.

Now, Madam Speaker, I think the Minister of Internal Affairs –(Member rose_)-

THE SPEAKER: About what?

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: I had wanted to say something, but I see the Minister of Internal Affairs here and in light of the statement by the Chief Khadi -

THE SPEAKER: Perhaps, the Prime Minister can give a commitment on when that other statement is coming. We want a commitment.
 
MR AMAMA MBABAZI: I did not have a specific time in terms of days, but I want to assure you, Madam Speaker and the House, that we will expedite it -(Interjections)- as soon as we are available because –(Interruption)

MR SSEGGONA: Madam Speaker, I have, as I have always said, the greatest respect for the Prime Minister. Of course, I appreciate this is a matter which touches him personally. It touches his conscience and his life. He is a human being like the rest of us. That is why at first, I thought he would leave it to his deputy, but it was his option. 

This is the second time the Prime Minister stands there to tell us we will do this. The first was about the Kasubi report. He promised to bring it in two weeks. By 29th of April this year, we expected this report, but he did not bring it. We have seen many other reports not coming to Parliament and that was the background. The Kayira report has never come. People who attempted to bring it were prosecuted. Is he, in order therefore, to tell us – even the Kanungu report – (Interjections)- the Kibwetere report which involved the death of his own relatives. (Laughter) We want a timeline and this is about the operation of this institution of Parliament – is he in order to tell us casually that, “As and when we are ready?”  

We have just heard the Minister of Works tell us that in the last 26 years, we have constructed two roads. For how long are we going to wait? There is no order; in order -(Laughter)- Madam Speaker, is he in order? 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the minister said those two roads have been constructed entirely with Government funds. I think that is what he said. Honourable Minister of Internal Affairs

3.45
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr James Baba): Madam Speaker and honourable members, two issues were raised to the Minister of Internal Affairs. One is about the safety of the Speaker. To my knowledge, up to date, I have not received any complaint from the Office of the Speaker saying the Speaker’s safety is in doubt. As far as I know, the security detail of the third ranking person in this country is in place. If it is inadequate, we review it and strengthen it. But as far as I know, the security detail of the Rt Hon. Speaker is in place.  

Two is about the killings, especially in relation to illegal guns. It is true there are some illegal guns in the hands of wrong elements in this country. As some of you may know, we have a serious programme of small arms and weapons control in the Ministry of Internal Affairs. We are seriously collecting these guns through various means. We have collected a lot of guns in Karamoja and that exercise continues. We are marking all guns in the armed forces so that any misuse of those guns can be traced to whoever is in possession of them. 

As far as investigations are concerned -(Members rose_)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I have to go to other work on the Order Paper.   

MR SSEWUNGU: Thank you, Madam Speaker and honourable minister. Actually, I want to help the Minister of Internal Affairs - we are in campaigns now. Let him give us the chance because we know the people with guns and they are NRM cadres. Even in Kampala, there are some with vehicles without number plates. So, if he is willing, we can give him the names of these people; they are civilians. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, you are diverting from the issue raised by hon. Latif; he wanted to know how far the investigation of the death of Mr Kiwewa and that of the other gentleman on William Street has gone, and the third one. 

MR WADRI: Madam Speaker, I do appreciate the explanation given by the Minister of Internal Affairs, especially with regard to guns in wrong hands. 

Madam Speaker, while they are out in search for these guns, I want the honourable minister to clarify whether they have also taken into account attires in form of uniforms. You find boda bodas wearing reflective jackets labelled “Police”. Therefore, a person who does not know what a policeman looks like, might mistake them for policemen coming to his rescue yet they are wrong men. Even if you go out now, you will find boda bodas riding their motorcycles with reflective jackets marked “Police”.

So, while you are out collecting guns which are in wrong hands, could you also take care of that, because such kinds of attires also mislead the public! 
 
3.51
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr James Baba): Thank you for the information you have given. Hon. Ssewungu, if you have information, please bring it to us, we need that information and any other Member who has information of people with illegal guns, please bring it. Save us from these people. 

Two, hon. Wadri, there are these reflective uniforms; I do not know how many are labelled “Police” but the ones I have seen are just reflective to avoid accidents, especially at night. 

To hon. Latif, you know in murder cases, you need concrete evidence for prosecution. If you go without the concrete evidence your case will collapse. So, the Police take time to investigate these things thoroughly so that by the time they bring them to court, they have concrete evidence about these murders. So, please allow the Police to do their work; collect the evidence and then come to court. I know for a fact that some cases take a short time while others take much longer because of the complications. Some of these cases, like escaping in a speeding car, are difficult; even the dogs cannot sniff where they have gone. So, give us time. But the commitment to investigate thoroughly is there by Police. Thank you very much.

Designation of Members to sectoral committees in accordance with Rule 176(7) and to the standing committees of human rights and subsidiary legislation in accordance with Rule 148(8) of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament 2012. 

THE SPEAKER: Prime Minister, no one has offered to respond on the issue of the clock. Can we ask you, because you are Minister of the Presidency, to explain what has happened to the clock at the Clock Tower? The clock at the Clock Tower has disappeared for over one year – you will answer tomorrow? 
 
3.52
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ECONOMIC MONITORING (Office of the President) (Mr Henry Banyenzaki): Madam Speaker, I am in charge of the Presidency for the next one month. Honourable members that is an issue that needs investigation because it is a treasure we need in our museum if at all it is obsolete. But in any case, the beautification of the roundabouts in Kampala has been going on. So, I will take it on and do investigations and I will help Parliament to know. 

THE SPEAKER: Now, honourable members, we had reflected item four on the Order Paper, but so far, this is my report on the committees. Some committees are under subscribed and do not conform to our Rules of Procedure. First, is the committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development; it only has nine Members. The Committee on Public Service and Local Government has 14 Members; Information and Communication Technology has 11 Members; Presidential Affairs has 11 Members; East African Community has 14 Members; Subsidiary Legislation, which you battled so hard to put in the rules, has none. 

I want to appeal to the whips of all the parties and the co-ordinator of the Independents to work overnight to ensure that some Members are shifted to other committees to meet our minimum requirement. 

Then, the Committee on Human Rights is oversubscribed; it has 31 Members, and the leadership of the committees - I did not see the Independent Members being taken into account as required by our Rules of Procedure. So, I want to defer this item to tomorrow so that the whips can co-ordinate. 

MR RUHINDI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. To the best of my recollection, the debate that ensued here disallowed the creation of the subsidiary legislation committee. So, I really do not know how it comes on your list of committees. Maybe you may need some clarification on that.

THE SPEAKER: This is a report from my Clerk. 

DR EPETAIT: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The clarification I seek is in line with that the Attorney-General is saying. We did amend the rules. As of now, we are still carrying and operating under the old rules. I want to find out when our new rules as amended will be ready so that the record is clear. 

Now, the Attorney-General is saying that we did not agree on the committee on subsidiary legislation – I believe the record would bail us out.

Secondly, I would like to observe that a Committee on Human Rights needs to check on Government excesses and in my opinion that would be an oversight committee to be headed by the Opposition –(Interjections)– that is my opinion and I am entitled to it. Most of the human rights abuses are actually being meted to the public by the Government. So, my opinion would be that the Human Rights Committee should be headed by the Opposition in the House.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think that will be settled when we meet to harmonise on the composition. So, clerk if you have misled me, you will have to explain why, on the Committee on Subsidiary Legislation. 

So, let us differ that matter to tomorrow; re-organise and ensure that we have the minimum on every committee. 

MS AMONGI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also want clarification as per the complied list, whether it conforms to the newly passed rules of 40 percent leadership positions being occupied by women. We passed that rule, and while you stated on conformity on the numbers, it will also be good to know conformity in respect to the minimum of 40 percent.

THE SPEAKER: From what I have so far seen, that particular one has been conformed to and we shall prove it tomorrow. Okay, honourable members, that matter is deferred to tomorrow. Let the whips meet and on the rules, the first draft I understand has been printed and I expect that by the end of this week. Clerk, when are you printing the real hard copy? Okay, we will get information about when the final text is coming out.

MR KATUNTU: I thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I have had the opportunity to look at the gazette although I do not remember the date. But it looks like what the Clerk’s Office did was to gazette a notification. The Clerk’s Office never gazetted the rules as required by the law. 

May I know from the Attorney-General whether our rules, the ones we are referring to, were actually gazetted and if so, when? If they were not gazetted what are the legal consequences of us proceeding on rules that have not yet been gazetted?

THE SPEAKER: Well, if they have not yet been gazetted, then I will apply for a special gazette for those rules. 

Now honourable members, I want to adjust the Order Paper to bring item No.7 instead of item No.5. So, we move item 7 forward to become item No.5.

MOTION THAT PARLIAMENT DO RESOLVE ITSELF INTO A COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY FOR CONSIDERATION AND APPROVAL OF VOTE-ON-ACCOUNT FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2012/2013

4.00
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mrs Maria Kiwanuka):  Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the House do resolve itself into a Committee of Supply for consideration and approval of Vote-on-Account for the financial year 2012/2013.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, before you proceed with that motion, can you lay the list of accounting officers?

MRS KIWANUKA: Madam Speaker, before I move, I lay on Table the list of accounting officers for the financial year 2012/2013.

I now beg to move that the House do resolve itself into a Committee of Supply for consideration and approval of Vote-on-Account for the financial year 2012/13: 

“WHEREAS Clause 4 of Article 154 of the Constitution allows the President to authorise the issue of monies from the Consolidated Fund Account for purposes of meeting expenditure necessary to carry out the services of the government until the expiration of four months from the beginning of the financial year on coming into operation of the Appropriation Act whichever earlier;

AND WHEREAS the Government financial year will end on 30 June 2012 and it is the belief of the President that by this date, the House will not have approved the estimate of revenue and expenditure of Government for the next financial year 2012/2013;  

AND WHEREAS it is necessary that the President authorises the issue of money from the Consolidated Fund for the purposes of meeting expenditure necessary to carry on the services of Government;

AND WHEREAS Clause 5(a) of Article 154 of the Constitution provides that the authorisation of the issue of funds from the Consolidated Fund Account for purposes of Clause 4 has to be approved by resolution of Parliament; 

NOW, THEREFORE, let it be resolved that Parliament approved Vote-on-Account of Uganda shillings three trillion, two hundred and ten billion, nine hundred and seventy five million, thirty six thousand, three hundred and eighteen allocated to the various votes attached to this resolution.”

WHEREAS the Vote-on–Account is computed as a-third of the total budget, next financial year’s Vote-on-Account exceeds a third due to necessary front loading of the following ongoing critical expenditures: Inspector-General of Government - Shs 1 billion required for contractual obligations to finish purchase of land for construction of the IGG’s offices; and the Ministry of East African Community Affairs - Shs 1.14 billion to cater for arrears – ”

THE SPEAKER: Point of procedure from hon. Akol.

MS AKOL: I thank you, Madam Speaker. I am rising on a point of procedure as to how we are handling our business today, especially in relation to the fact that you are now moving on Vote-on-Account before we close off with the supplementary, which relates to the year ending 30 June, and we are now handling the new financial year Vote-on-Account which is for 2012/2013.

Secondly, in accordance with the Budget Act, the Committee on Budget should have made its recommendations before Parliament by 15th May, but for reasons known to us all, that was not possible. 

Madam Speaker, I am seeking your interpretation of whether we will be procedurally right to now consider Vote-on-Account before we know the recommendations of the Committee on Budget here, which should have been made on 15th May, and then also continue to consider the supplementary expenditure, which should actually be considered because it comes – it is for the year ending 30 June, and then we start with a new year. I seek your guidance.

THE SPEAKER: You know that by 2.00 O’clock this afternoon, I had not seen the report of the Budget Committee, and so, I do not know if it is there. If they are there, they should let me know because I have not seen it.

MR TIM LWANGA: I thank you, Madam Speaker. We have been waiting because we are on the Order Paper, and the report is ready. I think there are reports for distribution. 

THE SPEAKER: You know that it is customary to send an advance copy to the Speaker. I should not be surprised here in the Chamber. So, let us defer that matter. You come and report. 

PRESENTATION FROM THE BUDGET COMMITTEE ON THE RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE MEDIUM-TERM MACROECONOMIC PLAN AND PROGRAMMES FOR SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT FOR FISCAL YEARS 2012/2013 - 2016/2017 AND THE INDICATIVE PRELIMINARY REVENUE AND EXPENDITURE FRAMEWORK OF THE GOVERNMENT FOR FINANCIAL YEAR 2012/2013

4.07
THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE COMMITTEE ON BUDGET (Mr Tim Lwanga): I thank you, Madam Speaker. The Budget Committee considered the National Budget Framework Paper on the Mid-term Macro-economic Plan Programmes for Social and Economic Development and the Indicative Budget Framework for the next fiscal year presented to Parliament in accordance with Sections 4(1) and (2) of the Budget Act 2001. 

The Budget Committee also considered the reports and recommendations of sessional committees on Government proposals. The committee prepared the report that was submitted to His Excellency the President, as per Section 7(3) of the Budget Act, on 14 May 2012.

Madam Speaker, I would like to request that you allow me lay this report on Table. Copies of this report have been wired to Members of Parliament via their respective email addresses.

The report is voluminous. So, what we have done is to do a summary, a copy of which you have.

Section 8 of the Budget Act requires that I present the same report to Parliament.  Let me highlight some key features of the report. The report talks about proposals for re-allocations and funding gaps.

The Budget Committee outlined key principles and proposals for effective budgetary allocations and implementation. These are expected to guide His Excellency the President in the subsequent presentations of the budget proposals and plans.

Section 2 of the Budget Act enjoins Parliament to analyse programmes and policy issues that affect the national budget and the economy, and where necessary, recommend alternative approaches to Government. 

At an appropriate time, Parliament will verify this to ensure the programmes of the various ministries and departments comply with these principles as a prerequisite for budget appropriation.

The Budget Committee also considered the submissions from the sessional committees and made adjustments to figures within and across sectors, in accordance with the priorities of the country. This was also done in line with the national goals contained in the National Development Plan (NDP). This was done by providing general and specific observations and recommendations.

Madam Speaker, allow me to also report that the committee made suggestions to improve the effectiveness and responsiveness of the NDP to the country’s economic and social needs.

The Budget Committee continues to support the theme of NDP being: “Growth, employment and social economic transformation for prosperity.” The committee will ensure that budgetary outlays in the medium-terms deliver the objectives of this theme.

The committee also supported the budget strategy for the financial year 2012/2013, which focuses on the following areas:

    a) Maintaining macro-economic stability;
    b) Increasing agricultural productivity;
    c) Encouraging agro-processing and mech-diversification;
    d) Appropriate skills development;
    e) Facilitation of the private sector;
    f) Removing infrastructural constraints in the transport and energy sectors; and 
    g) Efficiency in Public Service delivery.

The committee also welcomes Government’s employment strategy for the financial year 2012/2013 involving vocational training, youth venture capital, improving employment services and increased infrastructural development.

However, the committee recommends that this strategy is popularized and made –(Interruptions)

MS TAAKA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a point of procedure on whether the Chairman of the Budget Committee is procedurally right to continue reading a report whose copies we don’t have. I beg your guidance on that.

THE SPEAKER: How many Members do not have copies?

MR TIM LWANGA: Madam Speaker, copies of this report were photocopied and distributed, and even some copies were placed on the table.

HON. MEMBERS: No!

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I have noted that there are very few Members who have this report or even the summary. So, maybe –

MR TIM LWANGA: Excuse me, Madam Speaker. I would like to inform the House that the main report was handed to you before you delivered it to the President. That same copy has been e-mailed to each Member of Parliament –(Interjections)– we all have e-mail addresses!

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I have not yet been able to provide computers and laptops for each one of you to use in the House. In the circumstances, we need to photocopy this summary – give me money and I will buy them. So, let us defer this, have more copies photocopied so that we can handle it tomorrow. Clerk, please ensure that copies of this summary are distributed to all Members by 11.00 O’clock tomorrow.

Honourable members, I have also just noted that item 6 flows together with item 5. So, let us defer both until tomorrow. 

In view of this lacuna, I adjourn the House to 2.00 O’clock of tomorrow.

(The House rose at 4.13 pm. and adjourned until Wednesday, 27 June 2012 at 2.00 p.m.)

