Wednesday, 18 June 2014

Parliament met at 2.16 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this sitting. We agreed to start early so that we could conclude the debate on a matter that was before the House. So, I will accordingly alter the Order Paper to bring up item No.6 so that it can be handled immediately after the laying of papers. It is on the report that we debated yesterday; so we will finish debate today. 

Honourable members, you are aware of what has happened to our neighbouring country, Kenya. The terrorists have struck again, claiming lives of innocent people. As Parliament of Uganda, we condemn that act in the strongest terms possible and we express solidarity with the people of Kenya. We pass on our sympathies to those who have lost loved ones and we pray that they rest in eternal peace. These incidents worry all of us. When they happen that way, it means all of us are targets and are under threat. So we have to be extremely careful about what we do and how we transact business.

That brings me to the issue that happened here yesterday. I have had a meeting with the security team of Parliament this morning and they have assured me that the incident that happened was as a result of the lapse in the operations of the officers at that moment. They have assured me that there will never be a repeat of such an incident. The investigations are on-going and the Parliamentary Commission has taken over that matter to guarantee the security of the House, Members, staff and visitors to Parliament. 

Honourable members, tomorrow we will start with the debate on the State of the Nation Address. The motion movers should be prepared to do this tomorrow, and we will start with the response from the Leader of the Opposition before the general debate. So, Members, get ready. I am sure the texts are going to be uploaded on your iPads for you to look through, and many of you who took notes during the debate will be able to engage starting from tomorrow.

The Prime Minister has issued the legislative programme for this session of Parliament. It is long and elaborate and it is going to require that we work doubly hard to be able to accomplish what the Prime Minister has proposed. It is a very ambitious programme, including aspects of electoral reforms in preparation for the 2016 elections. So, the business is loaded and if all those Bills come to Parliament, it will be real hard work if we want to make achievements. Honourable members, I once again thank you. Let us now get to business.

LAYING OF PAPERS

ADDENDUM NO.2 TO SUPPLEMENTARY EXPENDITURE SCHEDULE NO.2 FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2013/2014

2.21
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table addendum No.2 to supplementary expenditure schedule No.2 for the financial year 2013/2014.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. It stands committed to the Committee on Budget to look through and advise the House on how we can proceed with that business.

CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE SELECT COMMITTEE ON THE DELAYED PAYMENT OF SALARIES TO CIVIL SERVANTS

(Debate continued)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the debate on this subject had progressed. I have Members that had requested to speak on this subject and I am going to go through my list and finish with them and then I will call on the Leader of the Opposition and the Minister to respond and we shall close this matter.

2.23
MRS ROSE MUTONYI (NRM, Bubulo County West, Manafwa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the committee for the elaborate and precise work that they did. They unearthed a lot of rot. Let heads roll. Find out where the problem is – who is doing what and who is not doing what. Otherwise, we shall keep talking but nothing is going to be done.

I will give an example of what happened in the public service in the 1990s. I was a teacher then and we would get our salaries after every two or three months and Prof. Nsibambi – he was at Makerere University at the time - used to make a lot of noise. So when the President heard, he appointed him Minister of Public Service and when he joined the ministry, there was a lot of rot and nothing was working well. So he visited different offices personally and there was talk in the ministry that he operated like a ghost because by the time someone entered their office, he was there. He would move around the offices, without waiting for the Permanent Secretary to do the work. So it made the staff work very hard and we started getting our salaries by the 28th day of each month. I want to give great honour to Prof. Nsibambi for that.

Secondly, Members talked about district service commissions being brought back under the Ministry of Local Government, but I feel that if we did this we shall lose the effect of decentralisation. Maybe we should have on-spot checks like I used to do with the robbers in Masaka those days; if hon. Ssempijja were here, he would have borne witness. I was the RDC then and I would go to the villages and pass around pieces of paper and people would name those they suspected. We dealt with them and the situation calmed down –(Member timed out.)

2.26
MS BETTY AOL (FDC, Woman Representative, Gulu): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to appreciate the select committee for their report but I would like to make an observation. 

You remember in 2010/11, there was massive registration of veterans and those who worked during – is it called African Riffles? I do not know. I think this kind of thing should have been the domain of the Ministry of Public Service but it was the forces that did the registration. In Gulu, it took about three weeks and I would like to tell you that it was as if they were rallying people for votes because to-date people have not yet received their payment. Moreover, very many people suffered; some people even died. So I want the committee to take note of that. Is that going to be left out? 

I would also like to observe that there is a lot of corruption.  I am talking about diploma holders being paid more than degree holders. The diploma holders are brought in not for their competence but because they know some people inside there. That is corruption of the highest order. 

Again, if the number of employees is not known, I think there could be at least estimated figures and you could make a few errors in your estimates. However, how can you say that you completely do not know the number of teachers and the number of health workers? This is deliberately done to make sure that they bring in ghost workers for the benefit of those in charge of those areas. 

What beats my understanding is that as we move on, the population continues to grow and as the population grows, I would think that there would be a review of the staff ceiling. It is unbelievable to see that one individual handles 3,000 forms in one day. That is not possible! Why don’t you recruit more people? We have young people who are crying without jobs and yet the ministries are staffed with very incompetent people and they still want the ceiling to remain at three people doing a lot of work. Why can’t we recruit more and why can’t we review this?

Hon. Deputy Prime Minister, we are greatly disappointed with the public service, especially with the area of payment –(Member timed out.)

2.30
MR DENIS OBUA (NRM, Ajuri County, Alebtong): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to restrict myself to two areas. 

One, the role of Parliament: I believe that as long as parliamentary resolutions and recommendations are advisory to Government, very little will be achieved. I say this because the report presented by this select committee has critical issues that would call for action. There are action areas but as long as they are considered advisory, we may not make a big contribution. 

Secondly, Mr Speaker, I am happy with the Appointments Committee of the Ninth Parliament because that committee, through your chairmanship, has rejected approval of a number of appointees. This must be a clear message to those who are not results oriented in government, to ministers who are just sitting and not working. Where are they; what has been done to them? This is criminal. 

Ever since childhood, I have always had a personal conviction that before I retire from anything I am doing, I must aspire to inspire others. If I am the head of this ministry, am I aspiring to inspire others? What legacy are you leaving? If there are people who know that they have outlived their usefulness and their productivity, let them quit. For me, in my mid-thirties, I want to inherit a country where systems and institutions are functional. I want to take charge at a point where all these departments are working. 
  
Mr Speaker, this is my submission: we need some criminal responsibility. On our role as a Parliament, we need to tighten the loose nuts in terms of approving these appointees who do not have demonstrated capacity. They are either tired or they should be retired or it is a combination of both in terms of executing their mandate. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

2.30
MS FLORENCE EKWAU (FDC, Woman Representative, Kaberamaido): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am grateful for the opportunity. 

The issue of public service and payment in this country is a disaster. In fact, when you look at the adage, “Fish begins rotting from the head”, I attribute the biggest challenges of the inefficiency of the Ministry of Public Service to the leadership. Looking at the age of the two prominent ministers running Ministry of Public Service, one would imagine that they would accord due diligence to the citizens of this country who have diligently served above self in order to render services to this country. We do not expect to milk cows we do not feed. 

Mr Speaker, for the time I have been in this Parliament as the MP for Kaberamaido, I have gone to the Ministry of Public Service over 50 times. Out of those times I have been to the ministry, I have had the worst experiences to register as far as cordiality and hospitality is concerned. You will go to other ministries in this country and you will manage to see the ministers; some of them are even seated here. However, in the Ministry of Public Service, hon. Kajura and his colleague, Sezi Mbaguta, are bigger than Uganda; you can never access them. They are not there to serve the interests of Ugandans. So how do you expect them to handle cases of payroll and pensioners effectively? 

If I had the powers, the first people I would sack would be those two ministers managing public service because you cannot expect anything out of them as long as they are heading the public service. Out of over 10 cases of salaries of the former service men, I have succeeded in only two. You walk to Ministry of Public Service and some of the offices open at 11 O’clock on Fridays. It is in a deplorable state. How would you expect services to be extended to the people? How do you expect quality service out of such a ministry? So, the biggest challenge is to do with the leadership of public service. We cannot accept this to continue. 

Secondly, the committee did due diligence and reported to the House in time and we appreciate the effort, but this question of opening up a new directory under the President’s Office I feel would not be proper. Look at what is happening in the President’s Office; you have the land’s department there, you have the finance department and you now want to take a public service desk there, which already employs millions of Ugandans who are due to be paid. How do you expect efficiency as far as this is concerned? The President’s Office is already loaded with its own challenges and the bulk of the stress of the country is on their shoulders –(Member timed out.)

2.36
MR SIMON PETER ALEPER (NRM, Moroto Municipality, Moroto): Thank you, Mr Speaker. There is no doubt that this committee has produced a good report. However, after reading through this report, a number of questions came to mind. 

First of all, it is not the first time that Parliament has appreciated a good report being presented. We have received and appreciated many good reports from various committees but we seem to be rotating in a circle. Who takes action? What role does this Parliament play? Mr Speaker, as long as our role remains merely advisory, these good reports will always be shelved. Two, we have the private sector and other institutions and we have the civil servants or the citizens of this country; what role does each of these play in fighting against this vice?

In regard to the matter before us now, it is saddening that these ministries – the ministries in charge of internal affairs, education and health – do not know the number of staff they have. I do not believe this, Mr Speaker. A teacher finds themselves in Lopelpel, a place that is very far from Kampala; who deploys that teacher there? A soldier recruited, with a number, finds themselves in Kidepo; who deploys such a soldier there? So, I do not believe what the committee said, that the ministries do not know the number of staff. We must go beyond that because I think there must be somebody doctoring this and such people must be brought to book.

There is a recommendation about the payment of arrears, that the Ministry of Finance must submit a general list. The Ministry of Finance and the accounting officers already have a big question mark, so how sure are we that even the list they will submit will be genuine? That is one of the things that the committee needed to bring out; otherwise, I have doubts about that.

Mr Speaker, on enhancing integrity in the Ministry of Public Service, the committee recommends that we must dismiss and prosecute. That is okay but we must also not stop at that. You have read in the newspapers that whenever a person is caught engaged in corruption, pictures are published to warn the public but for these, nobody knows whether they have been prosecuted or not. I recommend that in future, names of such people who have done such gross acts be published for the world to know that there are wrong people in Uganda bringing the country down.

As I conclude, I would like to comment on restructuring of the Ministry of Public Service. The committee recommended that we must put in place regional service commissions. To me, this is just worsening matters. The issue is not about –(Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, in the public gallery this afternoon, we have pupils from Msgr Ngobya Memorial Day and Boarding Primary School in Lwengo District. They are represented by hon. Mathias Nsubuga and hon. Margaret Nakabira. Please join me in welcoming them. (Applause)

2.40
MS MONICA AMODING (NRM, Female Youth Representative,): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I also would like to thank the committee for the good work they have done. 

We are all aware that our role as Parliament is just to do oversight. If we fail to do anything in regard to our work in that direction, we then become irrelevant. The issues in the Ministry of Public Service are issues that border on insecurity because the workers we are dealing are the ones holding the economy of this country in many aspects. So, continuing to ignore these issues without taking an actionable way forward, in my view, is letting down Ugandans. 

I, therefore, want to disagree with the statement that the Minister of Finance made while presenting the budget. She noted that yes, we have ghost workers, and these could be our relatives, friends, in-laws and God forbid, from my family also. However, what I understand from this statement is that this is not an act of God that it would be impossible for the committee to identify the people that are responsible for this. This is a creation of individuals. The ghost workers are a creation of people; it is a simple thing. However, we fail to read it in the report to understand where the blame falls. In my view, the committee failed us in that direction. You gave us a blank cheque; you gave us recommendations that are non-actionable. 

As a Member of Parliament performing an oversight duty on the Executive, the person I would point a finger at is the minister. The minister is mandated to play that duty to ensure that the ministry he is given to run functions very well. However, individual responsibility of ministers in this Parliament – I want to say starting with this one - is lacking and as a Member of Parliament, I will be rendered irrelevant.  

So, I want to urge the ministers in those ministries to take individual responsibility for the failures in their ministries. If I were in any of those seats, the first thing I would do would be to resign and admit I have failed on the duties mandated to me and allow another person take the front role. The second expectation would be for the appointing authority to either transfer you to another ministry where you have capacity or give you a rest. The third alternative is with Parliament here to take action. 

In the alternative, we need to do our oversight duties over the ministers who are not performing. It is not a blank cheque for you to just sit and enjoy the Front Bench without actions. You are letting Ugandans down. So, to the Leader of Government Business, this is a challenge and to the members of the Executive –(Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable members. I think we should also recall the timeframe we gave the select committee to do this work. It was quite tight. You will recall that it was below two weeks when they had to deliver this report to Parliament. So, maybe some more time would have been required to get into those details that the honourable member is talking about.

2.44
MR GEOFFREY EKANYA (FDC, Tororo County, Tororo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Last week when the Minister of Finance was here before we broke off for the recess, I requested the House to support her ministry and I was grilled by some members of the Opposition and the NRM on why I was agreeing with the minister. 

I would like to thank the committee for making a recommendation that we disband the Ministry of Public Service. This would come as a measure to downsize Government because the Ministry of Public Service has lost its relevance. While we appropriate money here - colleagues, the Constitution is very clear – we appropriate votes to each accounting officer. So, Government has been practicing an illegality by passing money through Ministry of Public Service because we always appropriate money to respective accounting officers to take care of wages and non-wages. 

Let us hand over this responsibility to the accounting officers in the Ministry of Finance so that if money goes missing because of ghosts, we can deal with the hon. Fred Omach, the Minister of Finance and the permanent secretary. In this way, we would reduce on the number of people to deal with. This will also relieve the honourable Deputy Prime Minister so that he can handle other responsibilities because of his age.

Mr Speaker, I have a policewoman with me here who has not received her salary for the last one and a half years yet she is a widow-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Where is she? (Laughter)

MR EKANYA: Mr Speaker, I will call for your protection because if I give this lady’s number, she might be victimized. With your permission, can I name her on condition that she will not be victimised? [Hon. Members: “No”] 

She says, “Honourable, help me get requirements for my salary so that I can take my children to school. I have missed my payments since June 2013. Please, help me; I have children who are not going to school. Can I come to your office?” She has sent more than 10 messages. It is here; I can lay it on the Table because electronic evidence is allowed.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It will become property of Parliament. (Laughter)

MR EKANYA: Mr Speaker and colleagues, this is a very serious matter. I have another document here. The Ministry of Finance has tabled a document showing that several accounting officers have failed to exhaust money, which means that while we were appropriating here they gave us ghosts. May I recommend that these accounting officers who recommended ghosts in their payroll or who created ghosts be retired in public interest so that they are prosecuted?

I agree that the committee did not have enough time but there is evidence that several accounting officers budgeted for ghosts and the information is available. Why can’t we have the DPP and the IGG take action against these individuals instead of us just talking every day and becoming a house of lamentations - (Member timed out.)

2.48
MR AMOS LUGOLOOBI (NRM, Ntenjeru County North, Kayunga): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. Let me begin by appreciating the report of the committee. Labour is the most important factor of production in economics but the way it is managed in this country leaves a lot to be desired, particularly when we talk about the public service. 

We seem to have a big gap between those that are managed and the managers. You go to certain ministries in this country and you find small gods there. I will give examples. A poor man with a land title goes to the Ministry of Lands and finds that in between the land he possesses, they have created another title. Today this man has nowhere to report this small god. This small god will continue operating in his style, in his own way, and you cannot go anywhere to report. 

There are serious problems relating to the way labour is functioning in this country. It is not surprising that the rate of labour productivity in this country is one of the lowest in the region. We have so many workers but we do not know the value of their output. If we do not know their numbers then how can we determine the productivity of their labour? So, we go on recklessly recruiting people, building the wage bill. We are now paying over Shs 3 trillion out of the budget just for wages but for workers for whom we do not know what their productivity is. We do not know the value of their output per unit of labour and yet it is a very important statistic if you really want to determine the number of workers that you need in your organisation. Today, we just recruit MPs without knowing the optimal number. We recruit soldiers and teachers and we do not know the optimal number.

You find a private school with seven teachers with very good results and a UPE school with 14 teachers with very poor results. So, where is the labour productivity in such schools? Mr Speaker, it is very important that we have a Ministry of Public Service but we must have a functional Ministry of Public Service, one that is efficient - (Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable members. These were the Members that we carried forward from yesterday; we will stop the general debate and I will allow the Leader of the Opposition five minutes to summarise his points and then we come to the ministers and we close. Prime Minister’s Question Time is coming up in seven minutes.

2.51
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Wafula Oguttu): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I thank the committee for the good report. Even if they had a short time, they came up with a good report and this report has also helped me regain confidence in my friend the chairperson, hon. Magyezi, because he had lost it when we brought the KCCA report. I am very happy that he has regained my confidence.

The two reports - the main one and the select committee report - have exposed the mess in our public service. In the ministry, we have political supervisors appointed by the President, two of them, and both of them are my friends. We hope that when the time comes for them to respond to what we have said, they will be kind enough to take political responsibility for this mess and to particularly apologise to Ugandans who have suffered for a long time because of their failure to supervise this ministry.

We also hope that the appointing authority will handle this matter in an appropriate way because I am sure that there are many Ugandans who can come and handle this docket with more vigour.

Mr Speaker, we support the recommendations of the committee except the one that proposes to take public service to the President’s Office. We do not think that it is an appropriate place or home for this. We think that the payroll should be taken to the Ministry of Labour. Yesterday, I was horrified to hear somebody propose that the UPDF could handle salaries of civil servants. It means a lot to say that salaries of civil servants be handled by the UPDF and we know that the UPDF is not very clean either; it has had a history of ghosts and paymasters running away with public funds.

When we set up this committee, I think we made a mistake; we did not include pensions. So, the committee did not have the mandate to handle pensions and yet there is a serious mess with pensions. You go to public service and you hate to have worked for this country if you are an old person. Those people suffer and sleep on the verandas when they come from upcountry. So, this House should address itself to the issue of pensions so that it is also settled. Pensioners are in our country and they are people who do not have anybody to care for them.

The mess in the Ministry of Public Service has been going on for a long time and we know that the people who handle salaries in this ministry are very wealthy; even the clerks are very wealthy. We know two names that were very famous two years ago - one Obey and one Oloka. They are billionaires and they were handling salaries and pension funds. We hope that Government will follow up these people who have worked on salaries for the last 10 years. They should be investigated and if found guilty, their property should be confiscated. 

Police bosses too should be investigated. Who is that police officer who decided to take away salaries from police officers and go and set up a camp in Bujagali? He is paid a salary but he can take Shs 5 billion to go and set up a camp in Bujagali and nothing happens? This Parliament should definitely pass a resolution to condemn the policemen who did this and to have them investigated.

We have a group of police officers called SPCs - the CHOGM fame police officers. I am sure, honourable members, you have these people in your constituencies. They are always asking for their terminal benefits. Some of them have not been paid but you have police heads transferring Shs 5 billion to go and put up a camp when these people are not paid and nobody ever talks about them or how their matter is going to be resolved. Many of the SPCs are in the villages and have not been paid.

There is also the issue of staff in acting capacities in the public service and this goes on and on. The law says that one can act for six months but some people act for 10 years - more than the time that is prescribed - and they are not paid but Government does not handle this matter. I think the committee should have had enough time to look at that as well.

There are also employees who get salary for the month of July, for example, and they do not get any in August and then they get in September. These are many and they never get paid for the month of August which they have missed; that money just gets lost. We hope the ministry can concern itself with this. Hon. Nambooze had a list of names for Mukono alone of over 100 people. They missed their salary in July 2012 and they have never been paid but they are getting other salaries subsequently. I wish to lay on the Table the list of teachers from Mukono who missed their salary for July 2012 and they have never received it although they have received the subsequent salaries -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What document is that?

MR WAFULA OGUTTU: The document is a letter to the personnel officer, Mukono Municipal Council, written and signed by 111 teachers.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What date is it?

MR WAFULA OGUTTU: The letter was written on 16 June 2014.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, let the records capture that.

MR WAFULA OGUTTU: Mr Speaker, I read in the report that the ministry staff who handle salaries come from the districts to process salaries in Kampala because they lack people who are qualified to handle the payrolls in the districts- (Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable. Can I have a minister from public service? 

3.00
THE MINISTER OF PUBLIC SERVICE (Mr Henry Kajura): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, and all of you who are here. I would like to thank those who wrote the report but they never came to discuss it with us. They never called at any stage; at least I never saw them. – (Interjection) - Well, they could have woken me up. Even that was too much? It was too much for the committee? They could have enlightened us on some issues. First –(Interruption)

MS ALUM: Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. The report that we are discussing now is the report of a select committee and this committee was given the terms of reference to look at the recommendations of the Committee on Local Government and Public Service. I sit on that committee and I remember very well that we invited the ministry in charge of public service and the state minister together with the technical team appeared before the committee. In addition, the select committee also invited the Ministry of Public Service and the technical people came. 

Is it, therefore, in order for the honourable minister in charge of public service to say that we did not invite them and we did not interact with them, Mr Speaker? Is he in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Rt Honourable, you now have the correct information. Please, proceed. The Ministry of Public Service was invited and they interacted with the committee. Proceed.

MR KAJURA: Thank you. Now I did not understand what you were referring to because if an allegation is made, I also have the responsibility to check on it. I would have gone around, met people and this is what they say –(Interruption)

MR SSEMUJJU NGANDA: Mr Speaker, a committee of Parliament has presented a report that has detailed information about the Ministry of Public Service. You have given us, MPs, an opportunity to debate that report and you have given the Leader of the Opposition an opportunity to respond. You have also given the Minister of Public Service an opportunity to respond to the same report. Is he therefore in order to complain that this Parliament has mistreated him and denied him an opportunity to respond yet he is on the Floor?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Rt Hon. Deputy Prime Minister, this is your opportunity to respond to the issues in the report and the debate in the House. Please, do so.

MR KAJURA: In the set-up today, it is not ministers who do the bookkeeping –(Interjections)– Well, I am informing you. I am not alone in being old, even ladies can be old. Recruitment of staff is not done by us; it is done by the Public Service Commission. According to the system we have today, ministers do not audit books. Their responsibility is –(Interruption)

MS NAMBOOZE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a point of procedure. It is true that the Rt Hon. Deputy Prime Minister Kajura holds the portfolio of Minister of Public Service but it is also true that in a very particular way, there is a state minister in charge of this ministry. From the way things look, hon. Kajura seems to be a very busy man. 

Mr Speaker, we all have elders at our places; I have my jajja who I highly respect. Is it procedurally okay, therefore, for Parliament to continue harassing this old man, asking him questions when he may have been appointed by the President to hold this portfolio because of his strength in another area and in actual fact he is not so able to address Parliament? I have been observing the Rt Hon. Deputy Prime Minister and I highly sympathise with him.

Would it not be procedurally okay if the state minister could take over so that we do not waste a lot of time and we relieve him of the burden of having to address this august House at this time? Isn’t it procedurally okay?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, that is an Executive function and we cannot command who says what in the matters of the Executive. Please, Rt. Hon. Prime Minister.

3.09
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Mr Speaker and honourable members, these issues that have been raised in this report and recommendations made by the committee are recommendations that we have received. On the part of the Executive, I have been chairing meetings between the Ministry of Public Service, the Ministry of Finance and others precisely to respond to some of these issues. Therefore, we shall take them on, see which of the issues we can incorporate in whatever we finally come up with as a solution to the problems we have been having and we will come back to Parliament and report – [Hon. Members: “When?”]- As soon as we are ready.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable chairperson, two minutes.

3.09
MR RAPHAEL MAGYEZI (NRM, Igara County West, Bushenyi): Thank you very much. Thank you so much for the debate on the report and its recommendations. I will respond within the two minutes that I am given. 

The first question was raised by a Member who asked about who takes action to ensure that this report does not end up simply with this debate. I think that it is important that we do recommend that the Leader of Government Business comes back to Parliament within the next three months on the actions taken – (Interjections) - Is three months too long? 

Mr Speaker, I am looking at the various recommendations and they actually fall within the month of July. The most critical recommendation is that all the outstanding arrears for those who have not been paid their salaries must be paid not later than 30th July and we got the confirmation from the PS/ST that this would be done. So maybe we could say not later than 30th July or two weeks thereafter. I think that let us give some time so that we get the right responses to the issues here. My proposal is that let the Leader of Government Business come back with a statement to Parliament not later than 15th August on actions taken.

Secondly, the other question was: why stop the supplementary budget for wages? We inquired into this and our own recommendation is very clear that recruitment, promotion and personnel matters should be planned for and a supplementary budget should only be for things which are not foreseen. So in order to ensure that the supplementary budget is not abused, we should ensure that all things to do with wages are planned for and made part of the budget to make it predictable. (Applause)

The other question was whether the committee visited the Bujagali campsite. We did not because the time we had could not allow for that, but we did lay on the Table here proof and documents showing the diversion of funds by the accounting officer from the wage and salary vote to construction of a training camp for the Police. We thought that this was irregular because this training camp should have had its own budget. We have identified the accounting officer responsible including the one of the Ministry of Local Government. 

Mr Speaker, the other issue was whether the committee actually looked into the issue of payslips. Yes, we did and we found out that there are a number of our officers who get payslips but when they go to their bank accounts, they do not find any money. We also found that a number of institutions do not actually issue payslips to their officers and one of them is the Police. We thought that this was against the Public Service Standing Orders. It is indiscipline and we think that the relevant accounting officers should be made to –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Mr Chairman, all that is in the recommendations. We are going to go through the recommendations now, if you could sum up.

MR MAGYEZI: Thank you and most obliged.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, chairman and Rt Hon. Prime Minister. Honourable members, what we are going to do now is to process the recommendations and take decisions. 

MR EKANYA: Thank you very much. The Minister for Finance, Planning and Economic Development has not commented and yet the issue of payment of salary and appointment of the accounting officers is the responsibility of the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. Don’t you think that hon. Omach could comment because the PS and Secretary to the Treasury last week said that all civil servants will get paid by the end of the month?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, the Leader of Government Business has spoken and summarised all those issues. We cannot invite a minister again to speak after that.

Recommendation No. 1 is on payment of arrears. Should I go through them one by one or we know what the contents are? [Hon. Members: One by one.]- Okay. Recommendation No. 1, payment of arrears: 

i) 	All accounting officers should submit to the Ministry of Finance genuine lists of all arrears of their respective institutions by 30 June 2014;

ii) 	The Ministry of Finance should ensure that all arrears are verified and paid not later than 30 July 2014;

iii) 	The Minister for Finance should submit a status report on the payment of salary arrears to Parliament by 15 August 2014;

iv) 	Accumulation of salary arrears must stop henceforth. Any accounting officer or head of department who causes accumulation of salary arrears must be penalised by the appointing authority.

Those are the issues in relation to recommendations under payment of arrears. I put the question to those sets of recommendations.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Recommendation No. 2, decentralisation of the payroll:
i) 	Processing of the payroll and payment of salaries should be fully devolved to the accounting officers. For clarity, the owner of the payroll shall be the accounting officer who will be held accountable for any payroll irregularities; 

ii) 	The ministry responsible for public service should retain the responsibility of policy guidance, hosting the IPPS, monitoring the payroll, maintaining standards and implementing system security and controls.

Those are the issues relating to this. I put the question to those sets of recommendations.

(Question out and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Recommendation No. 3, capacity building:

i) 	For all local governments lacking human resource officers, the Public Service Commission should centrally recruit at least one qualified and well-trained human resource officer within the first quarter of Financial Year 2014/15;

ii) 	Every Government institution should have a strong human resource department with adequate and qualified personnel to handle human resource related issues;

iii) 	The ministry responsible for public service should procure IT equipment and ensure availability of connectivity for the human resource departments of all local governments, ministries and government agencies;

iv) 	The Ministry of Finance should provide adequate budgetary provisions for recruitment of human resource personnel and IT equipment within the Financial Year 2014/2015.

I put the question to that set of recommendations. 

MR EKANYA: Mr Speaker, the recommendation on IT is in good faith but we are giving the Ministry of Finance money for IPPS rollout, even in this year’s budget. So, when you now pass a recommendation saying that the Ministry of Public Service should handle that, some people will be happy because they will say, “Give us also money because the Ministry of Finance also does it.” So, I beg that that recommendation be deleted.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: For those reasons, the honourable member is proposing deletion of – what do you want deleted? Is it the one that says, “The ministry responsible for public service should procure IT equipment”? Is that the one you want to be deleted or the whole thing to do with capacity building?

MR EKANYA: The one on ICT because it is being handled by the Ministry of Finance and it has been rolled out.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So it is this one: “The Minister should provide adequate budgetary provisions for recruitment of human resource personnel and IT equipment within the financial year 2014/2015.” Yes, committee chairperson.

MR MAGYEZI: Mr Speaker, as a committee, we found out that the IPPS is actually a project under a bigger project, which was signed between the Government and IDA in 2008 and it is ending in June this year. So this becomes absolutely important that Government finds money within its budget to carry forward the rollout.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The question is: Should it be the public service ministry or the finance ministry?

MR MAGYEZI: The finance ministry.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But here you are saying Ministry of Public Service. So, should we make the change? (Interjection) Is that what you are proposing?

MR MAGYEZI: Yes. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I put the question that the ministry be amended to be the Ministry of Finance.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I now put the question to the whole set of recommendations with that amendment. Yes, member for Ajuri?

MR DENNIS OBUA: Mr Speaker, there is that proposal No.1, requiring the recruitment of senior personnel officers to be done centrally. Under the Constitution, I think that rests with the respective district service commissions that are appointed and approved by the district councils.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So it goes against – 

MR MAGYEZI: Mr Speaker, this is not the first time that this is being done. I think about two years ago, it was done with the Ministry of Health. It is an immediate stopgap measure and the Public Service Commission would then handle it with the district service commissions. In terms of advert, the advertisement and recruitment is simply done centrally on behalf of the district service commissions.

MR EKANYA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. What has been happening with the Ministry of Health is that it is centrally advertised in order to reduce the costs but then the respective district service commissions will conduct the interviews.

MR MAGYEZI: Mr Speaker, I think that amendment is okay - the central advert and then recruitment by the districts. The alternative would be that Government provides money for this particular activity to the respective district service commissions. So I concede to that amendment; let it be with respect to the central advert and the recruitment by the districts.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Then we say: “For all local governments lacking human resource officers, the Public Service Commission should facilitate the recruitment of at least one qualified and well trained human resource officer within the first quarter of the Financial Year 2014/2015.” Facilitating means that they can do that advert and then the rest will be done the way it has always been done. Is that okay? - [Hon. Members: “Yes.”] - I put the question now to the whole set of recommendations under capacity building.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Recommendation No.4, roll-out of the IPPS and IFMS: 
i) 	The ministry responsible for public service should ensure functionality of all IPPS modules within the first quarter of the Financial Year 2014/2015. 

ii) 	Full rollout of IPPS to all sites within a period of one year. Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should provide the necessary resources for the full rollout in the FY 2014/2015. The financial implication is estimated at the cost of Shs 23 billion. 

iii) 	Comprehensive training of all staff involved in payroll management. 

iv) 	Implementation of the interface between IPPS and IFMS by 31 July 2014 to enable automatic transfer of data without human intervention that has been causing delays and errors. 

v) 	Implementation of the interface between IPPS, IFMS and national databases such as national ID, Uganda Revenue Authority taxpayers’ database and social security.

Those are the recommendations under that. Yes, Member for Tororo?

MR EKANYA: Mr Speaker, we have been recommending cost cutting – integrating these systems because all is based on ICT and using computer systems. That is why we had thought that IPPS and IFMS can be implemented jointly under Ministry of Finance. If we separate them, Ministry of Public Service will want money for ICT and software and then the Ministry of Finance will also ask for money for the same and that is very costly. That is why we proposed that the Ministry of Finance handles the entire thing. They can bring technical staff from the Ministry of Public Service.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Committee chairperson, can the finance ministry handle this? Is that you recommendation?

MR MAGYEZI: Mr Speaker, the mandate of the ministry responsible for public service remains within human resource management; it cannot be mixed with that of the finance ministry. The interface does not take away the responsibility of Ministry of Public Service. So, I think we should retain the recommendation as we have it here.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I put the question to that recommendation.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Recommendation No.5, cleaning up the payroll: 
i) 	The Auditor-General should submit the 100 per cent cleaned up payroll to Parliament by 30 August 2014.
ii) 	The ministry responsible for public service should adopt the cleaned up payroll database as verified by the Auditor-General as soon as it is availed by the Auditor-General.
iii) 	The ministry responsible for public service should set up regional centres to capture the biometric data of all new entrants.
iv)	The Government should implement what was learned in Rwanda called “a pay as we see you policy”. This entails the following:

    • Payment of all employees should be based on their availability at work.
    • The accounting officers should put in place local mechanisms to ensure that this requirement is strictly adhered to; for example, supervisors at all levels should implement clock-in registers.
    • The Ministry of Finance should avail a statement on the status of payment of salaries of each institution to the respective accounting officers on a monthly basis. 
    • Accounting officers should equally give feedback on a monthly basis to all unit supervisors on payment of salaries of staff under their units.

MR KATOTO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. In these recommendations, I have not seen where these people are going to be paid. They missed salary and they need it and some of them are not yet paid; I have not heard anything to that effect.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I put the question to those sets of amendments.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That one is captured under another set of recommendations.

MR SSEMUJJU NGANDA: Mr Speaker, the Auditor-General is supposed to report to Parliament I think once a year under the Constitution. This Parliament is now assigning him another deadline, that he must bring a cleaned-up payroll in two months. I do not want to go into details but I am only inquiring whether it will be procedurally right for this Parliament to assign the Auditor-General another deadline when there is a constitutional one.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: In your statement you said, “at least once a year.” That means it is not only once a year. We have special audits that have been requested by this House and performed by the Auditor-General. This could be one such assignment. 

Recommendation No. 6, budgeting for the wage Bill

i) 	Budgeting for the wage Bill should be strictly based on the approved staff ceilings across all government entities, not employees in position. 
ii) 	Budgeting for the national wage bill should take into account all anticipated promotions, salary increments and other remunerations of government employees as provided for in the standing orders. 
iii) 	Ministry of Finance should desist from forwarding to Parliament supplementary expenditure requests for wage with effect from FY 2014/2015. Henceforth, Parliament should not approve supplementary budget requests for salaries. 

MR OGUTTU: On budgeting for approved staff sealing, it means we can send money for approved staff ceilings like in a hospital where there are 30 workers yet there are only 20 in position and that money will have get there. Is that what we want, Mr Chairman?

MR MAGYEZI: Mr Speaker, every year, the Ministry of Finance, in consultation with the Ministry of Public Service, issues indicative planning figures to all accounting officers. In the memoranda submitted, they give staff ceilings for each institution. By that, we mean there is a structure. The district called Kaliro, for example, may have a structure under the personnel department of seven staff but each year the Government gives Kaliro District its ceiling - the numbers beyond which they cannot recruit. Now, our recommendation is that Government should meet the cost of that ceiling rather than saying it is according to that person who is in the post and so, when Rafael is no longer there, then the district has to come back to the centre to recruit. So, the proposal here is to revert to staff ceilings rather than employees in post. This will protect the wage bill. 

MR OGUTTU: Then how do we implement pay as you see? You have just recommended something you benchmarked from Rwanda where you pay as you see. How do you harmonise that?

MR MAGYEZI: The pay as you see policy is at the stage of payment whereas this is at the stage of budgeting. Although I have your budget, payment to you will be to the extent to which you are at work; we should separate the two. 

MR EKANYA: His recommendation sounds good but if I was the Prime Minister, I would have a problem with it. However, since I am not, as a shadow minister I will just say that the problem here is that we are putting Government in a very difficult position. The ceiling is there but people die, people move from one district to another and that is why a Member said that his sub county chief was named as an askari. So, if the House resolves on the ceiling, people will move away and that money will remain in that district. 

I think that this recommendation is good but implementation will create a big problem. In my district, for example, the ceiling is given by Government but we cannot find certain engineers to recruit. So, if you give money for doctors and the doctors are not there, then we shall have ghosts. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What I understand from this is that there is a ceiling and the budget will be based on that ceiling but the actual payments will be done on pay as you see basis. So if there is a surplus, the usual procedure of sending this money back will apply. That is the way the recommendation is structured. I put the question to this amendment 

MR EKANYA: Mr Speaker, on the recommendation on supplementaries, we will have a constitutional problem. I am a member of the budget committee; several accounting officers have declared excess money because the people moved away from their ministry. When we are voting here, we vote on vote heads. The money has to come here and is re-voted if people have moved away. Now if we totally block supplementaries for salaries, then we are going to create a bigger problem and people will not get salaries and we shall be the ones who blocked them. Why don’t we wait for the report and the other studies of the Auditor-General before taking such a decision?

MR WADRI: Mr Chairman, the erratic approaches that we have been taking, to the extent that the Executive comes here to ask for supplementaries to pay salaries, will be cured or done away with if we have money budgeted for the positions. So, even if a person dies or is promoted, the ceiling is there and the money is there. 

Secondly, salaries in the votes are not like any other monies you can play around with –(Interjections)– If Kayihura did it that was wrong. So, the moment we appropriate money for posts rather than for individuals, we will be able to trace the issue of salaries. If you have 20 positions and you only have 16 people, then you will know that the money for the remaining four is intact. If it is not utilised because there are no people in those positions, it will go back to the Treasury rather than having people promoted when vacancies exist and yet they are not paid. That is why the Executive will continue to run to us for supplementaries and that is why people will be appointed to posts without money to pay them. This recommendation will cure the whole problem. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I put the question to that set of recommendations. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Recommendation No. 7: 
i) 	Strict enforcement and adherence to the laws, Public Service Standing Orders, Public Service Code of Conduct, rules and regulations. The Head of Public Service should submit a report on a biannual basis to Parliament detailing the disciplinary measures taken on specific cases of non-adherence to the Public Service Standing Orders and applicable laws.

ii) 	Annual audit of the payroll by the Auditor-General and the report to be presented to Parliament by the 30th August every year.

iii) 	Identification of all overpaid staff by accounting officers and recovery of all funds paid in excess of the mandatory pay. 

iv) 	Statement from the Minister of Finance to Parliament by 15 August 2014 on the status of recoveries and disciplinary action taken on those persons involved.

v) 	The Auditor-General should carry out forensic investigation on the payroll to establish persons involved in the creation and perpetuation of ghosts and other anomalies on the payroll. 

vi) 	All persons involved in the creation and perpetuation of ghosts on the payroll should be dismissed with disgrace and prosecuted with a view to make good the loss.

MS OSEGGE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I think that No. 3 should have a time period tagged to it. When do we want these recoveries done? As it stands, it is an open statement. We need a timeline for follow-up. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: By 15th August, the ministry should report on the recoveries. I put the question to those recommendations. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Recommendation No. 8: In order to address the concerns of the Police Force, the committee recommends that the payroll system should be customised to meet the peculiar requirements of the Uganda Police Force in terms of force numbers, police districts, disciplinary measures and transfers. I put the question to that recommendation. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Recommendation No.9, restructuring of the Ministry of Public Service: Given the challenges as noted by the sessional Committee on Public Service and Local Government and the observations made by this committee, in view of the need to streamline the institutional framework for the successful implementation of the above recommendations, the committee strongly recommends as follows:
i) 	The Ministry of Public Service should be restructured into a directorate under the Office of the President with highly technical experts to carry out the following functions: 
    • provide human resource management and policy guidelines; 
    • provide technical support to the implementing agencies; 
    • coordinate the service commissions; 
    • host the IPPS; and 
    • develop and monitor implementation of standards of service.

ii) 	Establish regional service commissions at appropriate levels to replace the current district service commissions. This shall require a constitutional amendment of Article 198. The committee regards this as necessary because of the following: 
    • inadequate capacity of the district service commissions; 
    • politisation of recruitment, promotion and other human resource management functions; 
    • the need to remain consistent with the devolution principle at the appropriate levels; and 
    • cost efficiency for the human resource management and development function.

MR MAGYEZI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. We have listened to the comments of Members and I beg to make the following responses: on the regional service commissions, it is clear and we agree that this falls within the constitutional provisions and so to attempt to change it now becomes challenging. 

However, we have given the reasons: cost efficiency, remaining consistent with devolution, politisation in recruitment, inadequacy in terms of capacities. This, I believe could be taken up at a later stage. So, this recommendation, we beg to withdraw. (Applause)

On the one of restructuring the ministry into a directorate under the Office of the President, we beg to retain it because of the following reasons: Mr Speaker, if you look up to Chapter 10 of the Constitution, actually, Public Service mandate is already under the Office of the President. Indeed, the Head of Public Service falls under the same office. So, what we are saying is actually a practice in Kenya, Tanzania though for Kenya, this is a fully independent commission.

Thirdly, let me talk about the implication of decentralising the pay roll is simply that one - that you are taking away the big chunk of responsibilities of the Ministry of Public Service. When you look at the other aspect, for example, training and maintenance and monitoring the implementation of the standing Orders, providing the conditions of service of staff, personnel management, the development of the public service and so on, these are the mandates of the Public Service Commission.

Similarly, with the Education Service Commission and the Health Service Commission, our view is that if those two service commissions were empowered, it leaves very little, in terms of mandate, for the existence of a full Ministry of Public Service.

Lastly, we have talked about these two systems – the IFMS and IPPS – their integration and linkage means automatic handling of payroll of payment of salaries. To us, this will minimise the conflicts between the Ministry of Public Service and that of Finance. And that is why we suggest for the retention of a lean structure – we do not need to full Ministry of Public Service. 

Where you place it, I think that can be debated. Otherwise, they can only retain aspects of policy, technical assistance and overseeing the other service commissions.

We beg to re-submit and insist there is no need for a full Ministry of Public Service. Let it be restructured into a directorate. (Applause)

MR WAFULA OGUTTU: Mr Speaker, we agree with the committee that the Ministry of Public Service should be disbanded and turned into a directorate. But we are also aware that all departments and ministries fall under the President because he is in charge of all of them.

We also know with the Ministry of Labour – that name should have been changed to be the Ministry of Human Resources. So, it would have been proper to take this directorate to that Ministry of Human Resources, which is the Ministry of Labour today. In other words, it is not appropriate to put Labour under the President’s Office. That office is supposed to supervise all these departments and offices. 

Also, we are aware of the problems in the Office of the President – there has been a lot of diversion of money and theft because it is large. People in this country - when it is President’s Office, people do not want to probe very much. Once you say it is President’s office, people fear. So, we do not want that to happen. Let the ministry be taken to a place that is reachable and accessible to people, which is the Ministry of Labour. Thank you.

MR WADRI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. First, I would like to inform the Leader of the Opposition that this is the one thing on which we have not agreed upon as a side. So, allow me to express my inner-most feelings based on technicalities in which I squarely will want to disagree with my Leader of the Opposition.

Let me approach this issue from two fronts. The first one is about the domicile for this proposal that has been made. I am one person who strongly believes that the Presidency is too big. Even matters like Uganda Aids Commission, it is under President’s Office; KCCA is under President’s Office, Security is under President’s Office; Lands, President’s Office. Surely, what is the capacity of this office called Presidency to handle all these departments and agencies?

We have just had problems with many projects for example, the Presidential Initiative on Bananas, in markets and small business enterprises. All these have been lumped up under an umbrella and they caused inefficiency.

Mr Speaker, I am going to dwell on another sector where the Rt Hon. Amama Mbabazi, the Prime Minister, even has a big institution, which makes management and service delivery very difficult. We should run away from this thing called “presidentalism” where people think that for everything to succeed, it must be under the President.

Secondly, we also need to look at the technical role of the Ministry of Public Service. I have heard members talk about the Education Service Commission; the Health Service Commission and the Judicial Service Commission. These three commissions are only technical in as far as technicalities of the recruitment of people with those professions is concerned.

When you look at the Ministry of Public Service, you realise that it has a bigger mandate than any of these commissions you are talking about. How about Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Ministry of Local Governments, Labour, Gender and Social Development and all the other ministries? Are you going to say they should develop their own separate commissions?

I would like to disagree with the Rt Hon. Leader of the Opposition on the proposal of taking the proposed Public Service Directorate to Ministry of Labour, which he has proposed to be called the Ministry of Human Resources.

I want to assure you that at the Ministry of Labour or the labour department per se, is not responsible for human resource planning and policy matters relating to manpower planning in this country. Never. It is area specific. It specifically deals with human relations at places of work. That is why we have got issues to do with labour movements; that is why we have got issues to do with industrial safety. That is where it comes in. That is a specialised area where the Department of Labour comes in but not the entire human resource.

Public Service as a ministry –(Interjections)– you are attempting to inform a person who has been in this docket of civil service for long. Please, I cannot be advised by the Minister of State, who I know is my colleague in that area but not you. [The Deputy Speaker: “Please, please.”] Please –(Interjections)– No, let us be objective to ourselves. 

The Ministry of Public Service does not only take responsibility of policy issues of human resource management in this country. It deals with recruitment; promotions and more importantly, it deals with the issue of discipline amongst civil servants. That is the responsibility of the Ministry of Public Service. That is the reason whether it is Judicial Service commission or Local Government, Civil Service; at the end of the day they must give a report to Public Service when it comes to issues of discipline of staff.

I am one person who vehemently opposes this recommendation that the Ministry of Public Service be subsumed into this bigger thing called President’s office. It will create more confusion and more inefficiency.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, aspect two of this recommendation has been dropped and aspect one has been eloquently submitted on by my grandson who comes from Terego. I am going to put the question to this recommendation that is remaining.

(Question put and negatived.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I now put the question to the report of the committee and recommendations as amended. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have done ourselves a good job but at the same time, we have lost out on the Prime Minister’s question time. I am going to seek the indulgence of the Prime Minister to extend his time in the House so that we can do 45 minutes in the House of question time. It starts now.

PRIME MINISTER’S QUESTION TIME

3.48
MS FLORENCE NAMAYANJA (DP, Bukoto County East, Masaka): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to find out from the Prime Minister; about three weeks ago, we had statements on security that certain vehicles, whose registration numbers were known, had entered the country with bombs.

Since then, we have not heard any statements from Government about our security and we are now in panic about what happened in Kenya and also what happened here in our premises yesterday.

We do not see anything being done to take care of our security. Rt hon. Prime Minister, are we safe? Are you in control; is Government in control? I would like to find out from you.

3.49
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Mr Speaker, it is true that security in our region is of serious concern. We have talked about it many times; we have actually, been victims of acts of terrorism in Uganda and in other regions.

I would like to use this opportunity to extend our sympathies to the Government and the people of Kenya for the suffering they have endured at the hands of terrorists in the recent past and we extend our condolences to the families of the many that have been killed.

Uganda has had its own share of terrorism and we recollect exactly four years ago during the last World Cup when we suffered terrorist actions here in the city.

Previously, we had been targets for the terrorists groups. I would like to inform this House as I did then, that in fact, in 1998 when Nairobi and Dar-es-Salaam were bombed, Kampala was supposed to be bombed as well. We have had and paid particular attention to these threats as a nation. We have enhanced our capacity in the security services to respond to this terrorism. 

It is not always easy to anticipate all actions but I can assure you that the security forces of Uganda have been prepared to act against these threats. I am happy to inform this House that not long ago, our gallant soldiers in Somalia - I do not remember if we made a statement, we asked the Minister of Defence to make a statement and I hope he did - because he should come and make a statement to the House.

He will come and make a full statement on this matter. Not long ago, I read a piece in the media, so, he must have addressed the press. But as colleagues will recollect, there was an attempt in Mogadishu to enter the Parliament of Somalia, which was in session with 120 members sitting. Terrorists breached the first defence point by driving through it, with a truck full of explosives.

The truck exploded killing six Somali Police officers, who were on duty and of course, the terrorists who were in that vehicle but other terrorists used the cover of the smoke and confusion that had developed to enter and they were engaged by UPDF. They were 13 in number and they were prevented from entering the Chamber of Parliament. (Interruption)

MR SSEMUJJU NGANDA: Mr Speaker, this is supposed to be Prime Minister’s question time and he is supposed to give answers to questions raised. The Prime Minister is now giving a statement on Somalia, which he says the Minister of Defence will come and give; yet we have 45 minutes for all of us to ask questions that require shot answers. 

Is the Prime Minister therefore in order to turn –(Interjections) you can see the enthusiasm. Is the Prime Minister proceeding well to turn this into a lecture and give a statement on Somalia, yet he knows that there are several questions for which he must give answers.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, when you asked a question of security, you know, it is a regional matter, you know it is about Al-Shabab and all the other people involved in this sector. The question cannot be short for sure.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I hope that was not an attempt to stop me from saying what I want to tell the country.

I want to inform this House, as you all know, that we have deployed UPDF, police and all security agencies of Uganda in our operation in Somalia. Our level of preparedness and readiness to respond to and handle terrorists - this particular incident is just one example. I could give you many others. The Minister of Defence could give you a more comprehensive statement.

These 13 who had actually entered tried to enter the Chamber as they would try to enter inside here but the UPDF guard duty prevented them and they ran to an upper floor. With reinforcements of Special Forces, the UPDF pursued and eliminated all of them and protected the entire House of Somalia. (Applause)

So, the security threat by these terrorists cannot be under-estimated. It is here, obviously we have been talking about it. Our security forces have been talking about it but we have done everything possible to prepare ourselves against those threats and I am very confident that the reason we are enjoying this peace is not for lack of effort or attempt by these terrorists to terrorise Uganda again. Rather, it is because our readiness and capacity to handle them has proved to be effective. (Applause)

This is not to say that we should be like the Cameroon football team in the World Cup; lax or casual. We must be serious, we must be aware that security against terrorism is not only to be fought by these specialised forces but by all of us. We must take all the precautions and do everything necessary to prevent the breach of our security.

So the country should be assured that our forces are in control. The threat is still there and every effort is being made by these people to terrorise us but as they do that, we strengthen our capacity to respond to them effectively. Thank you.

3.58
MR HATWIB KATOTO (NRM, Katerera County, Rubirizi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to ask the Prime Minister a question. What are you trying to do for the roads of Western Uganda, which are rotting? (Laughter) For example, your road and my road in Katerera as well as the road from Ishaka to Katunguru? They are rotting. What are you planning to do about them? People are no longer transporting their food stuffs.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Yes, it is obviously sad, very sad that in Uganda, we still have sections of our road network that are in a very poor state of repair and they include the one to Kanungu, the one in Katerera and others. But as colleagues know, this government - Even in the Budget that was read only last week, we have made proposals to this Parliament to appropriate very substantial sums of money to infrastructure and roads are covered in these.

I think what should give people confidence and hope is that even if their roads are in a poor state of repair, not everything is lost because of our achievements in the construction and repair of roads. Obviously, you heard the State of the Nation Address by the President; he addressed this question about the roads that have been done; the new tarmac roads and he read the whole list.

We have a fairly impressive record in terms of construction of roads, both repair and constructing new ones so those whose roads have not been done yet, please, be patient. We will reach there. Thank you.

4.01
MS OLIVER KATWESIGYE (NRM, Woman Representative, Buhweju): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt hon. Prime Minister, the export of fish has declined over the years in Uganda. Uganda Government has tried to put some measures like stopping the catching of young fish in order to improve the stock but we share Lake Victoria with other countries who have not done anything. 

What is the Uganda Government doing to curb this problem? Thank you.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Yes, unfortunately, the hon. Member is right that the export of fish in Uganda has declined. Our lake has been over-fished and because we have, in the past, depended on fish in the wild because fish in the water is fish in the wild, this has caused that problem. Because the demand for fish in the international market has been increasing and rising very heavily, our people have resorted to unlawful methods of fishing including using wrong nets and therefore, catching young fish, as well as invading breeding grounds. 

In some activities against the environment, particularly, on the lake shores, indeed, the shores, which have been breeding grounds have been attacked. So, Government has taken measures and set up a special police, which unfortunately is still not so strong and not equipped enough to effectively handle the entire problem. However, I am reasonably satisfied that the trend is changing. It is changing because we have established - I do not know whether to call them reserves or breeding grounds. 

There are areas, which are especially protected in order to give fish the opportunity to multiply and - (Interruptions) - Well, I am talking about Government policy. I would like to inform hon. Mwiru, in case he did not know, that the policy of this government in the management of the economy is that the economy is private sector-led, export-oriented and Government takes steps and adopts policies conducive to the growth of the private sector. So, even fish, the breeding, and  - 

The confidence I would like to give this House is that our fish industry is reviving. I know one private farmer who is doing cage fish farming in Uganda and who has the biggest stock in the history of Uganda and in the region. No one has as many cages as he does and- (Interjections) Well, he may be German, I am not sure about that. The nationality does not matter. (Laughter) The important thing is that these private people are increasing our fishing stocks through modern methods of fishing.

As far as the protection of life in Lake Victoria is concerned, this has been a concern of all the lake shore countries –(interjections) - is that what we call them? - under the Lake Victoria Management Programme for East Africa. We have – yes, I am impressed by hon. Ekanya as he has this information – we have an agency called Lake Victoria Management Agency, which is incidentally headquartered in Entebbe, Uganda – (Interjections) - in Jinja. It has been doing a great job and we harmonise our positions because the problems that we face today here in Uganda have been the problems in the other countries as well. But I am very confident that we are coming on top of this situation. I thank you.

4.07
MR SSEMUJJU NGANDA (FDC, Kyadondo County East, Wakiso): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Can the Prime Minister comment on the “yellowlisation” of public functions? A case in point is the newly elected President of the UN General Assembly was received at Entebbe Airport by a crowd of young people wearing campaign T-shirts of Yoweri K. Museveni. They were branded in yellow T-shirts and not national colours. At several other functions, including Labour Day and Heroes Day where the trend now is that you must promote yellow instead of the national colours.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Well, my response to my colleague is that, thanks to the Movement, in Uganda we enjoy absolute freedom of dress. (Applause) We have free choice of colour – if you choose yellow, it is your right and if you choose blue, it is your right. We are going to make a statement to this House about the election of Uganda to the Presidency of the UN General Assembly for 2014/2015 and it is a great honour that Uganda has been elected of all the countries in the world to be the President of the General Assembly. (Applause)

So, it was right that Ugandans receive our person or representative of Uganda now as he does not represent a party but Uganda as a whole. I am surprised that hon. Ibrahim Ssemujju went there in yellow to meet him.  (Laughter)(Mr Ssemujju Nganda rose_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order.

MR SSEMUJJU NGANDA: Mr Speaker, the former Secretary-General of NRM, who is putting on a yellow tie, was not at the airport when young men wearing campaign posters went to receive the President of the UN General Assembly - which actually is the Presidency for Uganda. I was actually putting on a white kanzu.  Is the Secretary-General of NRM, therefore, in order to mislead this Parliament, first, that I went to receive hon. Sam Kutesa when I was actually returning from doing work for this Parliament?

Secondly, that I was putting on yellow when actually I was putting on white; is he in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, by your own statement, you said that everybody who went to receive hon. Sam Kutesa was wearing yellow. So, everybody who was there was wearing yellow and so the presumption is that since you were there, you could have also been wearing yellow. (Laughter) That is what he was saying.

4.12
MS MARIAM NALUBEGA (Independent, Woman Representative, Butambala):  Thank you. Mr Speaker, I would like to ask the Prime Minister – I want to know how far Government has gone to recover the money that was meant to procure bicycles for our LC-1 chairpersons because when we were in Mbulabuti on Monday, the Chairperson, Mr Isabirye, was asking the President to just donate to him a bicycle. 

I also want to know how far the Government has gone to reprimand those that swindled this money. I want to know when my Chairperson in Kabuye Village is receiving his bicycle because I allocated money for it and had already told him that he was going to get his bicycle and so, he is on my case asking for the bicycle and so are many other LC-I chairpersons.  

Thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Well, as my colleague undoubtedly knows, that is a matter that is pending on the courts of law. Those suspected to have misappropriated these funds were arrested and charged in court. I am not at liberty, therefore, to discuss the merits of the matter in this House lest I breach our well-established rules. So, as to what is happening on that case to determine whether the money was stolen and therefore follow up those who stole the money to recover it, I would not –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order.

MS NAMBOOZE: Thank you. Is the Rt Hon. Prime Minister in order to mislead this House that all the monies that were supposed to be used to buy the bicycles are part of the ongoing case in court while this same House resolved and indeed, allocated money for the purchase of mobile hoes and we were told here by the local government minister that the bicycles shall be given out in phases? 

Is he in order to mislead the House?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think the point that the Rt Hon. Prime Minister was making is that he was trying to disqualify himself from certain aspects of the question that he would not give answers to those that will touch on the matter in court but he had not finished. So, I do not know what he was going to say next. (Laughter) Yes, because he had just said, “That on this particular aspect, I cannot comment because those issues are in court.” 

On the other one, I was now waiting.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Now, I was responding to a question asked in the English language. Can I translate it? (Interjections)- into Luganda?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Into Swahili. Swahili is okay.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: I am not sure that Swahili would not complicate matters even more. 

So, I was responding to the question of money that was lost, that had been appropriated by this Parliament to procure bicycles. And I said, about the money which was lost, action was taken; I do not have to repeat what I said. But subsequently, of course, as honourable members know, Government has indeed gone ahead and procured bicycles. So far, distribution of bicycles is roughly to about 50 per cent of all the districts of Uganda and the process is on-going.

4.17
MR MATHIAS MPUUGA (Independent, Masaka Municipality, Masaka): Thank you, Mr Speaker. On the Floor of this House, two months ago, I asked the Prime Minister a question relating to what we are aware of that Government was going to reduce the per capita expenditure on every pupil in UPE schools, to which the Prime Minister expressed ignorance and he denied the fact his Government would never do that. 

Instead, he said, Government was planning to spend more money to boost UPE. At the moment, indeed Government – like I was worried – has gone ahead in the Budget to reduce expenditure on every pupil. My question now is: Will the Prime Minister explain to this House the wisdom behind the reduction of the money? Or actually the Prime Minister occasionally lies or is a speculator because he initially denied but now it has happened.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Well, it is some kind of question. I think what he is saying is that he had heard a rumour that Government planned to reduce the Capitation Grant. But, of course, as he knows very well, appropriation is the business of this House. The Executive only proposes. What we proposed and Parliament appropriated last time, in terms of the amount of money involved, is the same amount of money we have in the Budget that was read. Of course, it is true that the number of children has gone up. So, the effect may be to reduce. So, this will negatively affect the amount per child. 

To the best of my knowledge, at the time you asked the question – and even now – I knew and it is a fact that in terms of money, we are not going to reduce allocation under that item. We have not increased it because you are now asking why we did not increase. This is a different question from what you asked last time.

4.20
MR ROBERT KAFEERO (Independent, Nakifuma County, Mukono): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, navigation on Uganda’s water bodies remains largely risky because for long, we have not done any hydrographical survey on our water bodies. For your information, the last surveys were done on Lake Victoria in 1901. The charts now on Lake Victoria that determine navigation routes are too old to be relied on, for any navigation purposes. 

In addition, we have not installed any navigation aides. It is only in this country that we have disjointed and obsolete laws, regulations and standards in this sub-sector. What is Government doing in order to rectify the situation so that we can achieve safety on our water bodies? Thank you.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: As my colleague may be aware, I am a regular and enthusiastic traveller on Lake Victoria. And I would like to assure him that the navigation maps that I use when I move around, although they were done a long time ago, they are still up to date; the islands are still the same; the rocks have not shifted and I have found them very appropriate and useful.

I know that we have had the issue of water levels, which have been changing but it is easy to work out, for instance, the depth of the rocks and therefore, the risk one faces in travelling over a rocky area, depending on the level of the water. And I can assure you that our ministry in charge of water is up to date in terms of determining the water level of Lake Victoria, consistently, all the time. 

If there is need for us to update the navigation survey of Lake Victoria, of course, we will do it. And maybe, we should do it in order to satisfy those who may not be sure that the 1901 survey is still relevant today. Thank you.

4.24
MRS FLORENCE EKWAU IBI (FDC, Woman Representative, Kaberamaido): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, the bridge connecting Kaberamaido to Soroti district – that is Olianai Bridge – has been in the Budget for the last three financial years. What are Government plans to commence the work on this bridge?

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Now, hon. Ibi has caught me off -guard. (Laughter) Can I undertake to get that information and get back to you? (Interjections) I will do that. Thank you.

4.17
MR SIMON ALEPER (Independent, Moroto Municipality, Moroto): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I wish to ask the Prime Minister whether he is aware that some districts of Karamoja risk losing money that was given by the government of Ireland through the Irish Embassy for piloting boarding schools. But because it is alleged that the ministry has failed to play its role in supervising the work, the work has stalled and therefore, the Embassy threatens to withdraw the money. Thank you. (Interjections) 

Mr Speaker, maybe let me repeat or re-phrase my question: The Irish government gave money to the Ugandan government and this money was ring-fenced by the Ministry of Education. The purpose of this money was for construction of boarding primary schools in some of the districts of Karamoja like Moroto and Nakapiripirit.

As we talk now, the work has not progressed as expected. So, the embassy has threatened to withdraw its money. Therefore, I would like to know from the Prime Minister whether he is aware that the Ministry of Education has not performed its role as expected. 

Thank you. I hope it is clear now.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Yes, it is true that there was a problem in the construction of those boarding schools mainly because the contracts were awarded to people who clearly, either on account of incompetence or for some other reason did shoddy work. So, it was stopped and it was decided that the contract be cancelled. The money that remained will be – you know what happens to money at the end of a financial year; it will be returned. And the process of the re-tendering for the construction of those schools is under way.

4.27
MS KABAKUMBA MASIKO (NRM, Bujenje County, Masindi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to ask the Prime Minister whether he is aware that the problem of epilepsy in Bujenje Constituency is on the rise to the extent that for every household of about eight people, five of them are victims. (Interjections) It is that bad. So, I would like the Prime Minister to inform this House about the policy of Government on this disease. 

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: I am not aware and I am surprised that the MP for Bujenje did not whisper to me because she has the closest accessibility to me that anyone could have. (Laughter) So, I will get more information from her and respond next time. Thank you. 


4.30
MR ALEX BYARUGABA (NRM, Isingiro County South, Isingiro): Thank you, Mr Speaker. About three years ago, the Ministry of Local Government through the program of KAIP identified a number of roads in local government. One of the roads identified was in my constituency, from Katanga, Kisharira, Nyabushenyi – it goes through a very productive land. This is a major road as far as production in our area is concerned. But for all these years, there is nothing done on this road. It is now impassable. I actually have no access to some parts of my constituency because of those roads under the Ministry of Local Government under KAIP. 

May I know the progress; what should I tell my people?

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Mr Speaker, I think we have made this point before and I thank the honourable colleague for raising that question. 

Again, I do not have an immediate response to that question. We have said this before, that the Prime Minister’s question time, to ask about statistical information – these are the kinds of questions that are covered by our rules in regard to questions for oral answers. That is why they are given enough time so that even the sector minister can go back, digs for information and comes back to tell you the facts and the plans for that issue. 

So, I regard this as a question for oral answer and I undertake to come back and answer later.

4.32
MS GRACE KWIYUCWINY (NRM, Woman Representative, Zombo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Mr Prime Minister, while there is a law on disposal of assets, Government institutions are very lax in disposing assets. You can go to a district local government park yard and find up to 16 or 20 vehicles, which have been packed there for many years. They have rotten and lost value, which is a waste to the Government of Uganda. 

I would like to know whether you are aware of this and whether there is any step being taken by Government to clean up those aspects of the local governments and other institutions.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: I thank the honourable member for that question. Yes, I am aware of Government policy to board off, for instance, motor vehicles after a certain period has passed. As you know, on average, a government vehicle has a life span of five years. After five years, it is supposed to be boarded off. 

Unfortunately, this system of boarding off was abused extensively and therefore, Government took a decision to suspend it while a mechanism is worked out to avoid that kind of abuse. This has not come up yet and as a consequence, we have had quite a few assets of Government piling up without being boarded off. But I hope that this system will be in place soon so that that situation in Zombo comes to an end.

4.34
MR MICHAEL MAWANDA (NRM, Igara County East, Bushenyi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. According to the Auditor- General’s report, he indicated the levels of domestic arrears have reached unbearable levels to a tune of more than 1.2 trillion. And all efforts employed by the Ministry of Finance to attend to this problem seem not to be working and you know the effect this has on our local business. 

What plan does Government have to sort out this problem so that we can get some relief in our day-to-day businesses?

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: I am certainly aware about the problem of domestic arrears. Government has done quite a bit in the last few years to try and reduce domestic arrears. As you know, we actually even introduced the concept of cash budget. One of the reasons was to make sure that departments and agencies of Government spend what is available. So, I do not have the details about the Shs 1.2 trillion in domestic arrears as to how this accrued, whether it is a backlog from many years or cumulative – but as a Government we have resolved that we shall not take services especially of the private sector or even of the public sector, without paying for those services. That is how our position. 

I can tell you, for example, that we have had a very nasty experience where one ministry denied another utility services. You heard of the case of Mulago Hospital where water was turned off. And also I think in Jinja Hospital, power was turned off. This is not the right thing to do and it must be avoided.

On the one hand these Government institutions must have those utilities that they require for them to perform their services. And my expectation, therefore, is that most probably – I will have to get the details – this Shs 1.2 trillion domestic arrears are old and we will reduce it as we go along. 

Thank you. (Members rose_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Hon. Members, our time is up. – Yes, the time is up.  I am now asking the Leader of the Opposition to make some comments.

4.39
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Phillip Wafula Oguttu): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I also would like to thank the Rt Hon. Prime Minister for responding to the questions posed to you.

However, I have some clarifications that I would like to make. The first is about over-fishing on our lakes. This practice has been happening for some time. At one time we were crazy about giving licenses to process fish. Government was giving licenses to very many people. They set up factories for processing fish and I think this has been the cause for the depletion of our lakes.

Now, we are trying to restock the fish so that there is enough but the methods that Government is using are not appropriate. I represent the fishing community in this Parliament. These communities are not sensitised in any organised manner so that they appreciate the dangers of over fishing on our lakes.

We have the Marine Police that handles them as enemies. They keep beating them up and confiscate their fish and after which, the police sells that fish off. Some of them even export that impounded fish to Kenya.

I would like to ask the Rt Hon. Prime Minister, what the way out for our people who have been living on fish for their livelihood is. I am saying this because such people can no longer now depend on fish to survive –(Interjections)– not just for eating but also as an income generating activity.

Two, you talked about allocations to pupils in schools and you said that Government has not raised the figures in schools; the population in schools grows, you do not increase the budget. What does that mean? It means you are just giving out money for the sake of it or that the money is allocated for buying the items that pupils need most.

I find it inappropriate that the Government keeps giving out fixed amount of money when the number of pupils keeps increasing.

Three, the issue of vehicles that are scattered all over - we all see them and I am sure the Prime Minister also sees them in Kanungu at Kihihi. I am talking about spoilt vehicles that Government would have sold for Government to get some money. However, these vehicles are left to rot off – Ministry of Health is the worst at this practice.

Why does Government consider a change in policy so that civil servants do use government vehicles but they are given loans and mileage to own vehicles to do Government work? (Applause)

And lastly, what steps is Government taking to settle the people of Sebei who were displaced by UWA? And are they going to be compensated?

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: On fishing, Mr Speaker, yes, the Leader of Opposition, my friend, the hon. Wafula Oguttu, is right in saying that we licensed many fish factories and that as a consequence fish became a commodity of value to our economy. This is because as you all know, when the NRM came to power in 1986, there was no single fish factory I Uganda. 

There used to be one owned by UDC at Jinja and Kasese at Katunguru. But those two suffered the fate of the rest of the economy and that is why by the time we came to power in 1986 there was no single fish factory. (Interjections)– Lake Victoria was full of fish as the President said then. Fish in Uganda was dying of old age.

So, it is true that we encouraged the harvesting and processing of this fish to make fish a commodity that would earn income for the fishermen and women but it could also earn foreign exchange to Uganda.

Indeed, in 1986, when we took power, Uganda was a mono crop economy; 99 per cent of our foreign exchange came from coffee but by the time these fish factories were established, actually fish at that time surpassed coffee to earn Uganda foreign exchange. But as a consequence, as I said because this was fish in the wild, Lake Victoria and others were almost depleted of fish.

Now, we are taking steps to restock, if I may repeat myself. We have got some marine police. We have got a reasonable number of boats and we are not there yet. Our policing is not very effective, it has not stopped the illegal or wrongful fishing but we are building capacity and I think the results are beginning to show.


The question of sensitisation of people, if it is not enough, we should do more but certainly, it is a fact that we have done a lot of sensitisation in fish management units for all fishing communities. So, there has been reasonable effort at sensitising the people. We may need to do more certainly.

My comrade is giving me news that he represents fishing communities but that is alright. That means that he as the area MP of the fishing community has not done enough to sensitise his voters about this and I would like to urge him, please, do the needful the duty falls on you as MP to sensitise those that you lead. (Interruption)

MR MWIRU: Mr Speaker, in the previous budget, Parliament voted for Shs nine billion for the purpose, which the Prime Minister is alluding to.

So, is he procedurally right to transfer the function for which Government appropriated money to a Member of Parliament? Yet, Parliament appropriated this money for the same purpose and almost all of it was diverted for paying membership by the Ministry of Agriculture in other organisations. Is he procedurally right?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The role of a Member of Parliament is oversight and representation and all those other things that go with it. (Applause)

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: As to how the Police is handling the fishing community, I actually share those concerns and I have had reasons to complain because it is not the entire Police but some elements within the Police are misbehaving. In fact, they work with those who are over fishing, who are acting wrongfully and unlawfully and we are determined to take all the steps possible to fish them out so that the Police does the needful. 

I would like to encourage all fishing communities, anytime they receive this, to please let us know so that the necessary action is taken.

On money to schools, why not increase it when the students have increased in number? Well, you know very well that our policy as Government is not to do deficit financing or budgeting where we depend on printed money. We spend what we are able to collect. Therefore, when we do our projected revenue as the minister read in the budget and we have the priorities that were specified, like roads and so on, infrastructure and things like that.

Generally, most of the votes – you know we do not have much surplus in terms of additional revenue collection next year, above what we collected this year. I can tell you, for example, that Shs 450 billion was allocated to raising the teachers’ and low cadre staff salaries. (Interjections) For all of them, maybe 250 billion for teachers, but overall is 450 billion. 

Therefore, I can tell you that the surplus money that we have has gone to teachers or to low cadre staff in terms of increment of wages and there was no surplus for anything else. The rest of the programmes or votes were retained at the same level. That is why it is possible to have a situation like we have here.

The point I was responding to, which was raised by hon. Mpuuga, he implied that I had said that we were not going to reduce. Yes, we did not and that is the simple answer.

I think I had answered the question of boarding off of vehicles. It is the correct policy to sell them but we should only sell them if the system itself is free of loopholes; because I can tell you, I know of one or two cases where allegedly the vehicles boarded off had been written off after depreciation. They kept the old ones and sold the new ones. (Laughter)

The question is, as soon as the system is ready and I hope those responsible will do this as quickly as possible; we should be able to board off all these vehicles.

The people Sebei who were displaced, we set up a committee under the chairmanship of Rt hon. Gen. Moses Ali, which did carry out a survey. They made a report and we are in the process of resettling them or in advanced stages of doing so and have no doubt that we will handle this in due time and minimise the suffering that those people have been subjected to. (Interruption)

MR WADRI: Thank you, Mr Speaker, and I thank the Prime Minister for allowing me to seek this point of clarification to you. Last weekend, the Committee on Government Assurances went all the way to Bukwo. I have got pictures here, without pre-empting what the report is going to be like. What we found out in Bukwo is just not acceptable at all. You cannot imagine the type of people we saw there, on their own land, in their own country; they vote and they also pay taxes. We saw children who were starving and at the verge of death. My neighbours had to contribute from their own per diem and we raised Shs 600,000 to buy posho for these starving children.

This is a serious matter. It is a violation of human rights to have 65 families on two acres of land given by a good Samaritan. I think the whole thing is inhuman. Rt Hon. Speaker, through you, and as a matter of urgency, I would call upon Government, through the Minister for Disaster Preparedness, to urgently send food to these people. Ever since we came back over the weekend, I have been to that white tower twice and I have not seen any of the ministers. The situation is bad and my colleagues who went to the field will attest to that. Please urgently send food to these starving children: beans and posho. I have pictures here, and it is pitiful! I just want to show some of them so that we really appreciate what we are talking about. It is bad.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Point made.

MR WADRI: Mr Speaker, we will formerly make a presentation here, even a digital one but as a matter of urgency, save these dying children.

MR SSEWUNGU: Mr Speaker, I want to thank the Prime Minister for giving way. Actually he is my friend. Let me put this on record. Government spent Shs 5 billion to investigate the mismanagement of UPE and the report is out. Even the person who was heading this committee is the PS, Ministry of Education, Dr Nassali. When you talk about maintaining the amount you have been allocating to UPE and not minding about the number of children, you will not have solved any problem. Today, you are giving Shs 7,000 per child per year. If you look at all the months of learning, they are nine months in a year. Divide Shs 7,000 by nine months and you will find you are giving a UPE child about Shs 300.

I am happy you are giving teachers money and they are going to get it but what are they going to use to teach? Mr Prime Minister, go back and carry out research. You have eight million children in UPE schools but in primary seven, you have about 300,000 sitting PLE. That means there is something wrong within UPE. We have ghost children in UPE so why don’t you go and look for that report and help yourselves? (Interruption) Honourable Chief Whip, I am the one on the Floor, we shall meet in church after here.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: I thank my brother. I used to think he was from the North but I think he is more from the West. I thank you for that information, which I did not have. It really sounds terrible; I am very sorry about that situation. If you looked for these ministers and they were not there, you could or maybe you did, you could have looked for me but I have heard this and I will immediately take it up.

My brother from Kalungu, the question he is raising is also a very important question in terms of adequacy of the amount of money that is given out. To the best of my knowledge, at the time when we decided to introduce UPE, we had actually carried out a calculation with the ministry and the technical people; the PS Lubanga then and so forth. It had been determined that the amount of money, which was available and which we could raise at that time as a country, would be adequate to provide the basics for the child. 

What we need to do now is project to the future because the number of children has been growing and even to maintain the level of that time; we need to increase the amount.So my expectation is that our revenue is going to increase certainly. I actually expect, even before the oil comes, that the revenue will increase. I do not think I have time - Mr Speaker, I am over taxing the magnanimity of the Chair because we are taking too long. I think we could come back and have a full discussion on this question so that we have a picture about the state of our children in our UPE schools, and what we need to do to improve where improvement is required. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Rt Hon. Prime Minister. Hon. Members, we have done well on these issues. We have two businesses that we thought we would do today; I think we will have to choose one. I do not know whether the hon. Member for Jinja Municipality East is ready to present his motion.

MR SSEWUNGU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I do not normally want to disturb you when you have ruled over any matter but this is a procedural matter. Before the Prime Minister leaves, we have always been giving questions here and the Prime Minister promises to come back and give us answers. For example, I raised a matter about Kitante Primary School where Madam Jennifer Musisi removed teachers from the teachers’ house preparing to use it for her own business, and yet teachers were sleeping in that house. The Prime Minister was not aware of that and said he was going to come back.

But as I talk, it is two years since this happened. The house was repaired but it is empty and the teachers are renting outside from their meagre income. Mr Speaker, I would like you to help me. When do we expect -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable, put it in writing and copy to me.

MR SSEWUNGU: Thank you.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT ON THE NEED FOR URGENT REFORMS IN THE MANAGEMENT OF PUBLIC UNIVERSITIES IN UGANDA

MR PAUL MWIRU (FDC, Jinja Municipality East, Jinja): Thank you, Mr Speaker. This is a motion for a resolution of Parliament on the need for urgent reforms in the management of public universities in Uganda brought under Rule 47 of our Rules of Procedure:

“WHEREAS the Government of Uganda has since the mid-1990s liberalised the higher education sector in a bid to cascade accessibility to higher education through inter alia establishing more public universities, facilitating the sprouting of public universities and increasing admission of private students to public universities;

AND WHEREAS the enactment of the Universities and Other Tertiary Institutions Act, 2001 as amended, 2003 and 2006 was aimed at providing a legal framework for management and administration of higher education institutions in the country and give legal back up to the expansion of the quality of higher education;

AWARE THAT since 2003, the number of public universities in Uganda has risen from one Makerere Univesity established in 1922 to nine with the creation of Mbarara University of Science and Technology in 1989; Makerere University Business School in 1997; Gulu University in 2002; Kyambogo University in 2003; Busitema University in 2007; Lira University College, a constituent college of Gulu University in 2009; Muni University in 2013 and Soroti University of Science and Technology in 2013;

COGNIZANT of the fact that university education is more than just the next level in the learning process, but also an integral component of human development worldwide that provides not only the high level skills necessary for every labour market but also the requisite expertise that is a precondition for the competitiveness and transformation of society;

RECOGNISING THAT an educated populace is vital in today’s world and the convergent impacts of globalisation, the increasing importance of knowledge as a main driver of growth and the Information and Communication revolution, knowledge accumulation and application have become major factors in economic development and are increasingly at a core of a country’s competitive advantage in the global arena;

FURTHER RECOGNISING that public universities in Uganda are afflicted by far reaching malaise inert alia characterised by appalling low staffing levels, a mismatch between the rapidly increasing student number and inadequate infrastructure, inadequate funding, duplication and fragmentation of courses and thematic curriculum;

NOTING THAT while Uganda has over the recent past embraced private sector led growth and yet the education system is not in sync with the present day realities, the country runs the risk of producing redundant manpower hence worsening the unemployment puzzle;

FURTHER NOTING that the state and quality of higher education is a replica of the wider primary and secondary education set up, the efficacy and sustainability of the reforms at higher education level is dependent on appropriate restructuring of the wider education set up;

FURTHER NOTING that some of the new public universities such as Busitema and Gulu universities have been assimilating already existing technical colleges and yet such technical colleges are engines for production of the much-needed hands on skilled personnel that is a prerequisite for transformation;

AWARE THAT while the National Council for Higher Education is the regulatory body for public universities, its capability is grossly limited as exemplified by the sporadic monitoring of universities and the continuous accreditation of certain courses that has contributed to the fragmentation of existing ones;

NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved that:

    1 The higher education curriculum be reformed with a concerted effort of the various key stakeholders namely: the universities, the private sector, the National Council for Higher Education so as to reinforce the implementation of the newly and locally designed curriculum with a global outlook that would be compatible to the learning environment, the country’s need and the global realities.

    2 Government should within six months from the date of passing this resolution come up with a strategy to address the mismatch between higher education curriculum and the skills requirement for Uganda’s transformation.

    3 Basing on a number of human resource audits carried out by the Auditor-General, some of the universities be closed or merged for falling short on the required academic staff and in the alternative but without prejudice to the above, the ban of recruitment of academic staff in public universities be lifted.

    4 Government should ensure that every university has a quality assurance strategy; the National Council for Higher Education should have up-to-date inspection reports on public universities.

    5 Government should stop assimilating technical colleges for universities like was the case with Busitema and Gulu universities, since technical colleges can be transformed to offer degrees in technical courses which are the engine for production of the much-needed hands-on skilled personnel which is a prerequisite for the country’s transformation.”

Thank you, Mr Speaker, and I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the motion seconded? It is seconded by the Member for Kalungu West, the Member for Rwampara, the Member for Kyankwanzi but the constituency is Kiboga West. Would you like to justify your motion as it is a clear motion?

MR MWIRU: Thank you. As we speak now, we have over 35 institutions awarding degrees to students in this country but it is lamentable to note that there is no policy on university education. So there is no guidance on how these universities should actually proceed to offer this type of education as a result, they are actually proceeding to misinterpret or apply the curriculum as they so wish. You realise that there has actually been fragmentation of these courses to the extent that I even found one of my constituents who told me that he was studying human resource because they were creating districts. So I asked him, “What if the creation of districts stops, where will you work?” So we need guidance with this university policy on education.

Two, it is that since 1986, the President has reserved a lot of time to meet LCIs and everybody else in this country but devoted no time to meet vice-chancellors of universities in this country. It is a matter of fact that these vice-chancellors are in charge of actually determining what type of human resource we do need for the transformation of this country. So, we think that in the meeting that we are talking about, if they were to do a review of the curriculum, once these stakeholders come into play, it will become very pertinent that we get the actual human resource.

The Prime Minister is on record in this House to say that these people who are studying some of these useless courses are not only useless to themselves but even to the country. This is the statement that instigated this motion. When the President was in Kamuli said, “I am not sure that these people who studied these funny courses -” So I thought that instead of us dismissing our children in that style, it is important that we guide what they should go and study, what is relevant in transforming this country. 

When you go to the staffing levels, it is lamentable to note that in 2008/09, when you went to most of these universities and I can start with Makerere University, they had 559 academic teaching staff out of the required 1,821 meaning that they had 25 per cent of the academic teaching staff and that 75 per cent of the Makerere teaching staff was not provided for in the year 2008/09. When you went to MUBS, they had 275 out of the 550 meaning that they were 50 per cent. Busitema University had 84 out of 251 which is 33 per cent. 

I want to rush to the current position so that we see the staffing gaps. When you go to Makerere University, in 2011/12, they had 1,484 out of 2,742 representing 54 per cent meaning that 46 per cent was not provided for. When you go to Gulu University, there are 235 out of 545, representing 43 per cent and leaving 57 per cent unattended to. When you go to Busitema University, there are 268 out of 1,241 representing 22 per cent of the academic staff required in the university. When you go to Kyambogo University, there are 267 out of 573 which is 46 per cent. 

Mr Speaker, this is a very big problem. We have dealt with forms of disability in this country but we have not actually addressed intellectual disability, which in my opinion is even caused by this type of business. How can a university which is supposed to be producing human resource have only 22 per cent of its academic teaching staff? I want to say that we must review our priorities as a country. Twenty two per cent of academic teaching staff would mean - and I am only wondering; my good friend, the honourable minister, will tell us when he is responding whether a university with 22 per cent of academic teaching staff can be in position to channel out well schooled people to go to the market and offer any service and whether such a graduate can champion the transformation of this country.

Mr Speaker, of the statistics that I have, I only picked 2008/09 and 2011/12 but the Auditor-General’s reports speak volumes about that area. It is on the basis of that that I am of the considered opinion that Government prioritises lifting the ban on the recruitment of academic staff in universities otherwise we shall be creating illiterate graduates, human waste and affecting the transformation of this country. 

When it comes to assimilating colleges, there is thinking in this country that colleges can only train up to a level of getting a certificate and diploma. We have travelled and found colleges or universities issuing degrees in technical education. So instead of Government assimilating the existing colleges, and doing away with technical knowledge in those particular areas and lament about the many students on the street looking for jobs, I want to implore Government that we stop assimilating these colleges. If we want to create universities, let us actually create new universities so that we help to develop these colleges into awarding degrees in those respective areas.

Having said that, I want to re-emphasise the point on inspection. I was in the Public Accounts Committee when we asked Kyambogo University when the National Council of Higher Education last visited them and they said it was five years back. But they are in charge of inspecting the quality of teaching in these universities. So we need to strengthen this area.

Mr Speaker, I conclude by saying that I know for a fact that in very many sectors, including local government, the current Auditor-General’s report shows that there are some districts with only seven per cent staffing level but they are getting 100 per cent of their budget. This leaves us wondering whether a district with that level of staffing can implement Government programmes.

I implore colleagues to support the passing of this resolution; first, to implore Government to lift the ban on recruitment of academic staff in universities. If Government, in its wisdom, cannot allow that then let us close these universities to avoid creation of wastage of human resources. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. I will have one person speaking on seconding then we will open it up.

5.17
MR JOSEPH SSEWUNGU (DP, Kalungu County West, Kalungu): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am supporting the motion because I am a professional teacher and above all I am a member of the education committee and who has taken time to visit these universities. 

Mr Speaker, if you look at the universities which were founded by the church. Let me take the example of Nkozi, Kisubi, Bugema and compare with government universites that were started as a result of politics, there is a very big difference.

Mr Speaker, I visited Namasagali University; this is a university which was placed in the former railway station buildings and nothing was added. When we visited it, there were students who are very desperate and even the vice-chancellor does not live there. Snakes were almost biting us. But that aside, when we asked the students whether they have adequate resources, they said they did not. That means there was no planning at all.

Secondly, some of these universities have lecturers that are not qualified to teach because they do not have the qualifications; but because there is no other alternative, they are there. And for educational institutions, it is not about saying, “I have established one” and you place it there and start teaching. And institution must have minimum standards and in the Education Act, “minimum standards” refers to all those structure things that will make a student enjoy the institution. 

Busitema lecturers are sleeping in a place that looks like a bakery – (Interjection) – I am telling you that where they were loading luggage for the train passengers is where they were sleeping! When you sleep in that kind of accommodation, you get de-motivated.

Mr Speaker, when I visited Busitema – along Mbale Road – there was even a clock that was placed there, which I was informed was opened in 1969. And the more interesting thing is that a clock that has stopped working will at least be correct twice a day. So I asked for the vice-chancellor and he was not there. When I asked who passes along that corridor on their way to their offices, I was told that it was the vice- chancellor and the lecturers. Don’t they see that this clock stopped working very many years ago and replace it with a digital one.

The other thing is that when I was still teaching at Shimoni, I fought with the Ministry of Education to see that this school does not face a natural death. Government managed to relocate the school the way they did to Kololo and the PTC to Kira, which was wrong but at least they are there. When you remove a technical institution from one place, you should construct another one somewhere else because the services it was providing are no longer being accessed. Now, all these technical institutions which were converted to universities have vanished and at Busitema, even the tractors which were there have remained in place, although they are not useful to the university; they are just parked in the compound.

Mr Speaker, concerning the curriculum, I am lucky that these days I am trying to study law to join your fraternity and one of the major challenges lecturers are saying is affecting law in Uganda is that all the institutions teaching law in Uganda have failed to come up with a properly designed curriculum in order to set a particular exam which is uniform across the country. You will find Kampala International University setting its own exams, Makerere University also its own – and that is why even up to now we are seeing Makerere enrolling entrants through pre-entry exams and yet these students could have passed their A’ Level exams very well. This is because they have had an experience where students are admitted to the law course and yet they are not fit for it. In fact, personally I registered 56 per cent to be able to join the course. I was about to fail. (Laughter) So when it comes to universities, which are being established based on politics – because people are demanding for them – and you do not develop proper curriculum, there is a problem.

In conclusion, we have the students’ loan scheme – yes, Government opened these universities, which are functioning but they are creating half-baked graduates. None of our students are going to benefit from these universities because the courses they are pursuing do not qualify for the loan scheme. 

So, Mr Speaker, I am supporting this motion because – sincerely, if you went to school, Members, you know what you went through. Even in my rural area, at least a primary school boy could get time to go out and play; we used to say - I was a very good footballer - “Our teacher has today given us the ‘English ball’.” This is because we used to play fibre-made balls and when they gave us a leather-ball, we could rejoice. But when you have university students who are not feeling like they are in university and Government is not providing funds and the staff ceiling is low, we are creating ‘human waste’ and at the end of the day, you will use tear-gas to send them out of Kampala streets. So, Mr Speaker, I support the motion but the butterfly is in the government hands to tell us what they want. I beg to move. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion is: “That this Parliament resolves that there is need for urgent reforms in the management of public universities in Uganda.” And the way the motion is structured, I will have to extract the key recommendations – what we are asked to do, as Parliament. “
    (i) That the higher education curriculum be reformed.
    (ii) Government should within six months from the date of passing this resolution, come up with a strategy to address the mismatch between the higher education curriculum and the skills requirement for Uganda transformation.
    (iii) Some of the public universities be closed or merged for falling short of the required academic staff.
    (iv) The ban on recruitment of academic staff in public universities be lifted.
    (v) The government should ensure that every university has a quality assurance strategy.
    (vi) The National Council for Higher Education should have up-to-date inspection reports of the public universities.
    (vii) Government should stop assimilating technical colleges into university.”

That is the summary of the points that this House has to take a decision on in the form of the resolution based on what has just been presented. Hon. Members, the question has been proposed for your debate and we have 30 minutes to finalise with this. Going by the numbers, can we do two minutes each; okay. Let us start from Bukoto East. 

5.26
MS FLORENCE NAMAYANJA (DP, Bukoto County East, Masaka): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank hon. Mwiru for the motion which is timely. However, on the recommendations, there is one recommendation I want us to focus on. I support the rest of the recommendations except one which needs adjustment. When you talk about some universities being closed, we need to assess these universities. Without having a strategy in place, that recommendation may cause problems. We need to draw a strategy and qualify some universities and know those which do not qualify so that we have a method of assessing them, and close them when they are found unfit. That is my submission.

5.28
MS ANGELLINE OSEGGE (FDC, Woman Representative, Soroti): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I couldn’t agree more with the motion. I support it one hundred per cent and I want to thank hon. Mwiru for bringing it at this time. In my language, Ateso, when we cook potatoes and you do not put enough fire to make it ready, and you serve it half-cooked, they say, “Ayin” – it means, “Akonye”, it means that food can no longer get ready. So that even if you put it back on fire and give it the maximum heat possible, it will never get ready. 

I have heard many instances where people have referred to our education system as “Bonna bakone”, meaning, “All are half-baked”. No wonder, some statistics say that what takes ten Ugandans to do takes two Kenyans. One Kenyan can do what six Ugandans do. That tells you more about our education system; the kind of skills that we send to the labour market. 

During the State of the Nation Address, the President encouraged young people to do courses that make them job creators and not job seekers. My question is, why do we let courses that render our people job seekers be offered in the universities for which they pay dearly and having paid so much money, they have no future. Who is responsible for this? Why do we tell them to do something else yet you allowed them to take a path that you know is a dark tunnel for the young people of this country – (Member timed out_)

5.30
MR VINCENT KYAMADIDI (NRM, Rwampara County, Mbarara): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to support the motion.  From the experience I had as an administrator in Mbarara University, for which I worked for five years, but also as a student from Makerere University. I think there is a very big problem and that is why I support the motion to amend and have the motion applied to private universities as well. 

What is it that we want as a country? My friend Ssewungu, I also did the pre-entry and I defeated you by one point, but I was not admitted. So I went to KIU shortly but I found there was a very big problem and I stepped out. But what is it that we want as a country. When you see what happens in some of these universities, both public and private, you would wonder. 

I have so much respect for my honourable minister of state for higher education. Actually if you went to those private schools, they do better than public universities and private universities. You wonder whether he is not seeing them. Is it the number of universities that we want or the quality of education? They have fundamentally serious problems; one of them is funding. You have seen strikes. One time it was in Mbarara University, the other day it was Makerere and the other day it was Gulu. So there is a problem. I am a student of history. They say conditions must be bad in every society before men in large numbers undertake to overthrow it by violence. Do you ever take time to study why these students strike? Furthermore, politics; most of these universities have been infiltrated by politics –(Interjections)

5.32
MS KABAKUMBA MASIKO (NRM, Bujenje County, Masindi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to thank hon. Mwiru for this motion and I fully support the motion. If we tackle the issue of the curriculum, it will cut across even private universities, and if the curriculum is handled properly, then there won’t be issues of un-employability. So I really thank him. 

I also support the view that universities shouldn’t be assimilating technical colleges. I want to put the country on notice because it has been pledged by the President that he wants to uplift the Uganda Petroleum institution at Kibumba into a university. We do appreciate the institute and we also demand for Bunyoro University. But we do not want him to uplift the institute; instead we want a new university for Bunyoro. So I support you on this resolution.

But also, the staffing levels; if you have 25 per cent or even less you cannot expect a better job. I support the view that if we cannot afford to staff these universities, let us agree on what we can afford and what is not affordable. But that is subject to the creation of Bunyoro University.

5.34
MR STEPHEN MUKITALE (NRM, Buliisa County, Buliisa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The motion, though limited to a few areas, should be a wakeup call for Government to address the sector challenges right from policy. We asked for universities before we could perfect the certificates and diplomas of the polytechnics, which we need more than the universities. Now we are dealing with a problem at tenable end and we are talking of universities requiring a kind of national examination board. That is not where we should be. But because we are dealing with positive living, we have to do that. But our challenge should be vocationalisation of secondary school education; make agriculture compulsory, health science and book keeping compulsory. Then you will have the products which will go into those colleges. But now, we are dealing with universities, where people finish a degree and have no jobs and then they end up growing tomatoes. That is a big problem. 

Again, at the time when the Speaker and I were doing labour and industry in economics, there was something called manpower planning. Ministry of public service, education and others should work together and know the needs of this country in terms of labour. We think that private universities are private; no, privatisation means Government must regulate. That means they should not train people in work we do not need in this country. Where do they get the licence to teach what is not required by this country? We have diaspora nurses and teachers of Uganda who are required outside. Why don’t we focus on that because we know there are jobs there –(Member timed out_)





5.36
MR RAPHAEL MAGYEZI (NRM, Igara County West, Bushenyi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank hon. Mwiru for this motion. He raises two fundamental points on page 2. One is on the role of the private sector where he says that, “Government has over the recent past embraced private sector-led growth and yet our education system is not in conformity with the present reality and as such we are at the risk of producing redundant manpower worsening the unemployment puzzle.

Two, is the statement that follows where he says that, “Status quality education is a replica of the wide primary and secondary education centres. So, the efficacy and sustainability of any reforms at higher education is dependent on appropriate restructuring of the wide education sector.” To me, this raises a fundamental question. It is like this motion is supposed to be reviewed so that we don’t talk about reforms in the management of public universities but reforms in the education sector. This is because even the private universities are training Uganda’s children. So, you cannot reform just the public universities. You have to look at education at the higher level.

But again, according to your point, which I totally agree with, what you produce at primary and secondary levels is what will determine what you get at the higher education levels. So, I think you are raising a motion for wider thinking rather than restricting to management of public universities. That is what I want to put to the mover of the motion. Thank you.

5.38
MR ROBERT MIGADDE (NRM, Buvuma County, Buvuma): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also would like to thank the hon. Paul Mwiru for tabling this motion. I would like to remind the government about its promise of having technical school in each sub county of Uganda. If we are to analyse the 10 most successful or the richest people in the world, you realise that none of them went to school beyond college level. So, it is high time we emphasised to our people that it is not actually only graduates who can be successful. Taking the example of the people living on the islands, most of the successful people including those in Buvuma, did not go to school beyond senior four; but they have been able to educate their children.

One time on radio, I listened to a graduate of entrepreneurship from Makerere University who called in and said he was still looking for a job. This means that this person did not know why he studied entrepreneurship because he was trained to create jobs but here he was looking for jobs. But this also takes us to the element of career guidance done at school levels. When you interact with primary school children, you will realise that most of them will tell you how they want to be doctors, engineers and so forth. Most of them target to get degrees; they don’t know that there can be another way out besides getting a degree. 

I want to think that this is one of the reasons Government will continue to face challenges arising from jobless people. So, unless we emphasise technical education – there is need to re-evaluate the curricula of these different institutions. Why should one have a degree from KIU different from that offered by Makerere University vis-a-vis the job market?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, we should recall that there is a legal provisions giving authority to those universities to design their own curricula. So, it is a matter of the law – it is not a lacuna; it is a provision of the law. “Lacuna” means a gap in the law, which is not there because there is an actual legal provision giving such powers to those universities.

5.41
MR YORAKAMU KATWIREMU (NRM, Sheema County South, Sheema): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also would like to thank the mover of the motion. However, I would like to point out that the mover of the motion has only touched the tip of the iceberg. He has touched a huge subject, which I think we cannot give due justice via this kind of debate. What I am saying is that there might be need for another Kajubi Education Review Commission to analyse our school and university systems, and what this country needs in  terms of professional human resource.

Mr Speaker, I was a pioneer student of a faculty at Makerere University and that is Faculty of Technology before I became a lecturer. But the time it took, to have that faculty to a reasonable level where we could compete with for example Nairobi University Engineering School, was too much. But these days we have come to a level where universities are established like districts, of late. And we cannot go that low in terms of this critical area of the development of our country.

So, Mr Speaker, I would like to suggest that the ministry thinks about this issue deeply and focuses on studying the entire system of education. This will help us get appropriate advice at each stage, looking at what is it that we should teach to our children at primary, secondary, tertiary and university levels.

The universities in terms of skills and technical level should be the last. The engineers should be very few but with many technicians and that is how technical systems work. But right now the pyramid is upside down. We almost have more engineers than the technicians who are supposed to support them, which practice cannot propel development in our country.

5.43
MS BENNY NAMUGWANYA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mubende): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I also thank the mover of the motion and also state that this motion has been long overview. When you look at issues coming up, you get to understand that we have a big problem.

Mr Speaker, I want to put emphasis on one issue that university education in this country has ceased to be a service but a hot business, where even public universities are just looking at generating money from students. When you look at Makerere University, from where I did my first and second degree, you realise that the degree I got some years ago is very different from the degrees that our children are getting today. The reason is that what used to be course units have now been made full courses. You find one course being split into seven courses, which is very unfortunate.

Mr Speaker, I want to recommend that Government should regain its control over both public and private universities; otherwise, our country is destined to doom.

Second, I want to add onto what hon. Repeal Magyezi said about reviewing the entire education system. Today, Uganda is suffering from a degree fever. Whoever goes to nursery class dreams about becoming a university graduate? Some of us with technical institutions in our constituencies – in Mubende, I have St Peter’s Technical Institute and Mubende Community Polytechnic. But convincing children to go to those institutions is a nightmare just –(Member timed out_)

5.47
MR FRED BADDA (NRM, Bujumba County, Kalangala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also would like to thank my honourable colleague for moving this motion. However, Mr Speaker, I think we need to get into the details than just passing resolutions. I am saying this because in Uganda, we have a syndrome to cure and that is about moving the cart before the horse. We are passing resolutions and the ministry is giving our circulars and guidelines, which are not strongly paged on a strong policy.

So in order to have something that is sustainable, we need to have a strong higher education policy which will encompass all these issues. If we continue doing things this way, these regulations and resolutions and statutory instruments will be changed now and then; they will not be sustainable and they will be broken. This is because they are not paged on a strong policy.

My appeal is to the Cabinet to make sure that they amend and we come up with a strong policy and after the policy we can then continue making resolutions, guidelines and statutory instruments which are based on a strong foundation.  That is my humble appeal to honourable members.  I thank you.

5.48
MR JEREMIAH TWA-TWA (NRM, Iki-Iki County, Budaka): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to support the motion which my colleague has brought forward. Like the other colleagues have said, this motion is long overdue; it should have come yesterday.

We all know that education is the foundation for development but the way things are now, we are building a very weak foundation and we shall find ourselves in trouble. We are in trouble already because when you go to some of these colleagues who have just come out recently whether they are doctors, teachers or engineers, definitely there is a big problem, you fear for yourself, whether you should be handled by that kind of person or not.

Education should not be a business; it is a service. So this issue of over emphasising the private sector within the public universities - Really, people are emphasizing money more than training the undergraduates or the graduates. I think the sector should be reviewed and we need a policy to support the sector to train these university students.

5.49
MR PATRICK MULINDWA (NRM, Kasambya County, Mubende): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to thank hon. Mwiru for this motion. I personally think that this motion should be amended to include the whole education system. It is the education system of the country that helps the people to solve the existing problems in that country. We are here as Uganda, we are faced with unemployment; we are faced with poverty and so many problems from the youth. I would think that a drop out at P7 would be useful to Uganda; a dropout at senior 4 should be useful to Uganda; a dropout at senior 6 should be very useful to this country. That is why I suggest that we amend this motion such that wherever someone leaves the education, he is useful to this country.

We would want every graduate at any level to be useful to our country. I would therefore urge my colleagues that we amend this motion so that we look at the whole education system so that Uganda can now begin to produce skilled people. I would urge the minister and Government to import skilled people. Rwanda came out boldly when they wanted to study English and they imported English teachers. (Member timed out_)

5.51
MS JACQUILINE AMONGIN (NRM, Woman Representative, Ngora): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. I want to congratulate and thank my colleague hon. Mwiru for moving that good motion. I think this should have come yesterday but I would like to raise a few things.

One, the foundation is very important and when we are talking about reforms in the education sector, it should not start from the top, it has to start from down and that is why I feel that it is important for us to look at reforms in the education sector in general right from nursery level.

Two, our policy should be clear on encouraging our children to appreciate business education and skilling as something that is very important. Today all of us go to school, we want to get jobs; we are studying to get jobs, we are not studying to create jobs and that is why you realise that there is a high unemployment rate. 

When I went to China, I got a young girl who was staying upcountry and studying to become a computer wizard but in Uganda you have to wait to be admitted either to Kyambogo or Makerere for you to know. You have to study biology, history or economics for you to be a doctor. For heaven’s sake our curriculum should be revisited so that if this child is to be a doctor, then this should be started from the time the child goes to school up to university. Why am I studying history, biology and all these other subjects when I am meant to be a doctor? I am meant to be a politician and I study biology, and at the end of the day this child gets mixed up. I think it is very important that we guide our curriculum and the technical people should take this forward –(Member timed out_)

MR MUKITALE: Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. This motion is overwhelmingly touching everybody and we seem all to be in support. Interestingly, it is bipartisan and a matter of common good but listing to the policy issues, challenges of the cost of financing, recruitment and more expenditures. I would like the mover’s position and your guidance, Mr Speaker, if it is procedurally right to re-construct this motion to bring in all the salient issues which have been brought out by Members on policy, on a holistic approach and looking at sector gaps. So that when Parliament brings a question on this motion we are not swayed to push Government on recruiting more teachers when actually we are preserving problems. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So what have you proposed, hon. Member?

MR MUKITALE: That if the mover agrees, takes back the motion and co-opts more Members given the debate and what is on the Hansard, we rephrase it and bring in all other salient issues, which have been raised by colleagues.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, you are not on my list, you started standing up when I was closing the debate. For that matter, I will not extend it to cover you. I will take the minister now.

5.55
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HIGHER EDUCATION (Mr Chrysostom Muyingo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank colleagues for the concerns that they have raised. I thank my brother Mwiru for the motions. It is true that we have quite a number of challenges in our university education ranging from staffing gaps as you said, inadequate resources, underfunding, curriculum that does not satisfy the market and so forth. 

But it is also true that the ministry is working out reforms in the entire higher education system. There have been quite a number of studies; the most recent one was by a committee led by Prof. Omaswa. It came out with quite a number of recommendations which Government is considering and very soon, we shall be coming up - 

One thing Members need to remember is that I think the biggest problem is with the law. This is one thing that maybe did not come out when the hon. Mwiru was moving his motion but Government, through my ministry, is seriously working out an amendment - Is coming up with amendments of that law, Universities and Other Tertiary Institutions Act of 2001 as amended. Very soon we shall be presenting the amendments to this House for deliberation. 

It is also very important to note that on a number of occasions, we have presented our budget and when you talk about recruitment of staff, we have always presented this need but you know, much of what we are able to do is determined by the resource envelope. I think let us wait when our proposals of amendments come to Parliament that will give us the beginning but also the reforms. 

The law gives the councils a lot of powers and we are also trying to address that. We have asked the universities to review their curriculum and they are seriously working on this to be able to address the demands of the market. There is evidence that something is going on in the universities and many universities are changing their curriculum.

Three years back, we stopped the policy of taking over or affiliating technical colleges and turning them into universities. That was stopped and that is why the technical institute the other side is not a university; although there has been a lot of pressure, we stopped that. Some people wanted Teso University accommodated in one of our technical colleges but we are saying no, so that is already a policy and we are very committed to it.

Every university has a quality assurance committee. It is a requirement, a must and it is being followed. National Council for Higher Education, for example, even with its financial problems, is trying its best and inspection is going on. I would not say that it is to the best but something is being done.

Mr Speaker, I would not like Members to go away with an impression that the situation is terribly bad because when I look at hon. Ssewungu, he is a product of this system and he is doing very well because he was -(Interruption)- I agree as your minister that there is a problem and the government is trying to address it. Soon we shall be presenting to you the amendments of the Act and from the amendments even the new policies will be presented to you very soon. This is all intended to address the needs of the market, not only of Uganda but also the market outside Uganda.

I am happy that this is coming at this time when Parliament is about to consider the Budget because some of the issues we raised as a ministry were the staffing levels, which you also mentioned. I am happy because when we get down to discuss the Budget, hon. Mwiru and others will give us a lot of support. 

I thank you, Rt Hon. Speaker.

MR MWIRU: Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. I have listened to my good friend the hon. Minister and he seems to be pleading. I will take the proposal by hon. Mukitale that we can get a committee to work because this is not politics. He fell short of telling us that Government spent Shs 5.5 billion on the committee to review the education sector. A report came out but you did not bring it out; instead, you took it to Cabinet and said you were going to write a white paper. There was a value for money audit on the same education system but you have not talked about it.

Mr Speaker, I would concede that we set up a committee of Members to make concrete resolutions on these issues so that when we are dealing with the Budget, we can try to address them. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can we just send it to the Committee on Education so that they can handle it more expeditiously because if - Please, I am talking to the mover of the motion. 

MR MWIRU: Mr Speaker, I have no problem with that provided we take into consideration the budgeting process. We brought the motion early so that these issues can be addressed.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the Chairperson of the Education Committee here?  You are the Chairperson of Education? Why don’t you handle this matter urgently and get back because the way the motion is drafted, it is not going to bring out the issues. It is very focused and yet the issues are more involving than the focus of the motion. Can we allow the committee to look at this so that the minister can come and outline all those things before the committee? When it comes to the House, we will take a decision on a broader framework because this one is going to restrict us. Is that okay?

So, hon. Members, this motion stands referred to – Okay, the sectoral committee has not yet been constituted but by Tuesday, this committee will be in place. So let the Committee on Education handle this expeditiously and hon. Members, take keen interest in these matters so that we can finish with it very quickly and then come back and we can take decisions while we are handling the budgetary process.

Hon. Members, thank you very much for the interest you have taken in this subject. When it comes back, I am sure the debate will be larger and more comprehensive. This House is adjourned to tomorrow 2.00 O’clock. Hon. Members, I have already adjourned but just to say, tomorrow we commence the State of the Nation Address. House adjourned.

(The House rose at 6.03 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 19 June 2014 at 2.00 p.m.)
