Tuesday, 7 June 2011

Parliament met at 9.23 a.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

ADMINISTRATION OF OATHS 

The Oaths were administered to:

1.	Mr James Baba
2.	Mr Simon D’Ujanga
3.	Prof. Ephraim Kamuntu
4.	Mr Eria Kategaya
5.	Ms Maria Kiwanuka
6.	Mr James Mutende
7.	Mr Richard Nduhura
8.	Lt Gen. (Rtd) Jeje Odong 
9.	Ms Christine Ondoa
10.	Mr Ruhakana Rugunda
11.	Ms Agnes Akiror

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the Parliament is now fully constituted. I welcome the nominated Members of Parliament and to clarify that they will be full Members of Parliament with all the rights and privileges other than the right to vote in this House. So, from this afternoon, you can take your seats at Parliament, which will be convened at the Kampala Serena Hotel.

I also have two other pieces of communication. This afternoon, we request that you come with your invitation card for ease of identification. Parliament will sit at Kampala Serena Hotel’s conference centre today for purposes of the State of the Nation Address. 

Tomorrow we shall go back to the same venue for the Budget Speech. Please again, bring your card for that function. For the parking, the Members with disabilities will park at the hotel while others will park either here or at the National Theatre; for these two days we have paid for both places.

Let me take this opportunity to invite the Leader of the Opposition to inform us about his cabinet.

9.45
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Nathan Nandala-Mafabi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. As you are aware, you got the instruments from my party about my appointment as the Leader of the Opposition and I was not available that day. 

I want to thank my party for selecting me as the Leader of the Opposition, and I want to tell my colleagues both from the ruling party and the Opposition that we are all here for the good of this country, and I believe all of us will put the interests of Uganda before our own interests. I can assure you of my maximum cooperation for the good of this country in moving it forward.

Madam Speaker, we have constituted our shadow cabinet, which I will present here: 

I am the Leader of the Opposition; the Opposition Chief Whip is hon. Winfred Kiiza; the Deputy Opposition Chief Whip is hon. Betty Aol Ocan; the Attorney-General is hon. Abdu Katuntu; the Minister for the Presidency and Anti-Corruption is hon. Mathias Mpuuga; the Minister for Information is hon. Wafula Oguttu; the Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries is hon. Francis Epetait; the Minister for Local Government is hon. Betty Nambooze Bakireke; the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is hon. Geoffrey Ekanya; the Minister of Energy, Oil and Mineral Resources is hon. Beatrice Anywar; the Minister for Defence and Security is hon. Kaps Fungaroo; the Minister for Internal Affairs and Human Rights is hon. Hussein Kyanjo; the Minister for Foreign and Regional Affairs is hon. Jack Wamai-Wamanga; the Minister of Health is hon. Dr Michael Bayiga Lulume; the Minister of Education is hon. Franca Akello; the Minister for Public Service is hon. Roland Mugume; the Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development is hon. Florence Ibi Ekwau; the Minister for Youth and Sports is hon. Christopher Aciri; the Minister for Works and Infrastructure Development is hon. Ssebuliba Mutumba; Housing and Urban Development, hon. William Zoga; Tourism, Trade and Industry, hon. Kevina Taaka Wanah Wandera; Water and Environment, hon. John Ken-Lukyamuzi; Communications and ICT Science and Technology, hon. Benson Obua Ogwal; Rehabilitation, Relief and Disaster Management, hon. Rev. Fr. Ogwal; and Special Regions (Teso, Karamoja, Bunyoro, Luweero) hon. Stephen Ocola. 

Madam Speaker, that is our Shadow Cabinet. We shall also present our Members to the respective committees in due course.  I thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, hon. Leader of the Opposition.  I also welcome the Shadow Cabinet and pledge the support of the Office of the Speaker and that of the Clerk in all their work.  Let me appeal to the whips who should by now be fully constituted that we would like to form the committees during the course of this week. Can you please sit and agree on the composition of the committees.  

However, I would like to once again clarify that the Independents are nominated by the Office of the Speaker. I understand one of my Members has been under pressure from her constituency because they thought that she had been nominated by the Opposition. The Independents are nominated by the Office of the Speaker and I will continue to clarify that each time we name the committees, that the Independents are part of my office. So, I would like to wish you a good morning. We shall convene again in the afternoon at Serena International Conference Centre. Please, bring your cards and park as we have agreed.

MR SEBULIBA MUTUMBA:  Madam Speaker, you talked about the Budget Day being tomorrow, but I don’t know where we are going to get the cards though we have picked the ones for today. 

THE SPEAKER: You will get them in the same way that you got today’s cards. 

9.55
MRS FLORENCE MUTYABULE (NRM, Woman Representative, Namutumba):  Madam Speaker, I rise on an issue of public importance. As I notified you on the 26 May 2011, I would now wish to bring to the attention of the Ninth Parliament the plight of the people of Namutumba District.  Namutumba District was hit by a heavy hailstorm on the 25 May 2011. The situation is very pathetic;  560 households in Nsinze Sub-county, 30 in Kibale Sub-county  and 50 in Namutumba Sub-county are right now homeless. 

Roofs of five schools were blown off. The schools are: Budali Muslim Primary School, Ibn Tamir Primary School, Victoria Junior School, Namutumba Upper School and Namutumba Technical Institute.  If on the average each school accommodates 500 pupils, it means that 2,000 pupils are not going to school simply because they lack shelter; and these children are supposed to compete with other schools that are attending normal school, which means that at the end of the year, they are not going to perform well.

The value of the crops that were destroyed is estimated at Shs 2.5 billion according to the assessment that was carried out by the Chief Administrative Officer and the RDC’s office. 100 pine trees were destroyed and Izira-Ngobi-Kivule Bridge was washed away.  

It is true, Madam Speaker, that the Ministry of Disaster Preparedness has intervened. They have provided us with 100 bags of posho and 50 blankets, but this is just a drop in the ocean. So, I am now formally moving to call upon the Government of Uganda to come to the rescue of my people of Namutumba, so that they can look at both short-term and long-term remedies. The short-term remedies include things like food, temporary shelter, medicines and blankets. And the long-term include things like seeds, iron sheets, construction of schools and boreholes, because most of the wells that we have were washed away by this heavy storm. Madam Speaker, I submit. 

GEN. OKETA:  Madam Speaker and hon. Members, with due respect to the hon. Member who has just spoken, I would like to inform her that the technical team from the Office of the Prime Minister is working with the District Disaster Management Committee. I would humbly like to invite her to work with that technical team because they are compiling the details of the damages, loss of life and then tie them to the costs so as to project them to the authorities concerned at the appropriate time. I am the National Disaster Emergency Coordinator in the Office of the Prime Minister, so feel relaxed. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Oh that is very good information. So, whoever has a disaster should look for Gen. Oketa.  (Laughter)

10.00
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Nathan Nandala-Mafabi): Madam Speaker, I would also like to thank the General for being in charge of disasters. Under our Constitution, Article 157 talks about Contingencies Fund. Of course they say, “Parliament shall make provisions for the establishment of Contingencies Fund and shall make laws to regulate the operations of that Fund.” For Members of Parliament to come and cry here is not necessary. We need to see how the Contingencies Fund should operate so that these items of schools being destroyed and lives being destroyed are taken care of under that Fund. 

I recall we had an account we passed sometime back which should be handling issues of disaster. If it is not there, it is the role of the Ninth Parliament to handle that quickly so that we can also assist Gen. Oketa and the Office of the Prime Minister.

THE SPEAKER: Unfortunately, I don’t know which minister is in charge, but perhaps I will ask the senior minister, hon. Eriya Kategaya, to take note and maybe respond if he has something.

10.02
THE FIRST DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER (Mr Eriya Kategaya):  Rt hon. Speaker, this is the first duty that you have assigned me.  Definitely, the government is aware of the problem of the people of Namutumba. As the General has said, the Office of the Prime Minister is handling the matter and we are also going to remind the Prime Minister and the Minister for Disaster Preparedness to handle the matter as urgently as possible. 

Meanwhile, Madam Speaker, I would like to ask for permission to inform the new Members of Parliament that they are needed for a Cabinet meeting to be held at Entebbe to handle the budget matter.  I would beg that we leave with your permission. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, this session was really meant to swear in the nominated Members to enable them not only to attend Cabinet, but also to participate in the State of the Nation Address today. The official commencement of Parliament will be today when the Head of State gives the State of the Nation Address, and then we shall state our timetable. But I am glad that some of the concerns have been raised in your presence and that they will be handled. 

For now, I would like to release the Members of the Cabinet to go for their Cabinet meeting and the Members to prepare themselves for the State of the Nation Address this afternoon. House is suspended until 3.00 p.m. We shall reconvene at Serena Conference Hall.

(The House was suspended at 10.03 a.m.)

(On resumption_)

(Parliament met at 3.29 in Kampala Serena Hotel Conference Centre.)

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

NATIONAL ANTHEM

PRAYERS

The House was called to order.

PROCLAMATION BY THE RIGHT HONOURABLE SPEAKER OF PARLIAMENT

THE SPEAKER: WHEREAS under Article 95(2) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda a session of Parliament shall be held at such place within Uganda and commence at such a time as the Speaker may by proclamation appoint; 

AND WHEREAS the First Session of the Ninth Parliament commenced on the 23rd day of May, 2011; 

AND FURTHER WHEREAS the President of Uganda is required under Article 101(1) of the Constitution to deliver to Parliament an address on the State of the Nation at the beginning of each session; 

AWARE THAT it is expedient that Parliament receives the State of the Nation Address from the President at the Kampala Serena Conference Centre;

NOW THEREFORE, in exercise of the powers conferred upon the Speaker by Clause 2 of Article 95 of the Constitution, I hereby proclaim that Parliament shall sit at the Kampala Serena Conference Centre on the 7th day of June, 2011 at 14:00 hours to receive the State of the Nation Address from the President.

AND FURTHER in exercise of the powers conferred upon the Speaker by the Constitution, the Parliament (Powers and Privileges) Act, Cap 258 and the Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of Uganda, it is hereby proclaimed and declared that the said Kampala Serena Conference Centre including its fore court, the yard and the gardens to be the precincts of Parliament for the aforementioned purpose.
 
Given under my hand at Parliament House, Kampala, this 7th day of June 2011.  Rebecca Alitwala Kadaga, Speaker of Parliament.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Your Excellency, the President, your Excellency the Vice President, my Lord the Chief Justice, the Right hon. Deputy Speaker, my Lord the Deputy Chief Justice, the Right Hon. Prime Minister, the deputy prime ministers, the ministers and ministers of State, the Judges of the Courts of Judicature, the Members of Parliament, Members of the diplomatic core and all the invited guests.

I take the opportunity to welcome all of you to yet another event which marks the official opening of the first session of the Ninth Parliament. I congratulate all the Members of the Ninth Parliament who made it, and also congratulate all those who have been nominated by the President and those who have been appointed ministers in the Republic of Uganda.

You are aware that this day has been earmarked for His Excellency the President to address the nation under Article 101(1) of the Constitution. This will be the first State of the Nation Address to be delivered to the Ninth Parliament. It marks an important milestone that the Ninth Parliament has started in commencing its business. 

Hon. Members, as you all know, Government has as of yesterday been fully constituted following the appointment of the ministers and the ministers of state to their portfolios; that means that the structure to begin the business of Parliament has now been set. I now call upon the whips of all the Parties to expedite the process of assigning Members to various committees such that we shall be able to set Parliament on its course as early as possible.

As I have indicated before the Independent Members will be assigned by the Office of the Speaker. I do, therefore, plan to meet all the whips on Friday at 11 O’clock so that we can accomplish this business. That is Friday this week. 

So, Members of Parliament, I would like to once more welcome you to this momentous occasion when the President of the State is addressing us for the first time. Thank you very much.

INVITATION BY THE RIGHT HONOURABLE SPEAKER TO H.E. THE PRESIDENT TO DELIVER TO PARLIAMENT AN ADDRESS ON THE STATE OF THE NATION IN ACCORDANCE WITH CLAUSE 1 OF ARTICLE 101 OF THE 1995 CONSTITUTION OF THE REPUBLIC OF UGANDA

THE SPEAKER: WHEREAS Clause 1 of Article 101 of the Constitution provides that the President shall at the beginning of each session of Parliament deliver to Parliament an address on the State of the Nation; 

AND WHEREAS the first sitting of Parliament began on the 19th May 2011; 

AND WHEREAS it is expedient that his Excellency the President updates us and indeed the whole country on the current state of the nation; 

NOW THEREFORE, it is my pleasant duty to request your Excellency the President to deliver to Parliament an address on the State of the Nation this 7th day of June, 2011 at 3.00 p.m. at the Serena International Conference Centre.

Given under my hand at Parliament House, Kampala this 7th day of June 2011.  Alitwala Rebecca Kadaga, Speaker of Parliament.

3.47
THE PRESIDENT(Mr Yoweri Museveni): H.E. the Vice President, the Right Hon. Speaker  of  Parliament, His Lordship the Chief Justice, the Right Hon. Deputy Speaker of Parliament, the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, the Rt. Hon. Leader of the Opposition, hon. Ministers, hon. Members of Parliament, distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen. 

Madam Speaker, Article 101(1) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda compels the President at the beginning of each Session of Parliament, to deliver to Parliament an address on the State of the Nation. This afternoon, Madam Speaker, I am here to do two things.

First, I am here to fulfill the constitutional obligation by giving accountability of what has been done since the last address which I delivered on 2 June 2010. You remember I promised you that I will also deliver this one. (Laughter)

Secondly, I wish to apprise you, Madam Speaker, hon. Members of
Parliament and the country, of the plans and strategies of Government for the next 12 months.

Hon. Speaker, permit me to congratulate all the honourable Members of Parliament upon being elected to the 9th Parliament. I congratulate you, Madam Speaker and your Deputy upon your election to your respective prestigious positions. 

I congratulate you, the Leader of the Opposition, upon your elevation to an essential office in democratic governance. I
congratulate all those who have been elected to various levels of responsibility. 

Incidentally, I was watching the swearing-in ceremonies of the MPs; they were very colourful. You know there were some media houses which were determined to present a very bad image of Uganda, but those huge delegations which accompanied the MPs when they were swearing in showed how happy Ugandans are about what is going on. 

I am told hon. Nandala-Mafabi was accompanied by not less than 800 people -(Laughter)- that does not show misery, but happiness –(Interjection)- tear gas is for those who want it -(Laughter)- tear gas is totally optional.(Laughter) But those pictures really speak about what Ugandans feel about what is going on; yes, there are problems, but there is also happiness. 

The Political Scene

Madam Speaker, on 18 February 2011, we held Presidential and Parliamentary Elections; these were followed by elections at various levels. I congratulate all Ugandans upon their peaceful and active participation in the electoral process. 

I also congratulate the Electoral Commission for a job well done. (Applause) I am normally one of the victims of the Electoral Commission because its officials always destroy four percent of my votes –(Laughter)- as invalid votes, but I never mind because even with that encroachment on my votes, the NRM always wins with a big margin. Where there was violence, it was the exception rather than the rule. I thank all Ugandans who participated and contributed positively to the success of the elections.

I call upon the Electoral Commission and all stakeholders directly concerned to study in depth the various reports that have come up on the electoral process. The following must be of particular interest, among others: 

(i)	The management of the voters’ register, which I believe will be improved upon with the issuance of the National Identity Cards in the near future. 

	I have been hearing people talking about the elections in Uganda. I intend to write an article on that as I normally do, tracing for those who do not know the history of the voting in Uganda that started in 1961, which was the first time we had direct elections in the whole country.

	As I have told some people, one of the few outstanding issues remaining to deal with as far elections are concerned, is the computerisation of our identities so that we vote by our thumb print being electronically read. With that, it will not be possible to play any games; 

(ii)	The printing of voters’ cards and their security; and
(iii)	Voter education in the light of the high percentage of spoilt votes.

Madam Speaker and hon. Members, we should congratulate ourselves upon fully funding both the Presidential and Parliamentary elections.(Applause) We did not ask for any external assistance in terms of funding for the elections and the more than Shs 300 billion which we spent on the elections does not include Shs 180 billion which we spent on the Identity Cards which are being worked on. So, all together, we spent about Shs 500 billion on the elections last year.

Madam Speaker, while we congratulate the winners in these elections, I wish also, to thank those who did not make it, for their participation in the process. I implore them to continue to actively contribute to the development process of our nation as they prepare to try again in the next elections, because Uganda is not about to disappear; it is a long-term enterprise; and it is here today and tomorrow. So, if you did not make it this time, please try next time. Those who feel strongly that they did not lose fairly should seek redress in courts of law.

Madam Speaker and hon. Members, we must embrace all democratic principles within our respective political parties. Discipline is as important for democracy as it is for the management of our political parties. Democracy and discipline should be enshrined in all our political parties’ constitutions and regulations.

Constitutionalism and the Rule of Law

Madam Speaker and hon. Members, I would like to re-affirm the National Resistance Movement Government’s total and firm commitment to the rule of law in the management of all public affairs of this country. Let us remind ourselves that while Chapter Four of our Constitution is elaborate on the Promotion and Protection of Fundamental and other Human Rights and Freedoms, those rights and freedoms are not absolute, hence the provisions of Article 43(1) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda: “In the enjoyment of the rights and freedoms prescribed in this Chapter, no person shall prejudice the fundamental or other human rights and freedoms of others or the public interest.”  

Equally important –(Interjections)– this is in English and I am sure we all understand English. (Laughter) If it were to be in Runyankore, I would attempt to translate it. But as I was saying, equally important under Article 17 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, are the duties of a citizen, which include, among others, the duty to respect the rights and freedoms of others; to protect and preserve public property; and the duty to co-operate with lawful agencies in the maintenance of law and order –(Interjections)– teargas is a good solution for those who do not –(Interjections)- General limitations on fundamental and other human rights and freedoms are spelt out in Article 43(1) & (2). Let us all exercise and enjoy our rights and freedoms within the confines of the law.

State of the Economy

Madam Speaker and hon. Members, on 8 June 2011, Uganda, like the other four partner states forming the East African Community will be reading her Budget for the financial year 2011/2012 -  that is tomorrow. The Budget Speech will give a detailed background to the economic outlook of our country. But I can point out a few highlights.

Uganda’s economy rebounded strongly in the first half of the financial year 2010/11, recording a growth rate of 9 percent in the July - December 2010 period –(Interjections)– where? If you can have spectacles on, you would see the huge constriction going on around Kampala and Entebbe –(Interjections)– It is your money? Okay, then that is good; you are the ones building all those wonderful houses; that is wonderful. Kampala is now almost joining up with Entebbe and Mukono

In 1965, I came to Mulago Hospital to bring my sister for treatment. During that time, I stayed in the doctors’ village on Mulago Hill. But at that time, that place where Bahai Temple – I think that place is called Kyebando –(Interjections)– Kikaya, yes - was just a banana plantation. The town only ended at Mulago. Even by 1986, that is how it was. But now, all the way to Kasangati is more or less part of Kampala. (Laughter)

So, when I hear people saying where the nine percent rate of growth is, I am tempted to lend my spectacles to them because they seem not to be seeing these constructions going on in Kampala.

From July to September 2010, an annual growth rate of 5.1 percent was registered, while a 15.1 percent annual growth rate was registered from October to December 2010. The Industry and Services sectors grew by 17.6 percent and 13.6 percent respectively, in the two quarters. The month-on-month growth rate of economic activity in bricks and cement, sawmilling, paper and printing, as well as food processing, was eight percent in December 2010.

This overall economic performance of 9.1 percent in the first half of the current financial year was better than that registered during the entire financial year 2009/2010, which was estimated at 5.2 percent, as Uganda emerged from the global economic crisis. 

The economic performance is still substantially higher than global and regional economic growth prospects estimated at 2.5 percent and 4.5 percent respectively. The Ugandan economy was expected to grow by 6.6 percent for the whole of the financial year 2010/2011, with forecast for future years exceeding seven percent per annum.

External Sector

Madam Speaker, Uganda’s balance of payments with the external world continued to be constrained as a result of slower growth of exports, tourism receipts and remittances in the face of increased imports. This phenomenon is characteristic for exports given the ongoing recovery from the global economic crisis by some of Uganda’s major trading partners.

Imports on the other hand, are structurally dependant on domestic needs such as oil and petroleum products. Though export receipts increased in January 2011 to US$ 111.6 million from US$ 129 million in February 2010, imports were twice as much at US$ 418.9 million compared to export receipts of US$ 328.8 million in February 2010. Formal non-coffee export receipts that registered the largest increments include simsim, tea, cotton and fish.

Uganda’s national foreign exchange reserves amounted to US$ 2.662 billion in January 2011, representing almost five months of import cover, compared to US$ 2.8 billion and US$ 2.4 billion in December and June 2010 respectively, representing slightly more than five months of import cover.

The inter-bank foreign exchange mid-rate in February 2011 was Shs 2,341 per dollar compared to Shs 2,303 per dollar in December 2010 and Shs 2,200 per dollar in June 2010. The continued depreciation of the shilling is in line with increased import demand in the face of weak export performance that has not fully recovered from the global economic crisis.

Monetary Sector

Weighted average interest rates have remained stable over the period under consideration. The lending rates in January 2011 were at about 20.1 percent compared to the same level in June 2010, and the savings rates remained at 2.4 percent during January 2011. 

Treasury bill rates – although this issue of the lending rates is something that we shall have to study more closely with the Minister of Finance so that certain distortions can be eliminated - exhibited increases between June 2010 and January 2011 as the Bank of Uganda sought to stem excess liquidity. Consequently, the interest rates on the 91-day Treasury bill rate increased to 9.1 percent compared to 4.3 percent. The 182-day Treasury bill interest rates rose to 9.4 percent compared to 5.3 percent, and the 364-day Treasury bill rates increased to 9.8 percent compared to 6.2 percent. Private sector credit continued to grow at 35.9 percent between July 2010 and January 2011 amounting to an average of Shs 689 billion per month, compared to Shs 438 billion per month between July 2009 and January 2010.

Revenue Performance

Revenue collections amounted to Shs 3,281.2 billion against the target of Shs 3,277.4 billion at the end of February 2011, representing a growth of 20.1 percent compared to the same period last financial year and a marginal surplus of Shs 24 billion between July 2010 and March 2011.

Inflation

The annual headline inflation rate – and that includes all items - for the year ending April 2011 rose to 14.1 percent from 11.1 percent in March 2011. The main driver of price increases remained food price inflation, which increased by 39.3 percent; fuel price inflation stabilised remaining at 9.74 percent in April 2011. So, the main driver for inflation is food prices. Somebody who has got money has got a reserve. Do not think that reserve means only ebyagi or udero – that is what it is called in Acholi. You can have udero of money or udero of grains, but udero of money is easier to keep. 

The recent increase in food prices has been driven by a combination of domestic, regional and global factors including poor rainfall and drought that affected food production and consequently food prices. The depreciation of the shilling also affected prices. The depreciation of the shilling in turn has been caused by the following three factors:

i)	Speculative tendencies in the run-up to the 2011 general elections;

ii)	Slow growth rates of exports, tourism receipts and remittances while imports kept increasing; and 

iii)	Continued increase in imports that are necessities, such as oil and petroleum products.

You can see, especially in the case of Uganda, that these are factors that will be sorted out when we start using our own petroleum [HON. MEMBERS: “When?”] It will be in this term, unfortunately. (Laughter) By the end of this term, Uganda will be producing petroleum and this entire huge import bill will no longer be there. That will definitely help the shilling to be strong. 

The shilling, however, has been strengthening over the last few weeks as speculative pressures that emerged during the election period subside, giving relief for prices of imported goods and petroleum products. Government is committed to ensuring the stability of the shilling as was shown by the active intervention by the Bank of Uganda to mitigate volatility in the foreign exchange market.

Madam Speaker and honourable Members of Parliament, the recent rise in prices can also be explained by imported global inflation. On the regional and international scene, Uganda’s major trading partners have recently been facing a surge in commodity prices, particularly oil and food prices. Indeed, world food prices have risen by 36 percent, according to the World Bank. 

In comparison, within the East African region, Kenya registered increases in overall inflation of 9.9 percent in March 2011 with annual food and fuel-related inflation rising by 15.9 percent and 15.89 percent respectively. This followed a 6.5 percent annual inflation, which Kenya registered in February 2011. Tanzania registered an annual inflation rate of 7.5 percent in February 2011 rising from 6.4 percent in January 2011. Ethiopia’s annual inflation rate went to 16.5 percent in February from 17.7 percent in January 2011 as food prices rose more slowly. 

Food prices in Ethiopia rose by 12.8 percent during February 2011, slightly down from an increase of 13.6 percent in January 2011. Zambia’s annual rate of inflation increased to 9.2 percent in March 2011 on account of increases in prices of non-food items such as fuel and transportation, lighting and clothing, even though food prices declined as the harvest period commenced - their rainy season there is different.

Government Measures to Deal with Inflation

Madam Speaker, measures to mitigate current inflation trends are packaged into short-term, medium-term to long-term actions including the provision of energy and road infrastructure. [Hon Members: “Walk-to-work”] Walk-to-work is not infrastructure. (Laughter) Walk-to-work is abuse of infrastructure not -(Laughter)

In addition, critical measures that have a dampening impact on the rapid rise in both food and fuel prices have been put in place. Furthermore, it must be recognized that Government does not impose any tax on food items produced and consumed in Uganda. The only taxes on food are taxes on rice and sugar. These are meant to protect local production and consequently, jobs.

Agriculture

Madam Speaker and honourable members, agriculture remains the backbone of our economy. The NRM Government’s goal has been to fundamentally transform the three million Ugandan households in subsistence agriculture to commercialized agriculture. Structural transformation entails moving away from rain-fed agriculture to irrigation, from the hand hoe to mechanized agriculture, and from production for household consumption only to production for the market with associated value addition through agro-processing. In the short, medium and long terms, the NRM Government continues to undertake pivotal actions in a number of critical areas, which I will now point out to you.

In production and food security, Government will focus on increasing farm production and productivity through use of fertilizer and improved planting seed varieties and animal breeds. It will implement household food security programmes through the National Agricultural Advisory Services (NAADS) in order to ensure that households have enough food for themselves throughout the year. In the medium-term, the NRM Government will reach 100 households in every parish. These 100 households are local examples to teach the others. 

The NAADS programme is currently covering all the 112 districts. The NAADS activities are to be found in the country’s 1,041 sub-counties, in its 176 urban councils and in the five divisions of our capital city, Kampala.

In November 2010, Parliament approved the second phase of NAADS as a sub-programme under the Agricultural Technology and Agribusiness Advisory Services (ATAAS). Benefitting from the latest agricultural technology and agribusiness knowledge, NAADS is set to increase agricultural productivity and farm household incomes. To date, NAADS has delivered grants of assorted inputs, tools and equipment to selected farmers countrywide. It has developed and disseminated new implementation guidelines to all local governments and other stakeholders and it has established Village Farmer Fora (VFF) in 112 districts. The programme has put in place operational Village Community Procurement Committees (VCPG) throughout the country. 

The NAADS has recruited sub-county NAADS coordinators, although here there is a problem. What I had told these people was to use the existing extension workers at the sub-county, but I hear that these NAADS people have encroached on the NAADS money to hire new coordinators. That one, I will not accept. There is no need to hire a new coordinator when there is already the extension worker at the sub-county who is paid by the government. 

I picked this information when I was in the village. My network came and told me that money is now being squandered by these NAADS people in hiring new people when each sub-county has got an agricultural person with a university degree, a veterinary person with a university degree or a diploma; they are all there. Why don’t you use those? Why do you hire new ones? You even do it using NAADS money meanwhile the other extension workers are being paid. This one, I have already detected and we are going to sort it out. 

This business of what they call service providers, no; that one, we shall not accept. We are going to sort that one out. I found it from my network. You know this NRM network is very useful not only for votes but -[Hon Members: “Rigging”]- Rigging? Do not be bad losers. Rigging where? Do not be bad losers. How did you come here? Why didn’t you rig out -(Laughter)- [Hon Members: “We are survivors”] You are survivors! (Laughter) You are survivors of the detoxification campaign because you produce toxins and I go there and detoxify; so you are survivors of that. It is true you are survivors. (Laughter) This network of NRM has really helped me on the issue of the misuse of NAADS money to hire new people. Instead of giving goats and pigs to people, they are busy hiring new people when there are people already employed by the government at the sub-county. 

In order to supplement NAADS efforts, Government has put Shs 15 billion in financial institutions as a Commercialisation Partnership Challenge Fund. This money is put in the banks so that people can borrow it. I am told there are some issues there. We were even discussing today in the Cabinet, but we shall sort it out. At least the money is there; whether it is properly accessed is another matter, but at least the money is there. 

In addition, and under the aegis of NAADS, Government has developed a special intervention for the Acholi sub-region to demonstrate modern farming in partnership with the assembly of Acholi clan chiefs (Kerkwaro).

Similar interventions for the youth have been initiated in the Teso sub-region. An ambitious National Rice Development Strategy (NRDS) aimed ultimately at self-reliance in rice production by 2013, but targeting to double rice production in the next five years, adds to initiatives to ensure food security for the country –(Interjections)- Mahogany is safe and sound. (Laughter) 
 
Government has advanced plans to support households with small-scale rain harvesting and storage technology and large-scale water reservoirs to minimize reliance on rain-fed agriculture alone. To this end, Government has finalized designs to rehabilitate four irrigation schemes namely: Mobuku, Olweny, Doho and Agoro to be completed by December 2012.
 
On the issue of micro-irrigation, during my tour of Prosperity-for-All last year, I came across a good practice in Oyam where one couple was watering their crops using plastic bottles. They would go with a bicycle to a swamp, collect water in a jerry-can and then come and fill the water into the water bottles. They would then put a small hole and cover the top and put the bottle next to a plant. That is drip irrigation and it can be done by everybody. I commended that couple and I gave them support together with the people in their village. So, you should learn some of those simple techniques and pass them on to the people.
 
Support to modernise agriculture is backed by an Agricultural Credit Facility (ACF), which in the 2010/2011 financial year stood at Shs 90 billion. This money can be accessed from participating commercial banks at an interest rate not exceeding 12 percent per annum. Once borrowed, the farmer must pay back the loan over a period not exceeding eight years. 

Under livestock, Government efforts to prevent control and eradicate animal diseases and vectors are underway in areas affected by Foot and Mouth Disease (FMD), Contagious Bovine Pleuropneumonia (CBPP) and Contagious Caprine Pleuropneumonia (CCPP). Government has supported the development of the Uganda Meat Producers Co-operative Union.   
 
Progress has been registered in the dairy sub-sector with increased volumes of milk produced at an annual growth rate of 8 to 10 percent. With new investments in the sub-sector, our milk-processing capacity will increase from 463,000 litres to 710,000 litres per day. 

On this issue of milk, that factory of ours at Bugolobi used to process about 15,000 litres of milk per day. That is when I decided to give it to the private sector to run it. They are now processing 28,000 litres per day and they need more milk. Therefore, I have written to the Ministry of Finance and the Ministry of Agriculture – it is not in this speech, but I have already done it. 

I want to see whether we cannot have four or five milk cows per homestead in Uganda; if we can reach six, it can even be better. Since we have got about seven million homesteads in Uganda - even if you take six million homesteads - if you have got six cows in each homestead that comes to 36 million cows. That is my aim. We have now got about 14 million cows. When the NRM came to power in 1986, we had only three million cows. All the cattle in Uganda were only three million. You can go to the National Bureau of Statistics to confirm that. At Independence, Uganda had seven million cows. So, by 1986, they had declined to three million cows, but now as I speak, there are 14 million cattle in Uganda. So, the cattle have gone up by four times. However, I would like this number, especially the dairy cows, to be pushed to about 36 million cows by getting from those who have the cows, through a Government programme, to give to those who do not have. This should be for zero-grazing. 

When you have good milking cows, a cow can give you 20 litres a day. If somebody has got six cows, normally one third of them would be milking – that is two out of the six - and if each one is giving you 20 litres, that comes to 40 litres. You drink 10 in your home and sale 30 per day and that will mean that with the six million homesteads, we shall be selling 180 million litres of milk per day. 

The six cows in the home will also give you manure and urine  apart from the milk. So, I have already written to the minister and we shall see how to push this project. More factories which are coming into the country for milk need more milk as a raw material. You hear we have already gone to almost 700,000 litres of milk per day of processing and yet when I started, the group which was in the Dairy Corporation was processing only 25,000 litres per day - that group which was there in Bugolobi.

The fisheries sub-sector, with support from the Chinese Government, finished construction and hand-over of the Aquaculture Technology Demonstration Centre at Kajjansi in December, 2010. With an operational fish-feed mill and a hatchery completed, Government support to aquaculture means that the country can produce enough fish-fry (young fish) to meet national and export demand. Government finalised the rehabilitation and equipping of four aquaculture development centres.

Also, under the Fisheries Development Project supported by the African Development Bank, Government completed construction of the landing sites of Bwonda, Gorofa, Mwena, Kiyindi, Kitobo and Majanji on Lake Victoria; and of Lwampanga and Bukungu on Lake Kyoga. Butiaba Landing Site on Lake Albert is near completion while work will start this year on Namasale and Kagwara landing sites by Lake Kyoga.

Now, the fisheries subsector is one area where we can rapidly expand production. In 1986, there was not a single fish factory in Uganda; not one. When I used the Italian grant to build Masese Fish Processing Plant, it set the example and factories flocked in. I think now we have something like 20 fish processing factories. Their annual income from exports had gone to US$ 140 per annum. However, the income has now dropped to US $80 million. What is the problem? The problem is inadequate fish because of bad fishing methods. 

Now, the new Minister of State for Fisheries, the hon. Nankabirwa - she is there. Our woman -(Laughter)- will have to stop this problem of eating fish when they are young. The Basese call these young fish mudeeke. If there is a Musese he can confirm that -(Interjections)– mudeeke. Now, if you allow a fish to survive for nine months, it will lay millions of eggs. Even by the third month it has already started laying eggs. The problem is that these people kill these fish before they have reached the third month of life. This is terrible. We are going to fight it and it can change many things in a very short time, including giving more raw materials to the factories so that you can earn more money from fisheries. 

Government has re-engaged various communities into meaningful production under targeted interventions such as the Karamoja Integrated Disarmament and Development Programme, the Northern Peace Recovery and Development Plan (PRDP), and the Luwero-Rwenzori Development Plan. These programmes are not well executed because of the corruption of the fellows involved. For me, the difficulty is to have the money. Once the money is there but somebody is playing around with it, it is a simpler job to deal with -(Interjections)– Temangalo? The hands are still there; they are not cut. (Laughter) The hands were not chopped off. 

So, these programmes are not well executed because of the corruption and poor supervision, but that is why you are elected. That is why you are here. You should supervise those projects and if you supervise them well, it prolongs your political life. If you do not, you will have a short political life. That is why there was a high turnover in the last Parliament. So many people could not come back because they were not following up these projects. So, all of you, whether you are in the Opposition or wherever you are, please supervise these projects; as you will see, it will be good for you and also for the country. 

In the next five years, the NRM Government will implement pledges to the people of Uganda made in its 2010 Manifesto to specifically enhance production efforts countrywide. It will target three million households, approximately 180,000 model farmers, 90,000 commercial farmers and 550 nucleus farmers. This is under NAADS. Whatever problems there are in NAADS, we shall deal with them. 

Interventions will include those aimed at increasing production of improved seed and breeding stock through support to research. Other planned interventions include support for six market-oriented model farmers in every parish every year.

Also included in the package of interventions is support for three commercial model farmers per parish annually. 

The operationalisation of the Commercialisation Challenge Fund (CCF) under NAADS will give a boost to agricultural rural finance. This money is meant to provide financial support to nucleus farmers under the public/private partnership arrangement.

Government will also intervene in order to increase agricultural production and productivity by promoting the use of both organic and inorganic fertilizers. It will soon address the pertinent matter of actualising phosphate fertilizer production at Sukulu Hills in Tororo. Other interventions include the construction of multipurpose water reservoirs in catchment areas for human consumption, irrigation farming and for livestock. Special focus will be made on war-ravaged and former conflict areas including the Teso and Karamoja sub-regions.

Finally, in order to fulfill its pledge to transform Uganda, Government will enhance the marketing and processing capacity of agricultural products in four different ways. First and foremost, it will provide agro-processing technologies to organised groups like hullers, milk cooling plants, maize mills and others at sub-county and eventually parish levels. It will continue to fund the Makerere University Food Science and Technology Department in order to enable graduates set up fruit, vegetable, and animal byproducts and agro-processing enterprises. It will also fund the Uganda Industrial Research Institute (UIRI) so that it can continue to establish and support agro-processing ventures as was done for peanut butter production in Lira district, fruit juice processing in Mpigi district, meat processing in Busia district and; mushroom processing in Kabale district. 

The fourth way to enhance agro-processing and the marketing of Ugandan products will be through improved post-harvest handling. Government plans to build storage capacity for food and other commodities at the farm level and also at sub-county, district and regional levels.

Finally, Government will establish 18 regional trade information centres to undertake market information dissemination and to build linkages with grassroots agro-processing units at sub-county and district levels. These will be at Arua, Gulu, Kitgum, Lira, Moroto, Soroti, Mbale, Jinja, Iganga, Hoima, Luwero, Masaka, Kasese, Tororo, Mubende, Mbarara, Kabale and Fort Portal.

Above all, Government will guarantee national food security, while also enabling the people to move from subsistence to market-oriented farming for both the local and international markets.

Madam Speaker and hon. Members, in the Energy and Minerals Sector, I would like to report on the progress of some of the projects undertaken. Work on the construction of the Bujagali Hydropower Project dam, power house and its associated transmission line is nearly completed. The commissioning of its first turbine of 50 MW is still on course for October this year. Thereafter, the commissioning of the full 250 MW plant will be in April 2012. The delay in having the first unit on line in June 2010 with final commissioning in April 2011, was as a result of unforeseen poor rock conditions at the gated spillway which had to be handled in a special way. 

Construction of the Bujagali Interconnection Project is also progressing well. This project consists of a 220 KV transmission line from Bujagali to Kawanda and a 220/132 KV sub-station at Kawanda. This transmission line will evacuate power from Bujagali Hydropower Project to the National Grid.

A detailed feasibility study and engineering design for the 600 MW Karuma Hydropower Project has been concluded. The procurement process to acquire a contractor to undertake the construction has started. Construction works are expected to commence in July this year, with financing from local resources. Karuma will be funded by our Government, using our own money.

On Renewable Energy Projects, I would like to report that construction of Mpanga Mini Hydropower (18MW) Project in Kamwenge was completed and the project was commissioned in April this year. Buseruka Mini Hydropower (10MW), Ishasha Mini Hydropower (6.5MW), Maziba (1 MW) and Nyagak (3.5MW) will be commissioned before the end of this year. 

Feasibility studies for Kikagati (10MW) were completed and construction is to start before the end of July this year. Detailed feasibility studies were also completed for Olewa I (0.6MW) and Olewa II (0.6MW). Procurement of a contractor for the rehabilitation of Maziba (1MW) has started while procurement of consultants to undertake feasibility studies for Nshongezi (22MW), Ntono (2.5MW), Ndugutu (0.5MW) and Musizi (20MW) has been concluded.

A total of 30 Rural Electrification schemes will be commissioned in September this year. Another 19 rural electrification schemes are under construction and will be commissioned in November 2011. So, these small hydro dams are also going to make a very big impact like the one of Mpanga (18MW) which I opened the other time.

Petroleum Sector

To-date a total of 49 exploration and appraisal wells have been drilled in the country. Out of those, 44 have encountered oil and gas in the subsurface. It is estimated that the discoveries made to-date can support production of over 100,000 barrels of oil per day for 25 years. That is what has been found now. This quantity of oil justifies large-scale refining in the country. 

In the short-term, however, the discovered gas resources together with the test crude produced during appraisal, will be used to generate electricity, thus contributing to the country’s electricity needs. Plans are underway to develop a gas-to-power project utilising the discovered gas at Nzizi in Hoima District.

I am further pleased to report that the exploration drilling was extended to Kihiihi-Kanungu areas in Exploration Area 4B in 2010. Currently, the appraisal of the fields in Exploration Areas 1 (Pakwach Basin) and Exploration Area 2 (Butiaba-Wanseko) is in progress. A final evaluation of oil reserves using 3 dimensional seismic survey and appraisal drilling is in progress. Once completed, the development phase of creating infrastructure, like pipelines and oil-processing plants, will follow and will in turn lead to the start of oil production in the country. 

The feasibility study Government has undertaken for the development of a refinery in Uganda has revealed that the refinery project is both technically and financially viable. Consequently, Government has commenced development of a refinery as a project of three to five years.

Government is fast-tracking the construction of the refinery to process crude oil from the Albertine Graben - Albertine Graben is called “Mwita Nzigye”, so you should always put it in quotes.  While this is a medium-term measure, it will ensure that the vagaries arising from being supplied with fuel from far afield are mitigated. It will also allow the building of larger fuel reserves than those held by oil companies today. This is to deal with any shocks that may arise in supply. 

What I am saying is that in the next three or four years, we are going to be using our own petroleum, diesel, kerosene and aviation fuel from “Mwita Nzigye”. But in these intervening years, we need to solve the problems of getting fuel through Kenya, which sometimes has got some problems. We, however, do not have to panic because Kenya is not the only route to the sea, as you know. Sometimes people get excited about – I do not know why they like excitement.  You should know that there is also Tanzania, which is a bit longer, but it is there. If it becomes necessary, we shall use that one. There is also Southern Sudan -(Interjections)- you do not know that there is Southern Sudan? If you do not know that there is Southern Sudan, then you need sympathy. 

Madam Speaker and hon. Members, in 2010, petroleum and other fuel products supply was generally smooth, except for the month of September when erratic supplies of petrol were experienced. However, the situation has significantly changed since the beginning of this year, mainly because the demand for oil internationally, regionally and locally has continued to grow, surpassing supply.

As an illustration, here at home, statistical data from the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development for February and March, 2011 indicates that while PMS (Petrol) requirements for the month of March, 2011 were 32,832,900 litres, only 22,381,247 litres were supplied, leaving a deficit of 32 percent. Projected AGO (Diesel) requirements for March 2011 were 76,556,500 litres but only 40,722,383 litres were supplied, leaving a deficit of 47 per cent.

It is irresponsible and unpatriotic for some leaders to mislead the public that fuel prices in Uganda are the highest in the region. In our region, comparable fuel prices in the month of April were as follows per litre; in Uganda, petrol was at Shs 3,500 and diesel was at Shs 3,000; in Kenya, at that time, petrol was at the equivalent of Shs 3,192 and diesel was at the equivalent of Shs 3,135; in Rwanda, a litre of petrol was at Shs 3,857 while diesel was also at the equivalent of Shs. 3,857; in Tanzania, it was the equivalent of Shs 3,210 and diesel was at the equivalent of Shs 3,200; and in Southern Sudan, petrol was at the equivalent of Shs 3,063 while diesel was at the equivalent of Shs 2,040, which was cheaper.

Notwithstanding the discomforting prices, the following positive developments are worth mentioning. First, the Jinja Storage Tanks with a capacity of 30 million litres as national strategic fuel reserves are being refurbished and restocked under a Public-Private Partnership initiative. Furthermore, in order to ensure availability of petroleum products in the country, all oil marketing companies are required to maintain stocks of up to 10 working days.

Secondly, in line with the Petroleum Supply General Regulations, 2009, Government issued new guidelines for licensing of operators in the petroleum sector regarding compliance with Health, Safety and Environmental Regulations. These ensure the systematic development of petroleum marketing facilities in the country. 

Last but not least, as a result of efforts towards quality and standards monitoring, non-compliance levels reduced from 29 percent in 2009 to 4.2 percent in 2010.

In the mining sector, the following are worth noting, among other developments; During 2010, 123 Prospecting Licenses, 133 Exploration Licenses, 18 Location Licenses, 2 Mining Leases, 51 Mineral Dealers’ Licenses and one Goldsmith’s License were granted. This is attributed to the dissemination of the results of the airborne geophysical survey.

In 2010, Government realised revenue to the tune of Shs 3.631 billion as Non Taxable Revenue (NTR) accruing from royalties and mineral license fees. Royalties alone contributed Shs 2.795 billion of the total revenue generated, shared or to be shared at a rate of 80 percent for the Central Government, 17 percent for local governments of the mining districts, and 3 percent to the lawful owners of the land. The major contributors to the revenue earned in 2010 were Tororo Cement Limited, Hima Cement Limited and Kasese Cobalt Company Limited.

Madam Speaker and hon. Members, I now turn to the social sector.

In Education, among the interventions undertaken under the primary education sector in the financial year 2010/2011 were:

i)	The procurement of P.4 and P.5 curriculum;

ii)	The construction of teachers’ houses in 80 schools in Arua and Nebbi;

iii)	The admission of more pupils in schools in war-affected areas e.g. Laroo Primary School;

iv)	The signing of customised performance targets contracts by 95 percent of head teachers and their deputies in all quality enhancement initiative districts; and

v)	The payment of hardship allowances to teachers in hard-to reach areas.

In the year 2011/2012, the sector aims to achieve a pupil-teacher ratio of 56:1 in all Government schools. This will be attained by deployment of teachers across all districts. The sector plans to strengthen routine inspection and head teacher training in leadership management in all Government-aided schools.

Under secondary education, the year under review witnessed the payment of capitation grants for both private and Universal Secondary Education and the disbursement of funds for completion of 16 administration blocks for seed schools and for rehabilitation and expansion of 11 traditional schools. 

It also witnessed the rehabilitation and commissioning of Sir Samuel Baker Secondary School and the aiding of 66 private community secondary schools.

A major intervention in 2012 is the extension of Universal Secondary Education to cover A’level. Other prospects include the provision of grant aid for private community secondary schools. In addition, it is in plan to construct teachers’ houses for specific seed secondary schools. Additional teachers’ houses as well as classrooms, science laboratories, libraries and hostels in island or mountainous and other hard-to-reach areas are to be constructed under the Universal Post Primary Education and Training (UPPET) World Bank funded project. 

It is also in plan to provide management training to all Board members and Parent Teacher Association members in all schools in the country.

The Commission of Inquiry into the mismanagement of UPE/USE funds started its work in January 2011. I am waiting for their report. 

Under Business, Technical, Vocational Education and Training (BTVET), capitation grants have been paid in health training institutions, teachers’ colleges, technical institutions and colleges of commerce, among others. Libraries have been equipped while dormitories and classrooms have been constructed in several institutions. 

The popularisation of the BTVET Act, 2008 will be continued, as will the rehabilitation and construction of the physical infrastructure. All these activities will continue in districts that are still in need.

Madam Speaker, success has been registered in some of the following areas in higher education. There has been transfer of funds to Kumi University, West Nile University and to Kigumba Petroleum College. Top-up allowances to students on Government-to-Government scholarships in foreign countries have been provided. Some 60,000 students have been admitted to universities and other tertiary institutions in the Academic Year 2010/2011. 

Last but not least, another university is in the offing with the acquisition of 130 acres of land at Muni Hill for Muni University. Muni is in West Nile.

Plans for the financial year 2011/2012 include, among others, ensuring that internship and field attachments are undertaken by all public universities. Government will continue with construction work at Uganda Petroleum Institute, Kigumba and expand the admission of students. It also plans to set up a task force to look into the establishment of the Open University of Uganda. 

Government will continue the construction of infrastructure at Muni University in readiness to open its gates in August 2012. As a special consideration for students from the North, Government will, in the next financial year, support students from Acholi and Lango sub-regions who do not qualify for Government sponsorship but qualify to join University.

Teacher Instructor and Education Training

Notable achievements here were the commissioning of Shimoni Core Primary Teachers’ College in 2011, teacher participation in harmonisation of East African Teacher Education Curricular, as well as the completion of construction of teachers’ colleges and tutors’ houses.

Plans for Financial Year 2011/2012 include the completion and relocation of Shimoni Demonstration School infrastructure. Also at hand, is the expansion, rehabilitation and construction of infrastructure for teachers’ colleges. Targeted are Core Primary Teachers’ Colleges, National Teachers’ Colleges, Instructors’ Colleges and Mulago Health Tutors’ College.

Under Special Needs Education, career guidance and counselling, teacher training and orientation of administrators on specialised guidance and counselling was done in selected districts and institutions. Future plans include the development of a guidance and counselling policy, as well as its five-year strategic plan. Also in plan is the construction of the special schools for both the blind and the deaf in West Nile and Kibaale respectively, and the placement of school leavers.

Among the notable achievements under the National Curriculum Development Centre was the completion of the drafting of the Kiswahili Curriculum for pre-primary and primary schools. The translation of the Early Childhood Development Care Givers Guide in 16 languages was another major achievement as was the development of Supplementary Readers for lower primary.

Plans for 2011/2012 Financial Year include the piloting of the Kiswahili Primary School Curriculum and the development of educational materials for special needs deaf and blind children. A new A’level secondary school syllabus featuring 19 subjects will be brought on board this year. The completion of the National Curriculum Development Centre buildings is in prospect for the next financial year.

As far as health is concerned, Government is totally committed to the improvement of health service delivery all over the country. Government plans to achieve this through the implementation of the five-year Health Sector Strategic and Investment Plan that focuses on interventions in priority areas aimed at reducing morbidity and mortality. 

Emphasis is laid on the delivery of a minimum health-care package consisting of the following elements:

i)	Health promotion, disease prevention and community health initiatives including epidemic and disaster preparedness and response. 

	On this one, I wish to commend the Ministry of Health on how they controlled Ebola recently. I think even the Opposition must be beneficiaries of Ebola-free Uganda.

ii)	Maternal and Child Health, and

iii)	Nutrition, prevention, management and control of communicable diseases.

Significant achievements have been registered in malaria control through special interventions, including distribution of mosquito nets and improvement in the referral system.
 
Health infrastructure

Government has embarked on the rehabilitation and re-equipping of all existing medical facilities. It is also embarking on the construction of new structures such as staff houses. A number of projects attest to this. 

The following hospitals underwent partial rehabilitation during the year under review; Nebbi, Apac, Tororo, Bududa, Kambuga, Rushere and Itojo. The Health Centres of Lyantonde, Masafu, Bukwo, Kyenjojo, Katakwi and Buwenge are being upgraded to general hospitals.

Government has constructed Mental Health Units of 45-bed capacity each at seven regional referral levels. Conversion of Mbarara Referral Hospital to a 608-bed National Referral Hospital is in advanced stages.

Plans to de-congest Mulago National Referral Hospital through construction of three satellite hospitals at Naguru in Nakawa Division, Kawempe in Kawempe Division and Kiruddu in Makindye Division have been concluded. Construction of staff accommodation in Health Centre IIs and Health Centre IIIs in Karamoja region with support from the Italian Government has commenced. The rehabilitation and re-equipping of Moroto and Mubende Regional Referral Hospitals, 17 General Hospitals and 27 Health Centre IVs, using a loan from the World Bank is under way.

Supervision and Monitoring

A system of intensified supervision and inspection is addressing the issues of staff absenteeism, pilferage of drugs, staff and quality of care, among others. The Medicines and Health Services Monitoring Unit which I established in State House, to further strengthen inspection, has done a commendable job especially in exposing drug thieves, a number of whom are already being prosecuted. You do not have to worry, these things need stamina. I am just remaining with twenty pages. (Laughter)

Social Protection Programme

Madam Speaker and hon. Members, in September 2010, Government launched the expanded Social Protection Programme whose aim is to provide a mechanism for reducing chronic poverty; and for enabling vulnerable groups to benefit from the opportunities of economic growth by engaging in productive activities.


The special grant for programmes for persons with disabilities was increased from Shs 1.5 billion covering 48 districts in the financial year 2009/2010 to Shs 3.0 billion for all districts in the financial year 2010/2011. The grant has been used to support the creation of employment opportunities for Persons With Disabilities through entrepreneurship training and provision of seed capital.

Labour and Employment

In November 2010, Cabinet approved the country’s National Employment Policy which I officially launched on Labour Day, 1st May, 2011. The Policy identifies priorities and strategies for increasing employment opportunities for Uganda’s labour force and improving productivity of the workers.  

Under the Externalisation of Labour Programme, by December 2010, a total of 9,960 Ugandans had secured employment outside the country through recruitment agencies licensed by Government. In December, 2010 those workers remitted a total of US$ 5,478,000. 

To address the problem of unemployment and underemployment, Government through the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development, provided non-formal vocational and entrepreneurial skills training to 334 youths; and seed capital grants to 167 youth groups in 19 districts.

During the next financial year, emphasis will be put on building capacity of labour market information systems to produce accurate and timely information on jobs, desired skills and job seeker and other efforts to improve the quality of labour among others. Availability of labour information will enable the labour force to access employment opportunities within Uganda, in the East African region and beyond.

On the transport sector, Madam Speaker and hon. Members, the Shs 283.9 billion passed by Parliament as the Uganda Road Fund for road maintenance, has been disbursed to the Uganda National Roads Authority (UNRA) and to the District, Urban and Community Access Roads agencies respectively, for road maintenance. 

By December 2010, the percentage of paved national road networks in fair-to-good condition was 75 percent against the annual target of 80 percent. The achievement of routine mechanised maintenance of paved roads was 1,716 km out of the annual target of 2,000 km. The achievement of periodic maintenance of paved roads (re-sealing) was 86 km out of the annual target of 127 km.

The detailed design of the Second Nile Bridge at Jinja commenced, along with the construction and rehabilitation of Aswa Bridge on Gulu-Kitgum Road. Rehabilitation was also undertaken on the Awoja Bridge on Mbale-Soroti Road. 

The following, among others, are planned for the financial year 2011/2012:

(i)	Tarmacking of a total of 150 km of gravel national roads, along with the rehabilitation of 150 km of paved national roads.

(ii)	Dualling of Kibuye-Busega-Mpigi, Kampala-Northern Bypass and Kampala-Jinja Road will commence along with a Design Review for the proposed Kampala-Entebbe Express Highway. The Minister of Finance will say more about this tomorrow.

(iii)	Under the District, Urban and Community Access Roads (DUCAR) Network, apart from routine maintenance, 3.5 km of roads in Kampala Capital City will be upgraded to paved standard along with 15 km of low-cost seals elsewhere. One hundred and fifty kilometres of district and tourism roads will be rehabilitated. Contractors, labour-based societies and district non-engineering staff will be trained.

Madam Speaker, the enactment of the Kampala Capital City Authority Act means that the Central Government is now fully responsible for roads in the City. The Government will, therefore, in due course, start a three-year programme to address road and traffic improvements within Kampala City. I must tell you that the new Executive Director whom I appointed for Kampala is already doing good work. She has excavated brand new equipment –(Interjections)- [Hon. Members: “Mayor”] I am not aware about what the Mayor is doing –(Laughter)- I have never even talked to that Mayor, and so I do not know what he is doing. (Laughter) 

I am telling you about what is happening in Kampala; that the Executive Director has excavated brand new equipment which we had long ago given to the City Council, but which they were not using to maintain the roads; but now my Executive Director is using that equipment and you will see the big difference. 

I appeal to all Kampala residents, especially those in Bwaise, Kalerwe, Kawempe, Ndeeba, Nateete, Nalukolongo, Kisenyi and Kyebando to stop dumping garbage in the drainage system. Garbage blocks the smooth flow of water resulting into floods in the city.

Rail and Water Transport

Repair of MV Kaawa and dry dock was started. Design for MV Kabalega II, Port Bell and Jinja piers is to start later this year. The ferry for Lwampanga-Namasale will commence operations. 

Procurement of a new ferry to replace the old one at Laropi will commence. Socio-economic surveys on lakes Victoria, Albert and Kyoga were conducted. The feasibility study for repairing and upgrading the Tororo-Pakwach railway line was completed and the study for Kampala-Kasese railway line is ongoing.

During the Financial Year 2011/2012 the feasibility study for upgrading the Kampala-Kasese railway line will be completed and the study for the Kenya-Uganda standard gauge railway line will also commence.

Under Air transport, the second phase of construction for the terminal building at Arua is currently being carried out. So is the perimeter wall fencing for Gulu Airport. 

In the coming financial year, works on Kasese Airport Development Project will start almost simultaneously with work on the terminal building at Masindi Aerodrome. A bilateral air service agreement between Uganda and the Democratic Republic of Congo will be finalised.

With regard to road safety, Madam Speaker and hon. Members, the increasing number of road traffic accidents have been attributed mostly to over-speeding on improved roads. (Interjections) You must be blind; you have not seen good roads like, for instance, the wonderful road between Soroti and Lira? I have heard that some few people have died there.

The wonderful roads from Kawempe to Kafu, and Kafu to Masindi; the wonderful road we are working on from Masaka to Mbarara? Please do not declare yourself blind. (Laughter) It is not a good thing to have eyes and refuse to use them.

The wonderful road from Karuma to Arua –[Hon. Members: “Or Temangalo”]- but the hands are there. Temangalo? You mean hon. Mbabazi? (Laughter) Hon. Mbabazi has been a good NRM cadre for a long time and if some of you can last as long as hon. Mbabazi has lasted, it will be a good achievement. (Applause)

I appeal to all motorists and other road users to avoid over-speeding, drunken-driving and use of drugs, which have been major contributors to the occurrence of accidents. 

All road users must observe traffic rules. The Police must step-up the enforcement of the Traffic and Road Safety Act as well as the regulations made under it.

Information and Communications Technology (ICT)

Madam Speaker and hon. Members, indicators of the ICT sector’s contribution to Uganda’s economic growth in terms of GDP, investment, employment and tax revenue have all improved, as highlighted below:

(i)	Investment from the private sector for the financial year 2010/2011 is estimated to be US$ 300 million compared to US$ 270 million in 2009. Most of the investment has been in the form of infrastructure and network improvement by new and existing service providers.

(ii)	Gross turnover sales from the communication sector for 2010/2011 are estimated at US$ 936 million. The revenue is predominantly from the telecommunications sub-sector driven by increased competition, the landing of the undersea cable systems along the coast of East Africa, and the national terrestrial fibre rings starting to reach various parts of the country. New services such as mobile banking are also taking root.

(iii) 	In terms of Government revenue, it is estimated that the communications sector generated close to Shs 300 billion during 2010/11, an increase of close to 20 percent from the previous year.

(iv) 	The ICT sector has become one of the leading sources of employment, with close to 14,000 persons directly employed by both service providers and the Government by December 2010, and more than 800,000 indirectly employed.

(v) 	By December 2010, the estimated number of fixed and mobile voice telephony customers was more than 12.8 million compared to 9.6 million in December 2009.

(vi) 	The increase in competition, coupled with the announcement of reduced interconnection rates by the Regulator in July, 2010, triggered what is now being referred to as “price wars” in the telecommunications market, leading to reduced call prices.

(vii) 	Data and Internet

Like the voice market, the Internet market was very vibrant during 2010/2011. By the end of September 2010, international bandwidth uplink stood at 3,433 Mbps – now I don’t know exactly what this means, but it is some sort of measurement –(Laughter)- compared to a mere 850 Mbps - at least those figures are clear to me. (Laughter) In 2009, the Mbps was 850. By September last year, it was 3433 Mbps. That one is clear to me; mega byte per second. Okay that is very good, and this was an increase of more than 300 percent.

The improvement is attributed to the increased competition since the landing of the three cable systems (Seacom, TEAMS and EASSy) on the East African coastline; and to increased competition and infrastructure at the national level.

(viii) 	Mobile Broadband Access

By the end of 2010, it was estimated that there were more than 600,000 mobile Internet subscriptions compared to 310,000 in December 2009. This monumental growth is attributed to price drops for both bandwidth and mobile modems.

(ix) 	Broadcasting and Multimedia Sub-sector

By December 2010, the number of private FM frequencies issued had risen from 202 to 210, of which 156 are operational. Fifty-four FM stations were assigned frequencies but are yet to get on air. Of the 46 television stations assigned frequencies, 26 are on air.

Madam, it is essential that we put in place effective measures to prevent and fight cyber crime.

For the financial year 2011/12, the following will be undertaken, among others:

(a) 	Expansion of Tetra Communications System;

(b) 	Digital Television and Data casting (a migration from analogue to digital);

(c) 	Investment in new business ventures in Posta especially in IT-led initiatives, including setting up information centres to enhance electronic communications, instant money transfer and counter automation; 

(d) 	Setting up a national data centre to provide centralized storage and security of all Government information; and

(e) The operationalisation of ICT security and cyber laws.

Land

Government is committed to sustainable land use and land tenure security. The following have been achieved, among others:

(i) 	Enactment of the Land (Amendment) Act, 2010 –(Interjections)– yes, that is why I got many votes. Those who opposed the Land Act did so at their own risk. Yes, hon. Abraham Byandala, no change. Why change? (Interjections) hon. Omara Atubo was a casuality for other reasons. (Laughter) But you wait, hon. Omara Atubo will re-emerge; I can guarantee you. So, NRM Members, these people are maliciously rejoicing about hon. Omara Atubo’s problems. So, it is our duty to ensure that hon. Omara Atubo is comfortable. (Applause) Don’t jubilate too soon about hon. Omara Atubo’s problems -(Interjections)– no, for hon. Aggrey Awori, that was the problem of hon. Kevina Taaka.

	But this has enhanced the security of bibanja owners in accordance with Article 237 of the Constitution. The Act has been translated into 19 local languages and distributed widely.

(ii) 	Eighty district land boards have been given training on the determination of annual nominal ground rent (busuulu).

(iii) 	The School of Survey and Land Management at Entebbe, which had been closed for over ten years, was re-opened to build human resource capacity in the land sector.

(iv) 	Construction of the National Land Information System Centre on Plot 9 Lourdel Road commenced, and will be completed before the end of this year. When the centre becomes operational, it will be a one-stop-centre on land information in the country.

(v) 	Construction/renovation of regional land offices covering the districts of Arua, Gulu, Lira, Masindi, Kabarole, Masaka, Mukono, Kibaale, Mbarara and Wakiso have been completed; and

(vi)	The Uganda National Land Policy, which provides a framework for land management and administration, will soon be discussed by the Cabinet.

During the coming financial year, the following will be undertaken, among others:

(i)	Implementation of the Uganda National Land Policy;

(ii) 	Implementation of the Land Information System in the initial six land offices of Kampala, Mukono, Jinja, Masaka, Wakiso and Mbarara; and

(iii)	Legislation for operationalisation of the Uganda Land Commission, as a statutory body.

Regional and international matters

On regional matters, I would like to inform the House that Uganda has continued to enjoy excellent relations with her neighbours, and has continued to play a constructive role on matters of regional and international peace and security. Within the East African Community, the following were achieved:

(i)	Since July 2010, the East African Community has become the first common market in the whole of Africa, making it a big milestone.

(ii) 	In November last year, the East African Community Summit agreed to embark on negotiating the East African Community Monetary Union. This process is now underway and is expected to culminate into an East African Community Monetary Union Protocol by 2012.

(iii) 	The East African Community has continued to place great emphasis on food security in the region and the need to address the impact of climate change.

(iv) 	Uganda continues to participate in the negotiations under the COMESA-EAC-SADC Tripartite Free Trade Area Agreement, to boost trade in the Eastern and Southern Africa region.

(v) 	The East African Community partner states concluded a protocol on foreign policy coordination, aimed at strengthening regional collaboration and harmonisation through multilateral diplomacy, economic and social activities, as well as in diplomatic and consular matters.

(vi) 	Uganda hosted both regional and international conferences during the year under review –(Interjections)– Oh! CHOGM was a big success. Most prominent among these were the International Criminal Court Review Conference in June, 2010 and the 2010 AU Ordinary Summit.

(vii) 	Uganda will strengthen our relationship with the new state of Southern Sudan in terms of both security and trade.

(viii) 	In recognition of the meaningful contribution Uganda is making in the area of maintenance of international peace and security, the United Nations decided to expand its operations at Entebbe International Airport by establishing a Regional Service Centre for the UN peace-support missions deployed in the region. With the establishment of this centre, a number of peace-support functions hitherto carried out elsewhere in the region such as in the Democratic Republic of Congo, Burundi and Sudan are being relocated to Entebbe. Uganda is consequently benefiting a lot from this development in terms of procurements, employment, investment and tourism opportunities.

All the foregoing possible developments have been achieved because of the peace and stability the country has continued to enjoy. It is, therefore, incumbent on all of us to ensure that we do not carry out any activity that would tarnish Uganda’s image, thereby sending wrong signals to the regional and international community.

Justice, Law and Order

I wish to reaffirm Government’s total commitment to the promotion and maintenance of the rule of law and order. In order to strengthen the rule of law and order, Government has undertaken to carry out a number of activities whose outcomes I share with you below:

Government’s strengthening of the Police Force has seen a drop in the national crime rate. A total of 19 district police stations, 34 blocks of residential accommodation and eight anti-stock theft unit zonal offices in addition to the Police Training School at Kabalye, were constructed during the year under review.

Within the Police, the following specialised units have been established:

(i) 	Very Important Persons Protection Unit (VIPPU);
(ii) 	Field Force Unit;
(iii) 	Environment Police;
(iv) 	Aviation Police;
(v) 	Land Protection Unit; and
(vi) 	Integrated Highway Patrol Unit.

The Uganda Police Force has adopted community policing as a pro-active approach aimed at prevention and detection of crimes such as terrorism, murders, iron bar attacks and child kidnaps. Every Ugandan is a stakeholder in fighting crime. Therefore, each one of us should cooperate with the Police in this endeavour.

In addition to the operationalisation of the Mbale Regional Forensic Laboratory, as well as the near-completion of the Gulu Regional Laboratory, construction of the Mbarara Regional Forensic Laboratory will soon commence.

Case disposal in courts

Over the past year, out of the 25,000 cases filed in the courts at all levels countrywide, 23,000 were disposed of. The launch and implementation of the pilot “Case Backlog Quick Wins Programme” has resulted into a drastic reduction in the average length of stay on remand from 27 months in 2009 to 15 months in 2010/11. The ratio of convicts to remands has increased from 44.4 percent to 47 percent countrywide; and in some cases, like in the Luzira Upper Prison, there are more convicts than remands for the first time in 28 years.

In order to address the challenge of staff numbers in the Judiciary, the following actions stand out, among others:

(a) 	Appointment of 10 judges;
(b) 	Recruitment of 700 prison warders and 45 cadets now undergoing training; and
(c) 	Recruitment of 5,000 Police constables and 500 officer cadets now undergoing training.

These recruitments will improve the warder-prisoner ratio to 1:4 from 1:5 previously and the police-population ratio to one policeman for every 709 people from one policeman for every 786 people in the previous year.

The establishment of Duty Free shops in both the Uganda Police Force and the Uganda Prisons Service has and continues to improve the welfare of the staff, especially those who want to put up houses for themselves. From the prisons farms, Government was able to save Shs 2.4 billion on feeding prisoners.

Under the settlement of statutory obligations, by the end of this financial year, a total of Shs 52.9 billion will be paid in respect of court awards, Uganda Human Rights Commission awards and compensation (Exgratia awards).

Another significant achievement is to do with increased efficiency in the immigration department. The acquisition of a passport now takes 10 working days compared to 30 days previously. 

During the next financial year, Government will continue to build on the successes so far registered with a view to improving further the capacity and professionalisation of both the Uganda Police Force and the Uganda Prisons Service.

The recommendation of the Judiciary to Parliament to increase the number of judges of the High Court from 50 to 82; those of the Court of Appeal from eight to 15, inclusive of the Deputy Chief Justice; and of the Supreme Court from seven to 11, will be considered.

Peace and Security

Madam Speaker, while peace and security have been maintained, the country was faced with two unfortunate incidents last year; the burning of the Kasubi Royal Tombs and the 11 July terrorist attacks on people who were watching and enjoying the finals of the World Football Cup. The burning of the royal tombs destroyed a very important national and international cultural site, but fortunately, the tombs were saved by the strong action of the fire brigade –(Interjections)– No, I do not ignore them; I always help them because I regard myself as a  philanthropist to -[Mr Segona: “If you are interested, it is kabango.”]- Oh, kabango. You should know the Uganda languages well. Kabango means a hump. Kabango is the wooden part of the spear. So, when you said kabango, I thought somebody could be having a hump and I couldn’t get it. So, Segona could improve his cross-lingual efforts. The attack on the royal tombs destroyed the super structure, but the tombs were saved by the prompt action of the fire brigade, while the heinous attack by the terrorists left 76 people dead and 116 injured. 

I would like to request you, Madam Speaker, to allow this august assembly to stand up for one minute in memory of the people who were killed by the terrorists. 

(Members stood and observed a moment of silence.)

Government offered a moderate contribution towards the burial expenses of those who died and those who underwent treatment in the various hospitals in and around Kampala. The suspects who were apprehended in connection with the terrorist attacks will be subjected to the due process of the law.

Government, in consultation with the Mengo establishment, agreed to set up a commission of inquiry to investigate and probe the evil act of the burning of the Kasubi Tombs. The Judicial Commission of Inquiry under the Chairmanship of Justice Stephen Engwau completed its work and has already submitted its report. The report is going to be thoroughly studied to enable Government to decide on the next course of action. It will also be made public in due course. I would like to express gratitude to UNESCO for its support in rebuilding this world heritage site.

The Uganda People’s Defence Forces (UPDF) has been equipped to reasonable levels to enhance its fighting, mobility and deployability capabilities. Besides the fact that the UPDF is currently a bi-service force, comprising of land and air forces, with a higher defence headquarters, other specialized elements, namely, the Marines and the Special Forces, have also been created. 

It is also worth appreciating that for some time now, the UPDF has built capacity to help the Police deal with internal riots and national disasters. I would like to advise those championing riots, in the name of protesting against high fuel prices and other commodity prices, to stop. The ulterior motives behind those riots are already known by all the concerned agencies of the government. We know what all those groups are doing - what they were planning - because many of the youth who they tried to use work with the government and we know the whole story.

Consequently, any riots will be handled firmly and decisively, basing on the provisions of Article 43 of the Constitution, on the enjoyment of fundamental and other human rights and freedoms.

I am happy to inform this august House that apart from the continued support to peace and security, the UPDF in its five-year development plan, will renovate and rehabilitate the dilapidated national railway network. (Applause) The engineering brigade of the Army - we trained them and they are going to repair the whole of this railway working with the Citadel Company, the concessionaire. Not only can they repair the railway, but they can also build a brand new one. So, the Army is not only for fighting, but also for nation building.

Corruption

The NRM Government’s commitment to zero-tolerance of corruption remains strong and resolute! The legislation and institutions that have been put in place to fight it underline this resolve. The following achievements in fighting corruption are brought to your attention - (Interjections)- 

(Thereupon the Members of the Opposition withdrew from the conference hall.)

The Leadership Code Act, 2002 has been amended. The amendment Bill which also makes provision for an independent tribunal as spelt out in the Constitution will soon be discussed by Cabinet.

The Whistleblowers Protection Act, aimed at protecting those who volunteer information in corruption cases, was enacted last year. The outcome of this legislation has been a great encouragement to the public in the fight against corruption.

The Anti-Corruption Court has been doing very well in handling corruption cases expeditiously. 

Corruption being rampant in the procurement processes, the Public Procurement and Disposal of Public Assets Act is under amendment with a view to plugging the loopholes which have been used by the corrupt.

In the forthcoming financial year, the following will be undertaken:

(i)	Intensification of awareness of the public so as to enable it to participate effectively in the fight against corruption.

(ii)	Enactment of the Anti-Money Laundering Legislation.

(iii)	Passing of the Proceeds of Crime Legislation to empower Government to confiscate the assets of the corrupt.

(iv)	I will constitute a committee to investigate political leaders and senior public officers implicated in corruption-related scandals.

(v)	The IGG, DPP and CID will conclude all the investigations related to CHOGM funds. Where evidence has been compiled, prosecution of the culprits will be undertaken expeditiously.

Madam Speaker, I now report on the work of Parliament. As it may be recalled, the Fifth Session of the Eighth Parliament was convened on 4 June 2010 and it ended on 13 May 2011. 

During that period, Parliament was able to transact business as follows:

(i) 	Bills passed 	- 22
(ii) 	Motions for resolutions - 34
(iii)	Sessional committee reports presented - 13

Well, I just wanted to find out; do we have quorum to continue with the business? 

HON. MEMBERS: Yes. (Applause)

MR MUSEVENI: So, do people who walk out get their daily allowance? (Laughter) 

(iv) 	Ministerial statements presented and debated - 23
(v) 	Other statements presented - 6
(vi)	Papers presented - 42
(vi)	Questions for oral answer responded to - 13
(viii)	Other Business - 2

The Bills passed included, among others: 

(a) 	The Regulation of Interception of Communications Bill,
(b) 	The Kampala Capital City Bill,
(c) 	The Electronic Signatures Bill,
(d) 	The Public Procurement and Disposal of Public Assets Bill,
(e) 	The Institution of Traditional or Cultural Leaders Bill, and
(f) 	The Emoluments and Benefits of the President, Vice President and Prime Ministers’ Bill.

I thank the 8th Parliament for what it was able to accomplish. Since there are quite a number of Bills still pending, my request is that the Business Committee looks at them with a view to sorting out the most urgent ones for prompt handling.

The Public Service

Madam Speaker, the people of Uganda expect and are indeed entitled to the best service delivery from public servants who are paid from public coffers.

With our policy of decentralisation, most of the service delivery is by local governments. Presently, the total amount of money allocated to local governments, through Central Government transfers, stands at Shs 1.47 trillion, which is about 27 percent of the total budget.
 
Ministries and local leaders must ensure that there is enough guidance, supervision and inspection so that there is value for every shilling sent to local governments.

Members of Parliament should take keen interest in what is going on in their constituencies as far as service delivery is concerned. I have already sent specific instructions to the Rt hon. Prime Minister aimed at putting in place measures for improved service delivery. Coupled with this is the ongoing review of ministerial structures, aimed at not only rationalising the present structures, but also at plugging any loopholes that have been undermining service delivery. 
 
One of the outstanding achievements in this area is the payment of the massive pension arrears. These arose from the revision of pensions, to make them more meaningful, following the currency reforms of the late 1980s. Pension arrears also arose from non-payment of dues to Ugandans formerly employed by the then East African Community when it collapsed in 1977. Whereas Kenya and Tanzania paid their nationals, Uganda did not. All those pensions have now been paid. Another source of pension arrears was the non-payment of pensions and gratuities to members who retired from the former armies or the families of those who passed away. 

Finally, pension arrears accumulated from non-payment of pensions to those who were employees of various local governments in the country. Paying such pensioners should rightly have been the responsibility of those local governments.  Government took over the responsibility in response to the outcry of the people concerned whose strong belief is that they worked for Government. They pleaded that the 49 technical distinctions between Central Government and local governments should not jeopardize what they believed was genuinely due to them. 
 
Having cleared the bulk of those pension arrears, Government continues to receive and deal with residual cases as they come. I have decided to bring out all these facts, in order to dispel rumours that have been peddled around, especially by those in the Opposition that the NRM Government does not care about pensioners because it had refused or had stopped paying pensions. How odd! Rather than being blamed, the National Resistance Movement Government should be commended, not only for revising the pensions which had been negatively affected by the currency reforms, but also for taking over all pension obligations left by previous governments. 
 
Government is conscious of the concerns about the low salaries and wages paid to public servants. In due course Government, through the Ministry of Public Service, will come up with a Revised Pay Reform Policy which should address all issues related to pay which, among others, include: 

(i) 	Attraction and retention of scarce skills; 
(ii) 	Unjustifiable pay differentials among persons with the same skills and doing similar jobs; and 
(iii) 	Special allowances for those working in hard-to-reach, hard-to-stay areas. 
 
Government will finalise the establishment of a Contributory Pensions Scheme to replace the present one which is non-contributory.  Government will also decide on the appeal by local governments to make the payment of pensions to employees of local governments a responsibility of Central Government. 
 
As I conclude this year’s State of the Nation Address, Madam Speaker, I wish to reiterate that on February 18th 2011, Ugandans gave the National Resistance Movement the mandate to run the affairs of this country for another five years. (Applause) The NRM Election Manifesto, which is in consonance with what is spelt out in Uganda’s National Development Plan (2010/2011–2014/2015), is now the principal agreement between the NRM Government and the people of Uganda. It will be translated into policies and programmes for implementation every financial year.    
 
The National Resistance Movement, the vanguard in restoring constitutionalism, democracy and peace in this country, shall not support any schemes, which some individuals or groups would like to design, to get to power outside the constitutional framework. (Applause)     
 
Let us remind ourselves of the following provisions of the Constitution:
 
(i) 	Article 3(1): “It is prohibited for any person or group of persons to take or retain control of the Government of Uganda, except in accordance with the provisions of this Constitution.”  
 
(ii) 	Article 3(4) “All citizens of Uganda shall have the right and duty at all times – (a) to defend this Constitution and, in particular to resist any person or group of persons seeking to overthrow the established constitutional order….” 
 
Every Ugandan should always be conscious of the fact that nobody owes us a living. Every Ugandan has the responsibility to actively participate in the socio-economic transformation process of Uganda; an irreversible process that the NRM has set in motion.  
  
For God and My Country. Thank you very much! (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Your Excellency, President of the Republic of Uganda, we want to thank you very much for that elaborate State of the Nation Address, in which you have outlined the policy that is to guide this country for which you were given mandate not so long ago! (Applause) 

For the Members, the State of the Nation Address will be printed in book form and you will be given an opportunity to debate it. But for now, we want to thank His Excellency for carrying out his constitutional duty. But your Excellency, this is also the opportunity for you to interact with the Members of Parliament whom you have not met since they were elected. 

So, first we shall invite you for a group photograph to mark this historic occasion on the steps of Victoria Hall, where you were received, and thereafter we invite you, Your Excellency, and our guests, to proceed to the Serena Garden for a reception. 

I have to now adjourn to tomorrow at 2.00 p.m. This Parliament will again sit here tomorrow. 

(The House rose at 6.17 p.m. and was adjourned until Wednesday, 8 June 2011 at 2.00 p.m.) 


