


Thursday, 25 June 2020


Parliament met at 2.38 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this afternoon’s sitting. Yesterday, you remember the Minister for General Duties in the Office of the Prime Minister, hon. Karooro, tabled the Voluntary National Review report on implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs). I referred it to the Committee on Presidential Affairs because the Minister for General Duties, who is the focal person on the SDGs, is based in the Office of the Prime Minister. However, the SDGs contain 17 goals and 169 targets, which are cross-cutting. They cover a broad range of issues including ending poverty and hunger, improving health and education, making cities more sustainable, combating climate change and protecting rivers and forests. Therefore, it will be best if all the sectoral committees considered the part of the report which reviews their area of concern, its goals and targets.

I am, therefore, instructing the Clerk to ensure that each of the committees receives the voluntary review, takes time off to study their sector, and then the reports will be presented in plenary. I am also asking the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline to examine how we can structure reporting of the SDGs in our work.

Secondly, honourable members, tomorrow, 26 June 2020, will be 75 years since the Charter of the United Nations was signed in San Francisco, California. The United Nations was considered as an avenue of saving succeeding generations from the scourge of war. The United Nations Charter calls for the UN to maintain international peace and security, promote social progress and better standards of lives, strengthening international law and promoting human rights.

The values and goals of the Charter are as relevant today as they were 75 years ago. The anniversary provides us an opportunity to take stock, both of the successes and lessons learnt in the implementation over the last decades as well as to look ahead and examine how best to collectively overcome scourges and future challenges.

On behalf of Parliament, I would like to congratulate the United Nations system, the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP), the Resident Representative in Uganda and all other UN country directors and staff on the 75th anniversary of the UN. We shall provide time on the Order Paper to move a motion to celebrate the 75th anniversary of the Charter.

At the same time, honourable members, you are aware that Uganda is an active member of the Inter-Parliamentary Union (IPU). The IPU was formed 131 years ago, on 30 June 1889, by a number of parliamentarians as the first political multilateral organisation in the world, encouraging cooperation and dialogue between all nations.

On Tuesday, 30 June 2020, the IPU and the parliamentary committee will celebrate the third edition of the International Day of Parliamentarianism and the anniversary of the foundation of the IPU. That day will be an opportunity for the IPU and its members to reinforce the message that the world needs parliaments more than ever before to put in place legislations, the budgets, to respond to the health and economic crises, to protect vulnerable people, scrutinise Government action and help build back after the COVID-19 pandemic. Therefore, I am also informing the IPU delegation that we shall have an opportunity to have a motion for a resolution on that item.

Honourable members, I continue to receive petitions from citizens. This morning, I received a petition from the students of the Law Development Centre (LDC). You may recall that earlier last week, hon. Okupa raised a complaint about online examinations. The students were here this morning and clarified that they were not doing exams but they were studying online, and that each Bar Course student is required, as a condition of admission, to have a laptop, and that each of them is given an email address of the LDC. They also said that they have been paperless over the last four years. 

So, the delegation, which was led by the guild president and the students’ advisor, are seeking the support of this House to allow them to continue with their studies, like any others, which are going on. I would like to urge the Minister for Education and Sports to examine that and lift the ban that had been put on the online classes.

The second petition, honourable members, was from the entertainment industry. These are owners of the legit clubs, restaurants, bars and entertainment associations. They are undergoing the same hardships in the industry as a result of the abrupt closure of their facilities. The industry has a multiplier effect on the economy through the use of boda bodas, special hire taxis, maters of ceremonies (MCs), deejays, comedians, musicians, bouncers, etc. Therefore, it is a big industry. 

They are requesting the Minister of Health to permit them to present a proposal on standard operating procedures that would enable them to operate but also ensure good health. Otherwise, they are being crushed by debts and by their inability to sustain themselves and their staff.

The third petition is again from the boda boda industry. I mentioned that on Tuesday this week. Now they have gone further to say that the difference between them and the cars is that the boda bodas are ridden in the open air and therefore they are more hygienic. Also, they only carry one passenger and they are prepared to use their helmets and masks. They are asking the Government to consider them for resumption. Again, I will ask the Minister for Works and Transport to take into account these issues.

I also would like to ask the chairperson of the national task force to look into the issues of the entertainment industry because they are in quite a bit of problems.

Honourable members, I will be altering the Order Paper to permit a report from the Committee on Information, Communication Technology (ICT) and National Guidance. You may recall that the Minister of ICT and National Guidance laid here a series of regulations and in particular the Uganda Communications (Fees and Fines) (Amendment) Regulations, 2020. The House is required to consider them or revoke them within 30 days of their issuance. The 30 days end on Saturday, which will not be a working day. That is why I am allowing a report from the Committee on ICT to be included on the Order Paper, so that we can hear from them and see how to handle those regulations.

Finally, honourable members, you will recall that early this year, a petition was brought to my office by the Omugerere of Bugerere, that is, the Saza Chief of Bugerere, concerning the depletion of forests in Kayunga District. On 17 June 2020, hon. Idah Nantaba, MP for Kayunga District, again raised the issue. This House instructed the Minister of Water and Environment to visit the locus and report back to the House.

Yesterday, the minister presented a statement to the House highlighting that the matter was under consideration by court and that court had set aside the injunctions on the suit property, arising out of Miscellaneous Application No. 0005 of 2020 between National Forestry Authority (NFA) and Badru Semuga, consequently allowing the defendant to use the suit property and lead to termination of the main suit.

However, hon. Nantaba informed this House that as a consequence, the defendants are now using tractors and earthmoving equipment to grade beyond the area occupied by the defendant and beyond the suit property. She further informed the House that some of these tractors belong to Government, mainly the Ministry of Works and Transport and the National Agricultural Advisory Services (NAADS). 

I have, therefore, instructed General Counsel to Parliament to establish from court the import of the ruling - whether the ruling of the court ordered the defendants to use the entire central forest reserve, which covers an area of 2,147 hectares, for the sole purpose of Mr Semuga; secondly, to find out whether the deputy registrar’s report on the locus visit indicates that the entire 2,147 hectares has no growing trees and therefore, requires no protection from court.

In the meantime, I urge the parties involved in this matter, especially NFA, to be more vigilant and follow up in court on the allegations that the activities complained about are beyond the scope of the ruling of the court. Further, the allegations of use of Government property in the disputed land, if true, is a contravention of the Public Service Standing Orders. The Minister of Works and Transport and the Executive Director of NAADS should urgently investigate and take disciplinary action against the officers involved in this matter and report back to Parliament. 

Honourable members, because of the urgency of what is happening, we require a report on Tuesday next week at 2.00 p.m. Thank you very much.

There were two matters of national concern. Hon. Okupa and hon. Noah Wanzala, use two minutes each.

2.50
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Serere): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance regarding the violation of the rights of an individual called Odong Simon Peter, who hails from Soroti and is a staff member of the Internal Security Organisation (ISO).

This week on Monday, the wife of Simon Peter Odong and his sister came to my office to report a matter regarding Simon Peter Odong. Their report is that on 4 May 2020, some men came at night to look for where Simon Peter Odong stays. They pretended that they had brought food from the village. However, they did not find the place.

On 5 May 2020, at 8.00 a.m., they again came back and inquired from the guards, who directed them to the house of Simon Peter Odong in Kirinya. They managed to enter the compound and found him standing in the sitting room with his young son of six years old. The men pointed a pistol at Simon Peter in the presence of the young boy and shot his left leg. He tried to ask them what they were up to but they did not listen. When he requested them to allow him call this boss, the Director-General of ISO, Mr Kaka, they did not allow him.

Madam Speaker, in the process, Simon Peter collapsed and lay down in a pool of blood. They ordered his wife to administer first aid and they carried him away. One of them remained behind and at gunpoint asked the wife to clean the blood in the house because they knew Mr Kaka was on the way coming. When Mr Kaka came, they told him to leave and go back. This team comprised of people dressed in uniform and civilian clothes and they directed the Director-General of ISO to leave.

At about 2.00 p.m., the same group went back to Simon Peter Odong’s house. They were led by Assistant Superintendent of Police (ASP) Ayebare Benon from Kireka. They searched the house and, in the process, they picked the following items: two laptops, one drone, four phones, and Shs 4 million in 20,000 notes. They report that ASP Ayebare Benon put a gun behind the fridge and started claiming that it had been found in the house. They were even forcing Simon Peter’s wife to agree that the gun was found in the house.

When Simon Peter’s wife reported the case to Kirinya Police Station, the Officer in Charge (OC) of the station chased her and refused to take her statement; he told her to go to Kibuli. 

Madam Speaker, Simon Peter’s wife is called Kiiza Annet. She did not know where Simon Peter was taken. However, on 5 May 2020, his sister received information that he was in the Iran-Uganda Hospital at Naguru. Ms Annet Kiiza went to the hospital together with his sister, and that was the time when there was already curfew. Upon arrival at the hospital, they requested to see a patient by the names of Simon Peter Odong and the nurse established that the said patient was in the VIP room. 

As they went to the VIP room, they were stopped by some men who told them that they were ordered to stop people from accessing Simon Peter Odong. They were told that if they needed to see him, they should speak to some people. When they asked them whether they could leave for him a change of clothes, they refused. The plain-clothed young man who was guarding the room said that he could not allow them to leave the clothes because of COVID-19. 

Simon Peter Odong’s sister then called the Director-General of ISO to assist them so that they could access their brother and give him a change of clothes. The plain-clothed gentlemen also got on their phone and communicated to someone whose name they cannot remember. 

Eventually, they were told to open their bags and they picked out the clothes, toothpaste, a toothbrush and test strips for testing blood sugar because Simon Peter is diabetic. The plain-clothed man asked them to leave their contacts behind so that they could call them. They left their contacts and left the hospital. However, on their way, as they approached Bugolobi, they received a call from a service provider at the hospital informing them that the security personnel had removed Simon Peter Odong from the Iran-Uganda Hospital.

On the 7th of May, they got information that Odong had been rushed to Bombo Military Hospital. However, due to lack of public transport, they could not go to Bombo. After contacting some people about the whereabouts of Mr Odong, between 14th and 19th of May they managed to track Odong at the Chieftaincy of Military Intelligence (CMI) in Mbuya and then at Makindye Military Police Barracks. They saw him briefly and he had wounds. Later, they tracked him back to Mbuya Military Hospital, where they again saw him on the 19th and he had two wounds on his lower limbs. He was on oxygen and no one was allowed to see him. They decided to go to court. 

The family and friends got some lawyers to present the issue in court. The judge ruled that Simon Peter Odong be given access to his personal doctor, legal support and to his family. However, the legal team and his personal doctor have been denied access to Simon Peter Odong to date.

Madam Speaker, we have heard that Odong is in Bombo Military Hospital but in a very terrible condition. This morning, again, his wife and sister contacted me. Even the people who had been trying to help them at Bombo Barracks have now pulled out. He is on the verge of dying. He has a rotten leg. They said, “Please, ask Parliament to help us access our son, our brother and husband.” 

What is it that Odong has done? They have only heard, through some sources, that His Excellency the President had given Simon Peter Odong an assignment to investigate a senior General in the army and he produced a report, which was submitted to His Excellency. However, they have arrested him because they want him to change the statement and say that the statement was concocted.

Madam Speaker, they are appealing to this House, they are appealing to you and they are appealing to His Excellency to come to their rescue. They have tried to reach out to the President but they have failed. Madam Speaker, they are appealing to you and to this House to help the family. They have tried all avenues, including court, but they have failed even to access Simon Peter Odong. This is the plight of this family. 

I am happy the Minister of Defence and Veteran Affairs is also here. This matter must be taken seriously. Human rights lawyers like Nicholas Opiyo have tried to help the family to access him but it has become difficult. Even the few senior officers who have been trying to help have now shied away. What is the crime that Simon Peter Odong committed that he deserves this type of torture? Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable member, for raising an issue of human rights of a citizen. I am glad the Minister of Defence and Veteran Affairs is here. I do not know whether he has taken the details. Have you written them down? Commit yourself on the podium.

3.00
THE MINISTER OF DEFENCE AND VETERAN AFFAIRS (Mr Adolf Mwesige): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank hon. Okupa for raising this issue. The story he has highlighted is very complex and long, highlighting the facts under which Simon Peter Odong was subjected.

I would like to undertake, Madam Speaker, that as soon as I leave this House, I am going to ask the army leadership to investigate this matter. I appeal to hon. Okupa to give me the contacts of the family, so that at least we can take immediate steps for the family to access Simon Peter Odong. Therefore, I undertake to investigate and come back to this House and give an informed report.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable minister.

3.01
MR NOAH MUTEBI (NRM, Nakasongola County, Nakasongola): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance from my constituency, Nakasongola.

Nakasongola District has experienced a fishing holiday for the period of three years, whereby the Uganda Peoples Defence Forces (UPDF) took over Lake Kyoga. Operations have been taking place and a number of boats have been destroyed on that lake.

Madam Speaker, the UPDF and the Ministry of Health came up with guidelines. They registered all fishermen who are supposed to go back to the lake when they plan to open the lake to fishing. The registration and vetting of people to be licensed was supposed to be done jointly by UPDF marines, technical staff and local leadership but it was done by UPDF alone.

Secondly, Madam Speaker, the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries allocated a ceiling of 1,733 boats to be allocated to all landing sites in Nakasongola. However, only 700 boats have been allocated and the reserve was left with the UPDF. We hear that UPDF are planning to give them out on the black market.

Madam Speaker, there is also another plan by UPDF and Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries concerning boat construction. Since the other boats were demolished, they are constructing new boats that are fit to be on the lake. The construction is being handled by UPDF but our local contractors can also construct these boats. The UPDF is constructing these boats at a cost of Shs 1.7 million, when in actual sense, the local contractors at our place can construct these boats at a cost of Shs 1.2 million. The fishermen are asking where the Shs 500,000 is going. They are asking why cheat them when they have not been working for a period of three years.

Madam Speaker, there are also a number of illegalities taking place on Lake Kyoga. They detained people at the barracks in Kawongo without trying them in courts of law, and they release them when they wish. One of the culprits was released after paying a ransom of 100 jerricans of petrol, which they claimed were used to arrest him. 

Also, when I was moving around to see the impact of floods on Lake Kyoga, I met four young boys who had been brought back from Kawongo. They were arrested around Irima and Kasambya landing sites in Nakasongola but they were released, having paid Shs 250,000. They narrated their story; they said that they left other boys languishing that side because they had no money, and they were being used as casual labourers because they had no money. 

My humble prayers are: One, that the local boats builders are allowed to make these boats for the people of Nakasongola at a cheaper price; secondly, the entire allocation of boats be given to the people of Nakasongola as planned by the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries. Also, let the people of Nakasongola be compensated for their boats which were destroyed by UPDF. Lastly, my humble prayer is that Government opens up this lake, so that people can go back and do fishing, because it is the main activity which they used to do. I beg to submit, Madam Speaker. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, the Minister of Defence and Veteran Affairs is here. I hope you have taken note of the complaints concerning the UPDF. We would also like the Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries to come and clarify on the manufacture of the boats and how the local people will be participating in that, and when the lake will be officially opened. 

3.06
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (FISHERIES) (Ms Hellen Adoa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I met my colleague about two weeks ago and he raised the same concerns to me. I have written to your office to give me two weeks.

First, I will be in Nakasongola, looking at some of these issues he has raised. Also, on the issue of boats, it was agreed that the boats be made in a uniform way because if we allow everyone to construct a boat, they will not be uniform. 

Before the building of boats took place, the fishermen were contacted and they agreed with the contractors that they would be charged Shs 1,700,000 and if a person had their own timber, they would pay Shs 350,000 for labour. So, the price charged in Nakasongola is the same price charged in Buyende, Serere and Amolatar. However, today when I met the woman Member of Parliament for Amolatar, she told me the contractors now charge them Shs 2 million and that surprised me. For that matter, I will be in Amolatar District on 15 July 2020. 

Madam Speaker, on registration, by the time I was appointed the Minister of State for Fisheries, the Fisheries Protection Unit was already registering fishermen. The aim is to reduce the number of landing sites because they were so many with too many fishermen going onto the lake. On Lake Kyoga, for example, the recommended number of boats is 11,000, but Amolatar Landing Site alone had 37,000 boats. This means if we are to have 37,000 boats on the lake and we allow over 100,000, then we will not keep any fish in that lake. 

The opening of Lake Kyoga was going to be on 1 July 2020, but because of the rising water levels in the lake, most of the landing sites have been closed. In two weeks’ time, we hope Lake Kyoga will be opened –

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Oyet, what is your issue? 

MR OYET: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a procedural matter. The minister just made a commitment a few minutes ago that she be given two weeks to come with a statement. When she got to the podium, however, she straightaway started presenting a statement. Should we take it that this is the official statement that she is going to repeat to us after two weeks? Is it procedurally right?

MS ADOA: Madam Speaker, I think my colleague did not get me well. I said – maybe to give him some background – that when I was appointed the minister in charge of the fisheries docket, I needed to familiarise myself with issues to do with lakes and some of the major landing sites. That is what I have been doing. I have written to the Office of the Speaker to inform them that I will not be in Parliament for the next two weeks because I need to visit the other lakes too. Maybe that is what I needed to clarify to my colleague. It will be in those two weeks that I will visit Nakasongola and Lake Kyoga generally because I want to reach those places. I have only been this side of Lake Victoria. 

We are going to open Lake Kyoga. It has delayed because of the rising water levels, the delay in the boat making and the organisation of the fishermen. The purpose of making uniform boats is because we want to put number plates on them. We also want to designate different colours per district in order to monitor fishermen’s activities.

Lastly, Madam Speaker, the honourable Lt Col (Rtd) Bright Rwamirama was authorised to head the investigation into the issues of the beating and detention of the fishermen. We have been investigating the issue but COVID-19 interfered with the minister’s regular consultations with State House. Otherwise, we would have already presented our report to the President, and we would have brought the same report to Parliament.

So - 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I do not know what the investigations are about because on the Hansard of this House, there have been so many reports of impounded motor vehicles and boats. There is nothing to investigate, really, because we have all the information here. You just need to take a position on whether to hand over the things back to the owners or not. The confiscation is well known. 

MR JOHNSON MUYANJA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like the minister to be very clear. Is this arrangement of building boats selective, because in our area it is not there? It is not happening everywhere. When the minister comes up with a statement mentioning a few areas, I wonder whether we are not part of the islanders or the people on the lakes. Is this a different programme that is catering for a few Ugandans while leaving others out? 

MS ADOA: Madam Speaker, Lake Kyoga has been on a holiday and it is still on holiday. Lake Victoria is not on a holiday because activities there are going on. The making of the boats is basically for Lake Kyoga. The making of boats for Lake Victoria has been ongoing. For Lake Kyoga, we needed to destroy the small boats and make new ones, which are size 28. You are thinking we are not making boats in your areas, but this is a programme for Lake Kyoga. 

Madam Speaker, it is true there are a lot of complaints about the Fisheries Protection Unit. We also know that stopping illegal fishing on the lakes is another thing altogether. I would like to promise that I will talk to my colleague, Lt Col (Rtd) Rwamirama, who headed the investigation, and ask him to give us a feedback in two weeks’ time. Thank you.

3.15
MR PATRICK NSAMBA (NRM, Kassanda County North, Kassanda): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national concern regarding the status of our learning institutions, specifically the Government-aided primary and secondary schools. 

After the schools were locked down, like many other institutions, issues concerning maintaining of those schools are catching up with us. The last time the schools were swept and compounds slashed and cleared was in March. If one visited the different primary and secondary schools around the country, they would find that most of them now have bushes. Many schools have been reporting cases of vandalism. Desks and other school equipment have been vandalised.

There is a social media forum for head teachers, where a picture of anthills building up in classrooms has been making rounds. I tried to consult some of the head teachers, especially the ones in Kassanda County North, and they told me they have Universal Secondary Education (USE) and Universal Primary Education (UPE) funds on their accounts, but they are not allowed to use the money. 

Madam Speaker, most schools do not have security apparatus and so there is no way a head teacher can maintain the school property. My prayer is that the Minister of Education and Sports allows the head teachers to appropriately utilize the available funds, at least to ensure that schools are well maintained under the lockdown. Otherwise, it is shameful when you visit some of our schools.

My second prayer is that the ministry should come up with a comprehensive plan. What if COVID-19 takes another two years? What if the period for resuming schools takes longer? What will happen to our schools? I pray that the Ministry of Education and Sports comes up with a comprehensive school maintenance plan so that our schools are in good condition until we send back our children. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the Minister of Education and Sports is required to take an interest in the state of the schools, especially now that there are no people there and there is no security, no cleaning and no cutting of grass. Let the ministry see whether the funds that would have been used for other activities, which are not going on because the children are not there, can be used to service the schools. I request the minister to come back next week and let us know so that - Is the minister here?

MR SSEWUNGU: Madam Speaker, that is the same guidance that I was seeking from you. From your communication, you talked about petitioners and among them is the Law Development Centre where I am one of the students. Indeed, when we left your office together with our team, a majority of them were thinking that we shall resume online classes on Monday.

Therefore, I request that the minister gives us assurance on when he is going to report back. As hon. Nsamba has stated, we cannot keep in this form. If we are going to study online, then we should start; otherwise, there must be communication from Government on when we can continue learning, me inclusive. Therefore, my prayer is that the minister comes and informs us. 

The issue of schools is very important, as the honourable member has stated. Guidelines come from the Ministry of Education and Sports and not from Parliament. They should come out and help us. Otherwise, what is happening in schools is very terrible and Members can bear witness. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

3.20
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (SPORTS) (Mr Denis Obua): Madam Speaker, there are now two issues to be responded to by the Minister of Education and Sports. On the issue of clarity on Law Development Centre (LDC), we acknowledge receipt of a copy of a petition from the Bar Course students of LDC that was submitted to you. This petition falls within our broader dream of e-learning. I would like to state that we are not only looking at LDC; the ministry is looking at universities and other higher institutions of learning.

Madam Speaker, the ministry has already directed the National Council for Higher Education, which is mandated to provide quality assurance - We are saying that in principle, the Ministry of Education and Sports supports e-learning. However, in order to ensure quality for all students and learners in universities and other higher institutions of learning, the ministry has directed the National Council for Higher Education and we are waiting to receive and discuss their report on e-learning generally.

Madam Speaker, we are told the National Council for Higher Education is sitting on Monday and their report will contain the guidelines. Once this report is submitted, - of course the Ministry of Education and Sports is part and parcel of Cabinet - this will be a policy issue that requires the blessing of Cabinet.

Madam Speaker -

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, the Law Development Centre is the Law Development Centre; it is just one. There are no other law development centres in this country. It is a unique institution and they told me that they have been doing online courses. It is a requirement for every student to come with a laptop and they have got LDC email addresses. I do not think that they are really part of the arrangement for the other universities. It is just LDC.

MR SSEWUNGU: I have some clarification. Honourable minister, since you are going to carry out that programme, LDC can be used as a case study. If they have been moving on with online teaching, can’t you use them as a case study for enrichment of what you are going to do?

In education, we learn from others and imitation is very useful. Therefore, if they are already in high gear, can you take interest in them, find out what they have been doing and enrich other institutions so that you get a better position? I will be here to give you support in that matter as well. Thank you, honourable minister.

MR OKUPA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Honourable minister, I tend to agree with you because we need uniformity. However, within the LDC, there are those who are on the Bar Course and others on diploma. The Guild President of LDC comes from the Bar Course and the vice comes from the diploma class. The diploma class is also complaining and asking how can they only consider the Bar Course and leave out the diploma group.

Honourable minister, we need a standard because there was a ban from the President. I think the Minister of Education and Sports needs to come with a policy that encompasses everybody. Even within LDC, there is division between the Guild President and Deputy Guild President of LDC because they represent two different groups. What is this you are talking about? Is it for both or for one?

MR OBUA: Madam Speaker, I stated that in order to ensure quality and when you unpack the word “quality” - I also stated that the petition is only signed by the Bar Course students. We know that LDC runs two major courses, among others - the Bar Course and the diploma course.

Madam Speaker, we do not want to run into the risk of only allowing one course. We want to holistically look at the subject of e-learning during the lockdown of COVID-19 because we run the risk of allowing Bar Course students to proceed and then tomorrow you will receive another petition from the diploma students. All of them are finalists at LDC. In the circumstances, we have agreed that let the regulator of these institutions passed by this Parliament - the National Council for Higher Education - guide us in coming up with guidelines that will guide all these institutions.

Madam Speaker, for LDC, it is only the Bar Course. The diploma students are also waiting and once it is granted, your office will receive another petition from them. We are requesting that you give us a minimum of two weeks. We believe that the report and the guidelines will be out. The top management of the Ministry of Education and Sports will discuss it.

We will also need a blessing of Cabinet because this falls under policy. Under the Constitution, policies are matters of Cabinet. We must seek the blessing of Cabinet and then pronounce ourselves.

That said, I know that to every dark cloud is a silver lining. We are discussing e-learning because there is a dark cloud called COVID. The silver lining is that we have the opportunity to explore e-learning especially for our institutions of higher learning.

Therefore, I plead with this Parliament to give the ministry time such that we do not handle one institution or a course. For the Law Development Centre (LDC), that will be one course, another course tomorrow and another university the other day. Why don’t we handle all institutions wholly and we say, “This is the way to go during the COVID period, which has come with disadvantages and advantages for our education sector?” I pray for a minimum of two weeks.

Secondly, on the issue raised by my dear brother and friend, for even Ministries, Departments and Agencies (MDAs) of Government, they were guided that we need to re-align our budget to fight COVID.

In re-aligning budgets, I believe that Parliament as an institution had not planned to have tents for Parliament to sit. However, because COVID came in, we re-aligned our internal budget. We are now hiring these tents.

I strongly believe that in all these schools, according to my brother and friend the honourable member, the schools are saying they have the resources. Why wouldn’t they re-align these resources at their disposal? Even at the ministry, we had to re-align. 

I believe that the situation we are witnessing is unprecedented. How much does it cost to slash the whole compound of a school? I think it is less than Shs 50,000. Do you need the permission of the ministry?

I believe these are part and parcel of what offices can receive under imprest for purposes of managing such urgent matters. I do not see any problem as long as they follow procedures. They sit with the School Management Committees (SMCs), Parent Teachers Associations (PTA) or Board of Governors and everything is fully minuted, if the resources are available. 

I do not think anyone would question a school for allocating Shs 50,000 for slashing a compound or Shs 30,000 to remove an anthill. 

I would like to pray that these schools, in my opinion would proceed and record. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: I do not know what the Auditor-General would say about that. Anyway, let us proceed. There is something more before we go to item three.

Our members on the Committee on Health had gone on a health assessment visit to Buvuma Islands. Buvuma has over 20 islands. They survived a boat accident.
These are:
    1.  Hon. Dr Bukenya, the Chairperson of the Committee on Health;
    2. Hon. Beatrice Rwakimari, Member of the committee;
    3. Hon. Nantume Egunyu, Member of the committee and also the host Member of Parliament;
    4. Hon. Migadde Ndugwa, a Member of Parliament and host of the team.

We thank God for their safety. I would like to ask the Minister for Works and Transport - We have talked so much about water transport. The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should provide the money for water transport. The situation is serious.

LAYING OF PAPERS

    I) PROPOSAL FOR GOVERNMENT TO GUARANTEE UGANDA DEVELOPMENT BANK LIMITED BORROW USD 16.0 MILLION FROM THE EUROPEAN INVESTMENT BANK, USD 10.0 MILLION FROM INTERNATIONAL ISLAMIC TRADE FINANCE CORPORATION, USD 20.0 MILLION FROM OPEC FUND FOR INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT AND USD 20.0 FROM THE ARAB BANK FOR ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT IN AFRICA

3.32
The Minister of State for Finance, Planning and Economic Development (Planning) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay a Proposal by Government to guarantee Uganda Development Bank Limited to borrow $16 million from the European Investment Bank, $10 million from the International Islamic Trade Finance Corporation, $20 million from the OPEC Fund for International Development and $20 million from the Arab Bank for Economic Development in Africa. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, it is sent to the Committee on National Economy for perusal and report back.


    II) PROPOSAL TO BORROW A LOAN OF KUWAIT DINARS 6.0 MILLION (US$ 19.8M) FROM THE KUWAIT FUND FOR ARAB ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (KFAED)

3.33
The Minister of State for Finance, Planning and Economic Development (Planning) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay a Government proposal to borrow up to $19.8 million from the Kuwait Fund for Arab Economic Development (KFAED) to support the programme of operation for the Financial Year 2020/2024 for the Uganda Development Bank.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, it is sent to the Committee on National Economy for perusal and report back.


    III) THE CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE FOR THE ANNUAL BUDGET 2019/2020 TO NDPII

3.34
The Minister of State for Finance, Planning and Economic Development (Planning) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay the Certificate of Compliance for the Annual Budget 2019/2020 by the National Planning Authority. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I send it to the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development for perusal and report back.


    IV) SUPPLEMENTARY EXPENDITURE OF SHS 1 BILLION FOR THE ANTI-TICK VACCINE DEVELOPMENT INITIATIVE AND SHS 14.18 BILLION FOR LOCUSTS CONTROL IN FY 2019/2020

3.35
The Minister of State for Finance, Planning and Economic Development (Planning) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, we request that we lay that document next week.

THE SPEAKER: For item 3(V), hon. Achia is not here. Are commissioners here? Comm. Mwijukye, can you lay the annual report of the Commission of Parliament?


VI) ANNUAL REPORT – PARLIAMENTARY COMMISSION FOR FINANCIAL YEAR 2018/2019

3.36
The parliamentary Commissioner (Mr Francis Mwijukye): Madam Speaker, I wish to lay the Annual Report for the Parliamentary Commission for Financial Year 2018/2019. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, it is sent to the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs for perusal and report back.

Commissioner Mwijukye, can I also ask you to lay the one for - are you the one laying it?

Ms ogwal: Madam Speaker, for the last two weeks, there has been an item appearing on the Order Paper every day. It so happens that whenever it comes, the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development would conveniently be absent from the House.

Now that the minister is conveniently available for the purpose of laying on the Table papers for loans, I would wish that you request him to explain to us the reason for delay in paying the traders who are demanding their money for having traded in South Sudan.

Now that he is here, it is important that we take that opportunity. If we wait for this item to come under item 5, there would be no Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development in the House because they would have already completed their most urgent item, which is the loan. I beg to be guided.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, we are handling item 3 and almost getting to item 5. Commissioner Hon. Mwijukye, can you lay the Pension Fund report?

PARLIAMENTARY PENSION SCHEME BI-ANNUAL REPORT FOR THE PERIOD ENDED DECEMBER 31, 2019

3.38
The parliamentary Commissioner (Mr Francis Mwijukye): Madam Speaker, I wish to lay the biannual report for the Pension Scheme for the period ended 31 December 2019. I wish to lay. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, it is sent to the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs for perusal and report back. 

PRESENTATION OF A PETITION OVER THE CLOSURE OF ETOP WEEKLY NEWSPAPER
THE SPEAKER: Hon. Abala? 


MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON FAILURE BY GOVERNMENT TO PAY UGANDAN TRADERS IN SOUTH SUDAN AS RESOLVED BY PARLIAMENT AND MONEY ACCORDINGLY APPROPRIATED IN THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2019/2020

3.40
THE MINISTER of STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I seek your guidance because last time, you had directed that hon. Matia Kasaija comes to make a statement on this issue. I do not know whether you will allow me to do that now. 

THE SPEAKER: What we want are the answers. Why have you not paid? That is what we want to hear; whether you make the statement or hon. Matia Kasaija, we want answers.

MR BAHATI: Yes, this is because last time that is what you had ruled. However, Madam Speaker, it is true that Parliament appropriated Shs 76 billion to pay the South Sudan verified companies. Last week, we received a communication from the Attorney-General saying that the said companies have gone to court. 
I do not think that it will now be possible to clear those resources in the one day remaining. We are now in court and that is one of the challenges for that payment. 
THE SPEAKER: No, what is the issue in court? This matter has been on the Order Paper since April. This is a strategy to avoid paying; is that why you have sent people to court? Minister, please be serious. 

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, these people have gone to court because Government has not paid them, despite Parliament appropriating money. Government is now going to lose more money because businessmen are going to win the case and then we find ourselves doing double payment. Does the minister see that the country is going to lose more money because of their failure to fulfil and pay these businessmen? 

Last time, we were here and hon. Bahati said that his senior minister must answer those things. I do not know what has happened today; whether he is still served by that position. This is because his senior minister has eluded us and kept dodging to come here and respond. Last time, he had given a disclaimer that his senior colleague was the one who had said that he should be the one to answer. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I am not satisfied that you have a good reason for not giving us an answer. 

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, the last time we were here, you had directed that the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, who is the head of treasury, comes here to conclusively answer this question because it has been raised over and again. 

As I said, we appropriated Shs 76 billion but we have internal challenges which I think we seek an –(Interruption) 

MS ADONG: Madam Speaker, I seek clarification from the minister. It was the Minister of State for Finance, Planning and Economic Development that brought, before Parliament, a request of Shs 76 billion to have these traders paid. What happened along the way? Were you not ready? How do you bring a request for something you are not aware of? 
After granting you permission and giving you the money, you started dillydallying saying you do not know the people. What exactly happened and yet you went ahead and paid some traders and you are hesitating to pay others? Can you clarify to this House? 

MR KIBALYA: Madam Speaker, we need to save this nation. I think it is high time we stopped playing games here. We have information that within the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, between the ministers, there is a battle. They have refused to pay simply because they have information that some people are beneficiaries. Given that some people are beneficiaries, they do not want others to benefit. It is the information we have. 

Madam Speaker, we request you to use your Office irrespective of what the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development does. Hon. Matia Kasaija, the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, should come in person and tell the nation why he has not signed those papers and why he is refusing to clear this payment once and for all. 

Otherwise, everybody will come here, tell stories, go to court and so forth. Madam Speaker, the problem is just there. Let hon. Matia Kasaija come here; tell the nation the reasons he has refused to sign. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think we need the minister to understand that this issue is serious. Consequently, we shall not process any more work from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development until the minister has come and explained why he has not paid the South Sudan traders. Let us proceed with other business. 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE STATUS OF WETLANDS IN UGANDA
3.46
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WATER AND ENVIRONMENT (ENVIRONMENT) (MS Beatrice Anywar): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity. I refer to the motion posed during the Ninth Sitting of the Third Meeting of the Fourth Session of the Tenth Parliament of Uganda held on Wednesday, 5 February 2020, when you directed me to prepare and present a national action plan to wetland management outlining the comprehensive status of wetlands, their location, the current status and the list of cancelled titles in the wetlands. 

I would like to respond as follows: 
Uganda is well endowed with a lot of natural resources in form of forests, wetlands, wildlife reserves and water resources – 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, did you circulate your paper? 

MS ANYWAR: Madam Speaker, I sent it yesterday to the Clerk to be uploaded on the iPad.

THE SPEAKER: Is it there? Okay, proceed. 

MS ANYWAR: Thank you, Madam Speaker. 
I was stating that Uganda is well endowed with a lot of natural resources in form of forests, wetlands, wildlife reserves and water resources. Wetlands are prerequisites for social and economic development, as they provide incomes and employment for over 4.4 mi11ion Ugandans in both the formal and informal sectors. 
It is also estimated that approximately 5 million people in rural areas get their daily fresh water supply from wetlands and the economic values are estimated at US$ 25 million per year. 
However, these natural resources have come under a lot of pressure due to the increasing human population and weak enforcement of the laws on wetlands. 

This has caused serious consequences including prolonged droughts and the drying up of water sources as a result of the degradation of the catchment areas. 

Madam Speaker, wetland cover in Uganda has reduced tremendously. For instance, in 1994 the wetland coverage was 15.5 per cent of Uganda's land cover. By 2016, wetland coverage had reduced to only 8.9 per cent and it was projected to reduce further by 2019. 

The rate of loss and degradation of wetlands is accelerating in all regions of the country and not matching up with the wetland restoration targets and resources. 

Country wide, wetland coverage dropped from 37,346.3 Square kilometres, in 1994 (15.5 per cent), to 21,526.3 Square Kilometers, which is 8.9 per cent of the total national surface area. If this trend is not reversed by the deliberate and dedicated restoration programmes countrywide, we shall be left with only 1.6 per cent by 2040, which is unacceptable. 

Madam Speaker, 46 per cent of wetlands in eastern Uganda have been degraded in the last 25 years. Degradation levels in the central and western regions stood at 29 per cent and 28 per cent respectively. This wetland degradation has been majorly due to expansion of subsistence agriculture, industrial developments and settlements. 

In terms of districts, Mbale District has the most degraded wetlands in Uganda, with 99 per cent of its wetlands being under threat while Ntoroko has the most intact with 98 per cent of its wetlands still surviving.
 
If the rampant degradation is not halted, the country is likely to have all its wetlands degraded by 2040 and members know the implication of this to the nation. 

Cancellation of wetland titles
 Cabinet under Minute 114 (CT 2014) approved the cancellation of land titles issued on land in wetlands and public land acquired unlawfully after 1995, as one of the measures to address the problem of wetland degradation. It also directed the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development to commence cancellation as soon as the wetlands atlas is in place, starting with those within Kampala. 

Furthermore, Cabinet, under Minute 268 (CT 2015) approved the criteria and operational procedures developed by the Policy Committee on Environment (PCE) for handling cancellation of land titles. 
Cabinet also approved the road map for the cancellation of titles issued in wetlands and the restoration of degraded wetlands under Minute 223 (CT 2017). 

The Ministry of Water and Environment, with support from United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP) and United Nations Development Programme (UNDP-Uganda), produced a national wetland atlas and a cartographic atlas for Kampala Metropolitan area, Mukono and Wakiso. 

The atlases depicted a series of maps, aerial images, photographs and narrative on the state of wetlands in the aforementioned districts. 

The Policy Committee on Environment (PCE) in line with the Cabinet's decision, developed, mapped and updated the list of 600 affected land titles in the wetlands in Mukono, Kampala and Wakiso districts. 

It also established that the total area of wetlands degraded in Kampala, Wakiso and Mukono is 479.48 hectares out of which 104.24 hectares are vanquished wetlands; the ones whose ecological function is totally lost. 

The Ministry of Water and Environment was tasked to mobilize and sensitize the affected stakeholders on the process and the implication and has already sensitised selected stakeholders in Wakiso District Local Government on the process and criteria used for cancelling titles. 

The process began with political leaders, technical officers, members of land boards and real estate developers among others. Similar workshops would have been conducted in Mukono and Kampala district local governments had it not been for the emergence of Covid-19. 
The Ministry of Water and Environment and NEMA compiled and verified all titles issued in wetlands in Wakiso, Kampala and Mukono districts. 

A total of 300 titles have so far been cancelled by the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development, in wetlands in Wakiso, Kampala and Mukono. Cancellation is now expanding to cover the entire country and we thank the Lands Ministry for cancelling the ones mentioned.

Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development is now integrating wetland shape files into the National Lands Information System to aid the process of cancellation, country wide. 

The National Action Plan to Wetland Management 
The ministry has conducted inventory and assessment to determine the location, composition, land use and tenure bordering wetlands which culminated into the development of a national and district inventory report with the corresponding hotspots for restoration. 

My ministry is reviewing the National Wetlands Policy and developing a Wetland Resource Bill in order to address the challenges and issues of wetland management. 

I plan to table amendments to the National Wetlands Policy, and present the Wetlands Conservation and Management Bill to Cabinet; it should have been by April but it will be soon if the COVID-19 situation allows. 

A national wetlands restoration programme has been developed whereby 10,263.6 hectares of degraded wetlands have been restored within the NDP II. A total of 105,800 hectares of wetlands are targeted for restoration countrywide in the next five years of NDP III. 

These interventions are anticipated to help the ministry realise the targeted 9.57 per cent coverage of wetlands in Uganda by 2025 under NDP III. However, more funds to a tune of Shs 900 billion are required to restore wetlands to the desired 13 per cent coverage by 2030.

My ministry is continuing with demarcation of the wetland boundaries countrywide. So far, we have managed to restore 1,728.5 kilometres; awareness raising on the importance of these vital resources is a continuous activity. Focus remains on creating better understanding of the values of wetlands, the need to comply with the existing laws and desisting from further encroachment on these wetlands.

The ministry and local governments continue to get funding totalling only Shs 3 billion annually to support the restoration and management of degraded sections of wetlands, which is insufficient. The money is very little. This is why the intervention of this House will be much appreciated.

My ministry has started implementing 50 community based wetlands livelihood enhancement investment plans targeting installation of 50 mini-solar powered irrigation equipment and reservoirs as well as the implementation of the livelihood income generation enterprises to benefit 50,500 households bordering the wetlands.

My ministry’s Environment Protection Police Unit has established a joint compliance monitoring and enforcement task force that have intensified surveillance in Kampala, Wakiso and Mukono where there is reported increase in degradation.

Challenges
    i. Inadequate funding. The local governments, which are the custodians of the wetlands, are severely underfunded. As mentioned earlier, Shs 3 billion shared with the ministry and the local governments is really too little. 
    ii. Land tenure and contradicting policies. It is difficult to protect and conserve wetlands on mailo or private land. There is therefore need to provide appropriate incentives to communities. This has indeed worked in Limoto Wetland, Pallisa District where the communities bordering the wetlands are benefiting from the livelihood support initiatives, which include provision of water for agriculture through the solar powered irrigation system and fish farming.
    iii. Lack of a wetland specific law with punitive actions to support monitoring and enforcement of the legal regimes. A Bill is in the offing. 
    iv. Weak and compromised enforcement and impunity towards the law.

In conclusion, I would like to request the Speaker and this House to- 
    (a) note the critical importance of wetlands to national development and the environment;
    (b) note the urgent need to increase funding to the wetlands sector in order to facilitate my ministry and local governments to effectively execute their mandate;
    (c) note the need for political support at all levels, including the honourable members in this house. His Excellency the President has clearly given out a directive on this matter.  Therefore, I would like to request colleagues that we join His Excellency to implement rather than politicising the action of protecting our environment;
    (d) support the Wetlands Bill when it comes before the house.

As I conclude, I would like to draw the attention of this House to the copies of the cancelled titles in the wetlands, which I have been talking about. They are attached to the document and you can look at it. We are actually looking forward to cancelling more of those titles. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable minister. The other day, I informed Government that if there is any urgent business, it should come before August. I do not know whether you will be able to meet that, in view of the election roadmap. Hon. Migadde, hon. Angelline and hon. Majegere. Each two minutes.

4.03
MR ROBERT MIGADDE (NRM, Buvuma Islands County, Buvuma): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I welcome the presentation by the Minister of Water and Environment. However, two weeks ago, I raised an issue here concerning the same docket. 

The ministry has issued directives to all local governments to evict people who are situated within 200 meters of the lake reserve. I quoted the National Environmental Management Act, 2019, which stipulates that a protected area, as per the lake, means land not more than 100 metres adjacent to the border of the lake.

Madam Speaker, the letters issued by the ministry, as per the 200 metres - In fact, in some areas, people are already being evicted. Out of the 52 islands, only seven of them will be inhabited by people because the others are in the 200 metres directive. Now that the Minister of Water and Environment is here, I would like to know under which law they are evicting people within the 200 metres when the law talks of 100 metres? That is the clarification I would like to get from the minister.

4.05
MS ANGELINE OSEGGE (FDC, Woman Representative, Soroti): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I appreciate the minister for the statement. I think it is a step in the right direction and it has been long overdue.

Madam Speaker, I have a bit of concern. I am glad to hear that there are projects that have been developed in the wetlands for the wanainchi. However, my worry is that Government is very hard on those people upcountry - in the villages. In Kampala, big shots are erecting permanent buildings on wetlands and nothing is being done about it. After cancelling of titles where there is a permanent building, what does the ministry hope to do? We hope to see seriousness by the ministry demolishing these structures so that repeated action will not be done - (Interruption)

MR SSEWUNGU: Thank you, honourable member, for giving way. Madam Speaker, the two Ministers of Lands and Environment are telling lies to this House because they have no powers to cancel titles unless they have gone to court. This is actually one of the serious issues they are raising, which is not correct. Let them be specific. Have they gone to court or not? 

A minister has no powers to cancel titles, unless we shall be having endless litigation. That is the information I wanted to give.

MS OSEGGE: Thank you very much, honourable colleague. My last point, Madam Speaker, is that much as these projects – I personally passed through that Pallisa route, Olumot swamp; they call it Limoto. You will not be surprised to find that those projects are standing. They are in the name of the people around but yet owned.

THE SPEAKER: I would hope not. You know, it is something which – Honourable members, His Excellency the President wants me and some of you to go to visit Limoto. So I hope it is a Government project.

4.07
MR WAIRA MAJEGERE (Independent, Bunya County East, Mayuge): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am one of those people who feel bad when I see these wetlands being wasted away. I do not know whether the minister tried to compare her notes with the President’s notes.

When the President was making his State of the Nation Address, he said that do not cancel factories which are already in the wetlands. He said that you can only block those new ones but not cancelling the old ones. I heard him in clear language.

If a President is saying that those factories already in the wetlands should stay how are you, the minister, going to implement what you are telling us right now?

Secondly, if the titles, like hon. Ssewungu has said, were issued by a Government entity and it is a Government entity cancelling, who is going to meet the damages legally? You need to tell us.
Thirdly, like my colleague hon. Osegge has said, wetlands are here in Kampala; in Kyambogo, Natete, everywhere but your ministry leaves these wetlands here, as if they are not seeing them. They then drive in their double cabins and go upcountry and leave these wetlands here. 

You need to, first of all, rectify Kampala, Mukono and Wakiso. On the Entebbe Expressway, you see so many buildings in a clear wetland but you are leaving these rich people; you are going to attack our voters. First handle Kampala and we appreciate that. Thank you.

4.09
MR KENNETH LUBOGO (NRM, Bulamogi County, Kaliro): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Honourable minister, thank you for the statement you have given to the nation. 

Madam Speaker, I would like to remind the minister of the action that was being taken, immediately after the President made a statement on reclaiming the wetlands. People woke up; they rose up and went and started demarcating these wetlands anyhow. 

The question that I am trying to get answers for is what really is a wetland? In my place in Kaliro District, these people were moving to any form of a depression. Wherever there is kind of a depression, they would go there and say, “This is a wetland”. Is that what amounts to a wetland?

Honourable minister, you have told us that there are no atlases, indicating where the wetlands are. So, what is the basis? How are these people really going on executing this mandate? Fine; they were restrained a bit but they had already planted some of these things in people’s land.

Madam Speaker, these people were doing this work so haphazardly, that in my place, they would look for a particular type of grass. If they find that that grass is within that area, they say, “This is a wetland”. 

I do not expect this to be done with Government. You must have clear directions, showing the stretch of the wetland probably from the centre of a known wetland. You cannot just go everywhere and start taking up people’s land and calling it a wetland.

Finally, we need very clear guidelines to show what the wetlands are. I want the minister to know that there are people in our villages there who will have nothing at all left for them. They will have nowhere to settle if they –(Member timed out)

4.11
MR JOHNSON SSENYONGA (NRM, Mukono County South, Mukono): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for the statement. However, there is one challenge. When you talk of 200 metres, it should be on the shores of the lake or wetland. However, there are islands. For example, when you come to my constituency and talk of Koome, those 38 small islands; you cannot mention them to consider the 200 metres, unless you are clearing them off and relocating them somewhere else.

Secondly, Madam Speaker, the minister should know that when these factories are being established where they are – the so-called wetlands – they have approved plans from local governments. The only way you can either dismantle them or cancel their titles is through court and heavily compensated.
There is connivance. These people do those things very fast. They approve a plan and there is no way you can come and say, “I am just going to remove this factory without compensation”. So, let the Government be more prepared when they are handling this.

That is why I am sure His Excellency was talking of first leaving the already established factories because they have approved plans, either from KCCA or from those municipalities. To approve a plan, you must have a title first. Some of the titles the minister is talking about are old titles of 1958. So, there is no way you are going to say that is a forged title of 1958.

Therefore, let us think of compensating those people before we either cancel them, demolish or chase them away. Even relocating them –(Member timed out)

4.13
MR STEPHEN KANGWAGYE (NRM, Bukanga County, Isingiro): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for the statement. A few years back, NEMA went ahead and totally evicted so many people who were living near the lake and rivers. However, I do not know what their intention was.

After doing that, they again went back and used the same land that those people used to stay on, even without compensating them. Many of those people who were evicted had land titles but it is very dangerous. The very people who were evicted were not compensated and the officials who evicted them continued using that very land.

Honourable minister, I wanted to know from you. Who are those people? Who gives them those powers? Which plans do you have for them, so that you are able to see how best you are going to show them that they are not the very people using what Government has said they should not stay in that very area? 

I thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity.

4.15
MR AMOS LUGOLOOBI (NRM, Ntenjeru County North, Kayunga): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I think we have a very serious problem with the institutions charged with responsibility of regulating these water resources. Either they are so weak or they are not bothered because they know where these wetlands are. 

I am particularly referring to the ones around Kampala. They know where the wetlands are and they are simply here. NEMA is here; the ministry is in Luzira. People start backfilling all these wetlands for construction of these factories under their nose and they are watching. We have really failed to understand where the problem is.

One time in our committee, we interrogated NEMA about this and they said, “We are very limited in terms of staffing.” Remember that year, about two years ago, we provided additional resources to NEMA hoping that the situation would change, but nothing changed. So, I think this is deliberate and unless we come up very seriously, nobody is going to rescue this country from the dilemma we are in. 

The wetlands are going, and the authorities are there watching. You wonder what they are doing. You know, they are not authoritative enough to stop these people. It is a very serious problem, Madam Speaker, and we should not take this matter lightly. The authority is unbothered. We have been talking about the National Tree Planting Day, and money had been provided for it but nothing has happened. 

These problems look like nobody is bothered. Maybe the new minister will be able to put some energy into this –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. 

4.17
MR ALEX BURUNDO (NRM, Bulambuli County, Bulambuli): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Thank you, honourable minister, for giving that statement. As we are seated here debating about wetlands, if you just go some few metres away from here, just around Nakawa, you will see the mafias are busy degrading the environment. They are eating away on the wetlands around Kampala and other places. It is like we are just trying to dramatize around while outside there, the mafias are laughing at us. As we continue making statements, they are busy carrying out constructions especially of petrol stations. Even now, they are busy constructing as we are talking. They are seeing us; they are listening and they are unbothered. Nobody is bothered.

In fact, to me, I feel we should come up with clear, concrete measures to curb the encroachment on wetlands especially here in Kampala. I heard the minister said that because of COVID-19, the workshops, seminars and other activities cannot go on. She said nothing can go on unless COVID-19 ends and things get alright so that they can stop these encroachers. 

Madam Speaker, I will borrow some words of one of the historians, Otto Von Bismarck, who said, “The great questions of the day will not be decided by speeches and the resolutions of majorities” — that was the great mistake from 1848 to 1849 — “but by blood and iron.”  The issues of wetlands, if we continue talking and lamenting about them, honestly, we shall talk until the sun sets. Therefore, in my concluding remarks, I – (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Naggayi – I have called hon. Naggayi -
MS BETTY AOL: Madam Speaker -

THE SPEAKER: We are with hon. Naggayi.

4.20
MS NABILAH NAGGAYI SSEMPALA (FDC, Woman Representative, Kampala): Madam Speaker, thank you for the opportunity. I want to thank the minister for presenting the environmental degradation report. I would like to also comment on the issue of Kampala where all villages have been built in wetlands; not just individual homes. We have whole villages with LC1s and they are in wetlands like Katoggo in Ggaba near Munyonyo. Everyone sees that place on Munyonyo Road. With the rising water, all homes are submerged and they are now internally displaced refugees from the wetland area. 

As we speak, there are individuals who are now taking over the same wetland; they are backfilling the place as we speak now. As the small individual dwellings are being submerged, the big shots are busy backfilling. Lorries after lorries of murram are being poured in the wetlands. 

So, Madam Speaker, like my colleagues have said, we need to be truthful because workshops are not the ones occupying the wetlands. Our LC1s, LC2s and the parishes are willing to know what to do, but the big shots, like I said, are the ones using the small individuals in the communities as buffers to occupy wetlands so that when they are evicted, they can rebuild.

Madam Minister, I would like you to walk the talk. If we are talking about evictions, we should know. The maps should be sent out to our divisions so that everyone who is in wetlands can identify themselves. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

4.22
MS ANN MARIA NANKABIRWA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kyankwanzi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for the zeal, as usual, in wetlands. However, we need to also be genuine. How are wetlands formed? Wetlands evolve. There is regular flooding in some areas as a result of the climate change which we are experiencing; that is the geology. Then, a new wetland will be formed. This is somebody’s land with a title, and a new wetland has evolved on it. How are you going to consider such a situation? Are you going to take somebody’s land without compensation? In your plan, we need to include such considerations in wetlands.

Secondly, we have an atlas for wetlands as formed in the 1995 Constitution. It is that Constitution that paved the regulation for wetlands. It had not been there before. Land tenure systems, land Acts and ownership of land had been there before. We need to harmonise all these. 

Finally, on regulation, it does not mean that I do not need to use the wetland, but how you regulate the use of the wetlands is what matters. That is where we are faulting the regulator. I can carry out any activities on wetlands as far as it is mentioned in the Acts and it is regulated. That is where we are faulting the ministry, and that is where the ministry must come in. Somebody can build on a wetland, provided he is regulated, guided, monitored and assessed. Thank you.

4.24
MR JAMES KABERUKA (NRM, Kinkiizi County West, Kanungu): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity. I would like to thank the minister for presenting the report. I also would like to applaud her for taking a step forward. However, as my colleagues have put it, it is not good that the people in the villages should be the ones targeted first. I am a teacher; I know you teach from known to unknown. The known people who are misusing wetlands are in our backyard here; but you would rather drive double cabin pick-ups and Prados to the villages of Kanungu.

Madam Speaker, last week, the residents in Rushaka informed me that there were unknown people who were evicting them. When you go along these roads, people are constructing in wetlands, and yet they are being bypassed by the officials as they go to target the people of Kanungu.

I think it is proper that the minister should first clear the backyard here, and then we move forward. We should clear these messes first to make them examples. NEMA’s offices and the ministry’s offices are here in Kampala. We should not move faster to go and attack the villagers as if they are the only targets for wetlands misuse. 

I salute you, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Olanya, and then the Leader of the Opposition.

4.26
MR GILBERT OLANYA (FDC, Kilak South County, Amuru): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The Minister of Water and Environment should clearly define what a wetland is. What is happening currently seems that the ministry is not aware of what they call wetlands.

The case in point is: I remember His Excellency the President explained to Ugandans that currently, we have a very high level of water whereby Lake Victoria, Lake Kyoga among others, where water levels have risen extremely high. Currently, very many places are flooded. If you move through Lango sub region, especially around Lake Kyoga, you will notice that about three villages have been flooded. 

Around Kampala, the ministry is chasing people away from places that have been flooded. For example, this morning, people of Kirombe A and B in Luzira were in running battles with the police that went there to evict them. Yet the community explains that since 1964, water has never been in their area. This is a common problem. However, there are other greedy people who are trying to utilise the opportunity, on seeing that a particular area has flooded, to start claiming that that place is a wetland.

Madam Speaker, I feel this is causing terrible problems in this country. One cannot go on claiming villages and villages. All those people who live – (Member time out.)

4.28
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (MS Betty Aol): Madam Speaker, thank you very much, for the opportunity. I would like to thank the honourable minister for presenting very well. However, I would like to observe that she has an uphill task in this country. When we talk about wetlands, the most vulnerable are the swampy areas and we all know that swampy areas are homes for water. If we destroy the swamps, that is when we have problems of flooding yet, it is this swampy area that clean up our water that we always say we have fresh water. How can we talk about fresh water when we are clearing the swamps?

Honourable minister, I would like to tell you that wetland is just one aspect but another area one is the forest land. We know that all this wetland cover is going down day by day and it is by the rich; those who do a lot of things with a lot of impunity. They do not care. They are the ones that have money and have ways of filling the wetland and swampy areas.

However, I hope that now that you are in Government, you will talk to your boss, the President about giving wetlands to foreigners. As you move to Gulu, around Luweero, you see that that wetland was given to Chinese. You chase away our people but give it to the foreigners.  We are non-citizens in other countries but in our country, we should be treated as first class citizens.

Therefore, prioritisation should be to the nationals and not foreigners. Anything, which is denied to the nationals should never be given to the foreigners. This is what I can say but you have a very difficult task because the wetlands are reducing in size as well as the forest cover. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we are not required to take a decision and the debate will end there. The minister has heard our comments and I hope that she will address the issues we have raised but if the Bill is coming, please, bring it.

REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON INFORMATION, COMMUNICATIONS TECHNOLOGY AND NATIONAL GUIDANCE ON THE PETITION BY INTERNET SERVICE PROVIDERS ASSOCIATION OF UGANDA AGAINST THE UGANDA COMMUNICATIONS FEES AND FINES (AMENDMENT) REGULATIONS 2020

4.32
MR PAUL AMORU (NRM, Dokolo North County, Dokolo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am here to present a report of the Committee on Information Communication Technology and National Guidance on then petition by the internet service providers association of Uganda against the Uganda Communications (Fees and Fines) (Amendment) Regulations, 2020.

Introduction
Madam Speaker, this is report of the Committee on Information and Communications Technology and National Guidance on then Petition by the Internet Service Providers Association of Uganda herein referred to as “the petitioners” against the Uganda Communications (Fees and Fines) (Amendment) Regulations 2020.

The committee considered the petition and now reports. The petition was presented to the Speaker on 4 June 2020, who referred it to the committee in accordance with Article 90 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, 1995 and Rule 34 (6) of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament.

Background 
On 28 May 2020, the Minister of State for Information and Communications Technology and National Guidance laid on Table, a set of 21 regulations under the Uganda Communications Act, 2013. The list of the regulations is attached as Appendix A.

Madam Speaker, under section 93 (1) of the Act, “The minister may, after consultation with the Commission and with the approval of Parliament by Statutory Instrument, make regulations for better carrying into effect of the provisions of the Act.” It is important to highlight the chronology of development with regard to the regulations that have provided premise for this petition. 

On 3 November 2017, the Uganda Communications Commission (UCC) gazetted fees, which are the fees application of the Public Infrastructure Provider License and the Public Service Provider License, which were set at $30,000 and $10,000 respectively per annum. In this regime, the petitioners were not prohibited from having both the NPIP and NPSP license simultaneously. The combined fees for both licenses were, therefore, $40,000 per annum.

Madam Speaker, in April 2019, UCC issued a consultative paper on the proposed review of the licensing framework that was being proposed. According to the consultation paper, the objectives of the review were as follows;
a)To ease market entry to increase competition and consumer choice in the telecommunication sector;
b) To enhance quality of service provision in the sector;
c) To promote innovation and investment in the telecommunication sector;
d) To increase broadband rollout;
e) To increase local ownership in the telecommunication sector and hence reduce capital flight;
f) To reduce the cost of investment in ICT infrastructure and create efficiencies in the use of scarce resources;
g) To promote a seamless transition from the existing framework into the new framework.

Madam Speaker, on 8 November 2019, the Uganda Communications (Fees and Fines) Regulations, 2019 S.I no.95 of 2019 were gazetted. Under these regulations, the fees structure for the telecom sector was determined basing on the licensing framework that had been developed, which sought to set fees for the respective license categories depending on whether the license was for infrastructure or public services at national or regional levels. 

Further, the fees for the NPIP and NPSP licences were each at $ 300,000. When the regulations were gazetted, the petitioners raised several concerns to the Commission and the minister who then authorised the Commission to review the fees. Uganda Communications Commission revised the fees, which were passed in the Uganda Communications (Fees and Fines) (Amendment) Regulations, S.I no.66 of 2020. 

Both these regulations were laid on 28 May 2O2O by the Minister of State for Information, Communication and Technology and National Guidance.

Madam Speaker, I now move to the substance of the petition.

On 4 June 2O2O, the Internet Service Providers Association of Uganda (ISPAU) petitioned the Parliament of Uganda against the Uganda Communications (Fees and Fines) (Amendment) Regulations, 2020, one of the regulations that were laid before Parliament on the 28 May 2O2O.

The petitioners contend that:
a)The fees charged by the impugned regulations were prohibitive to the internet service providers sub sector and only favour Mobile Network Operators (MNOs) and the National Telecom Operators (NTOs). This is because according to the petitioners, the said regulations require that for an internet service provider to remain in business with its current National License, they have to apply for the National Telecom Operators Licence and pay the prohibitive figure of $ 21,300,000 currently being paid by the Mobile Network Operators and National Telecom Operators. 

The petitioners contend that the internet service provider sub sector lacks the financial muscle of the MNOs and NTOs who serve more than 20 million customers in total compared to the 16,800 clients serviced by the internet service providers.

b) The impugned regulations have the effect of cancelling half of the businesses of the petitioners by outlawing the holding of two licences. 

The regulations specify that the internet service providers cannot hold two licences, that is the National Public Infrastructure License and the National Public Service Provider (NPSP) License yet the internet service providers have been holding two licences under the regime currently in force.

c)The impugned regulations increase the Annual Licence Fees for the NPSP licence from $ 10,000 to $ 86,000. This is an increment of 860 per cent. 

The National Public Service Provider Licence is being raised from $ 30,000 to $ 86,030, an increment of 186 per cent. 

The petitioners contend that these high charges are likely to plunge the internet service providers into loss given the high cost of doing business and the high competition they presently face from the large Mobile Network Operators.

The petitioners made the following prayers:
a)That Parliament requires the minister to amend the regulations to create a category for internet service providers in the licensing regime that caters for both National Public Service Providers and National Public Infrastructure Service Provider licences and non-prohibitive fees are sufficiently charged for the created category;
b)That an increment in license fees be postponed to the Financial Year 202l/2022 to allow the sub-sector businesses to recover from the downturn of the COVID-19 pandemic and the resultant lockdown that has led to loss of revenues by approximately 73 per cent through cancellations, suspensions and downgrades;
c)That the matter be handled urgently as there are only a few days left before the start of the Financial Year 2020/2021.  

Madam Speaker, the committee used the following methodology - 

THE SPEAKER: You can skip that. Members will read.

MR AMORU: There is a section on communication licensing in Uganda, which is a paragraph. I could go through it.

The licensing of communication services in Uganda is governed by a number of regulations that were made in 2005 and 2006, complemented by other regulations added over the years. 

The major service providers in the sector were licensed 20 years ago and since then, the ICT sector has witnessed tremendous technological and business advancements like convergence of technology and evolution of value added services. 

The existing licensing framework is designed in such a way that the licensee can run the infrastructure; network services and content applications under the same license. This is known as vertical integration. This has resulted in lack of transparency in the cost of services delivered, revenues declared and has also made it hard for service providers to share infrastructure. 

This results in market entry barriers for new entrants and leads to unfair and a non-competitive environment because service providers compete on infrastructure. 

This has also resulted in capital flight and outsourcing services that would otherwise be provided by Ugandans.

The current licensing regime for telecommunications service providers falls short of critical regulatory issues that operators need to adhere to as part of their quality of service obligations and enabling of broadband penetration.

Madam Speaker, I now go to the observations and recommendations of the committee.

In the course of our hearings and after reviewing a number of literature, the committee concluded that the fees in the impugned regulations are prohibitive to the petitioners and would lead to the termination of half of the Petitioners' businesses, which investments the petitioners and other internet service providers have built over the past. 

This, in the opinion of the committee, would have the unwanted effect of lowering the penetration of ICT services in the country. 
This also, would not be in favour of promoting "connectivity for all" which is one of the key objectives of the National Broadband Policy.

In the course of the committee meetings with the Petitioners, Uganda Communications Commission and the Ministry of ICT and National Guidance, it was stated that there was still room to reach an agreeable position. 

The Ministry of ICT and National Guidance then asked the committee to allow them hold further meetings for purposes of coming to a common ground. Accordingly, the committee resolved to allow the parties go into negotiations and inform the committee in time.

The committee was later able to receive a formal communication from the petitioners, the Ministry of ICT and National Guidance and the Uganda Communications Commission indicating that they had agreed on an amicable way forward.

Madam Speaker, the minister, to that effect, wrote to you indicating that the parties had reached an agreement and committed to review the licencing framework and revise the fees. The letter of the minister is hereto attached marked Appendix 8.

In this light, therefore, the committee made the following recommendations: 
    1. That the Minister of Information and Communications Technology and National Guidance withdraws the Uganda Communications (Fees and Fines) Regulations S.I No. 94 of 20l9 and the Uganda Communications (Fees and Fines) (Amendment) Regulations S.I No. 66 of 2020 that were laid before Parliament on 28 May, 2020.
    2. That the Minister of ICT and National and National Guidance should lay before Parliament new regulations reflecting a favourable licencing framework and fees, as agreed in the consent document.

Finally, Madam Speaker, I would like to report to you that the committee was very pleased with the bold decision of the minister and UCC as well as their ability to work with Parliament and your office to listen to these petitions that always come to you and devise a workable and progressive way forward that helps everybody to work together to achieve the desired growth. Therefore, honourable Minister of ICT and your colleague the Minister of State and UCC, we commend you for that.  

Madam Speaker, we would also like to thank you very much because this petition came and we had to handle it within two weeks. With your support and guidance, we have been able to reach this destination. We would like to thank you very much.

I also thank the members of the committee who had to spare time, partly, during the recess to take part in these hearings. This said, I beg to move that this report be adopted.

I would also like to lay on Table the report of the committee, the minutes of the hearings we had and other relevant documents that we relied on to arrive at this decision. 

Madam Speaker, I beg to lay. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable chairperson and the members of the committee. I would just like some clarification about the signatures.

MR AMORU: On the report? 

THE SPEAKER: Yes. 

MR AMORU: Madam Speaker, we were able to secure the required number of signatures from Members.

THE SPEAKER: Okay. Honourable members, I would like to thank the committee, first, for their vigilance and also the speed at which they worked. Hon. Amoru, I think you have gone with the report of the committee. Please, lay it on Table. 

MR AMORU: Madam Speaker, the signed ones have been uploaded on the iPads.

THE SPEAKER: Okay. Honourable members, do we really need to debate this? Our committee has done a good job. 


4.52
MR SILAS AOGON (Independent, Kumi Municipality, Kumi): Madam Speaker, first, allow me to thank the committee chairperson and the entire team. They did a good job.

However, I would like to make one observation. Usually, when you make an increment, for instance, in a tax or fee, beyond 100 per cent from nowhere, it indicates a very huge reaction. The committee has been silent about this. What was the reaction about? This is because 860 per cent increment is such a huge increment to the extent that you intended to switch off that business. What was the issue? 

I think it indicates one thing; there is no clear criterion that UCC and the related bodies used to come up with the fees, charges and taxes within the sector. This has to be taken seriously, Madam Speaker. 

It is timely that this has been brought at a time when we have COVID-19. World over, we are now depending on the internet and so, we must be able to stay our emotions and make sure that we give the internet service providers an opportunity to grow the business because we are going to rely on them. 

Even the current elections that we are going for – if we are going for – are partly going to be based on the internet. How are we going to do away with the internet, if we are going to just ignore them? 

I hope this time around, when you come back, you will tell Parliament how you arrived at certain figures. Taxes are not about just negotiation with the tax payers; even fees. If you are telling me to pay and then you first have to negotiate with me, will you be able to negotiate with everybody on a daily basis? There must be standard criteria. Madam Speaker, that is my major concern. I thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: May be, the sector minister will explain the circumstances.

4.55
MR MUYANJA MBABAALI (NRM, Bukoto County South, Lwengo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Honourable members, my concern lies with the drop of calls. I wonder whether the committee noted with serious concerns regarding the drop of calls because once a call has been made and dropped off, the charges remain the same. I wonder whether the committee observed that. 

In case any license falls due for renewal, it should not be renewed until we apply the Local Content Bill, which we just passed. Probably, the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development will bear me witness. These are the biggest companies where Uganda is experiencing flight capital out of Uganda. Therefore, we should be very careful in making reductions unless we consider other factors behind. I beg to rest my case.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that the report of the Committee on Information, Communication Technology and National Guidance be approved.

(Question put and agreed to.)
Report adopted.
4.56
THE MINISTER OF INFORMATION AND COMMUNICATIONS TECHNOLOGY AND NATIONAL GUIDANCE (Ms Judith Nabakooba): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to thank you in a special way for steering the House but also thank the Chairperson of the committee for enabling us move this far.

I associate myself with the report of the committee because we met and they also allowed us time to negotiate with the petitioners.

What has been talked about is going to be handled. The chairperson of the committee talked about withdrawing the regulation. However, I request that you allow us withdraw the schedule on fees and fines, especially that section to do with the PSPs and PIPs we will be ready in a week to lay that schedule again.

Then, on the issue of how the fees and the fines are set, I will get the guidelines from Uganda Communications Commission, then I will be in position probably to report to this august House. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much.  Can I invite the Chairperson of the Committee on Budget? May be, before the chairperson comes in - I am only allowing this because our committee had already done the work. 

REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON BUDGET IN THE SUPPLEMENTARY EXPENDITURE SCHEDULE NO. 3 AND ADDENDUM TO SCHEDULE 3 FOR FINANCIAL YEAR 2019/2020

4.59
THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE COMMITTEE ON BUDGET (Mr Amos Lugoloobi): Thank you, Madam Speaker for giving me this special opportunity to present this report. It is a report of the Committee on Budget in the Supplementary Expenditure Schedule No. 3, which was laid last week and the addendum to that schedule for Financial Year 2019/2020.

This report is presented in two parts. Part A presents the Methodology, Legal Framework, Status of Compliance and Preliminary Observations Part B presents the proposed Supplementary Estimates under Schedule No. 3 and Addendum to Schedule 3 for Uganda Police Force the Financial Year 2019/2020; Observations and Recommendations.

In the interest of time, I am not presenting Part A because Members are very familiar with the legal framework and the usual methodology that we follow.

It only suffices that we met over 11 institutions of Government concerning this supplementary and the list is on page 2 and 3.

In Part B, which is on page 4, the proposed additional supplementary request that require prior Parliamentary approval under schedule No.3. In fact, the entire schedule requires prior approval before money can be spent. 

In this presentation we are discussing: 
a)Vote 003 - Office of the Prime Minister, Shs 45 billion 
b)Vote 008 - Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development (Uganda Development Bank), Shs 455.18 billion 
c)Vote 008 - Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development (Microfinance Support Centre), Shs 50 billion 
d)Vote 018 - Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries, Shs 10 billion;
e)Vote 015 - Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives on behalf of UDC and others, Shs 100 billion; 
f)Vote 23 - Ministry of Science and Technology, Shs 17.18 billion 
g)Vote 141 - Uganda Revenue Authority, Shs 45.67 billion; 
h)Vote 145 Uganda Prison Services, Shs 10.78 billion; 
i)Vote 144- Uganda Police Force (Addendum), Shs 41.69 billion;
j) Vote 126 - National Technology Authority – we shall get the figure later;
k) Domestic Arrears - Various Votes including UCDA, Shs 223 billion

 In 5.1, we discuss the justification for the proposed funding and we shall start with the Office of the Prime Minister.

The committee was informed that Shs 45 billion is required to address the impact of the rising water levels and floods including support for social services infrastructure.
 
The committee was further informed that an Inter-ministerial Committee was established to assess the impact of rising water levels in the short-term, medium term and long term.

The ministries involved include Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development; Ministry of Water and Environment; Ministry of Energy, Office of the Prime Minister, NEMA, UNMA, Ministry of ICT and National Forest Authority. 

Each of the ministries has identified key actions needed to address the challenges. Key interventions include demarcation of protected zones, emergency repairs to water treatment plants, repair of infrastructure, relocation and support to affected communities, monitoring and surveillance of operations, etcetera.

The committee recommends that a total of Shs 45.00 billion be approved and supplied to Vote 003: Office of the Prime Minister to coordinate and finance the interventions between the various agencies involved. 

Vote 008 - Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development on behalf of (Uganda Development Bank) Shs 455.18 billion. The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development requested for Shs 455.18 billion as a transfer to the Uganda Development Bank to support the private sector that has adversely been affected by the COVID-19 pandemic. 
In addition, these funds will support the implementation of the Import Substitution Strategy thus helping to address the unfavourable negative trade balance the country currently experiences. 

The committee recommends approval of Shs 455.18 billion for the capitalization of the Uganda Development Bank so that manufacturers and other investors can access affordable and friendly long-term credit.

Vote 008 - Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, Microfinance Support Centre (MSC) with Shs 50 billion.

The committee was informed that with the onset of COVID-19 MSC had witnessed a sharp decline in the operating capital of SACCOs, Village Savings and Loan Associations (VSLAs) due to reduced savings owing to the lockdown. This situation will mean less engagement in economic activities. 

Provision of affordable credit through the MSC is the best alternative to mitigate the negative impact of COVID-I9 and ensure continuity of the business activities severely affected. It is also important to note that the MSC services are regionally spread throughout the country and go right to the common man.

The committee recommends approval of Shs 50 billion for the MSC to offer affordable credit to SACCOs and other groups.

Vote 014 - Ministry of Health – Shs 89 billion
The Ministry of Health requested an additional Shs 89 billion towards funding requirements for dealing with the COVID-19 pandemic. The committee was informed that the funds are for the items that we have listed in Table 1. For each item, we have provided justification and amount of money proposed. In the interest of time, I propose that Members read all this material in their spare time. The committee recommends that that provision of Shs 89 billion is made to the Ministry of Health.

Vote 018 - Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industries and Fisheries – Shs 10 billion
 
The committee noted that Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries requested for an additional Shs l0 billion to enhance households' capacity for food security, including provision of inputs and support to the e-voucher system. We have listed the various interventions this money intends to facilitate as follows:
a)The e-Voucher Agro-input Subsidy Scheme
b)Rehabilitation of Road Chokes; and
c)Desilting valley dams, valley tanks and fish ponds.

The committee, therefore, recommends that Shs 10 billion be approved for this intervention under vote 018 for Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries.

Vote 015 - Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives for the benefit of Uganda Development Cooperatives, Shs 100 billion.

The committee was informed that Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives requested for additional Shs 100 billion for the Uganda Development Corporation to invest in businesses that will be adversely affected by the COVID-19 Pandemic. Please, note that the negative effects COVID-l9 to business have been outlined at page 9. 

Some opportunities have arisen from COVID-19, which Uganda Development Cooperatives would like to take advantage of, for the continuity of the existing businesses and new investments to boost the economy. The following are some enterprises where UDC intends to intervene:

a)Mutuma Commercial Agency
In order to substitute what is being imported, there is need to increase the production capacity of surgical cotton by the company. This is considered essential in health care facilities and also to diversity into production of other products such as medical gauze, gloves and sanitary towels. UDC will invest in this undertaking in a partnership.

b)Processing of Cassava into industrial starch (for pharmaceutical, textile and food industry and ethanol

Uganda still imports many products that can be processed from cassava as listed above. Investment in this area in partnership with the private sector in Acholi Bur, Pader Catholic Arch Diocese and Bagadia Group and Bukona Agro-processors Ltd, will result in employment creation along the value chain, foreign exchange savings and improvement in the livelihood of the communities as they will have already market for their produce.

c)Manufacture of beverages - Yumbe Mango Factory
Uganda imports a lot of juices despite the existence of the required raw materials. The proposed Yumbe Mango Factory, which is at completion stage is expected to tap into this opportunity and save the country foreign exchange amounting to $ 50 million.

d)Manufacture of veterinary medicines and vaccines
This will be done in partnership with Alfasan and Brentec Investment Limited for animals and poultry drugs and vaccines. Due to the failure of imported vaccines to address the key local strains of the disease agents, investment in this area is expected to address this problem but also lead to a reduction in foreign exchange outflows.

e)Budadiri Arabica Coffee Ltd
Uganda Development Corporation is to increase on the amount of foreign exchange earned by the country from the export of unprocessed coffee by partnering with this company to revamp the business.

f)Mabale Tea Factory
In order to scale up the country's foreign exchange earnings from the tea industry, UDC is investing in this company.

g)Grain storage and cereal processing
Uganda Development Corporation is to set up a food city complex by Molino that will receive, store, process and pack grain staples like maize, rice and wheat for both human and animal consumption or animal feeds. The investment will provide a ready market for small holder farmers, and thereby stimulate increased production.

Total investment required for the identified investment Opportunities under UDC is estimated at Shs 130.2 billion. However, a provision has been made of Shs 100 billion.  

The eligibility criteria UDC uses include -
a)Preliminary review of the proposed investment;
b)Commercial, legal and financial due diligence on the promoters;
c)Investment appraisal of the proposed investment;
d)Board approval of the investments.

The committee, therefore, recommends that Shs 100 billion be approved for UDC to invest in the proposed enterprises.
Vote 23 - Ministry of Science, Technology and Innovations,  Shs 17.18 billion.
The committee was informed that the Ministry of Science Technology and Innovation requested for this money to support scientists and innovators in COVID-19 interventions.

The committee was further informed that Government took the decision to fund a number of interventions by innovators categorised into different thematic areas of devices including ventilators, 3D printed face shield like masks and personal protection equipment in the fight against COVID-l9 as illustrated below. So, table three, gives us the details of the innovators who are going to be supported and the amount of resources required for the research and production of those products.

Madam Speaker, for the benefit of time, I am not going into the details of that. Otherwise, all the details are presented in a table in pages 11 and 12.

The committee recommends that Shs 17.18 billion be provided for support to scientists and innovators, as outlined above.

Vote 126 - National Information Technology Authority, Uganda commonly called NITA-U, with Shs 44.67 billion. This request is to cater for external financing for implementation of the Regional Communications Infrastructure Programme. The funds requested are to cater for the outstanding and projected obligations in the missing links and last mile connectivity and contract obligations under the project.

The overall objective of the project is to transform public service delivery in Uganda using ICT in order to improve the lives of Ugandans. 

The project beneficiaries shall include:
    i) Citizens and businesses across Uganda who will access more affordable internet and e-services, particularly as the prices of the internet drop and more public services become available through on-line means as a result of this project interventions.
ii) Government Ministries, Departments and Agencies (MDAs) and local Governments to benefit from improved quality and lower cost of connectivity with improved efficiency of day-to-day operations through use of electronic platforms and communications. The committee recommends the approval of Shs 44.67 billion to NITA-U.

Vote 141 - Uganda Revenue Authority, Shs 45.67 billion
Uganda Revenue Authority requested for additional Shs 45.67 billion to cater for outstanding payment to SICPA Uganda Limited to facilitate the implementation of the digital tax stamps for the Financial Year 2019/2020.

The committee held a meeting with URA (the new Executive Director and his team) but felt that the matter required more time to examine various issues relating to the law, the costs involved, increase in revenue as a result of this intervention and other associated issues. The House is reminded that a similar request presented before was rejected. 

Vote 145 - Uganda Prison Services, Shs 10.78 billion
The Prisons Authority requested for an additional Shs 10.78 billion to cater for costs arising out of the increasing numbers of prisoners and as a result of contravening measures, which were put in place to control COVID-19. 

In addition, there are quite a number of challenges related to feeding and ensuring compliance to all standard operating procedures of COVID-19 within the prisons. The requirements include providing blankets, masks and medical supplies. The table below provides a breakdown of the budgets requested. There is a detailed analysis of the expenditure.

The committee recommends that Shs 10.78 billion be provided to Uganda Prisons for that intervention.

Vote 144 - Uganda Police Force. This comes under Schedule 3 Addendum 1 with Shs 41.690 billion.
The committee was informed that this request is arising as a result of shortfalls in the Forces’ budget for the Financial Year 2019/2020 to cater for the outstanding bills incurred by the Force.

1)Fuel in arrears to the tune of Shs 16.480 billion;
2)Shs 9.150 billion for food, which is also in arrears;
3)Shs. 5.296 billion for maintenance of transport equipment. This is to pay various garage bills for repair of operational and administrative vehicles and all these are already verified; 
4)Shs 4 billion for classified expenses on intelligence gathering; 
5)Shs 3.557 billion for insurance of aircrafts and boats; 
6)Shs 1.707 billion for the balance of project management costs under the National CCTV project; 
7)Shs 0.550 billion for contract service fee to three expatriates for the Airwing and that is a contractual obligation. 
8)Shs 0.904 billion for maintenance of aircrafts; 
9)Shs 0.045 billion for renewal of the Aircraft Maintenance Organisation licence for Piaggo aerospace and new contract for helicopters.

The committee examined the request and recommends that Shs 41.690 billion is provided to cater for outstanding bills to suppliers of goods and services under the Uganda Police Force.

Domestic arrears coming under various Votes
Supplementary expenditure amounting to Shs 223 billion towards clearing domestic arrears to various categories as follows and detailed by Vote in table 6 below:
    i. Shs 93.9 billion towards recurrent domestic arrears, which are the bulk of arrears under various Votes.
    ii. Shs 73 billion for payment of arrears to suppliers of coffee seedlings. Madam Speaker, on this note, I would like to lay on Table the list of some of those suppliers. The total amount involved in this claim is over Shs 140 billion. Shs 73 billion has been provided and is the amount that was verified by the external auditors. The balance is yet to be fully verified. 

We are told by UCDA that the external auditor who verified these claims did not find some of those files available at the UCDA headquarters. This is what has delayed payment of the remaining claimants. The delay was because the districts had not yet sent those claims. Unfortunately, some of these claims have been there for more than a year. A number of our people in the villages fall under this category. 

Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on Table the verified domestic arrears for coffee seedlings, which shall be paid under this arrangement amounting to Shs 73 billion.

    iii. Shs 6.1 billion for the payment of arrears to tea suppliers. We talked to the Managing Director of NAADS and he told us that these claims are still being verified by the external auditors. Therefore, they were not ready to receive the money. As such, that request has been removed from our proposed approval. 
    iii. Shs 50 billion under various Votes to clear the verified utility service providers in line with Government programme on COVID-19. 

Madam Speaker, the accumulation of domestic arrears with various Ministries, Departments and Agencies had weakened the activities of many enterprises and service providers to Government. Some of these have collapsed while others have lost property to banks for their failure to service bank loans. 

The committee noted that providing funds to settle domestic arrears is one way of stimulating operations in the economy against the COVID-19 effects and to boost the purchasing power of the affected beneficiaries.

The committee recommends that Shs 223 billion, under various Votes, be approved for settling of domestic arrears as reflected in table 6 below.

Vote 015 - Ministry of Trade, Industry and Co-operatives: Shs 6,051,628,000 
This item was presented under Schedule 2. It has emerged that the request was not considered by the committee as it was presumed to have been among those requests falling within the 03 per cent legal provision. However, it has been clarified that no payment has been effected and the matter is pending prior Parliamentary approval. The expenditure breakdown recommended for approval is as follows: 
    1. Shs 2.051 billion was provided to cater for compensation to Bugisu Co-operative Union claims;
    2. Shs 4 billion was provided to cater for compensation for Teso and Masaba Co-operative Union.

Table 6A is a schedule presenting an outline on the arrears for various claimants. All these are recurrent expenditures. So, we have claims under:
    1. Vote 001
    2. Vote 001
    3. Vote 002
    4. Vote 003
    5. Vote 004
    6. Vote 005
    7. Vote 007
    8. Vote 008
    9. Vote 010
    10. Vote 011
    11. Vote 013
    12. Vote 013
    13. Vote 014
    14. Vote 015
    15. Vote 015 
    16. Vote 018
    17. Vote 019
    18. Vote 020
    19. Vote 101
    20. Vote 106
    21. Vote 110
    22. Vote 113
    23. Vote 115
    24. Vote 119
    25. Vote 122
    26. Vote 125
    27. Vote 126
    28. Vote 127
    29. Vote 132
    30. Vote 134
    31. Vote 136
    32. Vote 137
    33. Vote 138
    34. Vote 142
    35. Vote 144
    36. Vote 145
    37. Vote 147
    38. Vote 149
    39. Vote 151
    40. Vote 152
    41. Vote 153
    42. Vote 155
    43. Vote 156
    44. Vote 160
    45. Vote 161
    46. Vote 162
    47. Vote 163
    48. Vote 164
    49. Vote 165
    50. Vote 166
    51. Vote 167
    52. Vote 168
    53. Vote 170
    54. Vote 170
    55. Vote 171
    56. Vote 172
    57. Vote 173
    58. Vote 175
    59. Vote 176
    60. Vote 301
    61. Vote 302
    62. Vote 303
    63. Vote 303
    64. Vote 309
    65. Vote 310.
Under Development Expenditure, we have domestic arrears, through the Ministry of Education and Sports, under Vote 013. 

Now, in Table 7, we give you a summary of all the supplementary expenditure requests that I have just discussed above, and the details on the figures correspond with those votes as I have read them out. 

On Page 20, Madam Speaker, is the conclusion. The committee recommends that Parliament approves a total supplementary request of Shs 1,087,667,126,424 of which Shs 920,957,512,199 is for recurrent expenditure and Shs 166,709,614,225 is for development expenditure. The details recommended for supply by vote are presented in Table 8 below. 

The list is long and closely related to the votes that I have just read. Therefore, in the interest of time, since Members can access the copy that I have just presented, they can look at the details in that report. Madam Speaker, I beg to move. 

The minority report was not sent to me; so, I am unable to pronounce the minority report – (Interjections) - you wrote the minority report but you did not bring it to me. So, I am not privy to it. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, do you just upload the minority report? Are there no rules on how you treat a minority report? Does the rule say you inform the Clerk? 

MS OGWAL: Madam Speaker, we wrote officially to the Chairperson of the Committee on Budget and we sent copies of the report to him and the Speaker. Both reports have been uploaded. So, there is no way the chairperson would fail to see the minority report when he can see the majority report. The report has been made available to the Clerk, the Speaker and the chairperson of the committee. 

THE SPEAKER: Who is presenting the minority report?

MR LUGOLOOBI: Madam Speaker, I was waiting for a hard copy and I did not receive it. My assumption was that it was not there; that she had failed to deliver. However, it is your prerogative. As far as I am concerned, I do not have a copy. 

THE SPEAKER: Let me look at the rules. Hon. Cecilia Atim, do you have a copy of the letter you wrote?

MS OGWAL: I even sent him a copy and he acknowledged it. 

THE SPEAKER: Give me the letter. Honourable members, let the minority report be presented. Hon. Cecilia Ogwal, can you take the podium please? 

5.35
MS CECILIA OGWAL (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you for giving us an opportunity to formally present the minority report. Due to COVID-19, not all persons who subscribe to the views expressed in the minority report have appended their signatures. We have Members of the committee who subscribe to the views who include hon. Muwanga Kivumbi, hon. Winfred Kiiza, hon. Joy Atim and the reader of the report. 

Madam Speaker, on 16 June 2020 - (Interruption)

MR LUGOLOOBI: Madam Speaker, hon. Winfred Kiiza signed the majority report. Is the honourable member in order to insinuate that hon. Kiiza subscribes to the minority report? 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I see the signature of hon. Winfred Kiiza on the majority report. 

MS OGWAL: Madam Speaker, hon. Winfred Kiiza has a right to change her opinion but I would like to-

THE SPEAKER: No, honourable member that will invalidate your report. You cannot sign two reports.

MS OGWAL: Thank you, Madam Speaker. On 16 June 2020, the honourable Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development tabled before this House a Supplementary Schedule III for the Financial Year 2019/2020. It is envisaged that the supplementary request of Shs 1.132 trillion will cater for the mitigation of the negative social and economic impact of COVID -19.

As Members of the committee and after participating in the activities that led to the report, we take exception to some recommendations therein and accordingly wish to dissent.

Madam Speaker, we avail ourselves Parliament's oversight role in promoting accountability, transparency and are committed to highlight the pitfalls in the budgetary process with the view to ensuring compliance to the statutory provisions.

The dissenting opinion was informed by the following authority – (Interruption)

MS KAMATEEKA: Madam Speaker, you have just ruled that because one Member signed two reports, that invalidates the minority report. Those were the words of the Rt Hon. Speaker that that invalidates the minority report. Is the Member in order to continue reading a report that has been invalidated? 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I do not know why she has tried to import hon. Winfred Kiiza into her report. Her report has only two signatures.

MS OGWAL: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The dissenting opinion was informed by the following authorities:
Legal Frameworks;
    1. The 1995 Constitution as amended;
    2. The Budget Act,200l;
    3. The Public Finance Management Act, 20l5;

THE SPEAKER: Maybe, you should go to the main body because it is coming to 6.00 p.m.

MS OGWAL: That is correct. Thank you, Madam Speaker; it is important that we get to know the authority. The views of the Attorney-General have been incorporated in this view and the Speaker’s guidelines given in 2014.

Madam Speaker, as I summarise, we dissent on the following grounds;
    1. The supplementary request is time barred. 
    2. Piecemeal supplementary request versus a post COVID-19 comprehensive stimulus package is a big issue.
    3. Chronic budgetary and fiscal indiscipline has remained an issue.
    4. Unclear source of funding.

The supplementary request is already time barred and I would like to explain why. Section 17 (2) of the Public Finance Management Act, 2015, which reads “a vote that does not spend money that was appropriated for the financial year shall at the close of the financial year repay the money to the Consolidated Fund.”

Madam Speaker it is imperative to note that the supplementary schedule that was laid in the House on 16 June 2020 was 14 days to the end of the Financial Year 2019/2020. Should Parliament decide today, to approve this supplementary request, the Ministries, Agencies and Departments will be left with less than five days for disbursement and actual spending of Shs 1.132 trillion.

This is a risky undertaking because technically, we are all aware that on 20 June every financial year, Government financial systems shall have closed down thereby leaving no room for any opportunity to neither absorb nor return the unspent balances and that has been a big issue.

Madam Speaker, I would also like to draw your attention to section 31 to 32 on page 3 of the Public Finance and Management Act, 2015 as amended clearly stipulating that the procedures of authorisation that permit MDAs to utilise the funds, which shall include and I want you to know this; 
    1. The Audit-General issuing a grant of credit
    2.  The Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development issuing a warrant to the accountant general to facilitate requisition to spend and the issuance of expenditure limit to the MDAs;

All these approvals take, on average, three days; the process of paying a supplier by MDA on receiving an invoice takes a minimum of three days. Accordingly, the entire process takes six days as demonstrated above and this goes beyond the five days, which we are now left with for this supplementary to be approved; that is a serious matter of law. Just take note of it. 

There is need for a comprehensive study on how the Uganda Development Corporation and the Uganda Development Bank can benefit the ordinary SMEs, which are agro-based and can transform the lives of the ordinary farmers and general citizenry in our various constituencies. We have, however, learnt that Uganda Development Bank disburses loans through commercial banks thereby making the rates more expensive and unaffordable to the ordinary Ugandan borrowers. 

Madam Speaker, whether you like it or not, a commercial bank must charge interest for the service channelled through them. 

It is also important for us to note the chronic budgetary and physical indiscipline. Upon scrutinising the supplementary request for different boards, we make particular observation to establish whether they meet the criteria as guided by section 25 (7) (b) and (c) and the Public Finance Management Act, 2015 which dictates the criteria through which a supplementary request should be made; which of course you are aware, Madam Speaker, that one must prove that it was unforeseeable at the time of the budget, unavoidable, it is an emergency, absorbable and that the funding is available.

We have, therefore, decided to assist this august House to look at the matter more critically so that should anything happen, this Parliament cannot be blamed because we would have looked at both sides of the coin.

If we are to stick to the law - we agree that item (1) from the Ministry of Health on the procurement of masks is acceptable because the process has started. However, we have noted that there is an element of a very strong monopoly. As Parliament, we had advised that we should allow other persons to also participate in the production of the face masks.

The department of prisons complained to us that they have tried to get a cut from the production but that it has been difficult for them.

When it comes to the money to support Uganda Development Bank (UDB), we interfaced with UDB management - we have three days to the close of the financial year. It is true that they cannot go through the process and be able to hit this money on their account to transfer it to the recipients; that is absolutely impossible.

On the Uganda Development Corporation (UDC), it is the same thing. We are agreeable that this report be brought back to us next week in July and we will be able to approve it as a supplementary budget under the new financial year.

The Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries has been able to put up their case that because there are upcountry branches and the floods, they will be able to supply the seeds and the seedlings. For that matter, we have agreed to concede on the issue of Shs 10 billion to cater for those affected by the floods.

On the issue of the Office of the Prime Minister (OPM), we have also agreed that because of the importance of water and other necessities, that money can be appropriated. However, we feel uncomfortable with the issue of the Microfinance Support Centre. It is the same situation that will be experienced by UDC. There is no way that it will be practically possible to go through the process and have this money hit the microfinance account before it reaches the target group that we are all planning for.

On the issue of the scientists, we have agreed because of rapid testing. 

We have also agreed that a case of serious indiscipline is that of domestic arrears and this is known. It is predictable and must be budgeted as a matter of budgetary discipline. I find it odd that you must bring it at this critical hour when we are left with three days to close the financial year.

For the rest of the issues, you can go through the table as we have indicated. However, allow me to say that the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development has failed generally on the tests, which have been laid down under the law. 

Madam Speaker, you know very well that on 11 June 2020, the budget that the minister read – members doubting, please take a closer look at what we have presented. You will realise that the minister gave a different figure from what Parliament scrutinised and approved. It is on that table on Page 7. 

Parliament was able to scrutinise and appropriated Shs 103 billion under UDB but the minister read Shs 1.054 trillion giving a variance of Shs 952 billion. 

On domestic arrears, Parliament scrutinised and appropriated Shs 450 billion. The minister in his budget speech presented Shs 673 presenting a variance of Shs 223 billion. 

On UDC, Parliament scrutinised and appropriated Shs 38 billion but the minister read a figure of Shs 138 presenting a variance of 100 billion. Therefore – (Interruption)

Mr Esiagu: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The figures the member is speaking to are not in the majority report at all. I wonder what she is dissenting from with all those figures; they are talking about the next financial year.

Ms ogwal: It is on Page 7 of the minority report.

Mr LUGOLOOBI: But we do not have it in the majority report. How do you dissent from what we do not have in our report, which never came up in the discussion for this supplementary? Is it in order for a member to import new views?

Ms ogwal: Madam Speaker, I have made it very clear that –

The Speaker: Honourable members, you are not supposed to create new situations. You are supposed to refer to the main report and say what you disagree with in it. Do not bring in new matters that are not addressed in the main report. Concentrate on what you disagree with in the report.

Ms ogwal: Madam Speaker, I agree with your ruling. It was the Chairperson of the Committee on Budget that drew the attention of the House to the variance. 

I would like to emphasise, as somebody who has been vigilant in ensuring compliance to the statutory provision, I have observed - and we have followed the process for many years.

Madam Speaker, you have intervened and issued requirements that would guide the supplementary. The Attorney-General and the law have done the same. That is why we are very concerned. Every year, we raise the issue of budgetary indiscipline. Whether you like it or not, allow me to let the House to note that in the budget speech of the new financial year, which has been included, we have strange items that never came to Parliament or the committee. 

You do not want me to discuss it but I would like to say that we have observed it because it came up in the budget speech and we did not cite it in our report. That is the figure of Shs 300 billion under the National Agricultural Advisory Services (NAADS), Shs 97 under Microfinance and Shs 130 for intensive public works and urban -

Therefore, I would like to conclude by saying that before we dispose of this matter, the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development must confirm to us that the loans from the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund (IMF) have been disbursed to assure us that this budget is going to be funded.

Otherwise, there is a possibility that the ministry wants to cut from both sides. They want a supplementary request approved and that will be equivalent to the 3 per cent. Then, next year they will still qualify for another 3 per cent.

Therefore, I would like the minister to prove to us today that the World Bank and IMF monies have already been disbursed. That will be a statutory requirement by law that we cannot pass any supplementary budget unless there is proof of availability of money or the source of funding. 

Therefore, Madam Speaker, I beg to submit the minority report and pray that Parliament is not plunged into any kind of embarrassment. This is a matter of law, we either take or leave it. Where we have not complied with the statutory requirement, we have to obey the law. That is where I stand, Madam Speaker. There is no politics in this presentation. I am just bringing these issues to the attention of Parliament so that nobody continues to blame Parliament for anything that goes wrong. 

I beg to submit. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable members. It is almost 6 o’clock. I would like clarification from the chairperson, on domestic arrears. He had a figure of Shs 223 billion but on Page 15, he said for payment of tea suppliers, verification is on-going and approval will be differed. However, in the end, the same figure of Shs 223 billion remains. I thought the Shs 6.1 billion should have been removed from the Shs 223 billion. 

MR LUGOLOOBI: Madam Speaker, when you go to the supply schedule, that figure was removed.

THE SPEAKER: Where is the supply schedule? Which page is it? 

MR LUGOLOOBI: It is on pages 20, 21, 22 and 23. As you can see, Madam Speaker, we actually broke down these figures by Votes. That entire figure is spread within those figures. It was removed from the NAADS allocation, Vote 152 on page 22 to leave a balance of Shs 11.7 billion. We removed it. Where you are reading from is the schedule giving you a summary of what is contained in the report. However, when we came to supply, we removed it. 

MR KABERUKA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. On page 15, on domestic arrears, the chairman is quoting table 6 where there is nothing different. On page 13, Vote 141, Uganda Revenue Authority had requested for Shs 45.67 billion but the committee has rejected this allocation. I do not know whether it has also been spread within the figures so that Madam Speaker can guide us on the discussion of this paper. Thank you. 

MR OBOTH: Madam Speaker, I listened to both the majority and minority reports. I am not good with figures at this time, I need to do it before noon. 

However, going to the principle, looking at the minority report, they are referring to legal requirements. She is quoting several sections of the Public Finance Management Act. What the minority report is shy to say is that they wanted the report to be severed. She generally agrees with what qualifies for the supplementary within the majority report. Her concern is the budget indiscipline, which we can join the majority report in condemning. I think that is what she wanted us to do. 

On matters of execution of say contract, the minority report dwelt very much on procurement. Procurement of any kind is not a matter for this Parliament to look at; that is an Executive function. Execution of the Budget, whether it is left with one day or two, is not a matter for this Parliament. This Parliament should appropriate money. At the end of it all, we will look for accountability. That is the role of this Parliament. 

Regarding Budget indiscipline, we can join hon. Cecilia Ogwal. At one time, one person asked in this Parliament whether planning actually takes place. We now have this COVID-19. Hon. Cecilia Ogwal, maybe it could be the explanation of some of these shortcomings. 

In my opinion, when this came up, even when you went on to the variation of the figures, I would not have agreed with the Chairman of the Committee on Budget when he said, it does not matter what the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development says here or elsewhere about the appropriated amount. What matters is what Parliament appropriated. That is by law. It does not matter when the minister says – and several other variances. Parliament should be marking them against the figures provided by this House. 

Madam Speaker, I am now seeking your further guidance on how to harmonise because I found that on matters of percentage, the minority report agrees with the majority report up to about 65 per cent and the 45 per cent is where they differ. 

On one side, I agree that indiscipline is not being able to plan for certain foreseeable things. For the rest, you cannot plan for COVID-19. You would not know that it would come in 2019 and reach Uganda. What do we do, Madam Speaker, in matters like this where the minority report agrees in some part and disagrees in the minute detail, especially on the execution of the contract? I beg to seek for your guidance. 

6.04
MS SANTA ALUM (UPC, Woman Representative, Oyam): Thank you, Madam Speaker. It is true that COVID-19 was unforeseen and that COVID-19 in Uganda is now unavoidable. It is also true that we have been with COVID-19 since March. How I wish the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development could have come with a comprehensive package to deal with this problem. 

It is true that COVID-19 is making us redo what we should have done once and for all. Listening to both the majority and the minority reports, I would like to agree more especially with the majority report. We sincerely need supplementary funding to meet some of these problems that have been brought about by COVID-19. 

However, listening to the minority report and given the time that we are left with to finish this financial year, look at the issue of agriculture which wants to tackle food security. It is true that with the floods and even COVID-19, we need to help the agricultural sector, which has stood the test of time. However, considering the time left, we need to procure some of these seeds that the committee is talking about. 

However, when I look at the time because I sit on the committee on Agriculture, we do not have time given the end of the financial year. Furthermore, on UDB and UDC, Madam Speaker, we still do not have time. Therefore, I think you should guide this House more especially on issues or items that require time. 

Finally, I would like to agree with the majority report on the issue of health. I have been moving around. We have a very big challenge in the Ministry of Health. To me, even the Shs 89 billion is not enough. It is urgent and unforeseeable. 

Madam Speaker, we are doing social distancing in Parliament but when you visit our health facilities, we do not have the facilities to make patients adhere to social distancing. Therefore, I thought that this money is not even enough for the Ministry of Health because now donations are dwindling and yet there is the issue of feeding, repair of vehicles which are being used by the health sector. I feel this should have been the sector which should have taken the largest amount of money, Madam Speaker. Thank you. 

6.07
MR NATHAN NANDALA MAFABI (FDC, Budadiri County West, Sironko): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I think my brother hon. Oboth - he has gone away - it is true he does not know mathematics because 45+65=110. Madam Speaker, if you look at page 14 of the majority report - (Interjection) - I am just giving some examples. It says we need to pay Shs 1.195 billion for food already eaten. Shs 0.944 for aircraft maintenance, which is done. Shs 3.55 for insurance. 

What I want to put across is that we must thank COVID-19 because if it was not here, this supplementary we are going to pass was going to be arears for the next financial year. Now because we have savings in this quarter, because expenditure in this quarter has been down - no travel abroad, no seminars, etcetera, now we have saved money and we are able to cater for this expenditure. 

And, because of that, I want to be assured by the Minister of Finance, from what the minority report states, we have only five days to go, if you can really execute this so that it does not again become arears in the following financial year. Having said that, from what I see, the minority report is very okay with the exception of going to the next financial year which the Ministry of Finance - I can just give you free advice, you can bring what you never stated in your budget in the corrigenda to deal with that. 

However, what I wanted to say is that from the minority report, there are some things which have been raised in the minority report, I do not understand how we are going to spend that money within these few days. For example, masks - Shs 89 billion. Unless we have already procured them so that we need to pay but if we have not procured them, and we are going for a bid, by the time you evaluate the bid, the five days would have passed and I do not know where corona would be. 

Madam Speaker, for science and innovation, unless they have already started the work and we are going to pay for it; but if they have not and we want to contract them, again we have a problem. Therefore, Madam Speaker, merging both the majority and the minority, we would only ask the Ministry of Finance to confirm that these expenses have already been incurred. If they have not been incurred, then there are those you do not need to incur. 

Secondly, you must also confirm to us that within these five days - by the way, you have a weekend between, unless you are going to open Bank of Uganda - that these expenses will be carried out. Failure to do that, I can assure you that all the money will remain on the account and it will be swept back and these expenses which have already been incurred if at all they have been incurred, will become arrears of the following year. And given that they will be Shs 1 trillion on addition to Shs 1.7 trillion we have as arrears; it means we now have Shs 2.7 trillion and majority of it will affect the private sector. 

Madam Speaker, having said that, if I get the assurance from the Minister, I have no objection but to accept both the the minority and the majority. Thank you.

6.11
MR WILLIAM NZOGHU (FDC, Busongora County North, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I just want to seek clarification on three issues; one, I have heard the majority report talking about compensating cooperative unions like Bugisu Cooperative Union among others. However, Madam Speaker, I am also aware that Nyakantunzi Cooperative Union should have been on the list and I wonder why -

THE SPEAKER: It is there - Vote 015.

MR NZOGHU: Madam Speaker, I have seen that in the current circumstance, we have the Uganda Road Fund, which has not released money for community access roads and district roads. Aware that we have made a saving out of money that should have gone to workshops and foreign travels, why has Government not released money for community access roads and district roads? 

Finally, I would like to know from the chairperson why Government has deliberately failed to channel money that goes to UDB through banks that are willing to pilot Islamic Banking. 

Madam Speaker, these other banks which charge interest, make capital for investors and the people willing to invest very expensive. Why can’t Government ensure that they channel this money for UDB through banks that are willing to pilot Islamic Banking because they do not charge interest- (Interjection) - not what I think? That is the law that we passed.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, it is after 6.00 p.m. There is curfew in this country. 

6.14
MS SYDA BBUMBA (NRM, Nakaseke North County, Nakaseke): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the chairperson of the committee and the members for the very good report. However, I have one concern.

Madam Speaker, from the research, which has been conducted by the Policy Research Centre of Makerere and from what we see, the category of people who have been most affected by the COVID-19 situation are the energetic vulnerable poor like the boda bodas, the small traders, the market women and other informal business people.

These categories of people are not touched by banks. Since they are informal, they cannot access the money, which has been allocated to Uganda Development Bank. They have eaten up all their capital because of the lockdown and now they are vulnerable and a danger to society. The only bank for these people is the Microfinance Support Centre and other small money lenders.

Whereas, there are arguments on the Floor that there are no immediate off takers for the money, which has been provided, for this category of people, they are ready. The Microfinance Support Centre has got long list and it is spread out throughout the whole country with presence in all the districts. I, therefore, wish to propose that some of the money, which has been allocated and cannot be used immediately be reallocated to Microfinance Support Centre, from the Shs 50 billion, which is only Shs 30 million per district. For instance, we can take money, which has been deferred for digital stamps and allocate it to microfinance.

Madam Speaker, we need to guard against inequality. If these categories of people are not attended to, we are going to increase inequality and this is not good for society. I beg to support. Thank you.

MR LUGOLOOBI: Madam Speaker, on the issue of whether UDB, UDC, SACCOs and the Microfinance Support Center will be able to use the money - the money sent to UDB will not be returned. It is capitalisation of the bank. It could be released anytime now. It does not have to get back. They do not have to use that money in one day because it is capitalisation of that bank for lending to borrowers. It is the same with UDC.

Madam Speaker, UDC is the investment arm of Government. The money provided to UDC is Government capitalisation because Government is the sole shareholder in UDC. So, they are investing in their company, who will invest that money in other enterprises. So, it is not fatal at all. 

For the Microfinance Support Centre, the money is going to be lent to the SACCOs and other groups. I, therefore, do not think we have a very serious problem provided that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development will be able to release this money in the coming few days. Fortunately, the minister is here. He can talk about that.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, can you assure us how this money is going to reach the beneficiaries in three days.

6.19
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank the chairperson and the members of the committee and the minority report. It is a fact that we submitted this supplementary at the beginning of the month of June. Due to some circumstances, it is now with us, three days, to time;

As the chairperson has said, some of the money is onward; forwarding to UDC and UDB. If the supplementary is approved today, we will do our best to make sure that the money reaches them within time. If it does not, we have a procedure of re-voting this money. Otherwise, what Parliament has approved – the principle is of making sure that these activities are funded.

Like hon. Oboth said, you will request the Executive to come back here and say, how far have you gone with UDC, UDB and others? So, there is an internal procedure that this money can be re-voted in the worst-case scenario, if we fail to transfer the money by end of the month. Otherwise, what is important is the principle that we are approving to support the economy through these different channels, which we should abide by.


THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, there was a question of what should we do – we like some, we do not like some. We agree, we do not agree. Our position is that either we reject the whole or pass the whole. Otherwise, it is not possible to pick and out here. I put the question that the report of the committee be adopted. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Reported adopted

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the committee stage may take about an hour. I do not think I want to risk the lives of the staff. We can do the supply on Tuesday. Let us do it on Tuesday. Honourable members, House adjourned to Tuesday. 

(The House rose at 6.21 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 30 June 2020 at 2.00 p.m.)
