

Wednesday, 20 June 2018

Parliament met at 2.54 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

National Anthem

East African Community Anthem

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, Your Excellency the President, I welcome you to this special sitting to discuss a matter of national importance. I would like to inform Members that they are free to sit anywhere for today. (Applause)

Honourable members, you do recall that during the Budget Speech, His Excellency the President, requested for an opportunity to address the country through Parliament regarding the state of security in the country. 

This meeting is convened under Article 101(2) of the Constitution, which provides, “The President may, also, in consultation with the Speaker, address Parliament from time to time, on any matter of national importance.” I therefore, wish to welcome Your Excellency, the President of the Republic of Uganda, Commander-In-Chief of the Armed Forces and the Fountain of Honour.

I am sure that honourable members and the country at large are eagerly waiting for the presidential address. However, before I invite the President, I would like to draw your attention to Rule 10(4) (a) of the Rules of Procedure, which provides that, “The President, while occupying the Chair of State, may make a presidential statement, which shall he heard in silence and not followed by any comment or question.” 

Also, Rule 10(4) (b) states that the President shall not participate in the proceedings of the House in any way. Your Excellency, this rule inhibits our interaction with you. Therefore, on behalf of the House, I would like to request that a time should be found when we can have a free meeting with you, to have an exchange on issues of security in a different arena. 

Your Excellency, I now invite you to address the country. (Applause)

3.02
THE PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF UGANDA (Gen (Rtd) Yoweri Kaguta Museveni):  His Excellency, the Vice-President of Uganda, the Rt Hon. Speaker of Parliament, the Rt Hon. Prime Minister, the Rt Hon. Deputy Prime Ministers, honourable ministers, the Leader of the Opposition, Members of Parliament, ladies and gentlemen.

Rt Hon. Speaker of Parliament, I have a very good meeting hall at State House Entebbe. All of you are welcome. (Applause) 

In case you are allergic to State House, we also have a nearby hall here in this Parliamentary Building. We can all meet there and interact freely from those restrictions which you put on yourselves. Therefore, I am available; I have no problem. (Applause)

Madam Speaker, I have decided to use the rights of the President, under Article 101 (2) of the 1995 Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, to address Parliament. I am exercising this right in order to sensitise the Members of Parliament and the public about defeating challenges of insecurity.

In the early years of the NRM Government, I visited the area of Busoga; it could have been Luuka. As part of the entertainment for me, one of the dance groups performed an emandwa dance. The Basoga were calling that dance the Basweezi dance. Emandwa were spiritual mediums that people in the large part of the Great Lakes worshipped and appealed to; to convey their supplications to Ruhanga Nyamuhanga, Katonda Ow’obutonzi or Lubanga in Luo, which all means God the Creator.

The spirit mediums were not God themselves. They were intermediaries between the people and God. What is interesting is that these spirit mediums were originally human beings. The dance I witnessed in Luuka was called Basweezi dance by the Basoga. This would be Bachwezi in Buganda, Bunyoro, Tooro, Ankole, Karagwe, Bukoba – the last two are in Tanzania – and even Eastern Congo. I have not checked whether or not it spread to Rwanda beyond the Mutara region, which was part of Mpororo-Nkore before colonialism. 

These were generations of people that had succeeded in bringing stability to this part of the Great Lakes. Excavations at Ntutsi and Bigo-bya-Mugyenyi, which are in Ssembabule, have shown that those sites were being used by these people between 900 AD and 1500 AD. 

In 1998, Dr John Sutton of the British Archeological Society revealed that there were huge settlements at those sites by 900 AD to 1500 AD. The names of these Bachwezi that stand out are:

    1. Wamala
    2. Mugasha, whom the Baganda call Mukasa
    3. Mulindwa
    4. Ndahura or Ndawula in Luganda
    5. Kagolo or Kagoro
    6. Isimbwa or Ssimbwa
    7. Kyomya; that name is mainly in Busoga.

According to the oral history of this area, it seemed that these people had succeeded in uniting under one kingdom, much of present day Uganda. Bunyoro, Tooro, Ankole, Buganda, Busoga and Lango; what we call Bukiri - these people are on this side of the Nile. The historical name of Lango is Bukiri or Bukedi. Some people call it Bukedi but it is Bukiri - Acholi chiefdoms which are called Gani traditionally, Buhaya and Karagwe in Tanzania, Rwanda and the Hema chiefdoms of Eastern Congo in Bunya.

That unity brought peace, stability and prosperity to the region for maybe 500 years. When that dynasty collapsed for reasons that are not clear, the area was taken over by the smaller kingdoms that we found in place in our time. These are the kingdoms of Buganda, Bunyoro, Tooro, Nkore-Mpororo, Busoga chiefdoms, Lango chiefdoms or Bukiri, Acholi chiefdoms or Gani, Buhaya and Karagwe in Tanzania, Rwanda and the Hema chiefdoms of Eastern Congo in the area of Bunya.

These little kingdoms, run by egocentric and tyrannical kings and chiefs, fomented endless wars and insecurity for 400 years until the area was taken over by the British, the Germans and the Belgians following the conference among the European imperialists in Berlin in 1884-1885, where the mismanaged Africa was partitioned like a cake with each one of them taking a portion or portions of the defenseless territories, the incompetence of the traditional leaders having been finally confirmed by reality.

The imperialists fomented their own wars of global conquest, into which our people were sucked in fighting other people’s wars, in the form of the First and the Second World Wars. Nevertheless, at least the British established some law and order in much of Uganda. Extrajudicial killings became rare in many parts of the country. However, Karamoja and Turkana in Kenya were never pacified. 

During the time of the kings, the armies were very indisciplined. That was part of their weakness and that was one of the reasons they were defeated by the foreigners. To take one example, Henry Morton Stanley, passing through the Bunya area of Congo in 1889, wrote as follows of the Kabalega army. As you know, that Bunya is in Congo but it is inhabited by Banyoro-speaking people, Alurs and other people who are part of our system here. 

This is what Stanley wrote in 1889, when he passed through that area. “We have formed a confederacy on the plateau, embracing all the region from the Ituri River to the Nyanza.” Of course, he was not able to pronounce Nyanza properly but Nyanza means enyanja in Runyoro. So, Nyanja means Lake Albert. They formed a confederacy embracing all the regions from the Ituri River to the Nyanza for protection granted them by the marauding Balega. Balega is the name we give Congolese. We, the indigenous people of this area, traditionally call the people of Congo “Balega”. That is why you hear Kabalega; I think Kabalega’s mother had something to do with Congo. 

So, Kabalega meant akana kabalega; meaning, the child of Balega. Since you spend so much time in Europe, I thought I should bring you down here to our part of the world. (Laughter) Going back to the quotation of Stanley, “We have formed a confederacy on the Plateau, embracing the entire region from the Ituri River to the Nyanza”. This is on the Congo side of Bunya; not Uganda side. This confederacy formed was for protection granted them by the marauding Balega of the Mountains. These Balegas, in this case, were the Lendus. If you go to Zombo, some of them are there. They are part of the Zombo but they are mainly in Congo.

Balega of the mountains and Warusura -(Laughter)- I am reading the way Stanley wrote. Warusura is the Swahilinisation- (Laughter) – No, that one is another issue. It is because Stanley was moving around with the Swahili people from Zanzibar; so, they were writing in Swahili. So, warasura means Balusura which was the army of Kabalega. That was what the army of the Banyoro was called. It was called the Abalusura. Now, it is not there because we have the UPDF. 

The marauding Balega who were the Lendus of the mountains and the Warusura of Kabalega – “…the chiefs agree to supply us with contributions of grains and cattle and surrender the government of the country into my hands to raise fighting men whenever ordered and to assist me in invading Unyoro, should retaliation for invasion of their soil by the Warusura render it necessary.” This portion is found on page 147 of Stanley’s book entitled, “In the Darkest Africa”, Vol.2.

Later on, I will put in the speech another quotation which is interesting. I will see which one is there but, for instance, this one here; the British invaded Bunyoro Kitara to control resources of the kingdom. We shall see evidence in the records of the agents of Britain who massacred large numbers of Banyoro. Lugard had estimated in 1893 Banyoro’s number to be over 2.5 million people. He wrote, “Unyoro is probably more populous than Uganda (Buganda) and Ankoli (Ankole) about equal to it. Danba estimates the population was reduced to 400,000 from 2.5 million.” 

I will quote this; when Uganda - So, the point I am making here is that this part of yours - This part called Uganda has had a lot of problems. First of all, we had the chiefs fighting among themselves. I quoted that one and they were very indisciplined. You will see how in the other quotation, Stanley is in jubilation because the tribes on the Congo side have joined him to fight Kabalega because his soldiers were always misbehaving; looting and so on and so forth. That is what the quotation is saying. The Balusura, because of indiscipline, were driving away the tribes who actually were Banyoro. They were Banyoro speakers but because of indiscipline, they were ready to welcome foreigners to protect them against the indiscipline of the Abalusura. 

Now, after that problem of the chiefs, we then come to the British. They came with their own problems and you can see what they are talking about here. Today, the Banyoro are only one million but in 1893, they were 2.5 million according to Lugard. So, that whole population was reduced because of the British and their army.

When Uganda was subdued, the British colonial army was more disciplined and was rarely seen in public but it had a weak infrastructure of being mainly a tribal army of a few tribes. As already said above, it moreover, failed to subdue Karamoja and Turkana.

After independence, this former colonial army became very brutal and engaged in massive extra judicial killings at every opportunity. During the 1966 crisis, many people were killed. When Mzee Obote was shot in 1969, many people were killed. The same happened throughout the reign of Amin, during the West Nile operation of 1981, operations in Luweero of 1981 to 1985.

Therefore, the history of bad armies is what I am trying to bring to you. The history of bad armies for almost 400 years from the time of the - you know, I really pity some of our people because when they talk, they talk as if Uganda started with the British. It is amazing. (Interjections) Even when Jesus was born, you were not there but you know what happened. Somebody is saying that they were not there. You are a Christian; were you there when Jesus was born?  (Laughter)  Or were you there when Mohammad was born?

We belong to things even if we were not present. We inherit; call it heritage. Therefore, there is a Christian heritage and Islamic heritage but there is also the Great Lakes heritage. We are people of this area from time immemorial and we shall be here forever. (Applause.)

Therefore, that is why I am disturbing you by unearthing this history because you do not have time to know about yourselves yet you know everybody else. That is why FRONASA – (Interjections) I am telling you all these to bring to the present. That is why the FRONASA, the National Resistance Army (NRA), the NRM and the UPDF made it their core point to build a detribalised, disciplined and ideological national army.

During the eight years of the anti-Amin struggle - this was one of the major points on which we disagreed with Mzee Obote and the UPC while we were in Tanzania. The climax of our disagreements and different viewpoints was reached in October 1978 when Idi Amin attacked Tanzania. At that time, the UPC had a force of about 1,000 people at Kigwa in Tabora Tanzania.

Remnants of the 1972 anti- Amin debauch, - there was that invasion on which I also took part in 1972, which was defeated. These 1,000 mainly Acholis at Tabora were remnants of that force of 1972. These are the ones the late Tito Okello and David Oyite-Ojok came with to the frontline at the end of 1978.

On our side, we had a group of 28 cadres whom I had spent two years training at Montepuez Mozambique plus a few individuals we had earlier trained including Ahmed Seguya who had been part of the 1972 group that we had trained in farm No.17 in Nakingweya Tanzania. These were trained for us by FRELIMO party of Mozambique with permission of Mwalimu Nyerere.

I arrived on the frontline on 23 December 1978 with some of this group. By 11, April 1979 when Idi Amini fled Kampala, we had a force of 9000 fighters and cadres while UPC comrades only had a force of 1900 including the original 1,000 that had come from Tanzania.

Now, you need to study that - why is it that we who had a smaller force - I had only 28 fighters when I arrived on the frontline on the 23 December 1978. The UPC had 1,000 but by the 11th of April when Amin collapsed, our force had grown to 9,000 while the UPC was still only 1900 including the original 1,000. Therefore, you should study that and know why. The rest, as you know, is history. 

By 1986, the contending two lines; ours - because there were two lines of thinking. We were saying we need to build a detribalised ideological army but our brothers were saying, “no, politics kwa jeshi mbaya sana.” They should build askari na askari tuu. That he should not have any ideology in his head and you should just be a soldier. 

Therefore, by 1986, the rest, the issue had been resolved as you saw. By 1986, the contending two lines, ours of building an ideological detribalised and national army on the one hand versus our brothers’ of relying on sectarian ones on the other hand resolved itself in favour of the former.

Militarily gaining the upper hand by the forces of patriotism also helped the politics of the country. The previous politics of sectarianism of religion and tribe was replaced by the politics of patriotism and Pan Africanism. Nevertheless, even today, some elements still try to revive the politics of sectarianism. That however, is a subject of another day.

On the military and security side, a national patriotic force had been born and Uganda has never looked back.

In 1986, we solved the problem of how the army should be composed. Should it composed by democratically recruiting from all the districts equitably or should we recruit it the way it was before. That was resolved. You see for yourselves. The other day I was in Adjumani and the children there were complaining that they could not fulfil their quota - each district has a quota. When there is recruitment, each district must bring so many people. 

However, the children in Adjumani were complaining that when their blood was checked, many were found with Hepatitis B virus and were not admitted. So, they could not fulfil their quota. I asked them to look for the ones who do not have Hepatitis B virus until they fulfil their quota. 

By 1986, our resolve was composition of the army and the ideas in the heads of these soldiers. Our answer was that it must be composed nationally through quota recruitment from all districts and must be ideological but not partisan. 

It could not, by itself solve the problem of the professional and technical competencies of this new force. It could also not solve the strategic formula of defending the country. Starting with the strategic formula, our line had been clarified by 1991.

At that time we had a huge army of 100,000 but when we analysed, we realised that a big army was not good; it would undermine the security of the country. 

You remember those who were old enough - but even the young ones would have heard about it - we reduced the army from 100,000 to only 40,000 and we laid off a big number of soldiers. They were not happy but we had to stand our ground. Too many human beings are not good for the defence of the country. 

By 1991, the strategic line of how to defend the country had been resolved. The strategic formula for the defence of the country was to have a small standing army that is very well equipped, backed by a large reserve of Local Defence Units (LDU), vigilantes, Arrow Boys, crime preventers –(Interjections) - whatever name you call them. (Laughter)

These are Ugandans between the age of 18 and the age of 65. I checked with the Director of Legal Affairs in the army today before I came to give this speech. I asked, in order to belong to the LDU, how old should I be? He told me that you must be 18 years otherwise you will be considered a minor - apparently these army people did not indicate the old age. So, I decided to put the one of 65 myself. Assuming that maybe beyond 65 years old, you may not be able to run very well. 

The reserve force is comprised of this large number of people. These are Ugandans between the ages of 18 and may be 65 years old that in peace time have military training but continue with their normal economic or professional activities. If there is need on account of insecurity or war, a necessary portion of them will be called up to back up the standing army, the police force and the intelligence services so as to defeat the challenge. 

Indeed, this strategy was used against Kony in the north and ADF in the west. It is a reliable and affordable strategy for younger states still building their capacity.  Even developed countries such as Israel use them.

It is, therefore, foolish and a waste of time for anybody to think that he or she can destabilise Uganda using weapons. (Applause) We have an all-weather capacity to prevail in any war of aggression against us, any terrorist campaign against the country or any crime wave.

Since, however, calling up of manpower from the reserve involves spending more money on security and away from development, we are always hesitant to use this method. Human beings are more expensive to maintain than machines. They need breakfast, lunch, supper and some tea at intervals. They need medicine, clothes, housing, schooling for children, transport, entertainment and many others. And they have social issues such as burying relatives. 

The machines, on the other hand, apart from the capital cost of buying them and some maintenance costs, only make demands on the system when you use them. A human being will be eating whether you use him or not. Even if there is no war, they must eat but for a machine you only use it when you switch it on.

They only make demands on the system when you use them by driving, flying them if they are planes and firing them if they are guns. You can even oil and park them until you need them. You can oil, wrap and store it so that you do not spend anything on it other than the original cost of purchase. It is called snowballing; when you wrap and keep it. 

Since these machines are complicated, the crews to man them, when there is need, should be trained in advance. Such crews need a lot of time to train them to the required proficiency levels. Unlike riflemen and machine gunners, the more complex systems need long periods of training. Therefore, these crews always form part of the standing army. 

In more advanced countries, such as Israel however, the reserve force also has these crews of the advanced systems. In our case, because of the budget, we cannot manage to have pilots who are trained and are in the reserve. In Israel, you can have a doctor in a hospital who goes and trains to become a pilot of a fighter plane. He qualifies and goes back to his work as a doctor and when there is need, he is called from the operation table. However, he goes yearly for a refresher course. All that requires a budget for training and also for refresher courses. 

However, because of our budget, we are not able to train these highly qualified people in the reserve force. We only train the ones who are in the standing army, which is in the barracks. In our case, the limiting factor is the cost of training these crews. That is why, for now, we confine ourselves to the crews of the standing army. 

Apart from the technical crews, you also need a large number of officers and non-commissioned officers; sergeants, who can promptly exercise command within the battalions, brigades and divisions that we would call up in case of need. These again take time because they cannot conveniently be trained in a short time. They should therefore be prepared before as part of the standing arrangement. 

That is why you hear that we do not have United Nations to defend us and we shall never have them to defend us. (Applause) We are not “Kateyambas” or the disabled. However, how do you defend yourself? How do we defend our country when we do not have a big budget? If you look at the budget of UPDF and you compare it with the budgets – the minister should bring these figures to the Members of Parliament in dollar terms. It is not classified, the total is well known. What is classified is what you spend on but the total is read here every year. 

If you take that money and convert it to dollars and compare it with the budget of other countries, you will be amazed. How can Uganda be able to have a strong army with such little money? They should get the figures and compare them with other countries. You will see.

How did we do it? This is how we did it. We said, let us have a small army of well-educated people – because education is also a factor – who are well equipped and well trained but let us also have a large reserve of the groups I have mentioned. In the past, we used to call them “Mchakamchaka”. That was training our reserve force: the Local Defence Units (LDUs), vigilantes in Karamoja, crime preventers – boda-boda 2010 is another thing. I do not think those were properly trained. (Laughter) 

You need to listen carefully because we should be very clear, especially you the leaders and even other people in the country because sometimes I see people worried. Those who are doing bad things are endangering themselves. We shall crush them. (Applause) They have eyes but they cannot see, they have ears but they cannot hear and they do not know that they are playing with something very dangerous because we have thought about all these things. There is nothing that we have not thought about.

The plan is you have a small army of well-educated people, well equipped with a large number of technical crews - you cannot train a pilot in six months because it takes a lot of time to train a pilot or a tanker operator – and a large number of officers. You have a surplus of officers and Non-Commissioned Officers (NCOs). When there is need, you call up the other people like the LDUs because those ones are only dealing with lower level technology equipment: rifles and machine guns. That is like throwing stones. It does not have too much technology but you just need to know how to aim properly. 

When those people are called upon, they find that you already have the more difficult to train ones and you can expand the army the way you want. That was part of the problem with Idi Amin because he had a small army of 20,000 and he would go around thinking that he had got an army. When he attacked Tanzania, which was implementing our thinking, the Tanzanians were able to mobilise. Their own army was also small in peace time but because they had this system I am telling you about, they were able to mobilise an army of 45,000 plus we the Ugandans who were more than 10,000. Therefore, we ended up having an army of almost 60,000 dealing with the small army of Idi Amin of 20,000. They could not cope. 

Having dealt with the strategic concept of a small standing army with a large number of trained officers, non-commissioned officers and technical crews with a large reserve of trained riflemen and machine gunners, we now need to look at the professional and technical preparedness and adequacy of the army and the other security forces because they complement one another.

We must also look at the equipment and technology of these forces, especially the standing army and the sister security forces must develop capacity to cover the whole spectrum of threats in terms of skills and equipment. It is when there is an element in the whole spectrum that you have not dealt with that the country will experience a problem on account of that gap.

On account of obvious reasons, I do not want to go into details in some of these subjects. I can however give one example. The Lakwena-Kony insurgency started on 22 August 1986 when they attacked Battalion number 28 under Jet Mwebaze at Bibia. They were defeated. However, the insurgency, although not winning, dragged on until 2003 when they were totally defeated. 

In the 17 years of that insurgency, we had to neutralise whatever threat they deployed. Apart from the standard infantry weapons that we used to suppress them, we had to neutralise the threat of land mines. In the fight, Kony went to Sudan and got land mines. He thought, how will the NRA/UPDF solve the problem of land mines? If you cannot drive from Gulu to Pabbo without being blown up by land mines, how will you manage? Are you not going to fail? Therefore, they thought they had created a big problem for us. Mines are the things you put in the ground and they blow you up; bombs that they plant on the road. How did we solve that problem? We acquired mine resistant “Mambas” and “Buffaloes” as well as the Chubby mine detecting and demining trailers. What was our answer? We said, since you have got mines from Bashir, we have an answer for you. 

By that time, South Africa had become free so we bought these “Mambas”, which you see. That “Mamba” has a V-shaped bottom with strong armour so that even if it steps on a land mine, only the tyres will be damaged but the people inside will continue with no problem.

We also had another system, which could detect and remove the mine. Therefore, the poison, which those people had got from Sudan thinking that it would make us fail, was now neutralised.

The enemy was hoping to block the use of the roads using these mines but those mines were now useless for them. Moreover we could now follow them because when you plant, you normally leave a trail. You plant, we discover and follow you and deal with you. Therefore, we deal with your mine and you as well. In the end, you run out of mines.

Lack of air force also caused the dragging on of that conflict. People walking on foot on behalf of the Government were fighting other people walking on foot on behalf of the terrorists. That was another problem. The Government had more manpower and guns but the slow movement of those troops meant that the fight was inconclusive and protracted. That is why we needed a fast moving element in the equation; the air force, especially the gunships.

The Cabinet meeting in Gulu agreed to my proposal of cutting 23 per cent from each ministry in terms of budget in order to start the building of the air force. At the battle of Apopong in Amuria, the combined arms of the infantry and the air force plus other elements of detecting where the enemy is; reconnaissance, broke the capacity of the enemy to resist. That was the end of rural-based terrorism in Northern Uganda.

In the west, the ADF was finally defeated in 2007 in the Semuliki National Park and the Kijura escarpment where they had infiltrated from Congo. One of the additional elements here were the sharp shooting commandoes that decimated ADF.

To give you another example, which is not written here, the Rwenzori Mountains - you know that area is complicated because it is very high and cold so we had to create a Mountain Warfare Brigade; the ones who specialise in mountain warfare. Therefore, if you think you can cause any trouble in the mountains, you are just wasting your time because we can deal with you quickly and decisively. Hence, as we stand today, almost all elements needed to defeat terrorism in the rural areas are in place. 

Without going into details, these involve detecting, locating and destroying an organised group trying to fight guerrilla warfare in the forests, mountains or bush quickly. I can tell you that this where we stand now. 

That is why you hear that ADF is in Congo but they cannot enter here. They know the address of Uganda but they cannot come. That is why since 2007, Uganda has had peace from corner to corner for the first time in the last 500 years. (Applause) I have made this statement before but because people are not serious, they do not listen to the words. This is the first time in 500 years that this area you call Uganda has had peace from corner to corner. We never had peace during the time of the kings; we never had peace during the time of the British in the whole of Uganda - not even after Independence or under the National Resistance Movement (NRM). That is why I am saying that from 2007, I am not saying from 1986 because even after NRM, we did not have peace in the whole country. It was only in 2007 when we defeated Allied Democratic Forces (ADF) having defeated Kony and disarmed the cattle rustlers in Karamoja that for the first time in 500 years we had total peace. I am standing here authoritatively. (Applause) I am a man of this area and not an immigrant from anywhere. (Laughter) 

I am telling you that this is the first time, we have had peace in every corner in the last 500 years.

Therefore, people who are not serious really need to listen carefully. Indeed, rural based insurgency and cattle rustling were totally defeated and cannot resurface. That left us with the issue of crime, both in the rural areas, the towns and along the highways. Remember crime is different from war. There is war and there is crime.

On account of slower pace of life in the rural areas, crime using the old police techniques is easy to detect. There are less cars and “Piki pikis” in the rural areas. If cars and “Piki pikis” are used in crime, they would have heard it, if it was at night or seen it during the day with our ubiquitous telephone network; the residents can contact the police. The police can then mount prompt roadblocks and trap these killers.

If the criminals move on foot, they can easily be traced using police dogs and other techniques. If the police are alert and they work closely with the people that are aroused in terms of vigilance, rural crime is easy to stop. The more troublesome is rural crime – in rural areas, crime revolves around the stealing of vanilla, coffee, bananas, cattle or goats from the gardens. The canine unit of the police – the Minister of Defence and Internal Affairs should at some stage inform you - because God loves human beings so much. He gave us so many things to help us. 

One of the things that can help us are the dogs. Those dogs, I do not know how God created their noses. They can smell anything. I told the former Inspector General of Police to develop many –(Laughter)- the former one –(Laughter)- because he was the one in charge at that time. I told him to develop as many canine units as possible. The Minister of Defence and Internal Affairs should have come and told you how many they have now.

If a dog unit is – even in our old zones; Arua for West Nile, Acholi and Lango even if you have one or two units in each of those zones that dog unit can help us. The problem now is that we need to sensitise the public about interfering with the scene of crime. When something happens, people rush there and trample the scene of crime. Therefore, when you bring the dogs afterwards, they cannot smell because so many people have interfered with the scene.

However, we need to educate the public. Please, if something has happened, do not get near but stay some distance. The police can guide us on how that could be done or if you approach, approach in an organised way, maybe one person to see whether the person is dead or not. Otherwise, the whole village comes and you can no longer get any clues for the forensic; the dogs can no longer smell because there are so many people.

Otherwise, the canine units - for instance, if you find that people have stolen your vanilla at night instead of interfering with the situation, you go back, call the police and let the police come with their dogs and see where the trail leads. They may have stolen the vanilla, walked some distance and then jumped into a vehicle. However, people would have heard the sound of the vehicle in the night. Okay, you may not see it the first time, but now with roadblocks of the police in the area at night, you may catch these people. When you interfere with the scene of crime, then we do not know what to do because you help the criminals to escape. 

The rich farmers can of course, use private security organisations. Those who are rich, have two security people to stay in your garden and you pay them. We could have called up Local Defence Unit (LDUs) for this task. We are however, hesitant because of not wanting to divert money from “Dongo lobo” (development) to the “Dongo” “Lobo”, “Entunguka” (development), “Enkulakulana” or “Apol” in Ateso, how do you call it? In Lugbara, we say “Anguzoza”. 

That is why we try not to call up the LDUs. We can call up the LDUs but that means you will have to pay them, you will have to feed them, cloth them and that is the money we could use to do other things. That is why we are trying to look for smarter solutions as I will show you. 

Even in the towns and the highways where they are more vehicles, more human beings, more “Piki pikis” and more houses; alertness of the police and vigilance of the public would cope with crime. If you analyse the recent murders, they are always clues either before or after, but they are sometimes not followed up by the concerned people. 

Let me give you one example of the women who were being killed in Entebbe. Initially, I did not follow up because I knew the Police were handling it. However, when it happened a number of times, I decided to go there and I spoke with one of the women. This woman owned a building in front of which one of the girls who was killed had a kiosk. She is a young mother in her 30s or 40s, just like many of you here. (Laughter)

As soon as I arrived there, this young mother said, “Naye ka Sarah kano kabeera nga nyo ku masimu” meaning that Sarah, the girl who was killed was always speaking on the phone. She used to see Sarah on the phone because she was renting her space for a kiosk. This lady had been watching this Sarah and she knew her habits. She went on to say that even that day when she was retiring for the day at around 8.00 p.m., somebody was ringing her. So it was very easy to trace these killers, we called them, even with Sarah’s phone.

One wonders why somebody had not bothered to pick information from the landlady because she is the one who told me, “Ka Sarah kano kabeera nga nyo ku masimu” meaning, “this Sarah was always on the phone”. She went ahead to add that even that night when she left at 8.00 p.m. before she died, somebody had called her. From that information, it was very easy and in no time we got those people. 

There is a problem of lack of vigilance by the public and the Police. Police are not bothering to find information, not even bothering to go to the scene. I do not know why those people had not been arrested.

When I went there, I just asked her what happened and she gave me the critical information that led to the arrest of the whole group. When they were arrested, the people in the village were saying, “Si bwe bunno obwaana obubadde butunda wanno ffene?” meaning “These were the children who would come during the day and sell jack fruit.” As they were selling jack fruit, they were making a surveillance of where to steal from. This is just crude village thuggery, not even high level crime but just lack of vigilance.

When I intervened in the murders of women in Entebbe, the New Year’s Day murders in the Masaka area, the murder of Susan Magara, the murders which took place in Namayingo – you know there was a time when Namayingo had become a no-go area. That is where Sheikh Abdu Kadhir and the LC III chairperson of Namayingo Tito Okware were killed in Namayingo. 

I remember I was coming from Karamoja and I went there. I just sat with a few people. Straight away you could see the clues but nobody had bothered to follow them.

Soon after, most of those culprits were arrested and charged in courts of law. 

Negligence and even collusion with the criminals by some elements in the security forces -(Laughter)- has been part of the problem. I had not directly involved myself in the fight against crime until the killing of Maj. Kiggundu and AIGP Kaweesi. I had assumed that the police force, which is now full of educated people, since our 1980 reforms, would handle crime.

One of the reasons we criticised President Idi Amin and the other governments was that they had put people who were not educated in the army and the police and that is why they were not doing their work. 

Therefore, as soon as we had a chance to be in Government in 1980, when we were in the Uganda National Liberation Front Government, the first thing we did was to recruit graduates into the police force. This was the first time it was happening. We recruited the likes of Tinyefuuza, Jim Muhwezi, Odomel, and Katumba Wamala – he was not a graduate at that time, he graduated later. (Laughter) We recruited these people because we wanted a police force of educated people. When you look at their Curriculum Vitae, you will realise that there are very many educated people in the police. I do not think you can be in the police, even as constable if you have not attained at least an A’level qualification.

We have got a police force of educated people. Why should they be bothering an old man like me to go and look for criminals? (Laughter) I had therefore not directly involved myself in the fight against crime until the killing of AIGP Kaweesi. I had assumed the police force, which is full of educated people would handle the crime. 

However, with the earlier killings of the Sheikhs: Mustafa Bahiga, Abdul Kadhir Muwaya, Yusuf Madangu, Abdul Karim Ssentamu, Hassan Kirya, Yunus Mudango, Abdu Jowali Sentuga together with the killing of Joan Kagezi and later the killing of Kiggundu and Kaweesi, I was provoked into direct action. 

I came to the conclusion that just depending on the old police methods and vigilance of the people had to be supplemented with technology to stop crime promptly instead of relying on protracted investigations. 

With the army, police, intelligence and prison service leaders plus the sub-committees of the National Security Council, I have had intensive discussions resulting into conclusions in terms of what needs to be done to subdue undetected crimes which breed impunity in the country. There should be no undetected crimes after we have taken the following measures:

Fingerprinting all the guns in Uganda. (Applause) I have been using guns almost continuously since 1971 - 47 years. I did not, however, know that guns have individual fingerprints. I thought that guns of the same calibre – for example, AK-47 calibre 7.62x39mm – would have the same fingerprint. You know I was using guns for war, not for policing. With war, you do not look for fingerprints; you look for dead bodies. (Laughter)

In my interactions with the police a few months ago, however, they educated me that the cartridges left at the scene of crime can tell us which gun fired which bullet and that they have the machine to read those fingerprints. This police of yours has the machine to read all the fingerprints of guns. That is what I found out recently. 

“Why then are you not using it for all these murders?” I asked them. The answer: “We have not bothered to take the fingerprints of all the guns in Uganda.” They had not bothered. They had not seen it necessary to see that all the guns in Uganda must be fingerprinted in this way. That was amazing but true. 

I have now issued the order in the subcommittee of the national Security Council that all the guns must be fingerprinted by firing each gun a number of times in controlled conditions to capture the fingerprints of each one of them. That will mean that if any legal gun in Uganda is used, we shall know which gun was used and since we know who is carrying which gun, we shall easily know the crime perpetrator. (Applause) That will account for all the legally held guns. If any of them is diverted to crime, we shall know. 

That, however, will not cover the guns smuggled in from the neighbouring countries, which will be captured by other measures. This one will help us to know that there is no legally held gun by the army, police, intelligence services and even the ones held by the licensing Act – because you can go and buy a gun from the police with a licence. All those legally held guns, if they are used, we shall know. That will mean that those ones are now traceable. 

However, that will not capture the ones which are smuggled and are not part of this stored information. For those, we shall use other measures. It will at least remove this problem where the gun is legal but it is loaned to do illegal things and it comes back. That one will be handled.

The second measure we intend to introduce is to require every motor vehicle and “Piki piki” (Motor cycle) to have electronic number plates installed at the cost of the owner. That is where I need your support. (Applause) This is because these number plates which are there now are just a joke. They are screwed on and thrown away. They have no meaning. 

Therefore, we want to introduce electronic number plates with electronic signals in them. (Applause) If you are going to visit your girlfriend or what, we are not interested in those things. (Laughter) Some people are worried that if we can electronically trace you then we shall know your - (Laughter)

You don’t have to worry at all. We can embed it in the law that this information should never be retrieved or looked for, except if your car or “Piki piki” is found on the scene of crime. We can protect privacy. (Laughter) It is only when your car or “Piki piki” is found at the crime scene. Otherwise, if you are doing your other things, why would anybody bother with you? (Laughter)

This will enable us to know which vehicles or “Piki pikis” were in which area if a crime was committed in the different areas. 

The electronic gadgets will be very tuned that if anybody tries to interfere with the number plates, the central monitoring system will be alerted and the registration will be cancelled and we shall go – because like in these cases, they either remove the number plates completely or remove it. You cannot read it. Yes. However, this time if you try to remove it, the central system will be alerted. Why are you trying to interfere with the number plate? We will come for you.

The electronic gadget will be very tuned that if anybody tries to interfere with the number plates, the central monitoring system will be alerted and the registration will be cancelled and we go for the offender.

Thirdly, the police have already banned the practice of people zooming along our roads with jackets that have hoods to hide their identity. There are jackets, which people wear as if they are for warmth but they cover their heads and only leave out the eyes; so, when	they commit crimes even during broad daylight, you cannot see their faces well. The police have banned these jackets and once we see you hooded, we shall challenge you. If you do not – The police will challenge anybody who covers themselves in that way.  

How about the helmets then? If we have banned the hooded jackets, what about the helmets since they also cover the face and someone cannot be seen properly? Should people ride pikipikis without helmets since they also hide identity? No, we need the helmets. However, we need helmets with illuminated numbers both in front and at the back. We want helmets which have illuminated numbers - those that can shine at night - so that you can easily see the number at the back and in front. 

In addition, these helmets will be registered and stored in a central computer system in the police or wherever it is appropriate. I want to persuade National Enterprise Corporation (NEC) and National Social Security Fund (NSSF) to partner with the private sector in manufacturing these number plates and helmets locally. I do not want to lose a lot of foreign exchange on account of helmets, number plates, etcetera.

Uganda Telecommunications Limited (UTL) is working on assembling and manufacturing mobile phones here. The same must be done for the television sets, radios, electricity transformers, among others. These massively consumed items should not be imported but they should be made here. Therefore, the helmets and number plates will have to be made here.

I salute Mzee Mehta for making the cables here for a long time because it has solved one - (the President wears the hooded jacket to demonstrate to Members) - This is how they confuse people. (Laughter)

The master blow to criminals is number four, which is the installation of cameras on town roads, streets and along the highways. As somebody who has been involved in security and combat issues for the last 50 years, I can tell you that potentially, the criminal or the enemy can evade other forms of detection except the optical - eyes, cameras and telescopes. 

When we attacked and overrun Kampala in 1986, few people in the world believed that we had such capacity. Most of the embassies in Kampala were dismissive of our capacity. Why was this so? This was partly because we never used the military radios and telephones for any of our plans. I have been warning the security forces not to depend too much on telephones and things like that because serious criminals will avoid the use of telephones. Those criminals who use telephones are not very serious criminals; they just take advantage of the disorganization.

The one thing that they cannot escape is the optical - the human eye, camera and the telescope - to see. Whatever you do, you cannot escape the human eye, camera and the telescope. That is why I think this should be the anchor of the anti-crime. Therefore, our security forces should use our ears to listen for any clues but they should know that the eye is unbeatable and unflunkable. 

Satellite cameras in space may be obstructed by cloud cover. They are far, above the cloud cover. Therefore, when it is cloudy, the satellite cameras may not see. However, for the cameras that are on the road, they cannot escape them because they are like the human eyes - like the way I am seeing you. I can see whether these are good or bad people - (Laughter) – I can see my lamera.

However, the cameras on the ground, if necessary, will have thermal sensors. This is because we will have the problem of the night - What happens at night if there are no lights? We can have cameras, which have thermal sensors and can read the temperature of the body. These will not fail us. If the criminals try to play their childish games of covering their heads when they are travelling, the man at the command post will see them and then alert the police - “Someone is riding a pikipiki with their head covered, intercept him or her”. That will be very easy. If the person is covering himself or herself with a helmet, it will have illuminated numbers and they will be riding a pikipiki with electronic number plates. 

Someone has asked, how about the villages? People who go to the villages branch off from the main roads. If somebody branched off from the main road going to Chegere in Apac, from the cameras along the main road to Lira, we shall know how many pikipikis branched off that way. It will help us narrow down how many pikipikis branched off to that way on that day. Even if there are no cameras in the village, we shall have a smaller area to look at so that we can follow up.

The fifth method of discovering criminals is having a modern forensic laboratory. I had thought that the electronic national identity cards would solve part of this problem by capturing our fingerprints, only to be told that they only captured thumbprints and not palm prints. Why did you not tell us to provide our palm prints? We, therefore, need to have our palm prints captured. We also need the DNA of the criminals captured so that when blood is left at a crime scene, they are traceable.  

We had a debate within the National Security Council. I did not see any problem with providing my blood sample so that they can keep my DNA in the computer. However, some people said that they do not like their DNA to be in the computer. (Laughter) What is the problem? I do not see it. You see, the good thing with DNA is that if we find blood samples at the scene, we will quickly know whose blood samples they are. If it is a case of rape, then we know very easily who was involved. Even for sweat, we take a jacket like this one, which will be having sweat on it, and we shall know who was sweating in this jacket - (Laughter) – or even saliva and hair. 

Therefore, if we really want our country to be peaceful, there is no need for anyone to fear to give their DNA information to be stored. What do you fear? What is it? Who will lose if all our DNA information is stored centrally so that if there is a problem, we go for DNA testing? Only the criminals are worried – (Interjection) – Therefore, I appeal to you to support me so that we stabilise our country. 

When the country is very peaceful - I normally see our Ugandan grandchildren in the Red Pepper putting up their legs. (Laughter) My wife is always very angry, but I usually tell her, “leave those children, we shall see how to guide them”. This is their freedom. They are free and they stay in their bikeesa or trans-night functions. We shall guide them slowly on how to get out of gambling and these things they are involved in. Otherwise, let there be peace; let there be no crime. (Applause) Please, let us do everything possible to endanger criminals.

With the cameras and other means of detection, the next challenge in the fight against crime, which is point six, is the speed of response and how quickly we arrive at the scene. I have directed the police to revive the 999 system and the Flying Squad. Only that this time the Flying Squad will really be a flying squad and not a crawling squad, which crawls through heavy traffic and you call it a flying squad.

How shall we make it a real flying squad? We shall provide it with Unmanned Air Vehicles (UAVs), which you call drones. This will be in addition to the pikipikis, cars, light helicopters, etcetera. These drones are very useful. We are using them in the army and they help us. You do not have to have people running all over the bush. One person can stay in one place and you send UAVs and they simply watch the whole forest from their warm, air-conditioned room. You do not have to have people wasting money on dry rations, because you know when they go in the field, they want to go with food. Here, the officer will stay in one place and send out this UAV and if there is any call to 999, the drone flies out immediately. If anybody is trying to escape with pikipikis, it will be on him and the rest will follow.

Point No.7: While we use UAVs to fight crime, the enemy can also use them to promote crime. The Defence Committee has authorised 30 legal UAVs. This Defence Committee is chaired by the Commander of the Air force. One hundred and thirty-one applications have been put in for UAVs. These applications are being analysed. Five hundred have been impounded because they were being brought into the country illegally. Some people were trying to bring in UAVs illegally because they wanted to spy on people. I do not know what they wanted to do. Hence, these UAVs must be regulated. 

The responsible minister - I do not who the responsible minister will be; will it be the Minister of Works and Transport, the Minister of Defence or the Minister of Internal Affairs? We shall have to see. The responsible minister, under the Prime Minister, needs to develop a policy and a Bill for Cabinet’s discussion, which will eventually come to Parliament for debate, to control the use of these UAVs.

In the meantime, with the security personnel, we have discussed and agreed on how to deal with the hostile UAVs. There are technical means of neutralising these UAVs. One of the technical means is to jam them and then they fall down. The other one is to locate the sender and then you go after him. These are the small ones, which fly at a low level. The big ones, which fly in the airspace, can be seen by the radar. The radar of the air-force can see them. If the radar sees them, we can shoot them down with air-force planes or missiles. So, these ones are not a problem; they will be handled. They are just a nuisance but we shall use them properly to enhance security.

The eighth point is about the insecurity emerging as a result of misuse of social media. Criminals are suing social media to threaten violence, spread lies and cause panic. We are going to acquire capacity, on top of what the Uganda Communications Commission already has, to quickly locate these criminals without interfering with other honest users. Why do you hide your identity if you are a genuine person who is doing right? You are hiding your identity because you are a liar. We shall get you and expose you. 

Of course, we can also block social media, but I do not want to block it because our grandchildren are using social media. We just need to go for the jigger. When a jigger enters your foot, you do not cut off the whole foot; you just go for the jigger, push until you extract it.

The ninth measure: We shall acquire more scanners, under the Uganda Revenue Authority (URA), to look into all the containers entering and leaving Uganda so that the under declarers of imports stop cheating URA and criminals who infiltrate guns hidden as cargo are apprehended or deterred. In August 1981, the late Gregory Kaluletwa, working for the National Resistance Army, infiltrated a lorry full of rifles and landmines with tea on top, all the way from Burundi through the two borders of Rwanda, through Katuna and delivered the cargo to our units at Najjemba Forest, between Matugga and Wakiso. 

In 1972, I brought 12 rifles in brand new shinning suitcases from Bukoba to Arusha, Moshi, Lunga Lunga border north of Tanga, to Mombasa, Nairobi, Tororo, and all the way to Kampala. (Interjections) Yes, it was treason but it was – (Laughter) – legitimate treason. 

That era of weak or non-existent state authority should have been long over. The scanners we have are not enough. Uganda Revenue Authority already has some scanners but we need more. We need scanners to cover all the land borders, all the landing sites for the wagon ferries - Port Bell and Jinja - and for the airport.

Finally, back to the army, our strategy is to have a small army with a large number of officers, Non-Commissioned Officers (NCOs) and technical crews and also with enough equipment but backed by a large reserve force. We have carried out the audit and identified what needs to be done and we are working on it. Our capacity is robust, created over the last 50 years. We have abundant capacity to guarantee the security of Ugandans. (Applause)

All the criminals, including those hiding in Congo, will pay for their sins. Whatever is done in hiding will be proclaimed on the rooftop. In the Book of Luke 12:2-3, it says as follows: “There is nothing concealed that will not be disclosed, or hidden that will not be made known. What you have spoken in the dark will be heard in the daylight, and what you have whispered in the inner rooms will be proclaimed on the house tops” I thank you. (Applause)

East African Community Anthem

National Anthem

THE SPEAKER: Please take your seats. I will suspend the House for 30 minutes to allow the President leave. The House is suspended for 30 minutes.

 (The House was suspended at 5.04 p.m.)

(On resumption at 5.27 p.m., the Speaker presiding_)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, yesterday some of you expressed concern about the unresolved situation of the social assistance grants for the elders. Considering that we are about to go on recess, Members want a message to take to their constituencies. We asked the Minister of Finance to come and brief us today on what we shall tell the people of Uganda.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE SOCIAL ASSISTANCE GRANTS FOR EMPOWERMENT (SAGE) PROGRAMME

5.29
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, on the issue of SAGE, we would like to update the House on how much we approved this financial year.

The ministry needed Shs 40 billion to implement the Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) that we signed as counterpart funding. We provided Shs 30 billion for the next financial year. We also approved a supplementary budget of Shs 15 billion and you directed yesterday that it must be released before the end of the financial year.

Madam Speaker, looking at a number of scenarios which the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development provided, if we provide for the elders who are 65 years and above, we will require Shs 373.3 billion every year and if we provide for those who are 80 years and above, we will require Shs 142 billion every year. Given that we have now provided for this, I would like to request that you give us more time, as Government, so that we go and discuss this and agree on how we are going to handle it.

However, the status quo is that Shs 30 billion has been approved for the next financial year plus Shs 15 billion for this financial year, which you directed must be released before the end of this financial year. I request that you give us more time to look at different scenarios and come with a statement as Government.  

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, today was supposed to be our last sitting before the recess but several Members of Parliament approached me saying that they want to have an engagement with the President on the issue of security. We have agreed that we shall sit on Tuesday at the Office of the Prime Minister from 11.00 a.m. to whenever we shall end, so that Members can interact with the President. I would like us to use that opportunity to brief the House because Members should be allowed to go to their constituencies. So, it should be on Tuesday before the meeting on security. 

MS CECILIA OGWAL: Madam Speaker, we had made it clear to the Minister of Finance in the Budget Committee meeting that the age limit of 65 years and above would disadvantage many people, especially those from the east and north. Very few people can reach 80 years old in the rural areas.

To be fair, we need to consider 65 years and above. If you leave it at 80 years and above, most of our population would have died. We should be very clear that in our areas, you cannot find many people of 80 years old and above. Therefore, we want 65 years and above.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, let us allow the Government to debate the age limit and then come back to us on Tuesday morning.

5.32
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (GENDER AND CULTURE) (Ms Peace Mutuuzo): Madam Speaker, we know that by the 25th of this month the system will have closed at the Ministry of Finance. We would like to be sure that we will get this money before that date so that we are able to dispense it before the closure. We need Shs 15.3 billion for the financial year 2017/2018 to cover all the beneficiaries in the 40 districts as of now. 

Madam Speaker, as we continue discussing and sharing with the Minister of Finance on the budget for the financial year 2018/2019, can we first have the Shs 15.3 billion which is supposed to cover all the arrears of the 40 districts which are already enrolled on SAGE?

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, yesterday you directed that we ensure that the entire supplementary budget that was appropriated under Schedule No. 2 by this House is released by 30th June. We request that we come back on Tuesday to make a statement. The issues that the hon. Peace Mutuuzo is raising on the Floor will be taken care of in that message.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the House is adjourned sine die but we shall meet on Tuesday for the special meeting on security. 

(The House rose at 5.34 p.m. and adjourned sine die.) 
