
PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA

Wednesday 8 June 2016

Parliament met at 9.55 a.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this morning sitting. We have urgently invited you, because I had adjourned the House to 2.00 p.m. this afternoon for the Budget Speech; however, three important events occurred yesterday; one, I received communication from the President that he has appointed a Vice President and we are required to facilitate his ascendency to office and that is why I called you.

The second one is that the leading Opposition party in Parliament has also finally corrected the grammatical errors and I am happy to announce that hon. Winifred Kiiza, Woman Member of Parliament for Kasese, is the Leader of the Opposition for the Tenth Parliament. We congratulate her and this is a landmark. I believe she is the first woman Leader of the Opposition in the East African region. I really congratulate her and wish her well.

I also want to announce the appointment of hon. Ibrahim Ssemujju Nganda as the Chief Opposition Whip. We congratulate him and wish him well. I think that is all for my communication.
 
CONSTITUTION OF THE APPOINTMENTS COMMITTEE IN ACCORDANCE WITH RULES 151 AND 148(8) OF THE RULES OF PROCEDURE OF PARLIAMENT

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we are required to set up an Appointments Committee to vet the presidential nominees for Cabinet, Ambassadors and other commissions and agencies. Can I invite the Government Chief Whip of the NRM to present her nominees? Can I invite the Leader of the Opposition to name your nominees to the Appointments Committee?

9.59
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Ms Winifred Kiiza): Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, according to our Rules, I hereby wish to nominate hon. Betty Aol, Woman Representative, Gulu and hon. Francis Mwijukye from Buhweju as  Members representing the Forum for Democratic Change (FDC) on the Appointments Committee.

Accordingly, Madam Speaker, the Leader of the Opposition is a Member of this committee. Therefore, we become three Members on this committee from FDC. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the question is that the Leader of the Opposition, hon. Winifred Kiiza, hon. Betty Aol and hon. Mwijukye be approved as Members of the Appointments Committee.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: There were no Noes; everybody said yes. Honourable members, I am the Whip of the Independents and I would like to present the following names: Hon. Margaret Rwabushaija, Workers Representative; hon. Herbert Kinobere, Kibuku County; and hon. Ojara Okin, Chua West County as nominees for the Appointments Committee. Can they stand up? - Do you want to see them? I know them. 

Okay, we defer the approval until –(Interjections)- honourable members, I am their whip, I know them. Please, trust me. I put the question that hon. Rwabushaija, hon. Kinobere and hon. Ojara be approved as Members of the Appointments Committee.

(Question put and agreed to.)

10.02
MR JOSEPH SSEWUNGU (DP, Kalungu County West, Kalungu): Madam Speaker, I am the DP Whip and a Member of the Appointments Committee. I would only plead that I wish you gave us a second person if possible because my party has 15 Members.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, that is hon. Ssewungu the Whip of Democratic Party. He is a Member by virtue of his office. The other issues will be addressed later. 

I put the question that hon. Ssewungu be approved as a member of the Appointments Committee.

(Question put and agreed to.)

10.04
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Ms Winifred Kiiza): Madam Speaker, the UPC Whip is hon. Santa Alum. She is not in the House but the UPC Party agreed that the Whip represents them on the Appointments Committee and I am sure by the time the committee sits, she will be around. 

I, therefore, wish to present hon. Santa Alum of Uganda People’s Congress (UPC) as the representative of the Party on the Appointments Committee.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the question is that hon. Santa Alum, the Whip of UPC be approved as a Member of the Appointments Committee.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Nzoghu, what is the problem? 
 
MR NZOGHU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The procedural matter I am raising is in respect to the UPC nomination and yet, on the list of the ministers, which was presented by His Excellency the President of the Republic of Uganda-

THE SPEAKER: We are dealing with the Appointments Committee and not dealing with the Cabinet. Hon. Nzoghu, the item on the Order Paper is constitution of the Appointments Committee under item No. 3.

MS JOY ATIM: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. We are on the Appointments Committee and we know that hon. Santa Alum represents UPC as a Whip. UPC is a party; if individuals have been nominated or seconded or appointed as ministers, they have gone as individuals and they do not represent UPC. 

I would like to assure the honourable member that I am a member of the UPC. Can we have a document that shows that UPC has officially seconded the person in question or people in question as UPC? Is he in order to disrespect the position of UPC on the Appointments Committee? Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, both of you are out of order for introducing matters that are not on the Order Paper. (Laughter) We are dealing with Appointments Committee. Hon. Santa Alum is the Whip of the UPC and is approved as a Member of the Appointments Committee. 

10.07
MS RUTH NANKABIRWA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kiboga): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  I beg to present the following names as Members of the Appointments Committee representing the National Resistance Movement. 

The first one is hon. Arinaitwe Rwakajara representing Workers; hon. Moses Balyeku Grace, Jinja Municipality West; hon. Hellen Addoa, Woman Representative Serere District; hon. Robina Rwakoojo from Gomba West; hon. Hellen Asamo, PWD Eastern Region; hon. Henry Makumbi from Mityana South; hon. Janet Okori-moe from Abim District; hon. Beatrice Rwakimari from Ntungamo District; hon. Omony Oscar Otema, Youth Representative Northern Region; hon. Apollo Yeri Ofwono from Tororo Municipality; hon. Rukiya Chekamondo, Kapchorwa District; hon. Ashraf Noah Olega from Aringa County; and hon. Lowila CD Oketayot from Pader District. I beg to present, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Are they here?

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: They are present; they can stand up.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that all those names presented by the NRM party be approved as members of the Appointments Committee.

(Question put and agreed to.)

10.10
CAPT. SUZAN LAKOT (UPDF Representative): Thank you, Madam Speaker. As the Whip of the UPDF, I wish to propose the name of Gen. Elly Tumwine to be the Member of the Appointments Committee. I beg to present.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the question is that Gen. Elly Tumwine be approved as a member of the Appointments Committee.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I would like to thank you for fulfilling that duty. The Appointments Committee is now in place. We shall inform you when business is available. The other committees will be constituted probably towards the end of next week or early next week.


MOTION SEEKING PARLIAMENTARY APPROVAL OF THE APPOINTMENT OF THE VICE-PRESIDENT IN ACCORDANCE WITH ARTICLE 108(2) OF THE CONSTITUTION OF THE REPUBLIC OF UGANDA

10.11
MS RUTH NANKABIRWA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kiboga): Madam Speaker, honourable members of the Tenth Parliament, I am standing here to move a motion for a resolution of Parliament seeking parliamentary approval of the appointment of hon. Edward Kiwanuka Ssekandi as Vice President of the Republic of Uganda and this is under Article 108(2) of the Constitution of Uganda.

“WHEREAS Article 108(2) of the Constitution provides that the Vice President shall be appointed by the President with the approval of Parliament by a simple majority; 

AND WHEREAS the President has appointed hon. Edward Kiwanuka Ssekandi as Vice President and seeks approval of this Parliament for the appointment; 

AND NOTING that hon. Edward Kiwanuka Ssekandi being a citizen of Uganda and not less than 35 years old and not more than 75 years of age, and qualifies to be a Member of Parliament, and is eligible in terms of Article 108(4) of the Constitution, be appointed as a Vice President of Uganda;

NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved by this Parliament as follows:

That in accordance with Article 108(2) of the Constitution of Uganda that Parliament approves the appointment of hon. Edward Kiwanuka Ssekandi as Vice President of the Republic of Uganda by the President of this country.” I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: The motion is seconded by several Members. 

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Madam Speaker and fellow Members of the Tenth Parliament, hon. Edward Kiwanuka Ssekandi has been living since 1943. (Laughter) He is born to Mr Alex Kiwanuka and Mrs Vigo Kiwanuka of Bulegeya in Kyanamukaka Masaka and he is the Ninth Vice President of the Republic of Uganda. (Laughter)

Edward Kiwanuka Ssekandi is an old boy of Lubiri Secondary School and St Mary’s College, Kisubi. He holds a Bachelor of Law Degree from the University of East Africa, Dar es Salaam. He also holds a Diploma in Legal Practice from the Law Development Centre, Kampala.

Hon. Ssekandi was appointed State Attorney of the Government of Uganda in 1969 and he held that position up to 1973. This is when he started lecturing at the Law Development Centre, Kampala and later became a Principal Lecturer and Head of the Department of Law at LDC in the early 1970s. He was enrolled as an advocate of the High Court of Uganda.

Hon. Ssekandi was also appointed head of postgraduate Bar Course when he became the Acting Director at the Law Development Centre. A year later, he went into private practice with the establishment of his own law firm – Kiwanuka Ssekandi and Company Advocates. I am one of his clients. (Laughter) 

Before joining active politics, from 1982 to 1985, he was the Chancellor of Namirembe Diocese. From 1986 to 1993, he was lead counsel for the Commission of Inquiry, which was established to inquire into the violations of human rights in Uganda for the period between 1962 and January 1988.

Earlier on, in 1986, hon. Ssekandi was elected vice-chairman of the Law Council Disciplinary Committee – he is a disciplinarian. In 1994, he was elected as a Delegate representing Bukoto Central in the Constituent Assembly, which deliberated the 1995 Constitution of Uganda. 

This is when I first got in touch with hon. Ssekandi because we were both Members of the Constituent Assembly and we both chose to join the Legal and Drafting Committee, a very key committee, which enabled the delegates of the Constituent Assembly to come up with a document called the “Constitution of Uganda” which was embraced by all Ugandans.

In 1996, hon. Ssekandi contested for the Bukoto Central seat, which he won, thus becoming a Member of Parliament. I became a Woman Member of Parliament representing Kiboga District, and got in touch with hon. Edward Kiwanuka Ssekandi in the Sixth Parliament. (Laughter) I am presenting to you the person I understand well and with whom I have worked. I stand with all the confidence to talk about him and I am adducing evidence to that effect. (Laughter) We did not serve on the same committees in the Sixth Parliament. He chaired the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline. Honourable Members will come to understand the importance of this committee.

He was later appointed Chairperson of the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs until 1998. After two years in Parliament, Mr Edward Ssekandi was, in September 1998, flagged for the Deputy Speakership post and he was embraced by the Sixth Parliament for that position, which he held until July 2000. On winning the Bukoto seat again, in 2001, he was voted as Speaker of the Seventh Parliament until 2006. 

In 2006, he was re-elected Member of Parliament on the NRM ticket and later re-elected as Speaker of the Eighth Parliament, a position he held for five years until 2011. During that time, as Speaker of Parliament of Uganda, he was also elected Chairperson of the African Parliamentary Union (APU) and also President of the Parliamentary Union of the Organisation of Islamic Countries, until 2011. 

In May 2011, hon. Edward Kiwanuka Ssekandi was appointed Uganda’s Ninth Vice President. Edward Ssekandi is a very responsible father and husband. He is married to Margaret Ssekandi and the couple has been blessed with children –[Members chorus: “How many?”]- (Laughter) In hon. Edward Kiwanuka Ssekandi’s culture, we do not count children. (Laughter)

Madam Speaker, I have hon. Edward Ssekandi’s curriculum vitae; it is very fat; it is huge. I have only tried to summarise it but I will deliver copies to Members of the Tenth Parliament. (Interjections) Thank you very much the staff for the work you did in circulating the copies of the CV of hon. Edward Kiwanuka Ssekandi.

I would like to say that the person I am presenting is not the same that was presented in 2011 for Vice-President. He is a product with added value. The five years of experience in the Office of the Vice-President is an experience itself and experience is wealth; it is wisdom. I want to use this opportunity to thank the Members of the Sixth, Seventh and Eighth Parliaments who appointed hon. Edward Kiwanuka Ssekandi in those positions by approving his nomination and appointment.

I cannot end without thanking the people of Bukoto Central who have continued trusting hon. Edward Kiwanuka Ssekandi, a thing that has made the appointing authority have more confidence in Edward Ssekandi. This is because we have seen many people lose opportunities because their people have not appointed them. Thank you very much, the people of Bukoto Central. Thank you very much, Members of Parliament. Thank you very much, Your Excellency, the President of Uganda, for trusting hon. Edward Kiwanuka Ssekandi.

Lastly, to you colleagues of the Tenth Parliament, I want to thank you for your kind attention. I also want to thank you for what you are going to do by approving the appointment of hon. Edward Kiwanuka Ssekandi. Thank you very much. I beg to submit.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, hon. Nankabirwa. Can I invite hon. Odonga Otto, the Member of Parliament, Aruu County in Pader District, to second the motion?

10.24
MR ODONGA OTTO (FDC, Aruu County, Pader): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I wish to congratulate you for assuming that office since it is my maiden speech in this Parliament.

Madam Speaker, I am here to second the motion approving hon. Edward Kiwanuka Ssekandi as the Vice-President of the Republic of Uganda. I have been in Parliament for 16 years and when I finish, I will make 20 years. When I joined Parliament in 2001, it was hon. Edward Ssekandi who made life easy for us Members of Parliament who were barely 23 years old.

He is a very simple Ugandan. He is not pompous like others we know. (Laughter) He is very humble, right and fitting for the purpose. At this point, I wish to thank the Democratic Party for grooming such a humble Ugandan. (Laughter) 

THE SPEAKER: Order, Please.

MR ODONGO OTTO: Madam Speaker, in the Seventh Parliament, we had three memorial incidences of Rt Hon. Ssekandi as the Speaker then. He was very kind to Members. On some incidences, he would tell Members, “Honourable member, the Constitutional Court is just across the road. In case you are disagreeing with my judgment, feel free.” On another occasion, he ruled to an honourable colleague, whose name I would not like to mention because he is not in this House. He said, “Honourable member, this is the Parliament of Uganda, the national theatre is just across the road.” (Laughter) Such humor made the Seventh Parliament lively. He would put you to order without you feeling you are out of order. This is a person I am standing to second for the position of the Vice President of the Republic of Uganda. (Applause)

Unlike other leaders, hon. Edward Ssekandi visited northern Uganda frequently. For avoidance of doubt, he visited Barlonyo scene where the LRA executed people massively in the Lango sub region. We have had people who have been in big offices, even at the level of Prime Minister but they have taken over 25 years without reaching northern Uganda.  

I would like to appeal to this August House to support the candidature of hon. Edward Ssekandi. There is an old saying that “You do not fatten a cow on the market day”. Hon. Edward Ssekandi deserves to be in that position. He has worked for his name over the years and he deserves to be there. (Applause) Madam Speaker, as Catholics, we are happy for the appointment of one of us to such a highly placed office. Also as an advocate, when I joined this Parliament in 2001, I was just a political scientist. However, hon. Edward Ssekandi encouraged me and made it possible for me to join law school while being a Member of Parliament. Today, as I speak, I have been practicing law for four years now, courtesy of the hon. Edward Ssekandi whom I am standing to second.

Madam Speaker, now, that we are electing Rt Hon. Edward Ssekandi to that powerful office, we pray and wish him good health so that he can serve this country diligently. As you will be the second most important citizen of this country, I have three prayers that you will take to the first citizen.

    1) The presidential pledges in Uganda still stand at Shs 11.6 trillion, which is equivalent to one year’s budget for the Government of Uganda. That is if we stop doing all other things. We urge you to use that office diligently so that the presidential pledges are met.

    2) Being calm, civil and kind in character, we urge you to implore the President, to unconditionally forgive Dr Kiiza Besigye. These are political problems not legal problems. We can be here with all the positions but someone is incarcerated. This country needs to release him now that we have the Government formally constituted and nominated.

    3) Kindly, inform His Excellency, the President that the composition of Cabinet ministers is not fair now that you are going there with our support. As we talk now, we have 13 cabinet ministers from western Uganda, five from the north, five from east and five from the central. This is not the kind of regional balance we want in this country.  I would like to implore the House to genuinely and wholesomely second and support hon. Edward Ssekandi to go to that big office; you have a big task and we shall be waiting at the road side.

I would like to implore Members – some of you could have expected to be the Vice President – (Laughter) However, that is not how the world works. Some of you were also expecting to be ministers. But the reality has shown its true colours in your faces. I, therefore, urge Members to wish hon. Edward Ssekandi well and support him for that office. We also pray that he has good health. May God bless him and this country. I beg to second.  

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, hon. Odonga Otto.  Can I now invite hon. Joseph Ssewungu Gonzaga, Member of Parliament for Kalungu West, and Democratic Party Whip, to also second the motion.

10.30
MR JOSEPH SSEWUNGU GONZAGA (DP, Kalungu West, Kalungu): Madam Speaker, as a professional teacher, I will not take long. First of all, there is one thing missing about hon. Ssekandi. He is a son of a former seminarian. We are only lucky that his father was chased out of seminary. Otherwise, he would not have been born. (Laughter) When I am supporting him, I look at a son of Alex Ssekandi. 

Madam Speaker, it is true, hon. Ssekandi was a democrat and indeed, he worked with my father. However, I would like to talk about his qualities.

Honourable members, if you are an NRM member and you do not have hon. Ssekandi’s telephone number, you are in a wrong place. He is one of those diplomats you can call any time and he picks his phone. That is very important. You will find someone who belongs to a certain office, be it Vice President but his or her phones are never on. But whenever I go for meetings, he says, this is my telephone number. When you call, he or she will never pick. Hon. Ssekandi does not do that.

Madam Speaker, hon. Ssekandi is a dedicated person. Whenever you seek for an appointment with him, he will honour it and will be ready to receive you. He will never delegate to anyone else on his behalf. When you invite him as a Chief Guest, he will appear. One time, a former Member of Parliament, asked me “hon. Ssewungu, whom should I ask to be my chief guest at my function”? I asked him what kind of function? It was a function of the Catholic Church. He requested me to get someone who could give him a lot of money even if he or she will not attend. I then asked him, “Why do you want the chief guest?” It is not about money but the presence of the chief guest in the function. Indeed hon. Ssekandi does that.

Madam Speaker, hon. Ssekandi restored the dignity and respect of the office of Vice President. Some of us have been following things that were taking place then. What has been happening in the Ninth Parliament is that hon. Ssekandi restored the respect and dignity of this office. 

Madam Speaker, the person I am supporting is predictable, dependable and he does not backstab. (Applause) There is that kind of behavior in politics. I am standing here talking sense, you love me but you cannot talk about me before my master. What hon. Ssekandi says during the day is what he says at night and he does the same. Why can’t he be the Vice President?

Madam Speaker, the gentleman I am supporting is calm. Even if you try to attack him, he will just hold on until you settle by virtue of his faith and then you will handle your matters. (Laughter) He is even fashionable. That is why you saw the ceremonial attire he wore. (Laughter) When there was a purported ceremonial uniform, he clad the same. (Laughter) When I saw him, I asked what was happening that the Vice President was so smart in the new attire. I was told that was the new attire. At least, he was following Members’ suggestions. That kind of passion is at the helm. (Laughter)

I have never worked with him but I have seen his work. Madam Speaker, hon. Ssekandi belongs to Pope Paul Social Club. This is a very strong club, which was commissioned by Pope John Paul VI and he is a lively member there. He is not that person you will find rotating everywhere; he has a particular place he belongs. 

He is a member of the Buganda Caucus and indeed, I would like to thank him very much for all the support and negotiations he has conducted on the issues rotating around the Buganda Kingdom. He is also a member of the Catholic Chaplaincy to which I am the Treasurer in this Parliament. 

Therefore, I do not have any message, through him, to the President but the only message, maybe, is to ask the President to retire and he takes over if the Constitution permits. It is because you have all the qualities to be one. (Laughter) Madam Speaker, I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, hon. Ssewungu. Honourable members, the motion has been moved and seconded. We now need to take a decision. When we started the proceedings, we had 235 Members, but since then, many more have come. Today, we are not going to take roll-call but we shall vote by a show of hands. Therefore, we shall vote section by section while the clerks count. Therefore, I now put the question-

MR GILBERT OLANYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a point of procedure. Article 113(2) Constitution states, “The total number of Cabinet ministers shall not exceed twenty-one except with the approval of Parliament.” Madam Speaker, from the list of the Cabinet ministers we saw -

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Olanya, you are out of order. We are not dealing with Cabinet; we are dealing with the approval of the Vice President.

MR OLANYA: Madam Speaker, I was trying to inquire from you if we can, may be-

THE SPEAKER: You will inquire when we are dealing with Cabinet. Now, we are dealing with the Vice President.

MR OLANYA: Most obliged, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. 

PROF. KAMUNTU: Madam Speaker, I am standing to seek your guidance. Given the importance of the position of the Vice President and the fact that a motion has been moved and seconded; wouldn’t it be appropriate to allow one or two Members to contribute to the motion?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I do appreciate the need for Members to give further support to the nominee. However, the air conditioner is not working well in this room today. Therefore, I do not want to keep Members for too long. I would like them to be free and go to another place. You will speak next time, hon. Kamuntu. Honourable Members, I put the question-

MR NZOGHU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Article 108(7) of the 1995 Constitution as amended says, and is specific with the period in which the Vice President is supposed to be appointed, “Where the office of Vice President becomes vacant, the President shall, with the approval of Parliament, and as soon as possible but in any case not later than 14 days, appoint a person qualified to hold the office of Vice President.”

Madam Speaker, the procedural matter I am raising is whether it is okay right now after 28 days for us to conduct this business. I seek your guidance, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I was not privy to the departure from Cabinet of its members. If I had a letter saying “good bye” to them, I would be counting the days. However, what I have is the letter informing me that there is a new Vice President and that is what we are doing today. (Applause) Therefore, we are in order. 

Honourable members, I put the question that hon. Edward Kiwanuka Ssekandi, Member of Parliament for Bukoto Central be approved as the Vice President of Uganda. Therefore, we shall start voting.

(Members voted by a show of hands.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the results are as follows: Members abstaining are nine; Members against are four and Members in favour are 280. I declare that the motion moved by hon. Ruth Nankabirwa Sentamu, seconded by hon. Odonga Otto and hon. Joseph Ssewungu, in respect to the appointment of the Vice President has been carried. 

Congratulations to his Excellency the Vice President. May I invite you to make an acceptance speech if you wish?

10.46
THE VICE-PRESIDENT (Mr Edward Senkadi): Madam Speaker, Rebecca Kadaga - incidentally she is my sister - Honourable members of Parliament, without dividing you in parties, because I know you are supporting me irrespective of whether you belong to my party or not, I would like to dearly thank you for what you have done today.

However, Madam Speaker, in a special way, I would like to thank his Excellency the President of Uganda, Yoweri Kaguta Museveni, for the confidence he has expressed to me by appointing me his Vice President. I must say, His Excellency the President has observed me for a very long time because we were together in the University of East Africa, Dar-es-salaam, and has always followed me.

Therefore, he did not just rush into doing this. He must have really scrutinised me and he has confidence in me. For that, I would like to thank him and I would like to say that I will serve him to the best of my ability. (Applause)

I would like to inform Members who are representing the entire country that I will serve you and the people of Uganda without discrimination. I do what I am supposed to do. I would like to inform you that you should not fear, for instance, what I say during day time will not be different from what I say at night. I would like to say that I will serve you and I will do whatever I can to my best.

I will not change my position because you are absent or because you are present. What I will say in your presence is what I will say in your absence. This, I swear, I will do my best for the entire country as I have mentioned, not because one belongs to this or the other party; I am serving the entire country and the people of Uganda and therefore, I will do my best. I thank God for guiding me. Thank you very much. Your man, Ssekandi.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Your Excellency, the Vice President. In my other capacity, can I bring you congratulations from your relatives on the other side of the River Nile; you will understand.

Honourable members, I would like to thank you very much for performing that responsibility. The House is adjourned to 14:00 hours at Serena International Conference Centre for the Budget Speech. There was an issue about the weather conditions; I was informed that yesterday, the last Member submitted their details because that is what has been causing a problem; by Friday, there will be some rains. House adjourned.

(The House rose at 10.50 a.m. and adjourned to 2 p.m.) 

