Tuesday, 30 June 2015

Parliament met at 2.43 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this afternoon’s sitting. As I indicated last week, Parliament will no longer remain in analogue; we have to go digital. Therefore, with effect from today, registration shall be done electronically using the four machines in the four corners of the Chamber. Members are requested to clock in as they come in. There will be a clerk available from 12.30 p.m. until we close the registration. Thank you.

2.46
MS ROSE AKOL (NRM, Woman Representative, Bukedea): Madam Speaker, we tried to log in as we were coming in but it seems the machines are defective. If there are any Members who have logged in, they may be one or none – (Interjections) - Twenty have logged in but the rest have not.

THE SPEAKER: Well, the clerk will sort that out. Let us proceed.

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE PARLIAMENTARY PENSIONS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2014

THE SPEAKER: As Commissioner Akol comes, join me in welcoming our friend, hon. Sarah Nansubuga Nyombi, the former Member of Parliament for Ntenjeru in Kayunga District. I see some other people there but I do not know who they are as yet. I will inform you when I get the information.

2.47
MS ROSE AKOL (NRM, Woman Representative, Bukedea): Thank you, Madam Speaker. This Bill was laid on the Table last year in April and it seeks to amend the various Articles in the current Parliamentary Pensions Scheme Act and also to bring the Parliamentary Pensions Act in conformity with the Uganda Retirement Benefits Authority Act, being the parent law that governs all pension schemes in the country.

Madam Speaker, the main object is also to:
    1. Provide for members of staff of the Parliamentary Pensions Scheme to be members of the pension scheme because as we talk, there is already the Liberalisation Bill with Parliament and once the liberalisation law is enacted, every wage earning person in this country is supposed to belong to a pension scheme. Therefore, we thought it proper to align ourselves with that position so that our staff belong to our Parliamentary Pension Scheme.
    2. Change the pensionable period of service in order to qualify for a pension from five to ten years. This is so that staff and Members of Parliament, who are members of the scheme, should have served as a member of staff for 10 years and as a Member of Parliament for at least two years of service in order to get a reasonable pension. Otherwise, you qualify for payment of your lump sum outright; that is if the period of service is below or at 10 years or if you are below 45 years of age.
    3. Provide for additional voluntary contribution in this Bill.
    4.  Trivial pension, which is already provided for in our regulations but we wanted to align it with the law.

Madam Speaker, at this juncture, I would like to request the chairperson of the relevant committee, which is the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs, to come and read their report so that we go through it. They have gone through this Bill and have their report ready. I beg to present.

THE SPEAKER: Is the motion seconded? Okay, it is seconded by several Members.

2.51
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON LEGAL AND PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS (Mr Stephen Tashobya): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. This is a report of the Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Committee on the Parliamentary Pensions (Amendment) Bill, 2014.

Madam Speaker, the Parliamentary Pensions (Amendment) Bill, 2014 was read for the first time on 10 September 2014 and referred to the Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Committee for scrutiny. The committee scrutinised the Bill in accordance with rules 117 and 118 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament (2012).

Madam Speaker, in 2007, Parliament passed the Parliamentary Pensions Act, which created a contributory pensions scheme for Members of Parliament and staff of Parliament and established the Parliamentary Pensions Fund. This is the second amendment to the principal Act of 2007. The first amendment Bill was moved in 2010 seeking to amend the Parliamentary Pensions Act.

The first amendment was introduced by hon. Biraahwa Mukitale, the then Chairperson of the Parliamentary Pensions Board of Trustees and this august House passed it in 2011. The amendments sought to:
    i. Clarify on membership by including Members of Parliament, who were not members as at 2 July 2001.
    ii. Clarify on the type of pension scheme that was created.
    iii. Transfer of members benefits to another pension scheme upon retirement or withdrawal from the scheme.
    iv. Provide for dispute resolution; and, 
    v. Provide for disability pension, amongst others.

Madam Speaker, the second amendment to the principal Act; the Parliamentary Pensions (Amendment) Bill, 2014 was presented in September 2014 and among the objectives of that Bill was: 
        i. To give a corporate status to the Parliamentary Pensions Scheme and to provide for additional powers of the board of trustees.
        ii. To provide for continuity of board membership.
        iii. Change the pensionable period of service from five to 10 years of continuous service.
        iv. Include the staff on the Parliamentary Pensions Scheme as members of the scheme.
        v. Provide for additional voluntary contribution.
        vi. Change the duration of the actuarial valuation from five years to three years.
        vii. Provide for trivial pension.

Madam Speaker, we met a number of stakeholders but we also had a study tour to Kenya where we met the Retirement Benefits Authority of Kenya. 

Stakeholders raised the following issues:
    1. Clause 3 seeks to amend section 5 of the principal Act by allowing staff of the Parliamentary Pensions Scheme to become members of the scheme. The staff of the Parliamentary Pensions Scheme are employed on contract basis and make their contributions to NSSF. This would compromise the proposed clause on establishment of a body corporate and create a conflict of interest.
    2.  Clause 5 introduces voluntary contributions by members of the scheme towards the scheme and a planned contribution would distort planning for the scheme.
    3. Clause 16 seeks to give powers to the board to delegate any of its powers to any other person. The provision does not specify which powers the board can delegate.
    4. Clause 16 seeks to empower the board to borrow money. The stakeholders were of the view that the pension scheme must restrict the investments to members’ contribution.
    5. Compliance with the Uganda Retirement Benefits Authority has led to increased operational costs in form of fees, the authority itself and fees to third parties such as the investment manager and custodian. All this is charged as a percentage of the value of the pension assets.
    6.  In addition to the fees in (5), the scheme pays 30 per cent of gross earnings from investment activities as income tax to Uganda Revenue Authority as opposed to SACCOs where investment activities withholding tax is the final tax obligation. The exorbitant tax levy on the scheme erodes availability of funds to members in form of enhanced interest payments.
    7.  Further, section 7B of the Parliamentary Pensions Act restricts the lending out of the scheme fund to any person. The exception is section 7B(2), which allows a member to utilise a portion of his or her benefits to secure a mortgage or a loan for purchasing a residential house. This is not easy to operationalise.
    8. The scheme funds should be available to members as loans at a low interest rate.

Findings and observations of the Committee:

1. 	Section 92 of the Uganda Retirement Benefits Act, 2011, provides that the Act takes precedence over other Acts regarding pension matters. The Parliamentary Pensions Scheme has to be subjected to the provisions of the URBRA Act. Any law in conflict with the Act must be amended to bring it in conformity with the Act.

2. 	The trustees of a pension scheme must be skilled people or professionals, especially in financial and investment matters. The trustees have the main responsibility for the administration of a pension scheme and compliance with the requirements that apply to that scheme. Even if the day-to-day administration is delegated, the trustees are still responsible for the scheme. They have to be aware of the up to date position in respect of the documentation governing the scheme and should take steps to ensure that they are sufficiently informed to discharge their duties and responsibilities as trustees.

	They have to keep evaluating the fund manager, they have to participate in drawing of the investment policy, which policy should have risk controls, research and access allocation. Trustees must undergo trustee training as frequently as possible.

3. 	The Bill proposes to include the staff of the Parliamentary Pensions Scheme as members of the scheme. The committee made the following observations on this proposal:
a) 	The Parliamentary Pensions Scheme is a hived scheme under which members and the government make contributions to the fund.
b) 	The scheme is a defined contribution scheme where the benefit is defined in accordance with a hived with balance benefit formula as provided for in Schedule one of the Parliamentary Pensions Act. Where the fund cannot sufficiently recover the benefit of an entitled beneficiary, the government will have to make good the benefit.
c) 	The staff of the Parliamentary Pensions Scheme, being employed on a contract basis, have to be catered for under a special arrangement. The proposal is for the scheme i.e. members’ contribution, to provide the 30 per cent for the staff of the Parliamentary Pensions Scheme. Madam Speaker, this is not an acceptable expense considering best pension governing practices.
d) 	Where employees are employed on contract basis as opposed to permanent and pensionable basis, the appropriate retirement scheme for such employees is a provident fund like the National Social Security Fund.
e) 	The staff of the secretariat of the Parliamentary Pensions Scheme are the administrators of the scheme. To this effect therefore, the committee observed that to ensure effective dministration of the pension scheme, the administrator of the pension scheme should be independent of the scheme.

4. The proposed Bill intends to introduce voluntary contributions and the committee made the following observations:
a) 	For voluntary contribution to be allowed in the scheme, there is need to have proper laid down guidelines to cater for such.
b) 	The funds have to be deducted from source for a period by a member.
c) 	The arrangement requires a separate account and the member decides whether to withdraw the lumpsum amount or spread it over a period of time by purchasing annuity.
d) 	The Parliamentary Pensions Scheme is a defined contribution benefit scheme where benefits accruing to a member are determined basing on the provided formula. Allowing voluntary contributions may not augur well in the existing scheme.

5) On whether the scheme funds can be lent out, the committee made the following observations:
a) 	The best pension governing practices worldwide require that any Act, rules, regulations or deed documents establishing a pension scheme must put in place restrictions on the use of the scheme funds. The fundamental restriction is that the scheme funds should not be lent to any person.
b) 	The URBRA Act, section 68 puts restriction on the use of scheme funds. Section 68(1)(b) and (c) stipulate that the scheme funds shall not be lent to any person except through securities sold on the open market or be invested with the bank, non-banking financial institution, insurance company or any other institution with a view of securing loans or mortgages at a preferential rate of interest.

c) 	Subsection (2) of section 68 gives an exception that a prescribed portion of the benefits accruing to a member in a retirement scheme may be assigned and used by a member:
    i. To secure a mortgage or a loan for purchasing a residential house from any institution; or,
    ii. To pay for medical treatment in respect of the member on recommendation of the Uganda Medical Board.

d) 	Section 7 of the Parliamentary Pensions Act provides the same in respect of a mortgage or loan for a residential house. The proposed amendment will bring in the option of securing a proportion of a member’s contribution for purposes of covering medical bills.

6) 	The committee found that for a defined benefits scheme, it is very important to have the actuarial evaluation often. The recommended period for the defined benefit scheme is three years. The committee, therefore, agrees with the proposal to reduce the period of actuarial evaluation from five to three years. A lot of things that require our attention could have happened in a period of five years. If there is need for intervention, it will be done early enough to cure any mishap.

7. 	The committee agrees with the proposal to have the Parliamentary Pensions Scheme become a corporate entity.

Recommendations:

    1. The committee recommends that the composition of the board of trustees should be revised. The board should be composed of persons having experience or a professional rating in the field of finance, statistics, actuarial studies, accounts or law. The board of trustees is the engine of the scheme that has to make fundamental decisions.
    2. The committee further recommends that the board of trustees should submit a bi-annual report on the performance of the scheme to Parliament for consideration.
    3. There is need to amend the Parliamentary Pensions Act to bring it in conformity with the URBRA Act.
    4. The staff of the Parliamentary Pensions Scheme should maintain remitting their contributions to NSSF, which is a provident fund appropriate for their circumstances.
    5. The Parliamentary Pensions Scheme should consider introducing the voluntary contribution, if only there are proper guidelines in place. This requires putting up a separate account for the voluntary contributions for a defined contribution scheme.
    6. The committee recommends that the Bill be passed into an Act of Parliament, subject to the following amendments.   

Madam Speaker, the report is duly signed by members of the committee and I beg to move. I thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, the chairperson and members of the Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Committee for the work done on this Bill.

Before we proceed, I would like you to join me in welcoming members of Uganda Debt Network who are part of the civic society. They are here to observe the proceedings of the House. You are welcome. (Applause)

Honourable members, the report is eligible for debate as it has the minimum number of signatures. You have three minutes each.

3.06
MR EMMANUEL DOMBO (NRM, Bunyole County East, Butaleja): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I do support the various amendments to the Act and at the right time, we shall specifically support particular amendments that we ascribe to.
I stand here to debate the recommendation of the committee regarding the proposition that had been made to evaluate the possibility of the pension fund lending directly to its members. Madam Speaker, I would like to beg the indulgence of this House to allow me to give a background on how we eventually came up with the pension law in the first instance and what it was intended to cure. 

Until 2007, Members of Parliament were not entitled to a pension, despite their contribution and input. This usually led to Members living in a deplorable state, especially if they were bundled out of their gainful work by the electorate. This situation became direr because Members of Parliament are the only employees of Government who subsidise Government work by using their personal gainful income to do work that would have been funded by Government. 

When it comes to elections and a Member of Parliament loses an election, he will have, at the same time, blown all the personal savings that he would have had thereby becoming worse off than what an honourable member was just a few days ago. In the wisdom of this House, it was decided that we come up with a contributory pension scheme, which we put in place.

Madam Speaker, Members should note that at the beginning of this pension scheme, it was deemed that Government made a contribution effective from the previous Parliament and Government took time to make good its contribution. The contributions were not much, therefore, making the fund small.  

In the initial stages, the fund was available in the Bank of Uganda but this money was not being invested, partially because the administrative structure had not been set up. When they started investing this money – when you go to the parent Act and you look at the objectives of the fund – (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, I do not know why you do not go straight to what you are proposing because the justification for that law was made in 2007. You may say what you want to but we know that history and we did that because it was justified. Okay, you have three more minutes. 

MR DOMBO: Madam Speaker, I indulged in that because many Members of Parliament were not around at that time. When you go to the parent Act and look at the objectives of the Bill, they are strictly stated as:
    1. To collect contributions of members;
    2. To ensure the grant of a reasonable retirement benefit to members;
    3. To optimise returns on investments on the members’ contributions.  

Madam Speaker, I have a problem with the recommendation of the committee because instead of optimising the return, it instead contradicts the provisions of the objectives because it minimises the returns. That is why we are still disturbed in determining whether it must be five years or 10 years that will be the pensionable period that will grant enough payments to the Members of Parliament when they have retired.

I was a member of the trust fund and we engaged a consultant and asked him whether lending funds directly from the pension fund was international best practice. There is a report that was given to the members of the trust fund, which said that lending money is an acceptable international practice. The report is here and I can lay it on the Table.

If this was a recommendation by a consultant for money that was paid from our funds, why should we renegade to continue donating money to banks when we are going out deprived? 

Madam Speaker, I have a statement with me from the Finance Department where I was conducting some research. I have not completed it but thus far, I have discovered that Members of Parliament and staff, in this term of Parliament, have borrowed over Shs 200 billion and they have paid back over Shs 321 billion. Of this money, Shs 116 billion is interest that has been donated by Members and staff to the banks and yet our pension fund is not earning this money. Why can’t Members of Parliament and staff earn this money so that they can get better retirement benefits when they retire? 

Madam Speaker, I consulted the Attorney-General yesterday and other legal minds, Members of Parliament and staff and they are all in conformity that we must amend this Act for Members of Parliament and staff of Parliament to borrow from their own pension fund. (Member timed out.)
 
THE SPEAKER: One minute.

MR DOMBO: Madam Speaker, I will lay this on the Table so that Members of Parliament can see how the various banks have depleted us. 

Madam Speaker, you will recall that when we were commissioners, you tasked us to interact with banks and see whether we could negotiate a better interest rate for Members and staff of Parliament. The banks refused because we did not have a fall-back position. If the banks discover that we can lend our own money and have a fall-back position, they will also offer agreeable and better rates for Members and staff of Parliament.

I therefore urge my colleagues that we should do something good for ourselves. This is money that we have contributed. It is lying in a bank and it can be collected from the source. Banks are depriving us of our income when we are paying them interest and going back home empty handed. 

Madam Speaker, I beg honourable members –(Interjections) I wish to rest my case, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: You must speak to the document you are laying.

MR DOMBO: Madam Speaker, this is the report of the actuary; the consultant who told us that worldwide, pension funds can be lent directly to the pension beneficiaries. The report is here and it can be read with the modifications that it requires.

This is the research I was doing with the Finance Department to show how much money the banks have lent us, how they have deprived us and how much of it is the interest. 

The rest are laws, which are in the possession of this House, which show the objectives of the House and also the areas, which we would like to amend:
    1. By deleting the restrictive provision in section 7(b). 
    2. By withdrawing the operations of URBRA Act section 68 from affecting the activities of the pension fund. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

3.16
MS MARGARET BABA DIRI (NRM, Woman Representative, Koboko): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I would like to thank the committee for bringing this very important report on our pension Bill.

Madam Speaker, our pension is ours and it is very important that we make use of that money by borrowing it. I support the idea of Members of Parliament borrowing this money so that any interest, which accrues remains with us. When this money goes to the banks, you find that the interest rates are very high. We can use our own money so that we do not incur a lot of interest.

We talked of pension being applicable only after 10 years. However, being in Parliament is very unreliable. You can stay for five years, fail to come back for the next term and then return after five years. Therefore, I am suggesting that we remain with the five years so that if you are over 45 years and you do not take all your money, it is for you to decide whether or not to be given the money as a lump sum. When you are given these monies in a lump sum, you will spend it and in future, you will have nothing. I would like us to insist on the five years, depending on how long you are staying Parliament. 

Madam Speaker, I am happy that we are not involving ourselves in investing this money in assets. If we begin investing our money in assets, some businesses may collapse and in the end, we do not get our money. The only way we can invest is by lending to Members of Parliament.

Madam Speaker, we talked about board of trustees who are technical. I know that board of trustees is there to guard our money and we need Members of Parliament to be there themselves. They are knowledgeable in finances and not necessarily technical. Technical issues are handled by the staff who are employed. This will also give an opportunity to a person like hon. Baba Diri to sit on the board of trustees. If you say it must be technical people only, you will leave out many people who should be able to handle this fund. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

3.19
MS HUDA OLERU (NRM, Woman Representative, Yumbe): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the Member who has decided to bring this amendment to this Act. I would also like to thank the committee for their recommendations. 

As Members of Parliament, this scheme is the best fallback position after leaving Parliament. Therefore, it is our responsibility to invest and to make better investments without a high risk. One of the investments that we can undertake is to borrow our money. In the process, we will be increasing it using the interest. When I borrow, there is interest charged and the interest that is accumulated will be our own money.

Therefore, I really want to support that we borrow our own money because it is assured that this money will be paid without defaulting. We must therefore make savings so that we have a better life after Parliament. 

I also want to support that proposal for voluntary contributions. I know that our SACCO has been helping us but we have almost finished what we have been saving because of the pressures we now have from our constituencies. If the pension scheme was also open to us, it would be another alternative so that we would have two sources in which to save. Therefore, I would like to support the recommendation that we save in the Pensions Scheme so that we have another source other than the SACCO.

Madam Speaker, I also want to propose that Members who will be serving here for only five years –(Interjections)- Madam Speaker, can you protect me from honourable -

THE SPEAKER: Can you allow hon. Oleru to make her point, please?

MS OLERU: Madam Speaker, I know that sometimes after five years, the voters may not renew a Member’s contract to come back here and the Member may leave Parliament when they are already 45 years. I would therefore propose an amendment that when one is 45 years or more, they can be given 65 per cent of their savings so that they can begin –(Member timed out)

3.22
MS FLORENCE MUTYABULE (NRM, Woman Representative, Namutumba): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to support the proposal brought by hon. Dombo. It would be very good if we borrowed from our own Parliamentary Pensions Scheme. 

I would like to ask two questions:
    1. If we say that we want to borrow from our Parliamentary Pensions Scheme and say each MP wants to borrow Shs 200 million and above, can the scheme be able to handle this?
    2. I would like to know what would happen to our Parliamentary SACCO if we started borrowing from the Parliamentary Pension Scheme. Would the Parliamentary SACCO be phased out or shall we use both of them? Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

3.24
MR NATHAN NANDALA-MAFABI (FDC, Budadiri County West, Sironko): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Before I say anything, I would like to report that I am now the Secretary-General of Forum for Democratic Change and I thought that you would have welcomed me in that fashion.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Nandala-Mafabi, I think I did not see you last week otherwise, I would have congratulated you on behalf of the House but we are happy for you and wish you well. (Laughter)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. In 2010, we amended the Parliamentary Pensions Act to take care of the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker. At that time, we thought they would bring an amendment to take care of the Members of Parliament and I had anticipated that this Bill we are going to debate would take more care. This business of the banks is okay but I thought we would do more for Members of Parliament, especially those who leave Parliament and how they can benefit as they retire because they always have big problems. At committee stage, I will make my proposals.

Madam Speaker, I do not agree with the committee that staff of Parliament are supposed to continue to contribute to NSSF because of the law. The moment you have an approved pension scheme, you do not need to go to NSSF. This is under the law and you can look at the Income Tax Act. It says, the moment it is approved by the Ministry of Finance -

THE SPEAKER: No. Hon. Nandala-Mafabi, they were talking about the staff of Parliamentary Pensions Scheme who are on contract basis and not the staff of the Parliamentary Commission.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Okay. If they are on contract then it is true. Contracts have a limitation and they can contribute to NSSF. I thought they meant the entire staff.

Madam Speaker, recently we attended the annual general meeting and I discovered a lot of problems there. The chairperson of the committee has all the powers to determine what he is going to give to members and what not to give to members. I think hon. Geofrey Ekanya is there and he can testify for those who attended. 

I would request that if this is our pension scheme, first and foremost, the accounts of the pension scheme must go to members. That is number one and that is the amendment we should put here.  Having done that, when there is an annual general meeting, the decisions of the scheme must be made at the annual general meeting and not where the chairperson and a few members come and say we cannot.

When we requested that we needed an urgent special general meeting to handle matters of the pension scheme, I can tell you that the chairperson said, “It is impossible” yet the supreme body is the annual general meeting. 

On election of board members, if we are all Members of Parliament, why should a few people be elected as members of board - (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: You have one minute to conclude.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, I was talking about board members. In the amendments, I think the annual general meeting should be responsible for appointing the board members because they will appoint people of interest and that will take care of the issues raised by the committee that these are the professionals in this area.

Finally, Members of Parliament are part of the reasons as to why interest rates are going up. We give the banks our money to keep and we have confirmed that the key borrowers are Members of Parliament. They do not borrow for their own benefit but to service their constituencies. Right now, they are in problems because they want to come back in 2016 and the rate of borrowing is very high - (Interjections)- well, I also borrow but I borrow for business not for campaigns. 

3.29
MR HATWIB KATOTO (NRM, Katerera County, Rubirizi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to contribute to the report by saying that Members should be allowed to borrow money from the pension scheme because we have got several problems. (Laughter) The scheme should also provide short term loans because when you go to an Indian, he will tell you, “Honourable, we are giving you the best rate. Even Madam Speaker was here. Everyone has allowed to borrow at 10 per cent.” 

Therefore, you will find that for Shs 10 million that is borrowed, one has to pay Shs 1 million every month, which is a lot of money. If we can allow the pension scheme to lend Members of Parliament and if they can also provide short term loans because they have security, this will be better and we will not face so many problems.

Madam Speaker, if you want proof, ask anyone. When you go there, the Indian will tell you that even the Speaker and the Vice President were there. This is in order to make money but what if this money was being borrowed from the pension scheme? I swear that we would make money for ourselves and again avoid problems of being harassed or tossed up and down. 

For example, as I speak, I got Shs 100 million from the Indian. After six months, they wanted 300 million. I had to go to court. If it was our pension, I would have taken back at least Shs 150 million. Therefore, I suggest that we be given a chance to borrow our money from the pension scheme. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. For the record, I think they use that to convince you. I borrow from banks not from money lenders.

3.30
MR KENNETH LUBOGO (Independent, Bulamogi County, Kaliro): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Like my colleagues have spoken, you may not know exactly what your Members are going through but many banks are behaving in a delinquent way. 

I would like to tell you, Madam Speaker, what some banks do when a Member goes to borrow money. For example, you may have agreed that you are borrowing money at 16 per cent. However, the banks will provide that they can vary that interest at any time. Once you have signed the agreement with them and left, that very day, they will change the interest rate from say the 16 per cent on which you agreed and make it 22 per cent. This has happened to many people and I believe several Members who borrowed money from Equity Bank have suffered that fate.

I got a loan at 16 per cent but when I went into their records, they had not captured 16 per cent anywhere. Even on the first day that I took the loan, they captured it at 22 per cent. They were relying on the other provision that they can vary the interest. Why are they doing this? It is because there is no option for a Member to borrow from elsewhere.

Madam Speaker, this money is almost risk free because it is Parliament, which is going to pay the money and Parliament, which is going to deduct the money and remit to the pension fund. Therefore, it is guaranteed 100 per cent that recovery is assured. I do not see any reason why we should labour so much to convince anybody that we need to grant the proposal that has been moved by hon. Dombo.

Madam Speaker, right from the objectives of the Act that he has read through, any investor knows that he wants to maximise and if we want to maximise and we can maximise from within, then that is the best proposal because we know that nobody is going to cheat us. We are not going to suffer a loss to anyone.

Therefore, I would like to second the proposal by hon. Dombo that it is high time we thought of changing this provision to allow Members to access this money. Should anybody want to borrow beyond the limit, that should be catered for. Somebody can make arrangements with the bank or with other lenders but somebody should have the option of borrowing from himself and then pay the interest to himself. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Before hon. Latif comes, I want to understand something. If you are coming as a Member of the Tenth Parliament, it means you have no savings as yet. Therefore, if you want to borrow, you are borrowing the pension of the Members of the Ninth, Eighth and Seventh Parliament. That is their pension you are going to borrow. I want to understand how that works. You are coming in the Tenth Parliament and you are borrowing the savings of the previous parliaments. Think about that as we proceed.

3.33
MR LATIF SSEBAGALA (DP, Kawempe Division North, Kampala): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The pension scheme must be seen as our lifeline as Members of Parliament, given the fact that some of us have been here since 2001. Others joined in this Ninth Parliament. The possibility of many of us coming back in the Tenth Parliament is not guaranteed. Therefore, as we debate this scheme, we should put this into serious consideration. Looking at our colleagues who were here in the Eighth Parliament, where are they now? What status are they really in? Do they deserve the other title of honourable as they move on the streets and as they are in their constituencies?

Therefore, we should really look at this scheme as a fall-back position and any debate should be centred on making sure that when you do not come back - let us all debate as if we are not coming back and if we are not coming back, our fall-back position is the pension. How best should it be so that even if you have lost, you can continue to live honourably using the pension scheme? 

Honourable members, you have talked about borrowing and getting loans but we should not focus on whether we should borrow from the pension scheme. Rather, we should centre our debate on what the benefits should be, apart from borrowing. As Members of Parliament, if one does not come back, can one take the biggest percentage and start a new life? Should we say that we should continue getting a monthly allowance? How far can it take you? Or is it better that if you have not come back, you can have your package and carry out other activities that can lead you to a better life?

Madam Speaker, I would request honourable members to concentrate mostly on the benefits that we are going to get as we retire –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: As hon. Nyakikongoro comes in, I would like you to join me in welcoming leaders from Kingo sub-county, Bukoto South Constituency in Lwengo District. Are you the ones? Please stand up. They are represented by hon. Mathias Nsubuga and hon. Nakabira. You are welcome. You can see the ladies are very smart.

3.37
MS ROSEMARY NYAKIKONGORO (Independent, Woman Representative, Sheema): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I wish to support the point raised by hon. Dombo that much as we are talking about how the Members can be secured even after Parliament, I believe that some monies in the pension scheme can be committed to Members for borrowing.

Madam Speaker, right now, the banks are calm; they are not harassing Members of Parliament. However, as soon as the new Parliament begins, people are swarmed by different banks and urged to borrow from those banks. Their interest is because they know that money is deducted at source and it goes directly to the banks. 

Madam Speaker, we are enriching these banks and most of these banks, by the way, are not Ugandan banks. These are foreign banks that extort the money and take it outside. We would rather have part of the pension money, say Shs 50 billion committed to the members for borrowing. After all, it is not that every member has to borrow from the pension scheme because there are other options. 

However, in order to safeguard Members of Parliament from suffering from the consequences caused by these banks, let us have our own internal borrowing mechanism and then we set the standards in terms of interest rates. I heard some Members asking in the corridors, “What if Members insist that we lower the interest rates?”

I believe that if we all agree, we can accept the standard or market interest rates that are prevailing so that we do not cheat ourselves by saying that we put it at a lower rate. We should use the market rate and once we do that, I believe that the interest will be going to our pension rather than enriching those banks –(Interruption)

MR SSEBAGGALA: Thank you very much, honourable colleague, for giving way. The information I am giving is that in as much as we would like to have that as a fall-back position, what are the safety measures? As Members of Parliament, at times we can default. What measures are we going to put in place?

Madam Speaker, I am not very comfortable without safety measures. When we go to banks, there are safety measures and mechanisms. What mechanisms can we put in place? Otherwise, we may really be at risk.

MS NYAKIKONGORO: Madam Speaker, I do not see any risk because the same processes that the banks have been using would be the same processes that would be introduced here. The money is deducted at source and I wish we would do the same. If you borrow this money, the interest rate is calculated and every month, you pay that specific amount of money rather than donating the money to the banks.

Members of Parliament, let us support this move. It is not that we are looking at ourselves as if we are selfish but we would also like to enrich our accounts. This is our money. Whether you are in the Seventh, Eighth or Ninth Parliament, still that money goes to whoever was a former Member of Parliament, the current Member or whoever comes to Parliament. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: You have raised something interesting. How do the former Members who do not earn every month have access to this money, which is their money? You need to address these issues as you debate. How do we get authority to spend their money? 

3.41
MR JULIUS MAGANDA (Independent, Samia Bugwe County South, Busia): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the report and also appreciate the effort that was brought by hon. Dombo.

This is a law that impacts on the wellbeing of a Member of Parliament, whether it is a sitting Member or those who are out of Parliament. However, one of the items that I was planning to speak about was the question you raised that while we look at these amendments, we should also provide for the former Members of Parliament because they already have money here. However, they may not have security in form of a salary like a current Member of Parliament would have as what would be mortgaged. 

However, I believe the board can sit down and create a system on how former Members of Parliament would also access these loans at a rate, which is very appropriate.

Madam Speaker, today all Members of Parliament here -

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think I am getting more and more confused. At what stage does a Member become eligible to access this money?

MS AKOL: Madam Speaker, I would like to clarify that as members of the board of trustees, we are under an obligation to treat all members of this scheme equally. Therefore, when we talk about borrowing, it must apply even to the pensioners.

However, the issue here is when you go to the bank and say you are a pensioner, the banks will not lend you money. They can only lend you money if you have a company that generates income and that is the cash flow that you will use for paying the loan.

Therefore, I do not understand how we are going to treat our members equitably when even the banks that we are referring to, do not lend to pensioners.

With regard to borrowing, Madam Speaker -

THE SPEAKER: You will come back later. I wanted that point clarified.

MR MAGANDA: Madam Speaker, thank you very much. As I conclude, I would like to draw the attention of Members to the fact that this law will reduce the pressures on the Members of Parliament, especially from banks, with the variations that banks have made. 

As we speak, there are Members of Parliament who entered into contracts with banks and they had anticipated to clear their loans within this month but the banks made variations without consulting those Members. You will find that somebody is going to complete his payments in February next year. However, this is a variation that has been done. What surprises us is that even within our Parliament, a loan commitment period may vary but the accountants continue to remit this money without consulting the Member of Parliament.

Therefore, we have a feeling that if we have our own funds and circumstances of that nature arise, that member would benefit from the interest that the banks would have taken from us and it is the scheme that would benefit. At the end of the day, the dividends will end up going to the member. This is why I support this law and I believe it is the right time for us to have some treatment on it. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

3.45
MR TAYEBWA ODO (FDC, Ishaka Municipality, Bushenyi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I support the committee’s report. It is crystal clear because the interest that we have been giving to commercial banks will now be befitting our pension funds. 

I would like to tell you that when I became a Member of Parliament and that was a year after the Ninth Parliament had started –(Interjections)- you know I came after a by-election but immediately I won the elections, I got so many phone calls from different commercial banks wishing to lend me some money. If I was not a wise economist, I would have fallen into a big trap.

I sat down with so many commercial banks who gave me different interest rates. I borrowed some money from three commercial banks. However, I have found that I have paid Shs 90 million, which has accrued from the interest on the money that I borrowed. If this Shs 90 million had been taken to my pension fund to which I belong, and assuming that we are 385 Members of Parliament and 300 Members of Parliament have borrowed from our pension fund, the pension fund would have got Shs 27 billion. That will be beneficial to our pension funds.

These commercial banks are actually benefiting from our sweat. In addition, they have now increased the interest rates after inflation but I believe that our board of trustees would have sat down and given us the best rates.

To the question of other members who belong to the pension fund, this is very simple because all of us are beneficiaries. All of us will benefit from the money that will accrue from the interest whether you belonged to the Seventh or the Eighth Parliament or when you are no longer a Member of Parliament. Even then, if you want a loan, the board of trustees will sit to calculate how much you are gaining from the accrued pension that you get every year and how much you can access as a loan.

Therefore, it is very beneficial that we now start borrowing from our own pension fund other than giving money to these commercial banks, which are not helping us at the end of the day. I beg to support.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I am still confused. Suppose I am joining Parliament as a new Member of the Tenth Parliament, whose funds am I borrowing? I have not contributed, I am just coming in. I want to know whose money I am borrowing since I have just come and I am not part of the fund. I am not yet eligible but I am borrowing. That is what I want to understand.

3.49
MS JALIA BINTU (NRM, Woman Representative, Masindi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to start from –(Interjections)

THE SPEAKER: Order, please.

MS BINTU: Madam Speaker, can you protect me?

THE SPEAKER: Allow hon. Bintu to speak and she is fasting.

MS BINTU: Thank you very much. I want to start from the question you have put forward to Parliament: “Whose money are you borrowing?” Madam Speaker, if you come to the Tenth Parliament, you will borrow money from the previous parliaments but the members who have their money with the fund will benefit from the interest that will accrue from their money, which will have been lent to you. 

When you start saving your pension in the Tenth Parliament, you will start benefiting from the monies that you will have also saved. It is a win-win situation and all members will benefit. Whereas the Member in the Tenth Parliament will benefit by borrowing, the Seventh or Eighth or Ninth Parliament member will benefit from the interest plus her savings. Therefore, Madam Speaker, that should not worry the House - (Interruption)

MR SSEGGONA: I want to thank the honourable member for giving way. Actually to me, it is not a problem because we keep going to banks to borrow money. Whose money are we borrowing?

THE SPEAKER: No, this is a contributory fund. It is a contribution between the government and the member. That is what I am asking; whose money are you borrowing?

MR SSEGGONA: That is where I am heading, Madam Speaker, with your permission. The managers of the fund will assess the applications on merit and look at how much this new member is asking for, how much he has saved and the kind of security they are looking at within the scheme. Then, they will give the amount that is proportionate and appropriate and we the members will benefit from the interest.

MS BINTU: Madam Speaker, section 7(b) actually violates our rights and this clause has impoverished so many members here. I want to state here that Members of Parliament have been donors to the banking institutions in this country. This is because we borrow money from them, they make interest, which we do not even share and they keep on harassing us and yet they are borrowing money from the monies that we saved.

Madam Speaker, I want to agree entirely with hon. Dombo that we start borrowing this money. I know that the committee’s report states that elsewhere, at times it is not allowed for members to borrow their pension funds as an individual. 

However, we can create a vehicle within Parliament through which members can borrow so that we get that money into that vehicle and the members access it. When we were still in the Commission, at one time when we pushed for members to borrow money from the pension fund, we were asked to look for a vehicle, which we can use to get the money from the pension fund so that the members can be able to access it.

Therefore, this can be improvised and we put it in place. I know it can work and we need members to be rescued from the money sharks who are terrorising them.

Madam Speaker, I would like to propose especially on the period in which a member can be able to access the money. After every term, a member should be allowed to access the money. 

If you fall off after the Ninth Parliament, you will be out there; there are so many young people who have entered Parliament. They are not earning money from any fund anywhere else because they have not been working. Take an example of myself; I worked, but I have not yet qualified to get my money from NSSF to date. 

Then if they fall off from the Ninth Parliament and they are not in the Tenth Parliament, we cannot stop them from earning their pension because they have not attained a certain age or they have served for two terms. I therefore want to propose that after every term, a member should be allowed to access his or her pension. 

Madam Speaker, I entirely agree with the committee’s proposal especially on including the staff of Parliament in being members of the Parliamentary Pension Fund.  This is because they are part and parcel of the parliamentary institution –(Member timed out_)

3.55
DR MEDARD BITEKYEREZO (NRM, Mbarara Municipality, Mbarara): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank hon. Dombo. This is because we have been fighting through the IPad for about one week over this. 

I am a scientist and Dr Ruhakana Rugunda will bear me witness that the heart of a human being is one of the most selfish organs of the body. This is because it first gives blood to itself via the coronary vessels which are the first blankets of the common aorta. 

I looked at the money which Members of Parliament have given as interest to the banks in this country, and I almost collapsed. It was too much! You cannot have billions of shillings lent to the banks without giving any to yourself. The good thing with it is that terms of recovery are crystal clear. This is because we are paid through Parliament. When we borrow from these banks, we are borrowing money we do not even know. What is wrong with the interest money going back to the savers scheme? 

I was of the view that even if it means stopping the debate, we stop here and move a motion. We are tired of being harassed by banks and appearing in papers that we are highly indebted even when sometimes we are not. I have seen some people waiting for me at the Parliament gate. 

What is wrong with borrowing from our own money? I retire and eventually leave Parliament; I can be able to go with my money. When I come back, I can start afresh.  Those who are coming in and are fresh can borrow from their colleagues. What is wrong with that? We can borrow from Jane or what is wrong with borrowing from the Rt hon. Kadaga? Sincerely speaking, why don’t we borrow from ourselves? Why do we donate to banks and fail to give ourselves interest? What is wrong with having a hotel and then your children come and eat from there? Then they give you money. Why do you want to credit others? On a selfish note, may I now move a motion that the debate stops and we adopt this? I thank you, Madam Speaker. 

3.57
MS MARGARET KIBOIJANA (NRM, Woman Representative, Ibanda): Thank you, Madam Speaker. It is very frustrating, humiliating and dehumanising for those old Members of Parliament who have pooled resources and have most of their money in this Pension Fund to be seen in abject poverty out there. 

Madam Speaker, I would wish to move an amendment at an appropriate time that this tagging of the age bracket should stop. It states that if one is over 45 years, one accesses 40 per cent of one’s pension money. I would wish that we remove it and make it open in that if a member wants to access all his or her pension fund and a member has got serious investment plans, let that member access the money once and for all.

At the worst case scenario, let members who are above 45 years outside there be able to access 60 per cent of their pension money. This is in order for them to go out and make serious investments either in real estate property or in other serious businesses. Let us not just leave them to live as if they do not have money anywhere. 

Madam Speaker, I wish to move again that indeed I am in support of members borrowing from their own fund. When you are a new Member of Parliament, you are lied to at the steps of this Parliament by the money lenders in the name of banks. They are such sweet talking fellows that you will think that after borrowing their money, you will have everything. After accessing the money, you are harassed on a daily basis by letters, phone calls and even they increase their interests at will. 

Most times, you find that you are at their mercy. It can be very frustrating. Many of the members here have been humiliated and even taken to prison at the worst case scenario. I support the argument that we borrow from the pension money. In agreement, we should put lending rates that are conducive to members. This will be helpful instead of just donating to the various banks which later demand us and we start hiding in the toilets of this Parliament –(Interruption)

MS KWAGALA: Madam Speaker, I would like to give information regarding the way banks harass people. If you do not know banking and accounting, you might land into a serious problem. 

I remember this very well; one time they wrote a letter that they were demanding many Members of Parliament money and they wanted to take them to court. If these Members of Parliament did not know or engage accountants, they would be in trouble.  

I wanted to give the member information that some Members of Parliament were quietly seated there, but being harassed. They were only helped when other people who knew accounting bailed them out. Otherwise, banks were cheating them. Thank you.

MS KIBOIJANA: In conclusion, like I have said, you look at some of our old colleagues. A colleague falls sick and needs serious attention and treatment abroad, but cannot access this money. I hate to mention names here but the late Deo Bukwasi died because he could not be rescued- (Member timed out_)

4.02
MR ALEX RUHUNDA (NRM, Fort Portal Municipality, Kabarole): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The idea of borrowing from our Pension Fund is excellent. This is because we want to earn more money. 

If I have my money being saved - even these other agencies like NSSF invest this money such that the savers can have better returns on investment; that is the principle. I think it is too late, but better late than never. 

I would like to commend hon. Dombo for the spirited show you have depicted from the business point of view. For sure, this will enable us as Members of Parliament to learn how to invest. This means that we are going to be within the parameters investment. Our financial literacy levels are also going to improve.

I have seen many of these money sharks; they really take advantage of desperate people and there are moments when the cash flow of a Member of Parliament cannot match with the needs and demands on the ground.

This also has a heavy toll on our health. I expected Dr Bitekyerezo to illustrate this further when he was talking about the heart. If you diagnosed the hearts of many of us, Members of Parliament, given the pressure we go through, for sure we are not healthy.

When you are not liquid in the pocket, it then becomes worse. So, for us to earn any extra income on our money and get it out of the banks is the best thing to ever happen in the history of parliamentarians in this country.

I would really urge you, Madam Speaker, to support us. We should have our own fund and manage it with dignity; a dignified fund. As a Member of Parliament, you carry the decorum with you and to be exposed to the young people who are working in the banks – if you go to these banks, they have young people; you are required to sit down with them and go through a lot. However, when we are managing our own fund, it goes with that respect - (Member timed out_)

4.05
MR JACOB OPOLOT (NRM, Pallisa County, Pallisa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also rise to join the rest in supporting the argument that as members and staff of Parliament, we should be able to access the funds from the Pension Fund.

However, from the arguments being given, it is as though, once we have opened up, we shall never need to borrow from anywhere else. That is wrong. People will always borrow. That is the reason why someone says that he has borrowed from three banks and others from six.

The issue here is, can we access this money and be able to do something useful for ourselves at a reasonable interest rate? Can we be able to build our fund so that even our savings can earn more money?

If this position will be adopted, I will also be looking forward to a provision in the law on how the interest rate should be determined. People should not think that we shall go by the market price or it is the board to unilaterally determine it. The law must prescribe how such interest rate is determined.

From the discussions also, members seem to be bringing up some administrative issues on how to secure the money so that it is safe and I would think that the board has mechanisms of doing that.

However, what is especially important here is that when we are talking of borrowing money, I also get uncomfortable when someone says that, we should be able to borrow money within five minutes. You are actually endangering our money.

The systems should be so clear and elaborate that we borrow money that is beneficial to you but through a safe and secure way, so that those who expect to benefit from what you are paying as interest, get that benefit.

Also you who are benefiting through borrowing and also the returns you make, you pay other than risking the money by making it easy to borrow that anybody who wants to defraud us, can do it with ease. I therefore think – (Interruption)

MR DOMBO: Madam Speaker, I would like to give information to the honourable member and other colleagues specifically about some major issues that have been raised. The first one, when we engaged a consultancy, in his recommendations about interest, he said that the fund would be able to charge a cheaper interest rate than the bank but high enough than what is being charged in the market. So, either way, we get a cheaper one but also the members benefit from it. The consultancy made a recommendation in the report which I laid there.

Secondly, when we approve the fund to lend, the board of trustees and the management of the fund, will still have the responsibility of prescribing rules and putting guarantees on how to protect the money.

Let me give an illustration; in the Parliamentary SACCO, when you apply for a loan, you pay a loan protection fee which is set aside, should a member default or die. If we lend Shs 50 billion of the pension fund to the members and staff and you charged loan protection of two percent, that will be a billion set aside, to wait for a member to die and then the money paid back because that will be loan protection.

The board of trustees will have two responsibilities: of bench marking and putting a system in place to ensure that members’ funds are safe and can be on a loan and recovered within the term of Parliament. I thank you.

MR OPOLOT: I thank hon. Dombo for the information. I think the main issue we need to focus on, if it is agreeable, is on how the board can secure members’ money. However, for us to debate here and want to make it so easy to borrow, we would be making it so easy to defraud the scheme. Thank very much, Madam Speaker.

4.10
MR MATHIAS KASAMBA (Kakuuto County, Rakai): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the report and also I would like to appreciate the proposed amendment by hon. Dombo. I also thank all the members for the support over accessibility of the Pension Fund as part of the investment portfolio for Members of Parliament to access funds to borrow – (Interruption)

MS AKELLO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. According to our Rules of Procedure, the Members of the Opposition are supposed to sit on the left side of the Speaker and the Members of the ruling party should sit on the right side of the Speaker. I am wondering what kind of sitting arrangement is taking place in that corner where the former Leader of the Opposition who is FDC and is an Opposition Member is seated - because there is also hon. Deogratius and the minister who has just walked away from there. (Laughter) So, I wonder what kind of sitting arrangement it is.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, arising from our numbers and the configuration in House we came to some agreement about collaboration and cooperation. I know that hon. Besisira is consulting very seriously with hon. Nandala. (Laughter) 

MR KASAMBA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to support the possibility and the motion to amend so that Members of Parliament can be able to access the Pension Fund during their term of office, so that they can have affordable financing for appropriate financing, investments, dignity in treatment by their own; the Pension Fund and the fund itself will grow very first, compared to the current scenario where Members of Parliament go to the other money lenders.

What I would like to emphasise as members, let us do the collaboration. I am the Chairperson of the Parliamentary Savings and Credit Society. It has done tremendous work to ignite financial literacy to Members of Parliament.

This can be a very good vehicle so that even formers Members of Parliament can also access financing and loans within the parliamentary fund guarantee. Therefore, if we can adopt the principle of agreeing that pension funds can be a very good vehicle for giving Members of Parliament, in the Tenth Parliament - where we shall limit many intermediary banks from coming and lending money to Members of Parliament – we shall make that a one shop centre where we have about 100 billion of pension fund which we can access. 

For instance, the new Members of Parliament who join will have a need to have a house in Kampala. That means they have to access some reasonable financing to acquire a house where they will stay in the next five years - 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, are we talking about lending the entire fund or part of it?

MR KASAMBA: Madam Speaker, we could say that all Members of Parliament especially during the first point of call for any financing which parliament can guarantee will be the Pension Fund since it is our own. The rest we cannot guarantee because this is a system we are beginning to develop - I am aware. Therefore, if we can say that whatever a Member of Parliament can borrow within the agreement of Parliament for as long as it is agreeable let it be accessed through the Pension Fund.

THE SPEAKER: No, what I would like to know is how much of the Pension Fund will be committed to borrowing. Is it the whole or part of it?

MR DOMBO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Even under the current investment, the board of trustees are supposed to develop an investment policy, which sets quarters or areas within which we invest and how much should be invested. For instance, right now, there is a portion which must be invested in fixed income deposits, treasury bills and bond. We have a percentage that must be invested in equity and traded in the stock exchange. We also have a portion that can be allowed in property; but because our fund has been small, we have not yet ventured into property. Therefore, the board of trustees, especially once the allowance is given, will sit down and develop an investment policy taking into consideration how best they can provide security for the funds that have been before them.

However, when they see the returns, they will just get the temptation of putting the entire fund in because of the guarantee of returns, payment and that should a member die, what happens? Once those provisions have been catered for, then the funds can be lent out because they can get an insurance policy.

MR KASAMBA: As I wind up, one of the biggest advantages of this fund, as my brother Hon. Dombo has said, are accessibility and affordability., The highest degree of discipline is also possible because  deduction is from source. The degree of risk is minimal unless there is death, but if then death is provided for under the loan protection fund, we can setup mechanisms of insurance provision for loans beyond 200 to 300 million. Insurance can take care of that so that we know that we have a full backup position because the loan is protected. I pray that we support this motion to amend and we access this member’s fund. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, honourable members, we have had quite a debate. I think we should go to committee stage. If there are members who want to contribute, I have seen you and you will speak in the committee stage.
Honourable members, I put the question that the Bill be read for the second time.

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE PARLIAMENTARY PENSIONS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2014

THE CHAIRPERSON: Before we go to the clauses, chair of the committee wanted to address us.

MR TASHOBYA: Thank you very much, Madam Chair, for allowing me to make a few comments on the issues that have been raised by honourable members. I think the points raised have been revolving as to whether or not members should access the fund and giving security to the earnings in their life of Parliament. 

I would like to say that the fundamental problem especially what members are talking about is bigger than the Pension Fund. We are talking about the interest rates charged by banks. Therefore, in a way, we are trying to push for ourselves - but the bigger problem of the interest rates still lingers. Maybe there is need for Government to look at the bigger problem than Members of Parliament looking at them and providing an ad hoc solution.

I also would like to say that the Pension Fund as some honourable members have pointed out is supposed to provide push on for members when they have left parliament but we are now trying to convert it into a financial institution of which it is not. The parliamentary fund is not a financial institution, how do you –(Interruption)

MR EKANYA: Madam Chair, I would like to seek clarification from the chair of the legal committee. When we borrow money from the Chinese Government, the contractors are from China; when you borrow money from the European Union, the contractors are from European Union, people take care of themselves. Is that procedure legal and do you think that when we Ugandans take care of ourselves, it is a crime yet the Chinese, Europeans and Americans do it? Is it legal for the Chinese, Europeans and Americans to think about themselves? Why should it be different when it comes to Ugandans?

MR TASHOBYA: Madam Chair, we are not talking about crime and criminality, we are talking about the purpose of the fund. I am saying the purpose of the fund is to provide for members pension when they have left the service of Parliament. It is wrong to turn it into a financial institution and it is not legal. That is the point I am making – [Mr Dombo rose_] - can you take your seat please; I am informed.

Secondly, you have raised an important question which I think has not received a good answer. We have different members in this scheme and many of the members’ overtime about 10 to 20 years from now will be getting their pension. Therefore, by turning the fund into a financial institution, the viability of this fund will be compromised and that is not the purpose for which it was formed –  

THE SPEAKER: Let the chair finish his submission.

MR TASHOBYA: I also have loans with banks but it is not right to turn the Pension Fund into a financial institution. 

Lastly, Section 95 of the UBRA Act provides that this law shall supersede all other roles in regards to pension.

Are we only looking at their pace? Madam Chairperson, thank you so much.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Let us hear from the mover.

MS ROSE AKOL: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I have listened to all the arguments that members have brought forward. And I would like to respond to some.

First of all, I would like to bring to the attention of members that the Parliamentary Pensions Scheme is a regulatory scheme. It has to abide by the law and regulations of the Uganda Retirement Benefits Regulatory Authority. This Parliament passed this law; and it has provisions that restrict us from moving in the way we are proposing.

First of all, I would like to quote our own law.  Section 7 says: deductions not assignable: “Subject to the provisions of this Act, no deductions made under it shall be assignable or transferable or liable to be attached, sequestered or levied upon for or in respect of any debt or claim”.

Sub section (i), “Shall not apply to an order of court for the payment –“(Interruption) – Members, let us listen to each other so that we can make a good law.

Sub – section (i), “Shall not apply to an order of court for the payment of periodical sums of money towards the maintenance of the spouse and others.’

The parent law is the Uganda Retirement Benefits Regularity Authority Act. Section 68 - restriction on use of scheme funds; this is the parent law, Madam Chairperson. This parent law which regulates the operations of the Parliamentary Pensions Scheme states that:
”
    1) The funds of the retirement benefits scheme shall not –
    a)  be used to speculative investments;
    b) be lent to any person except through securities sold on the open market; 
    c) be invested with a bank, non-banking financial institutions, insurance company, building society, or other institutions with a view to securing loans or mortgages at a preferential rate of interest or for any other consideration to the trustee, custodian, administrator or fund manager of the retirement benefits scheme;
    d) be used to make direct or indirect loans to any person;
    e) be used as security for loans; 
    f) be invested outside East Africa; or
    g) invested contrary to any guidelines prescribed for that purpose.”

Madam Chairperson, it also goes forward to say that:
“ 
    2) Notwithstanding section (1) a prescribed proportion of the benefits accruing to a member in the retirement benefits scheme may be assigned and used by the member to –
    a) secure a mortgage or a loan for purchasing a residential house from any institution and/on such terms as may be prescribed in regulation made under this Act.”

Madam Chairperson, Section 95 of the parent law that governs the Parliamentary Pensions Schemes says:”
“
Supremacy of this Act: 
    1) This Act takes precedence over all existing Acts relating to establishment, operations, management and regulation of retirement benefits schemes and where there is a conflict between this Act, and any other written law other than the Constitution, it shall prevail. “

Therefore, I would like to advice that, if members wish to borrow - which is currently against the existing law of the Parliamentary Pensions Scheme, which is against the regulatory authority, which regulates the Parliamentary Pensions Scheme - the only way we have to do this is by amending the parent law; because even if we amended our own scheme, it still remains null and void. And, therefore, will not apply.

The only way forward is for you members to propose a private member’s Bill to amend the Uganda Retirement Benefits Regulatory Authority Act. Once it is amended, then the Parliamentary Pensions Scheme will go ahead to do such things as provided by the parent law. 

With regard to the special Annual General Meeting (AGM); it is true, some members wanted to have a special AGM, immediately. But as members of the board of trustees we did not refuse. We guided members under our regulations; section 27 of our regulations provides: 
“Special general meetings of the scheme. (i) The board may, whenever it deems fit to convene a special meeting of the scheme.

(ii) The board shall on the requisition in writing of at least one third of all members convene a special general meeting of the scheme.”

Therefore, it is up to the members; whoever wishes to have a special AGM; look for the one third of signatures of members in order for such an AGM to take place. I would Also like to – (Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, I know you have been a member of many boards, and many organisations. An annual general meeting is a supreme body. Members requesting for a special general meeting can do it in writing if there is no meeting.

However, the moment there is an annual general meeting and the meeting decides that we need to have a special general meeting, all the laid out procedures of a special general meeting by members asking or in writing does not apply.

Is it now procedurally right for the member, who is the previous chairperson, who had even signed the minutes before they were approved by the AGM, to come and say -

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, do not divert the debate; we are not in the AGM now. I would like us to resolve the conflict between that regulatory provision and what we are proposing. That is my interest; leave the issues of the assembly. They are not for this forum.

MS AKOL: Madam Chairperson, I would like to further clarify that the board of trustees have fiduciary responsibilities, one of which is equitable treatment of members and when we are going into borrowing, I think this has to be looked into.

Madam Chairperson, the law provides for a custodian which has to be a financial institution. It provides for an investment manager; which has to be an institution registered with the Capital Markets Authority to perform such duties, the secretariat which is our staff here and trustees.


When we talk about borrowing we have to look at the roles of these various bodies, and the personal liability of trustees.

Madam Chairperson, our law provides that this is on restrictions on use of scheme fund. It provides that where such funds –(Interjection)– that defined benefits scheme –(Interjection)– can I finish this one and then you give your clarification?

Madam Chairperson, the sponsor for this scheme is the Parliamentary Commission and this is what our law provides: (a) “Defined benefits scheme means a retirement benefits scheme in which a sponsor undertakes to provide benefits expressed in the form of annuity or lump sum calculation based on work history, and guaranteed return on contribution accounts regardless of the investment performance of the fund associated with the scheme and accordingly constitutes a contingent liability for the sponsor.” The sponsor here is the Parliamentary Commission.

Therefore when we are looking at borrowing of the funds, lending out these funds, vis-à-vis the responsibilities given to the sponsor and also the fiduciary role played by trustees, and also the role of treating members equitably, we should sort out all these when we are considering this. 

However, in the meantime, Madam Chair, the way out is to amend the parent law. Otherwise, to amend the Parliamentary Pension Scheme does not help us. I thank you.

MR DOMBO: Thank you, very much, Madam Chairperson. The Constitution gives powers to this Parliament to make all laws. Even the laws my dear sister is quoting were made by us. Therefore, when we start on the process of that amendment, I think nothing stops us from proceeding because of the reasons you have given.

Madam Chairperson, you raised a question about the accessibility to the funds of members those serving and those that have retired given their equitable rights that they deserve. In lending money, the lender assesses the risk profile. The risk profile of a serving member is not the same as of a pensioner. The risk profiles are different because a serving member has a guaranteed source of income, utmost and a serving contract. That lessens the risk profile so there is no way there can be equitability when the risk profile is not the same.

Secondly, Madam Chairperson, I did consult a number of lawyers. Yesterday I consulted with hon. Adolf Mwesige, the Attorney -General and each of them had their story. If it was not for the business they have in state house that they have today, they would have been here to tell their story and also to give the legal provision. However, we have some lawyers here who will help us. In their submission yesterday, they said that the supplement of this law is not entrenched - these are two different Acts. You cannot make this Act and then you boomerang other Acts to say this and this.

Hon. Rose Akol has been to pension funds where they have excluded themselves from administration and supervision and such includes the Parliamentary Fund of Kenya. They have been excluded from duration. It is the amendment that we wish to make today so that we can comply and subject ourselves to administration –(Interruption) 

MS AKOL: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. We have benchmarked on this law, the Parliamentary Pension (Amendment) Bill. We have also been to other parliaments and learnt what they do with their funds. Other parliaments are even coming here to benchmark on our parliamentary pension scheme fund. 

Is it, therefore, in order for hon. Dombo here to insinuate that the Parliament of Kenya have excluded themselves from their own law that they made, which should affect others and not them and therefore as Parliament of Uganda, we should also be making laws that affect others and we exclude ourselves from being affected by the same law under similar circumstance? Is he in order?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, please let us be calm and try to handle this matter in a focused manner. I am not privy to provisions of the Kenya law. I have not looked at it but I was also asking myself, if we have subjected all the other funds to the other Act, is ours a standalone because we are Members of Parliament? I just want to understand that position. Should we remove it from the other law and we are ourselves?

MR EKANYA: Madam Chairperson, with me here, I have the NSSF Act. What has been happening in NSSF, the staff of the scheme have been borrowing money from the fund. If you have ever worked with commercial banks, the banks lend their staff money at three or four per cent or zero per cent. Therefore, what we are doing –(Interjection)– the banks lend to their staff. People who have worked in the banks are here and they know that they do not lend at the same rate.

I would like to plead with hon. Rose Akol and the chairperson of the committee hon. Tashobya that what we are doing here - I am the person who moved the amendment to the Constitution to introduce pension for members of Parliament when we were amending this Constitution. In this same Constitution, we have a system where Members of Parliament determine their own pay.

Therefore, we need to go further to answer your concern that immediately we are through with this legislation, I intend to bring another Bill to amend the money lenders’ Act which is affecting civil servants outside there so that we bring the country at the same level.

As we speak now, Madam Chairperson, about 6.7 trillion of our budget is going to be borrowed from NSSF, through domestic borrowing and yet in the URBRA Act, which hon. Akol has read very well, it says: “The pension fund of Uganda shall not be invested outside East Africa.” 

In the report I have, we have investors coming from as far as Europe through the commercial banks trading in our pension through the bond market, which is totally illegally; it is violating the law because the Central Bank Rate of Uganda (CBR) was 11 but when Government wants to borrow to finance the budget – honourable members, you may not know why the interest rate is high; we finance the budget by borrowing domestically and by issuing Treasury Bills and Bonds. 

Now the only source of money which is available for the bonds is money form NSSF which now, Madam Chairperson, let me tell you, the same law we passed is very wrong. It says there will be an investment manager; when NSSF wants to issue a bond because the Government of Uganda wants to fund our budget of 6.7 trillion, the investment manager gets 10 per cent.

Therefore, you borrow through commercial banks, NSSF gives Centenary Bank, Kenya Commercial Bank, Crane Bank or any bank, but the banks are just custodians. They will be paid two per cent then the investment manager who will go to negotiate the bond. And just because these bonds are auctioned, they will get 10 per cent. Therefore, you borrow 6.7 trillion, but 10 per cent will go to the investment manager because of the URBRA Act. 

All the investment managers we have in this country, Madam Chairperson, are Kenyans; foreigners because our universities have not been training actuaries and people in this sector. We have crisis at ourselves; we are like monkeys in the forest setting fire in the forest. The only time we have - I have even had discussions with ministry of finance officials and experts that if the government wants to borrow money does not need to go through a commercial bank to give 10 per cent because the government will issue a treasury bill or bond.

The way forward like you put it in the URBRA Act to cater for the fear of my sister Rose, we just say, notwithstanding provision 38, the Pension Fund of Parliament can be able to invest as per the scheme rules. 

Now in this case the scheme rule will be made by us because we are the owners in an AGM, the board will propose a scheme rule and we approve it in an AGM through an investment arm and in this case the easiest investment arm we have is our Parliamentary SACCO, so that we do not interfere with the internal operations. The Parliamentary SACCO will assess whether Ekanya or the former MP qualifies, the analysis will be protected 100 per cent so that the interest - still we are members of the Parliamentary SACCO and the pension fund. We are not violating any law, colleagues do not burn the forest, I beg you. (Applause)

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, we have heard the responses from the movers, let us keep Clause 1 which is the interpretation and go to Clause 2. 

Clause 2

MR TASHOBYA: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. The amendments we are proposing under Clause 2 are related to Clause 1 because Clause 1 is talking about including members of staff of the pension scheme whom we are proposing to delete, and if that one is passed then Clause 2 is consequentially also deleted.

THE CHAIRPERSON: You are proposing to delete Clause 2 - isn’t it only paragraph A? 

MR TASHOBYA: Yes, Madam Chairperson.

MR EKANYA: We have here the Parliamentary Pension Act 2007, Parliamentary Pension (Amendment) Act 2011 which one are we using? You need to read out the words you are deleting hon. Tashobya, because I have Clause 2 here -

THE CHAIRPERSON: The Principal Act.

MR EKANYA: Can you read the words because Clause 2 (b) which you want to delete - Madam Chairperson, we need to sort out procedural issues because we amended the 2011 Act and it is the one we need.

THE CHAIRPERSON: When we amend, can’t the amendments be incorporated into the Principal Act, do they stand alone really?

MR TASHOBYA: Madam Chairperson, I do not see the problem the member has because we are talking about the definition clause which truly is in the Parliament Act. The proposed amendment is to delete members of staff of the pension fund in the Act; a “member” is defined as a Member of Parliament and staff, but in the Bill we are including a member of staff of the pension scheme whom we are proposing to delete because of the reasons we have already alluded to.

MR EKANYA: Madam Chairperson, my concern is what the chairman is proposing to delete. He is saying delete Clause 2 -

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that Clause 2 (a) -

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, I have the Principal Act and Clause 2 is talking of amendment of section 4 of the Principal Act and Clause 2 specifically talks about the scheme being contributory; it is about establishment of the scheme - 

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, honourable members, if you look at this Bill of 2014, the object of the Bill is to amend the Parliamentary Pension Act, 2007. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, I have 2007, Clause 2 says, “Amendment of section 4 of the Principal Act” and section 4 is establishment of the scheme. In sub section (2), it says the scheme shall be a contributory scheme and here they are inserting the words “Parliamentary Scheme” and the chair is saying delete it. We cannot delete (a) –(Interruption)

MS AKOL: Thank you, honourable member, for giving way and I would like to thank you on attaining the position of Secretary General in your party. 

Madam Chairperson, I would like to say this, the amendment is to amend the word “member” to mean Members of Parliament, staff of the Parliamentary Commission and staff of the Parliamentary Pension Scheme. The new amendment here is staff of the Parliamentary Pension Scheme; that is what we want to include in section 2 in the definition section where there is “member” in that section to include the Parliamentary Pension Scheme members.

Madam Chairperson, we are in a transition period and now introducing the Pension Sector Liberalisation Bill which obliges every employer - even if you just have an employee - to make sure this member contributes to a pension scheme. We are only trying to align ourselves because as soon as the Liberalisation Bill takes effect –(Interruption) 

MR KATUNTU: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. I do not know whether my sister has realised her mistake. First of all, the issue she is raising is very speculative, she is saying we should conform to a Bill which we have not yet debated and passed. We may actually reject the very clause that you are citing. So can we really limit ourselves to the issues under discussion? 

Having said that, the confusion is arising out of the many amendments that have taken place prior to this. When you look at the Parliamentary Pensions (Amendment) Act, 2011, the second amendment was actually on Section 4 of the principal Act. 

There have been various amendments along the way and my view is that we just need to go back to which particular section as it is currently, and then we can amend it accordingly other than just referring to Section 4 which has since then changed. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Can we have copies of the principal Act?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: When the Parliamentary Commissioner was talking, she was in fact referring to interpretation and I am happy that hon. Katuntu has raised it in a better way. 

Clause 4 in the principal Act that we are trying to amend talks about establishment of a scheme and if that is the law, what you are talking about, honourable commissioner, then you are wrong because what you are referring to is interpretation which Madam Chairperson said we skip and we would come back to it later.  

Given the circumstances, I think that we now have so many laws and I do not think that we shall proceed well. I would propose that we end here because the principal Act is different; the one of 2011 that hon. Katuntu is bringing is different and at the end of the day, we shall be making different amendments and make a wrong law.

I would like to propose that we go back, reconcile all the laws and we return tomorrow and proceed with it.

MS AKOL: I have listened to my honourable colleagues and I do not know whether there is really a problem here because I think that our amendment Bill is very clear because we are amending the principal Act, and the object of the Bill is to amend the Parliamentary Pensions Act, 2007 and it is what we are referring to – it is the sections in the parent law that we are amending now.

MR KATUNTU: I do not think we have to waste time on this one. You see, there is only one law but as amended and so you cannot go back to the parent law. It does not exist now as it existed then. It has gone through changes and what you are saying is not correct because it is as amended, as its update.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, I would like to propose that the Clerk circulates the text of the principal Act of 2007, the amended Act of 2011 and then we come back to this on Thursday when we have synchronised. I do not know how many of you have access to all those.

I would also like the Attorney-General to be present to tie up some lacunas in the law and the Constitution. Can we defer to Thursday such that we give ourselves time and for the Clerk to distribute the materials to all the members on their Ipads and then we can move together on Thursday?

Let me now ask the mover to move for the House to resume.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

4.58
MS ROSE AKOL (NRM, Woman Representative, Bukedea): Madam Chairperson, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House do report thereto.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question to the motion. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding.)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

5.01
MS ROSE AKOL (NRM, Woman Representative, Bukedea): Madam Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled, “The Parliamentary Pensions (Amendment) Bill, 2014” and has considered no clause and therefore without amendments. I beg to move. 

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

5.01
MS ROSE AKOL (NRM, Woman Representative, Bukedea): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Report from the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that the House do adopt the report of the committee.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have deferred the consideration until Thursday. Next item.

MOTION FOR RECONSIDERATION OF THE PUBLIC PRIVATE PARTNERSHIP BILL, 2014 WHICH WAS RETURNED TO PARLIAMENT BY H.E. THE PRESIDENT FOR THE SECOND TIME WITH A REQUEST TO AMEND CLAUSE 26(1), (7) AND (8) OF THE PASSED BILL

5.03
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that this House approve the request by His Excellency the President to reconsider the Public Private Partnership Bill, 2014 which was returned to Parliament for the second time with a request to amend clauses 26(1), (7) and (8) of the passed Bill. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, it has been seconded. Can we now receive the report?  

5.04
MR HENRY MUSASIZI (NRM, Rubanda County East, Kabale): Madam Speaker, permit me to present the report of the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development on the Public Private Partnership Bill, 2014. 

You will recall that the Bill was referred to the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development after H.E the President returned it to Parliament for reconsideration in a letter dated 7 January, 2015 and addressed to the Rt Hon. Speaker, in accordance with Article 91 (3) (b) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda.

The Article reads as follows: “The President shall, within thirty days after a bill is presented to him or her — 
(b) return the bill to Parliament with a request that the bill or a particular provision of it be reconsidered by Parliament.” 

Madam Speaker, I do not want to waste a lot of time and would like to ask for your permission to go straight to the committee observations and recommendations.

Madam Speaker, in the original Public Private Partnership Bill, 2012, clause 18(1) and (2) provided for the public-private partnerships agreements as follows: -

THE SPEAKER: Please continue with the report.

MR MUSASIZI: That the minister shall, with the approval of Cabinet by statutory instrument, prescribe the value of an agreement for which the approval of Cabinet is required before the agreement is signed by an accounting officer.

It also provides that where an agreement is of a value for which the approval of Cabinet is required before it is signed by the accounting officer, the accounting officer shall not sign the agreement without the approval of Cabinet.

The committee observed that this provision will safeguard PPP agreements since the principle of collective responsibility shall prevail.

Public-Private Partnership agreements as defined by the Public-Private Partnership Bill, 2012 is a written contract recording the terms of the public private partnership concluded between a contracting authority and a private party. It is therefore an agreement or a concession between Government and private entities as a form of procurement and hence an executive function.

Parliament is empowered, under clause 13(2) of the unassented to Act, to appropriate money for PPPs. The clause provides as follows: “An accounting officer shall not enter into an agreement that in any way to binds the contracting authority to a future financial commitment or which results into a contingent liability, except where the future financial commitment or contingent liability is authorised by Parliament in the budget of the contracting authority”.

The committee observes that the clause empowers Parliament to approve future financial commitments and contingent liabilities that arise as a result of the PPPs.

Recommendations

Madam Speaker, the committee recommends as follows:
    a) For avoidance of doubt and to ensure transparency the relevant minister shall lay before Parliament any Public Private Partnership agreement or agreements within one month after they have been signed for parliamentary oversight;
    b) All PPP agreements, amendments or variations thereto should as well be laid before Parliament within one month after the amendment or variation;
    c) Ministries, Government departments and agencies should indicate in their budget framework papers to Parliament, the respective PPP projects to formalise the appropriation of funds for those projects.
    d) Government should specify which PPPs are co-funded by Government and those that are wholly funded by investors.
    e) Clause 26 of the Public Private Partnership Bill, 2012 as passed by Parliament should be reconsidered and passed.

Conclusion

Madam Speaker and honourable Members, Parliament is empowered under clause 13(2) to appropriate funding under PPP, which results into contingent liability. 

The committee recommends that clause 26 of the PPP Bill 2012 should be reconsidered and the committee will propose necessary amendments at an appropriate time. Madam Speaker, I beg to report. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much.

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table, committee minutes of the meetings that were held to reconsider the returned Act. I also would like to lay on the Table the un-assented to Act of Public Private Partnerships Act, 2014. I beg to lay.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you so much hon. Chair. I understand there is a minority report but I don’t know who is taking the lead in presentation.

5.11
THE SHADOW MINISTER OF FINANCE (Mr Geofrey Ekanya): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I wish to present a minority report in accordance to our Rules of Procedure. Public Private Partnership may broadly be defined as long term contracts between a private party and Government agency for providing public assets or service in which the private party bears risk and management.

Do PPPs pose any challenge and limitation? 
The PPPs include: 
    a) Financing that could be viewed as a form of backdoor borrowing, that is, a financial commitment that does not directly involve the state but draws on the same resource base or otherwise holds potential implications for the state’s financial and other interests. It is important to recognise that private financing does not constitute new source of funding ultimately. The cost would be borne by the public.
b) 	Increased financing cost, that is, private companies typically pay higher interests than Government entities when they are borrowing.
c) 	There is greater possibility for unforeseeable issues to rise. Such issues could include disputes regarding certain terms in a contract as well as a private party being acquired by another company or going out of business effectively resulting in project rescheduling, delaying and additional costs. 

Limiting Government flexibility, that is, locking certain Government funding priority based on operational need determined at a time the contract is negotiated. It can make it difficult to change funding allocation to reflect changes in Government priority.

Poorly drafted agreements can be costly and difficult to correct. The legal and administrative costs associated with correction or negotiation can easily eat up all the benefits that were supposed to be approved from a PPP contract.

Uganda has had examples of PPP undertaken, which include the Bujagali Dam, the Umeme Concession, the Rift Valley Railway Concession and Operation of railway tracks and wagons, the Serena Hotel, operated under consortium comprised of the tourism promotion service division of Aga Khan Fund for Economic Development, NSSF and PACOS, a French property company, the Oil Palm Uganda Ltd, a consortium comprised of Wilmar Managers of Plantations and Bidco responsible for processing and producing palm oil, street packing in Kampala, the collapsed Pioneer Easy Bus Concession, and the Uganda Taxi Owners and Drivers’ Associations(UTODA). 

Local governments all over Uganda also have contracts with several obligations like the Market and Abattoirs, the Jinja Nakasongola Fuel Storage, Entebbe Handling Services, which crippled Uganda Airlines. This is different from the committee position. 

Rule 194 (1) stated thus: “A Member dissenting from the opinion of the majority of a committee may state in writing the reasons for  his or her  or their dissent, and the statement of the reasons shall be appended to the report of the committee.”

Point of Dissent

A Public-Private-Partnership project is a debt to the present and future generation. Consider the example of a road constructed and citizens have to pay the road toll to use that road for 20 years but during the period, the PPP cost of the projected was inflated then the traffic law reduces yet the investor has to recover the cost. Is it the investor who pays or the citizens have to budget?

Madam Speaker and honourable members, we have fresh lessons from the Bujagali Power Project about which the President himself recently complained that he did not know how that project was entered into increasing the cost of power to 11 cents. That is classical example of PPP, which has made the cost of consumption very high. 

Why should PPP details not be reviewed by Parliament yet we review all borrowings before then the Attorney-General organises the financial signing?

Madam Speaker and colleagues, when Parliament reviews, it does not mean Parliament is going to be involved in the signing; it is still Government to get involved in the signing. What is hidden in those projects whose terms and conditions should not be told to us yet the financial commitments are repaid by the present and future generations. 

Article 159 (1) of the Constitution states: “Subject to the provision of this Constitution, Government may borrow from any source.”  The borrowing in this form is not borrowing direct cash but allows the private party to bring in cash and implement a project.

Sub Clause (2) of the same Article states: “Government shall not borrow, guarantee, or raise loan on its behalf of itself or any other public institution, authority or person except as authorised by or under an Act of Parliament.”

Article 159 (3) states thus: “An Act of Parliament made under clause 2 of this article shall provide- (a) the terms and conditions of the loan shall be laid before Parliament...”  What we are just saying is that the terms and conditions of this PPP should be brought here for approval. 

The money received in this case shall go to consolidated fund. This may require - because the PPP resource will go direct like the road toll - pre-collected by the third party yet the constitution says all money should go to consolidated fund to the extent of total indebtedness.

Madam Speaker and colleagues, rescinding clause 26, as passed by the Parliament, contravenes clause 6 (ii) which state that- “An accounting officer shall not enter into agreement that in anyway binds the contracting authority to a future financial commitment or which results into a contingent reliability except where the future contingent reliability is authorised by Parliament in the budget of the contracting authority”.

In this case - because the PPP exceeds one financial year - it cannot be put in a budget because we appropriate our budget annually.

Violation and Abuse of the Public Finance Management Act, 2015

The Public Finance Management Act, under Section 43 (i) provides that all expenditure to be incurred by Government on projects, which are externally financed in a finance year, shall be appropriated by Parliament.

Clause 43 (iii) states that where a vote, a loan or a grant is received for a proposed project, the accounting officer shall in the budget for that year make presentation.

Recommendations

As an institution charged with the main function as provided for by Article 79 of the Constitution of Uganda, we should make laws for the peace, order, development and good governance of Uganda. We should uphold the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda and all the provisions therein and the Public Finance Management Act, 2015, especially in relation to any borrowing or open or backdoor borrowing or external financing in relation to PPP projects.

Clause 26 of the PPP, as passed by Parliament, be maintained and sent back to the President without any changes to avoid the spirit captured. In this case, be passed so that it becomes law.

Clause 6 (ii) provides that the accounting officer shall not enter into agreement that in anyway binds the contracting authority to future financial commitment or which results into contingent reliability except where the future contingent reliability is authorised by Parliament in the budget of the contracting authority.

Conclusion

Parliament and the President should respect the provisions of the Public Finance Management Act, the Constitution and ensure that we make a law for prosperity. Madam Speaker, I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Members who have presented the minority report. Honourable members, we have debated this matter - this would probably be the third occasion. So perhaps I will allow only five contributions for and against; we will then vote because the matters are not new. Is there anything to discuss?

5.21
MR ISAIAS SSASAGA (FDC, Budadiri County East, Sironko): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to give more information to the House because yesterday I watched, on Nation Television, a colleague among us in Parliament saying that world over, the practice of PPPs is that they are approved by Cabinet. 

I also heard one of the stations the sector minister saying the same. But the information I want to give colleagues is that for us, like I, who was part of the team that went to Malaysia for benchmarking - I wish the minister was here -

THE SPEAKER: Are you a member of the committee?

MR SSASAGA: Yes, Madam Speaker and that is why I am giving the information.

THE SPEAKER: No, this is your report. Let the others comment on your report. Let the others who are not members speak.

5.22
MR JACOB OBOTH (Independent, West Budama County South, Tororo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The honourable member is suggesting he gives me information which I have declined. You have rightly guided this. Apparently, this matter has caused fatigue; it has caused dilemma to us too. Any attempt to try to open up fresh debate would be just worsening the fatigue situation that we have. 

This is my first time in Parliament and the first time to see a Bill being returned twice.  My brother, the hon. Geoffrey Ekanya - we agree with him on many things and I have very high respect for him. We debated this matter and that time my voice was among the minority. 

Now that we have another opportunity to prove that this minority can actually be the correct view - Madam Speaker, I am avoiding the temptation to give merit and to distinguish and attack the minority report because it is well said but the majority report is also well said. 

The only difference I would like to make is that in my limited knowledge of matters of procurement and partnership, is that PPP can never be a backdoor borrowing. Even if it was, this Parliament has made laws. In our Constitution, we have a provision that cater for situations of borrowing. This is the only problem that I risk losing a very good relationship with my district caucus chair, the hon. Geoffrey Ekanya. So, to have this as borrowing and have specific provisions under clauses (12) and (13) regulating that, we would be missing the point.

5.25
MR KENNETH LUBOGO (Independent, Bulamogi County, Kaliro): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I just have one issue on which I would like hon. Geoffrey Ekanya to clarify, so far as I understand the PPP arrangement, as opposed to loans. 

I would like him to clarify to me, if for instance, Government entered into a PPP with a private company to construct an express highway to Jinja and this investor is supposed to recover his money from the users of the road. But after the project is ready, Ugandans say we are not going to use that road and they indeed refuse to use it. Has Government got to pay this money to the investor? If not so, it does not arise as a loan, but it becomes a joint investment where the recoup comes from the revenue generated.

Otherwise, I would like you to clarify whether in that arrangement Government would have to pay money where the users have refused to use the facility. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members,  we should not move away from the debate. The question is simple. The minority report is proposing that we stick to the position as before – retain the decision we took. The other is saying there is a slight amendment and the approval is by the Cabinet rather than Parliament. That is all. 

MR EKANYA: Can I clarify?

THE SPEAKER: Do not mix issues. You will clarify later. Let us focus on the minority report and the main report.

5.27
MR WILFRED NIWAGABA (Ndorwa County East, Kabale): Madam Speaker, in supporting the minority report, I would like to give information to this Parliament that when we debated the motion on the Standard Gauge Railway and the committee which is still investigating, Government went ahead and signed a contract. When you look at the contract, which I have and will be laying at the Table here, you realise the danger we have investing the power, to look through PPPs, with Cabinet without parliamentary scrutiny. 

Madam Speaker, on 30th March Government, through the Permanent Secretary of the Ministry of Works and Transport, signed a contract in respect of the Standard Gauge Railway with China Harbour Engineering Company and the contract price of $3,290,149,218 for only one leg – the Northern line of the Ugandan section of the Regional Standard Gauge Railway network from Malaba to Tororo. If you read clause (4)(4) of the agreement -

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, I do not think those issues are relevant to what we are discussing. They are not relevant to what we are discussing.

MR NIWAGABA: Madam Speaker, they are relevant because it is some form of PPP.

THE SPEAKER: No, honourable members, the PPP law has not been assented to because there is a clause still pending. There is no law until we complete this one.

MR NIWAGABA: Madam Speaker, in concluding the information I have given, I would like to lay this at the Table.

THE SPEAKER: No, you have not created the basis. Please, stop just laying things anyhow. No, no! 

5.27
MR MEDARD SSEGGONA (DP, Busiro County East, Wakiso): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I think the questions that we need to answer are as follows: What is borrowing? You are entering a PPP with somebody because you do not have money to immediately invest in a project and you are asking a private person to invest their money with a view that you pay. How you pay is a different mechanism. Is that acquiring a loan or borrowing or not?

Why would you commit this country without involving the representatives of these people? We are not saying we want to sign this agreement. We are saying present it to us for scrutiny the way we do with the budgets, which we have approved for this country before. Why would the Member of Parliament want to give away such a power, which is –(Interjections)– I will allow you later, my brother; let me drive my point. 

The point I am making is: What is our power? We make laws for the good governance of this country. The second is that we oversee the operations of the Executive. It is as simple as that. Why would you make a law that contradicts clause (26)(1) and (2), which we have already passed?

I would beg my colleagues - we love coherence and consistency, but it is very important that for the commitments we are making for the future of this country and for generation here today and tomorrow, we must get involved because we are their representatives. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I would like to draw your attention to the provisions of Rules 89 (c) of our Rules of Procedure. This matter is an appeal from the President. So, we have to vote by roll call and tally. If the outcome of the roll call and tally is that those opposing the approval of the request of the President are more than two-thirds, it will be taken that the request has been rejected.

If, on the other hand, those opposing are less than two-thirds, it will mean that the President’s request has been granted. Therefore, we shall now proceed with the roll call.

MR SSASAGA: Madam Speaker, I beg your indulgence on a procedural point. We are aware of the time in which we are. I believe that ministers on the Frontbench would want to go with collective responsibility of the Cabinet position. Some colleagues on the other side could be having an alternative view -

THE SPEAKER: You are speculating, please – but these are the Rules of Procedure. The rules say it should be done by roll call and tally. 

Honourable members, this is one of those occasions when you must show your side. It is not my work; it is the Rules of this House.

MR KATUNTU: Madam Speaker, I am looking at Article 91(5) of the Constitution, which says thus: “Where the President returns the same Bill twice under clause 3(b) of this article and the Bill is passed for the third time with the support of at least two-thirds of all Members of Parliament, the Speaker shall cause a copy of the Bill to be laid before Parliament and the Bill shall become law without the assent of the President.” 
Our Rules of Procedure were actually enacted in pursuance of Article 91(5) and this one only relates to passing this Bill. 

The second part of it, which you have talked about, I do not see it in the Constitution. I only see the standard given to passing the Bill, if the President has declined. The other part is not provided for in the Constitution. 

Therefore, the point on which I am seeking clarification on, Madam Speaker is: where do we get the powers to say that if it has not, then it has passed or the President’s request has been granted?  It is because it is not provided for specifically by the Constitution and the rules were made pursuant to Article 91(5) of our Constitution.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, I think you are not really thinking straight today. If one side gets two-third, that is the side that wins. If those saying the President’s request should be granted get two-thirds, then that side wins. If the other side, which does not want, fail to get two-thirds, it means it has been passed. No, no, hon. Abdu Katuntu, please let us vote by starting with a roll call. We are proceeding as I have ruled, please.

(Voting by roll call and tally.)

THE SPEAKER: It cannot be secret. These are our rules. How do we roll call by secret ballot? It is not provided for here. Those who are in favour of granting the President’s request should say aye and those who are not say no; and those who are abstaining, say abstain. Please, you call the names; we are on hon. Christine Acayo. 

No those who are in favour of the request by the President - the President invited you to review and to move away from your position as Parliament. So, you say either yes or no.

MR DOMBO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. We are proceeding properly so far, but I want all of us to be on the same plate because the President made a request and the committee made adjustments. 

Therefore, are we voting to the President’s request or to the adjustments? That must be made clear so that we can proceed correctly.

THE SPEAKER: Let us do it this way. Those in favour of the committee’s report will say Aye, and the other ones opposed to it, say, no. I think that is simpler.

Start the roll call, please – no, the other one is minority. Okay, you say Aye in favour of this or that, if that is what you want. (Laughter) Please proceed with the roll call, Clerk.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, honourable members, I think let us start again. Let us vote on the minority report first - yes, because if it collapses, then that is okay.

MS AKOL: Madam Speaker, I would like to propose - the committee report is the main report. Those who are in favour of the committee report, as amended, will say, Aye. Those who definitely are not in support of the committee’s report but want to support the minority report will say, no. Yes, that should be the position because the minority report definitely goes against what is in the committee report. That is what I think will make matters simple, honourable members. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, are we clear on what to do? Let us proceed. What is it hon. Jacob Oboth?

MR OBOTH: Madam Speaker, you guided so well. I think we are over interfering with that initial guidance. The choice is clear. The choice for the committee report should be in favour of the new position while the choice of the minority report should be in favour of the old position. The voting should take that pattern. I am sure, with the little knowledge that I have in this House - I have seen other Members voting, no, when they are supposed to vote, yes. 

Madam Speaker, I insist since I am holding the Floor that this should be as clear as you guided before so that Members vote – I am already fatigue, we need a clear way of voting. We cannot just take chances and we succumb to those who were -

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we had reached hon. Christine Achia. Please proceed. If you are supporting the committee main report, say, yes and yes to the minority report, still say it. Please, proceed with the roll call.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the “noes” have 27 votes and the “ayes” have 118 votes. In the circumstances, the “no” position collapses and we should now proceed to committee stage. I put the question that the Bill be read for the second time.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: For the committee stage, we shall proceed by simple majority.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, you said two-thirds of the Members of Parliament. If you wanted to vote for what the President wanted, we needed two-thirds of the Members of Parliament –(Interjections)- If you do not know, then you are making a mistake. Where is the Attorney-General? The moment you do not get the two-thirds, it means that it collapses. When it does so, it means that the President’s position is out and the original position that Parliament passed is the one that remains. That is the law that we made ourselves.

THE SPEAKER: I did not say “all” but I said “present”. 

MR DOMBO: I thank you very much. I would like to thank my honourable colleague and the honourable members for this opportunity. 

I think the rule that hon. Nandala-Mafabi was quoting – We have just been voting either to adopt the minority report or the committee report. In which case, your ruling, Madam Speaker, becomes absolutely right and valid that we proceed to the committee stage for us to consider the amendments as proposed by the committee.     

MR NIWAGABA: Madam Speaker, I beg your indulgence. We are dealing with a unique situation that is covered under the Constitution. In the event that we go for a second reading, a vote must be taken. When you read the Constitution, it provides for a quorum of two-thirds of Members of Parliament. Already, the members here are not even half of two-thirds – (Interjections) - Yes, because if you consider the number of Members of Parliament, you are talking of two-thirds, which is 249.

The point of procedure on which I rise is whether it is worthwhile to go into an exercise in futility, in view of the fact that the two-thirds are not there.

THE SPEAKER: Let us go to the Bill’s committee stage.

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE PUBLIC PRIVATE PARTNERSHIP BILL, 2014

Clause 26

THE CHAIRPERSON: Clause 26, honourable chairperson.

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chairperson, substitute clause 26 (1) and (2) with the following:
“(1) The minister shall, with the approval of Cabinet, by statutory instrument, prescribe the value of an agreement for which the approval of Cabinet is required before the agreement is signed by an accounting officer.

(2) 	Where an agreement is of a value for which the approval of Cabinet is required before it is signed by the accounting officer, the accounting officer shall not sign the agreement without approval of Cabinet.

(3) 	An agreement shall be forwarded to Cabinet for approval where the accounting officer confirms that-
(a) the best evaluated bid meets the requirements of affordability, value for money and substantial technical operational and financial risk transfer;
(b) the contracting authority puts in place a management plan that explains the capacity, including the mechanisms and procedures of the contracting authority to implement, manage, enforce, monitor and report on the project effectively; and
(c)	 satisfactory due diligence is carried out on the private party in relation to the competence and capacity of the private party to enter into an agreement.”

In clause 26 (7) and (8), replace the word “Parliament” with “Cabinet”. 

Insert a new sub clause 26 (9) to read as follows: 
“(9) (a) The minister shall, within one month after signing any agreement, lay before Parliament a copy of the agreement.
(b) Any amendment or variation made under subsection (10) shall be laid before Parliament within one month of the amendment or variation.”

The justifications for the above proposals are: 
a) 	Clause 13(2) of the un-assented Bill entitled, “The Public Private Partnership Bill, 2014” adequately covers the need for Parliament to approve future financial commitments and contingent liabilities that arise as a result of PPP agreements.

b) 	Under clause 30(3) of the same un-assented Bill, the Auditor-General shall each year present a report to Parliament on each public private partnership project.

Madam Chairperson, I beg to submit.

MR BAHATI: Madam Chairperson, I move to amend the amendment proposed by the chairperson of the committee in (1) – “The minister shall, with the approval of Cabinet by statutory instrument…” I think “by statutory instrument” is misplaced here because in other clauses we have provided for the minister to make regulations. After all, the minister will be going to Cabinet; so, he is not going to Cabinet with a statutory instrument to prescribe the value of an agreement. I beg that “by statutory instrument” be deleted.

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chairperson, I concede.

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I have a bit of a problem with sub clause (1) and with the indulgence of the committee chairperson I beg to amend it radically. I propose that sub clause (1) be amended in the following terms: “The Cabinet shall approve the prescribed value of an agreement for which the approval of Cabinet is required before the agreement is signed by the accounting officer.” 

Madam Chairperson, the value that it would add is that you would remove from an individual minister the authority to prescribe the threshold and take it to a collective organ - the Cabinet. It should be the forte of Cabinet to prescribe the threshold. If the committee does not find that very offensive, I propose that we consider it.

THE CHAIRPERSON: If it is the Cabinet, then who signs the instrument? Is it the head of Cabinet or the President?

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Madam Chairperson, I hear your concerns but there are two things here; there is the determination of the threshold and there is the issuance of the instrument. If Cabinet is to determine the threshold, the minister can still issue the instrument. I do not see any contradiction. I was only suggesting that we leave the power to determine the threshold with Cabinet but the minister can then issue the statutory instrument.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Coached in words like “the Cabinet has -

MR OBOTH: If I got the concern of hon. Fox Odoi well, it would be like a need for approval; Cabinet approves but it will not be signing. The signature of the line minister will come after the approval of Cabinet. It is the same thing like determining of the threshold. There is a fear that if you left it to one Cabinet minister, that would be subject to unnecessary suspicion or suspicion of powers that could be abused. If you subject the threshold to the Cabinet to set and the minister can issue the instrument, that would still be a safety measure on one individual minister, whether it is hon. Omach, hon. Bahati or hon. Byabagambi.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Does the chairperson have an objection to that formulation? 

MR MUSASIZI: We welcome ideas and I would like hon. Oboth to improve this proposal and we move on.

THE CHAIRPERSON: But that was hon. Fox Odoi’s proposal. 

MR MUSASIZI: It was enhanced by hon. Oboth.

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Madam Chairperson, I propose that first we split sub clause (1) into two parts. The first part would read, “The Cabinet shall approve the prescribed value of an agreement for which the approval of Cabinet is required before the agreement is signed by an accounting officer.”

THE CHAIRPERSON: May I know whether there are those that do not require Cabinet approval? Under what conditions would the minister act without Cabinet? You are saying “for which Cabinet approval is required”; are there those that are not?

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: That is what sub clause (1) presupposes, Madam Chairperson. It presupposes that there will be insignificant amounts of money invested in some PPPs that you do not have to go to Cabinet all the time. If say the value of a PPP is Shs 10 million, the Cabinet need not consider that. I think that is also founded even in the PPDA Act; there are thresholds that are set. A procurement of Shs 200 need not be advertised.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Okay, state the structure which you want us to adopt.

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Clause 26(1) - “The Cabinet shall prescribe the value of an agreement for which the approval of Cabinet is required before the agreement is signed by an accounting officer.” We introduce sub clause (2) thereafter to read, “The minister shall, by statutory instrument, publish the prescribed value.”

THE CHAIRPERSON: It would have been agreed by Cabinet; his work is to inform the country. I put the question that clause 26 be amended as proposed by hon. Odoi-Oywelowo.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 26, as amended, agreed to.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

7.04
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Chairperson, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question to the motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding.)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

7.06
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled, “The Public Private Partnership Bill, 2014” and passed it with amendments.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that the report of the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I am proposing that we defer the third reading to tomorrow; we will start with it and then conclude. I would like to thank you very much for the work done. House is adjourned to tomorrow at 2.00 p.m.

(The House rose at 7.07 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 1 July 2015 at 2.00 p.m.)
