Disclaimer: The electronic version of the Official Report of the proceedings of Parliament (Hansard) is for information purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Office of the Clerk to Parliament.




Thursday, 20 June 2019

Parliament met at 2.39p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this afternoon sitting. I would like to remind the whips that we need to settle the issue of the sessional committees. I would not want to do them in piecemeal. Sometimes, we undersubscribe or oversubscribe other committees. So, I want us to do it together. I know that the Opposition Whip is ready but the other two colleagues are not here. I appeal to them that we will handle this on Tuesday next week so that our committees can start working.

There are two matters of national concern.

2.42
MR ODRIA ALIONI (Independent, Aringa South County, Yumbe): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance and this is about the administration of the Uganda Telecom Limited (UTL). 
Well aware that on 19 February 1999, UTL was incorporated, taking over the operations of Uganda Post and Telecommunication Corporation. Under the Uganda Post and Communication Act No.3, 1983, we are well aware that the Government of Uganda has 31 per cent of the shareholding and that is being taken care of by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. Luckily enough, both the Minister of State for Finance, Planning and Economic Development (Privatisation and Investment) and the Minister of State for Finance, Planning and Economic Development (Planning) are all here. 69 per cent of the shares went to Ucom. These are Libyan based directors.  

Madam Speaker, in February 2017, the Ucom investors pulled off and that means the Government of Uganda only remained with 31 per cent of the shares. Therefore, an administrator was appointed. As I talk now, there is a summary of creditors under UTL of over Shs 534 billion. These include pensioners who are not paid, unpaid loans and a lot of other issues. 

It has come to our notice that there is a company called Teleology Company Limited that is illegally operating in this country. It is operating illegally under the 69 per cent of the shares. When this company came, in a financial intelligence report, which came out on 25 May 2018, the authority made it clear that this company have no national business report anywhere. They also have no clear source of funding anywhere in the world.

When they came here, I am told the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development had an agreement with them where they were to invest $70 million in three months. It has been over a year and this company has not even invested one dollar. 

Madam Speaker, in the report that the administrator made to the President in November 2017, he made it clear that there has been an increment of five per cent in the monthly profits made by UTL. This clearly proves that Shs 4.2 billion was made monthly between April 2017 to September 2017. By September, they are saying the increment went to Shs 4.5 billion. We have information that UTL is currently making Shs 15 billion monthly. 

Therefore, what is the source of this money? The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development gave a directive that all the internet services in Government offices must be provided by UTL. They also make money from all the landline telephones that we have in Government offices as well as the mobile phone calls that are made. 

So, what is our concern? The administrator does not give way for any accountability. From September 2017 up to now, there is no single accountability by UTL. Nobody in this country knows how much money UTL is making monthly. Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development made a request to the Auditor-General to come and audit UTL. Up to today, there is no single audit report from the Office of the Auditor-General about the operations of UTL.

The finance ministry went ahead – I have all these documents with me – and wrote to have an internal audit from the ministry. The finance ministry, which is holding 31 per cent of Government shares, does not even have any accountability about UTL’s operation. 

What is my prayer?  I pray that: 

    1. Using your power, Madam Speaker, can the finance minister explain to us what is happening with the operations and accountability by UTL? 
    2. Can we know this company called Teleology and how it is operating in Uganda? Is the company still operating after breaching the contract they signed? 
    3. Is it possible to have a select committee to go and investigate the operations of UTL, which cannot be accessed by anybody, including the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development?

I rest my case. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, you have made some prayers which I think I should respond to. Hon. Nandala-Mafabi, in the Second Session, came here and brought a complaint about UTL. We set up a select committee; they brought their report and we recommended certain actions. I would like to know from Government where the treasury memorandum on that report is and whether it is true that people are chewing our money. Why are they treating our country like it is a public toilet? 

It is good the minister of investment is here. She will speak after hon. Okot-Ogong and hon. Okupa. 

MR OKOT-OGONG: Madam Speaker, you have just made a very important statement that this country is being treated as a public toilet.  UTL used to belong to Government 100 per cent. The way it was sold in a “mafia” way - how it is being run “mafia” style - The hon. Nandala committee investigated and gave us a clear report with clear recommendations. However, this Government that you are saying must explain to us never acted on these recommendations of Parliament. This is contempt of Parliament. They cannot talk to Parliament - a Parliament that they do not respect. We cannot even tell these people who do not respect us to again do what they want. Let us have a motion of Parliament which must be respected.

This is a Parliament of Uganda; and by the Constitution of Uganda, we must make laws for the good governance of this country. Why are we being treated like this Parliament is a toilet? We make recommendations and they do not act on them.

Madam speaker, the way they have looted UTL is a shame to this country, Parliament and everyone. Is it procedurally right to allow again taking this matter back to a Cabinet/Government that has not respected our recommendations?

We wasted money here by financing the select committee to go and investigate. I can assure you those recommendations were very good and for the good of this country.

Therefore, Madam Speaker, let us act as Parliament. If we cannot act as Parliament, let us organise a meeting with the President of this country; Parliament should discuss this matter with the President directly if we cannot be heard here.

2.52
MS CECILIA OGWAL (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Madam Speaker, my prayer adding to what my colleague has just said is that the administrator has clearly and deliberately failed to carry out the duties which he was supposed to carry out. Therefore, this Parliament must take a decision which the Government fears to take and terminate its contract immediately.

I have a document in my hands authored by Uganda Communications Commission telling the country that this administrator has failed to comply with all the regulations. How do you manage a public company when you are failing to prove that you are in compliance with the regulation?

Therefore, this is a deliberate defiance of the rules and regulations and the laws of the country; we need to terminate the contract of the administrator now.

Secondly, Madam Speaker, much as the Members are very uncomfortable about putting another select committee, we need to verify how much money we have lost. We were able to prove - and there are documents to prove - that at the time the administrator took over this company, it was making Shs 4.5 billion per month.

After that, this administrator was allowed to be the monopoly in providing Internet service and all the voice calls for all Government departments. This monopoly alone should have been able to generate revenue of almost Shs 10-20 billion a month. Therefore, we need to verify where this money has gone.

Madam Speaker, my prayer is that:

    1. The contract of the administrator must be terminated.
    2. We must verify how much money he has lost and where we can recover that money from.

These are my prayers. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: You know it was hon. Odria who raised the issue and made prayers. However, let us have the last comment and I would like to know from the minister where the Treasury Memorandum is. We finished that thing and gave you that report long ago; you were supposed to come back in six months.

2.55
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Serere): Thank you, Madam Speaker, and thank you, hon. Alioni for raising this matter. It is good that hon. Anite and hon. Bahati are here. You remember after the appointment of the administrator, our colleague hon. Anite went for studies. There was rumour all over that she had run out of the country.

However, it was shrouded and connected with this issue of UTL because I followed and read the articles. It is good hon. Anite is here; she should be able to tell us because reading that information, the issue was which company had been given to be in charge of UTL.

From the intelligence report that we have here, she did not approve this teleology company. It was a Mauritius company; how did Government go ahead to give this company called teleology, which completely has nothing in this country? They tried in Nigeria and failed; now how did the Ugandans end up with it? 

There was even a Cabinet sub-committee - I beg to be corrected here; there is something that happened to the report and hon. Anite was one of the members of that sub-committee; how the documents were doctored.

Madam Speaker, since UTL and the administrator have failed to respect the request from Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development that the Auditor-General does forensic audit - I know we made a report here but the Administrator-General came after. We need to direct the Auditor-General to go and do a forensic audit before we even set a select committee such that after that report can be acted on based on what the Auditor-General has found out from UTL from the time he took over to-date.

I understand people are busy selling the assets to themselves. There is a lot of asset-stripping in UTL. We need to help this country and Ugandans because this would be a company that would be making money every year. They are remitting money to their countries.

Madam Speaker, I pray that you direct the Auditor-General to do that forensic audit and bring the report as we ask the ministers here to update us, especially hon. Anite who is here today. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: I will invite the honourable minister. However, even the minister is requesting for accountability; if he has refused, it is in breach of a statutory obligation under the law. He does not have a choice.

However, as I invite the honourable minister, join me in welcoming children who have come to visit - the students from Seeta Junior School Mukono; is that you? Maybe they are not certain. There is another group, St Joseph Kyabiruka Primary School; is that you? From Mbarara represented by hon. Bright Rwamirama – No, this is Isingiro and not Mbarara; you clerks, this is Isingiro - hon. Rwamirama and hon. Justine Ayebazibwe. Welcome, young people, to Parliament.

Are you Seeta Junior School? Please stand up. That is Seeta Junior School Mukono represented by hon. Ronald Kibuule and hon. Peace Kusasira. Welcome. (Applause) Please sit down.

2.59
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PRIVATISATION AND INVESTMENT) (Ms Evelyn Anite): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to start by thanking you for ably leading this House and always helping us to resolve this House to address the issue of corruption in this country.

I am very happy that today, and above all this afternoon, the issue of the rot in Uganda Telecom is being discussed in this House. I do not know how the Members got access to all that information. However, as the Minister of Investment and Privatisation who is in trust holding 31 per cent shares of the people of Uganda, I must report to this House; given that you have told me to do so, that what the members have raised is true.

Madam Speaker, as of this morning, we had a meeting with the Attorney-General, the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and the Permanent Secretary for the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to try to get a way forward on how we can get accountability from the administrator on how Uganda Telecom Limited(UTL) is being run.

In January this year, the Minister of Finance, hon. Matia Kasaija wrote a letter to the Auditor-General demanding that the latter goes and audits Uganda Telecom under the administration. 

Uganda Telecom went under administration on 01 April 2017. This was not by miracle but it was following the committee recommendation from Parliament that we must let the Libyans leave. When we tried to implement the committee report that they wanted the majority shareholder to leave, the Libyans decided to write to us and withdrew all their five directors from UTL. They filed for liquidation of the company.

However, the company was not liquidated because we did not want to sell the shares or the assets of this company. Therefore, we took a decision as Government to make sure that we put a provision called “Provisional Administration”, which protects the company from being liquidated.

We put the administrator in April 2017. The administrator was filing monthly reports but when the minister wrote to the Auditor-General in January this year to go and audit, the Auditor-General wrote back saying, this is a court-led process; he cannot audit the company. We had a meeting – (Interruption)

MR KAKOOZA: Madam Speaker, this is very important because I do not want to mislead this House. There is a law we passed here; it is called the Audit Act, 2008. Section 18 says that where Government has a controlling interest in a company, you do not need to request. If you have 31 per cent shares, what does the Auditor-General do? You do not have to request because there is a law and Government has interest -

THE SPEAKER: The majority shareholder is a ghost. There is a ghost called “Techno-something.”

MR KAKOOZA: Then what is our share? If the minister is saying that we have 31 per cent then we must investigate – 

MS KAWOOYA: Further information –

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I have asked the minister to account for what happened to our report. That is what she is doing.

MS KAWOOYA: Madam Speaker –

THE SPEAKER: Why don’t you allow the minister to respond? What is the issue hon. Hanifa? Speak quickly.

MS KAWOOYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have been here for some few years. Regarding the matter that is before the House, as hon. Kakooza said, the Government is not supposed to seek permission.

This matter came up, I think in 2000 –(Laughter)– Madam Speaker, I am saying that the directors of this UTL were Ugandans. Regarding ownership, there is nobody that was not Ugandan. For purposes of information for us to follow up, can the honourable lay at the Table the first owners of this UTL and the directors?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we had a select committee, which reported exhaustively on those issues and we adopted their report. Proceed, honourable minister.

MS ANITE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I was informing the House that the Auditor-General wrote back saying he is unable to audit this company. He gave his reasons. If I am given more time I will come and lay at the Table what the Auditor-General stated in his letter for saying he cannot audit this company.

As the minister responsible and holding the shares in trust, I know that this company belongs to Ugandans. I felt concerned and said that if I cannot be allowed access – if the Auditor-General says he cannot audit, since this UTL is under the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, we should get an internal auditor to audit the company.

The administrator wrote back to me and to hon. Matia saying that he cannot allow the internal auditor of Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to go and audit this company because he can only account to the court since it is a court-led process.

At that point, we had nothing to do but to call upon the Attorney-General to tell us what we should do. This morning we had a meeting with him and he said we should give him time to go and consult the books of law to tell us whether –(Interjections)– we can go in and audit the company.

What I can give as an analogy of what is happening now is that whereas Ugandans are very sure that they have a Government that is trying to watch over their shares, I would like to tell you that I am afraid to announce to the nation that the watchman has denied the owners of the property access to the house. We cannot go to UTL to find out what is happening.

In other words, we do not know how much money the company is making. As the Minister of Finance –(Interjections) 

THE SPEAKER: Order. Honourable members, we asked for information and she is giving it to us.

MS ANITE: I would like to make it clear that the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is concerned, I am concerned and the country is right to be concerned about what is happening in UTL.

Madam Speaker, I would like to inform the House that the last time – I would like to respond to the issue of Teleology –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Atiku, what rule are you addressing?

MR ATIKU: Rule 77. Madam Speaker, the honourable minister is giving very vital information of which we would like to quote here should we consider this matter serious and take it forward.

I would propose that we allow the honourable minister time to go and consult her ministry, prepare a good report and an update of what has so far been done ever since the Mafabi report was tabled here to date. When we start debating this matter, we know what the ministry has done and what has not been done such that we guide this country properly. 

However, to speak off the cuff without any document that we can refer to seems as if we are just running around circles and lamenting without guiding this House.

Therefore, isn’t it procedurally right for us to allow the minister to go and prepare an update report and present it before this Parliament?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I do not know whether we are even going to debate the issue. However, hon. Odria raised a question and I wanted to know from the minister what she has done about our report and that is what she is answering. It is not a matter for debate now. 

MS ANITE: Madam Speaker, I was just winding up and I was trying to report on what hon. Odria said about Teleology. It is true that we advertised for investors to come and invest in UTL and over 17 investors expressed interest.

As the procedure is, we subjected all these companies to financial intelligence to do financial audit and see if the companies actually have money. The report returned to us, as raised by hon. Odria, that Mauritius Telecom actually had the financial capability to run this company. We had a discussion because some of these different companies that had expressed interest did not have the financial muscle. The issue was discussed in Government and we took it to Cabinet. A decision was arrived at, that although the company that had the financial muscle is Mauritius Telecom, owned by the Government of Mauritius, Teleology had a higher proposal of money to invest in this company than Mauritius Telecom. 

Teleology had offered to invest US$ 70 million and US$ 200 million per month in this company and Mauritius Telecom had offered to buy the debt at US$ 46 million and US$ 200 million for investing in their investment plan. Therefore, the guidance that I got from Cabinet is that the one who had given a higher offer should be given the first chance without the financial muscle.

Therefore, we put strict conditions and said that within three months, Teleology should be able to pay the money. 10 per cent of the US$ 70 million was supposed to have been paid within a period of one month and the balance in a period of three months. 

Madam Speaker, that did not see daylight as the financial intelligence had put in their report; that they did not have any work experience or financial muscle. Therefore, it was another white elephant and we had to go back to the drawing board. As it is, we went back to the drawing board and announced to the country that we are in search of investors to come and invest in Uganda Telecom. 

Therefore, Teleology, technically for not having the money to invest in the company, left. As it is, we are advertising for new investors to come. However, what is disturbing us right now - What I can say on the Government side is that we now do not know the status of the company and how it is operating.

The Attorney-General, as of this morning, said he was going to consult and get back to us. Madam Speaker, if you give me more time and after the Attorney-General gives us the way forward -(Interjection)– that I do not know and I cannot confirm. Madam Speaker, it is very clear that – Pensioners are questioning us and workers are being fired from UTL. As the only shareholder of the company, I would like to say that we have technically lost control of the company.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think there are two issues. One is the question of what is happening to the work going on in the telecom and whether the Auditor-General is stopped by law from investigating it. We need to look at that.

The second one is to identify who this Teleology is? Therefore, honourable members, I will give a ruling on Tuesday after studying those documents so that we know whether to discuss it or to ask for an investigation.

MR KAKOOZA: Madam Speaker, I need clarification. The minister has told us that she is holding 31 per cent shares in that company. Each year, according to the laws of Uganda, you must declare the assets and liabilities of that company; the audited books of accounts. 

How do they know that they are holding 31 per cent? Don’t they depend on the audited books of accounts every year? If you say that you are calling an investor, what are you going to sell to that investor without knowing the portfolio you are investing in? Unless there is hidden information, nobody is going to invest in a company without knowing the shareholding and its portfolio.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think the minister told us that they have had no information. They know that there is work going on after directing Government to use UTL facilities. They know that there is money coming in but they do not know how much because the administrator has declined to inform them. 

Therefore, honourable members, I will give a ruling on this next week –(Interjection)– we shall sack him after looking at the law. Okay, there was another matter by hon. Anthony Okello. Hon. Odria, can you lay those documents? I want to look at them.

MR ODRIA: Madam Speaker, I have the Financial Intelligence Authority report of 25 May 2018, which clearly disqualifies the Teleology Company. I beg to lay.

I have communication from Uganda Communications Commission to the administrator, UTL about compliance obligations dated 29 April 2019. I beg to lay.

I also have a request for a special audit of Uganda Telecom Limited and this is a response from then Auditor-General to the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. I beg to lay.

I have a response from the administrator, Uganda Telecom Limited written on 18 June 2019, to the honourable Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development about a special review of the state of affairs of Uganda Telecom. I beg to lay.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, hon. Odria. Do you have another? 

MR ODRIA: Yes, Madam Speaker. I also have a report that the administrator wrote and submitted to His Excellency, the President, of the Republic of Uganda. It was written in November 2017 and was full of false information. I beg to lay. 

Madam Speaker, I also have the UTL’s creditor’s summary, which has even added – the one I have here is over Shs 534 billion and there is more. I beg to lay it too. Thank you very much. 

3.22
MR ANTHONY OKELLO (NRM, Kioga County, Amolator): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The matter for which I rise is in relation to the operation of UPDF on Lake Kioga as well as the fear of causing more death in the area. 

About three weeks ago, Mr Edward Lutaaya, who happens to be a fisherman residing in Bangladesh Landing Site in Amolator District, was arrested by the UPDF operation team and allegedly tortured. Unfortunately, he collapsed and died while in the custody of that UPDF operation team. 

The laws of the land are very clear that suspects are presumed innocent until proven guilty. You can imagine torturing a suspect to the extent of causing death. 
The people of Kioga and I are wondering if there is no better method of enforcing this operation without causing torture. Can’t this operation be undertaken in a manner that does not cause death? Can we have the operation done with a lot of sanity? 

Madam Speaker, as I speak, my people are under a lot of fear because they know once they are arrested, they will be tortured or killed. Can’t Government help us to prevail over the UPDF team conducting this operation? Can’t Government help create confidence in the people in as far as this operation is concerned? 

Madam Speaker, these are members representing fishers, like I do and if you do not mind, I would like you to allow them give information. 

MR MIGADDE: Thank you, Madam Speaker and colleague for giving way. Of course, we have received a lot of information on such incidences and a number of complaints on this Floor of Parliament. However, the issues that we have been getting have been about UPDF soldiers or operatives shooting members of the fishing community. 

The information I would like to give is that actually some UPDF officers have also started shooting at some of their fellow staff who they work with. Such an incident happened in Buvuma, where a one Stephen Lukoma, who was a councillor at the district, was shot dead by a UPDF officer while in his bed.

Therefore, it has actually gone to a level where the same team has started shooting at themselves. That is the information I would like to give. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the other day, you were in Serena and they (the UPDF soldiers) were being congratulated. Anyway, the Business Committee discussed this subject and we are waiting for just two reports to be completed and we shall bring a debate here on that issue. 

MR ANTHONY OKELLO: Most obliged, Madam Speaker. You know we talk for the people and at Serena, much as we were being congratulated – 

THE SPEAKER: It was not you. It was the soldiers who were being congratulated. (Laughter)

MR ANTHONY OKELLO: Madam Speaker, I thought I was being congratulated for – 

THE SPEAKER: No, it was the UPDF soldiers who were being congratulated. Anyway, we are going to have that debate to resolve that issue here on the Floor of this House.

3.26
MR FELIX OKOT-OGONG (NRM, Dokolo South County, Dokolo): Madam Speaker, I would like to confirm what the honourable member stated in this Parliament because I neighbour Amolator District and its constituencies.    

As we wait for the report, our people are being tortured; day in, day out. Even today, we have received information that those soldiers are looking for our people and torturing them. I would like to appeal to this Parliament to stop their operations until we have that report. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, on the Floor of this House, the Minister of State for Defence and Veterans Affairs came here and said that those were Kenyan soldiers yet they were wearing Ugandan flags. Therefore, we have talked about this from Buvuma, Buyende, Kalangala and Lake George. We have talked about this issue many times on the Hansard and no one is listening. Anyway, we are going to have a full debate and take some resolutions. 

3.27
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Serere): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Yesterday, a matter was raised here about Ugandans watching the African Cup of Nations and it excited some of us. Later, after that debate, I went to Kenya Airways with some colleagues, hon. Alioni being one of them because we wanted to buy tickets to fly to Cairo but we found that we could not get space on Kenya Airways. We went to Rwanda Airways and found it full too.  We went to Ethiopian Airways and found it also full for the next three days.

I am giving this background to the effect that two months ago, we received two bombardier planes. If those responsible were not asleep, this was the right time to market Uganda Airlines. The bombardiers are parked at Entebbe International Airport yet our Uganda Cranes team would have been flown to Cairo in our two bombardiers.

Madam Speaker, may we know from the Government why it did not use this opportunity first to make money but also to promote Uganda Airlines? This was the right time to do so. If we were futuristic and landed in Cairo - because we knew two years ago, that the African Cup of Nations was going to be played in in Cairo, why are we losing this opportunity? Where is the ministry? Where is the Government and the ministry responsible?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I do not know whether they still have the landing rights? Maybe, the Government can explain. Do we still have landing rights from Entebbe to Cairo?

3.30
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING)(Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, without going into the details of this issue, our aeroplanes will start flying in July. We announced this before the aeroplanes came. When they came, we announced to the whole country and the world about our programme that flying these planes will start in July. Unfortunately, they cannot start in June but in July. When the bombardiers came, we announced that we shall start flying in July and we have not changed our road map.

It is very surprising to see a senior member, who has been following this, to come again here to ask the same question when he got the answers two months ago.

THE SPEAKER: First July we shall be in the air. The bombardier will bring back the Cranes. (Laughter)

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON PREPARATION TO TELECAST THE 32ND EDITION OF THE AFRICA CUP OF NATIONS 2019

THE SPEAKER: Have you paid for the rights to telecast?

3.32
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING)(Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, we have received a requisition from UBC and this programme is supposed to start on Saturday. We are working around the clock to make sure that it is fixed.

THE SPEAKER: Ugandans can look forward to watching their children play. Okay, thank you. 

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC ACCOUNTS (COMMISSIONS, STATUTORY AUTHORITIES AND STATE ENTERPRISES) ON THE AUDITED PUBLIC ACCOUNTS OF SELECTED STATUTORY CORPORATIONS FOR THE FINANCIAL YEARS 2013/2014-2015/2016

THE SPEAKER: The committee chairperson and vice-chairperson are still not here. Next item.

BILLS 
SECOND READING

THE LANDLORD AND TENANT BILL, 2018

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, yesterday, we took the second reading and the report was presented. We are now waiting for the debate.

3.33
MR IBRAHIM SSEMUJJU (FDC, Kira Municipality, Wakiso): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I do not see the committee chairperson and I wanted to thank him. I was listening to his report; they did a very good job. 

My worry is that we are still a bigger per cent, an informal society. I will speak about my own constituency because many of them were calling me after hearing that Parliament was considering the Landlord Tenant Bill. Many people who are renting and even those who are constructing rentals in many of these urban areas, are informal and this business has remained informal. I am happy that the law has come. However, the restriction as noted by the committee may cause us a problem. 

Mr Chairman, I was thanking you before I saw you. Issues of deposits, for example, look at the business that you are going to require someone renting a shop in Kampala to make a deposit of three months. I do not know where people are going to get that money from; first you have borrowed from the bank and now, you are going to make a deposit of three months before you enter and begin operating a shop.

Yesterday, I was meeting youth, who benefited from the Youth Livelihood Fund and they had been issued with notice because they are supposed to repay the money. First, they thought that this money was for free and now, they are required to pay. Some of them cannot pay back and others have been arrested in some areas.

I would like to discourage the issue of institutionalising the payment of deposit. It is going to discourage, especially those who are starting up. If I am going to borrow Shs 10 million to rent a shop of Shs 1 million and I have to deposit Shs 3 million to stay with the landlord and I do not know for how long. There are areas that we may not have to institutionalise with the law.

Madam Speaker, concerning the issues of evictions, the moment all the procedures are now going to be laid out in the law, it is going to be very difficult to operate. I am speaking from experience because I represent an area where almost more than 70 per cent are renting. We need to be very careful with the procedures that we are putting in this law. Otherwise, we are opening a Pandora box. 

Like the committee chairman suggested in one of the cases, I would rather leave some of the regulations to the law of demand and supply to allow individuals – the attempt to regulate the relationship between landlords and tenants on land, we know where it has brought us and the fear it has caused. You have landlords who have heard that Parliament is considering this law and they are panicking but also the tenants themselves. 

In Kireka and Bweyogerere, they do not even have agreements. People just agree and send money on mobile phones and the following day, they are given keys. (Interjection)- you are saying that it is dangerous but the moment you try to formalise some sections of an informal society, you may think that you are helping to protect the tenants but you are instead creating problems. That is why I agree with most of the findings of the committee; that there are areas that we may not need to institutionalised but leave to the law of demand and supply. You may want to regulate to protect the landlords and tenants, especially if it is business related but with residential areas, you may be opening a problem.

Madam Speaker, that is the point I wanted to make. However, I am also requesting that once this law has been passed by Parliament, I think we may delay the implementation until a lot of sensitisation has been done. The moment you begin implementing a law and the users are going to learn about the law for the first time, you are going to be in trouble. My prayer to Government is that the moment the law is passed, implementation should start maybe after six months and it should be preceded with a lot of sensitisation. There are people who are not even aware that the relationship between landlord and tenants is regulated by the laws that the committee Chairperson was speaking about yesterday. Now, this is an improvement and they were not even aware that there was a law. They will not be aware that there has been an improvement.

My prayer is that we do a lot of sensitisation and then the law can go into force. Otherwise, we may create chaos where we think we are providing a solution. Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable Chair, yesterday, I was really alarmed by your report when you said that one should pay a deposit of three months. It means that I must find the deposit for three months and I still pay the rent. It is very onerous on the tenant. You might want to revert to one where – the three months is really punishment to the tenant because they still have to find rent for the rest of the year and yet that three will sit there until the end of the tenancy. It does not even attract interest.

3.40
MS MARGARET BABA DIRI (NRM, Woman Representative, Koboko): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for scrutinising this Bill and coming up with these recommendations. 

When the chairman was reading the report, the original Bill appeared to have been written by a tenant who was favouring the tenant at the expense of the landlord. There are very few areas where they supported the landlord.

I support the idea that we should have only one law; we have the residential houses and the commercial houses in the Bill. 

What we should include is that there are some people who rent very big premises or a big room and then they sub-rent to other tenants. This needs to be included to be regulated because you will find that the tenant may be paying normally but the people who have sub-rented will bring problems. I hope this shall be included.

I support the idea of agreements; an agreement is very necessary. It is evidence that you have entered into a working relationship and one that is written down. I know many of our people cannot read but we can provide a simple format of agreement and it can even be written in local languages, and interpreted for those who may have big premises but do not know how to read and write. The agreement is very important. 

You said the threshold should be around Shs 100,000 but there are some houses where only some rooms are rented out and they can go for Shs 80,000 or Shs 70,000 or even Shs 50,000. How do you accommodate these people that are only renting rooms? Do you mean that they should not enter into an agreement? They should also be included. I think the threshold should not be Shs 100,000; it should depend on the cost of the house. In fact it should not be considered because there are some places where the rent is Shs 10,000 or even Shs 5,000. Some of these are grass-thatched houses. Do we leave these ones out?

The next is the cleanliness and security of the house. Take, for example, a landlord who has just built his house and he gets a very dirty and careless tenant who even breaks the septic tank, the door handles and so on. Why should the landlord repair those damages made by the tenant? The landlord should also improve on the compound by putting flowers, gardens and maybe pavers so that a tenant is able to clean his place. Some tenants may become a source of insecurity and they may be destroying things and then it will be the work of the landlord to repair.

The issue of going to court; if a person has rented my house for three months in advance but he stays for six months and he refuses to pay, when you go to court, you have to spend a lot of money to hire lawyers and go through the whole process. Can we devise a better method? Maybe informing the LC I, or the lawyer for the sake of witnessing the eviction? Maybe one should go to those who evict and explain to them? Otherwise, going to court and the person has stayed in my house for a whole year without payment – we need to improve on that one because it is infringing on the landlord.

We talk of “landlord” but some of us ladies here own rental premises; so we are “landladies”. This Bill is not gender-sensitive. Can you put “landlord/landlady” to include women that have houses they are renting out? 

I support the report. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: I would like to welcome the delegation from Nakaseke, the chairman LC V, Mr Ignatius Koomu, minister of works, Mr Makanga and Mr Sam Mutibwa of Kasangombe.

3.45
MR JOSEPH GONZAGA SSEWUNGU (DP, Kalungu County West, Kalungu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the chairperson for this report. 

Let me start with payments of rent in Uganda Shillings; we amended that, even in the Income Tax Act, but up to now, there are landlords who are still charging Ugandans in US dollars.

Yes, a contract can be either verbal or written but there must be a contract. I do not know how I can explain to the honourable members here the situations I have had in my constituency where a landlord gets money and does not provide a single receipt to the tenant and they get into a bitter row.

What is happening right now is that every landlord has his own system of writing a contract. Each one has his own rules and principles and majority of the tenants do not know how to read those rules. When we have a law in place, it will solve a lot of problems. 

I have heard about the three months. What I know is that when we were renting – when I was a teacher, we were fond of renting – we would go and pay three months ahead to the landlord but not keeping three months with him for any eventualities. 

Someone may be interested in staying in your house for only one month and since you need money, some landlords will allow but that will be against the law. Making it an obligation that one must pay for three months – there are those who cannot afford it because even after paying the three months, you start paying for one month as it goes on. 

I am interested in seeing where we are going to give privileges of tenants by landlords. As we talk right now, in Kampala someone is renting at Shs 2,000,000 per month; he is paying for power and yet the people that come to his shopping mall have to pay for toilet facilities. Where does the owner of this property put all this money when he cannot even clean toilets for people who come in to procure goods? Those privileges that are demanded by the tenants are not catered for by landlords. 

I am more interested in seeing that in the law. That if Mr Ssewungu is a tenant – yes he has a shop; you are earning money from him, he is clearing water bills but when his customers come, still you have to pay Shs 500 to use toilet facilities. That is putting us backward as a country. This man is earning billions but he cannot pay Shs 500,000 for someone to clean toilets. Uganda must move away from that level. 

I support the law and I am going to participate fully but I would like to say that we must have a way in which we set out agreements between the landlord and the tenant to avoid misunderstandings. I beg to move, Madam Speaker.

3.49
MR SILAS AOGON (Independent, Kumi Municipality, Kumi): Madam Speaker, I would like to copy from hon. Baba-Diri to say that the Bill is talking about landlords, yet we also have landladies. I do not know how we are going to define the word “landlord” to cater for the ladies. Does “landlord” also mean the lady owners of property? Otherwise, we do not want to discriminate from the very start of this Bill. 

Secondly, I do not support the idea of depositing money for three months. That is quite backward and I reject it.  There are people who go through disasters. We also have among us students who do not have proper earning and there are those who have lost their jobs. These need a listening ear. They need someone to be patient with them. If we make it very strict, how are we going to handle them? I would like to inform colleagues that it is easier for you to squeeze the tenants to the corner when your pocket is fat but the day you pocket becomes thin, you will realise that you needed to have debated this Bill with openness.

Madam Speaker, someone talked about privileges. Yes, as the landlords or landladies charge money, there are those little things that they are supposed to give to their tenants. For instance, there is the issue of parking in Kampala. There is a bank on Entebbe Road; one time I parked there but by the time I came back after withdrawing the little money I had, they had already clamped my car. They said I had not paid parking fee. Who was supposed to pay for that parking fee? Was it me or the bank? Those are some of the questions someone needs to answer.

When you look at the issue of consultations, I do not think you have consulted widely. For instance, when did you go to Kumi to ask my people about this intended Bill such that you could get ideas from them? This Bill is going to touch on many people who are in the informal sector and they will think, for instance, that I am the one who brought this law; yet, you are the one bringing it before asking them. Don’t you think that will tamper with their sense of joining the economy in the right direction?
People usually make their agreements – they listen to one another, share and agree that “this is what we are going to do” and they follow that. When you have paid money, you are issued with a receipt as an evidence of payment.

Finally, Madam Speaker, I think this is not the right time for us to make this law. We needed to take time and first sensitise the masses. Let us consult and maybe in the next term we can think about what to do. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think this Bill was given to you several months ago. You have had the Bill for a long time. Let us have hon. Alum and then hon. Syda Bbumba.

3.53
MS SANDRA SANTA ALUM (UPC, Woman Representative, Oyam): Madam Speaker, I thank the chairperson of the committee for coming up with this report. I join my colleagues in observing that this is the most gender-blind Bill I have ever seen. In this country women are moving forward and they own property. However, for a Bill to come without even sensing that there are women who are landladies is something that we need to look at critically.
Secondly, the committee observed that clause 20 seeks to impose unfair obligations on the landlords. However, I think the Bill really wants to stand on the side of tenants, which – to me – is very okay because the law normally comes in to address the problem which exists in a society. Most of the tenants who suffer a lot are the poor. 

For example, there are some landlords and landladies who provide premises, which are very dangerous for the occupation by the poor people. You may find a house which has a very big crack but the land lord or landlady would be charging money as if he or she does not know that the house is almost falling. Therefore, I disagree with the committee’s recommendation on clause 20 because the clause seeks to address a problem.

There are also some landlords and landladies who stay together with the tenants and do some small businesses such as rearing chickens, which cause bad smell and make the premises not good for human habitation. Therefore, this clause about safe premises that and free from health hazards will go a long way to address that problem. When the committee proposes that this clause should be deleted, I find that this problem will continue, which is unfair to the tenants occupying those premises. 

Madam Speaker, it is the fundamental responsibility of the landlord or landlady to make sure that the rented premise is fit for human habitation.

Madam Speaker, the second point is about the payment of rent in advance. I would like to agree with the Opposition Chief Whip that this Bill should be looked at very closely. I feel that there should be an agreement between the tenant and landlord or landlady. I think the Bill wants to protect the tenants who are not capable of paying in advance, say, for three months or more yet there are some landlords or landladies who will, irrespective of the level of income of the tenant, want the tenants to pay in advance as he or she wishes.

Let us leave it to be an agreement between the landlord or landlady and the tenant. If a tenant can afford to pay in advance, let it be. To fix that it should be open would be giving an open cheque for the landlord or landlady to exploit the tenants is not proper. I think that during committee stage, we shall have to deal with this problem. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: As I invite hon. Sebaggala, join me in welcoming the students from Maranatha Mixed Primary School represented by hon. Robert Kyagulanyi and hon. Rosemary Seninde. Welcome. (Applause)

3.57
MR ABDULATIF SEBAGGALA (Independent, Kawempe Division North, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the chairperson and members of the committee for the report. 

As Members of Parliament, we must be very careful when handling this Bill because some of us here are either tenants or landlords. Here, you may be a tenant but a landlord somewhere. Therefore, fairness must be the guiding principle. Of course, over the years, there was no law guiding the tenants and landlords and yet, most of them have been living harmoniously. Of course, there were some challenges and I think this Bill intends to cure the challenges that we have observed over the years.

I have a few observations and questions to the chairperson. I do not know whether he took into consideration the issue of brokers or middlemen because these days, if you want to rent a house, there is a cost that you have to pay to access the various houses that you are going to look at. At the end of the day, the cost you are going to pay the brokers is a shared cost. As a tenant, you pay them and the landlord also pays them. Madam Speaker, I do not know how we are going to capture that.

Secondly, regarding the three months’ rent, which is supposed to be deposited, some landlords call it a security fee in some tenancy agreements. They say, “Please, you have to deposit three months’ rent and when you are getting out, we will sit and analyse what you have damaged and then we deduct the cost.” There are some tenants who cannot keep these houses well and that is the reason why landlords charge security fees. Some tenants move out of the houses without informing the landlord.

Madam Speaker, what we should agree on in this Bill is, how much should the security fee be? Should it be three months’ rent or one month? In any case, it is refundable if the house is left intact. I think we should look at that.

Finally, when you look at landlords and other tax obligations like the property rent and ground rent, at the end of the day, the landlord will extend all those taxes to the tenant because he has nothing to do. For fairness, we should capture that so that landlords and tenants live harmoniously.

I would also like to ask whether, in the Bill, we can afford to include the tribunal for disputes. For example, if there is a dispute between the landlord and tenant, is there a tribunal that could sit with them to agree on how to sort the disagreement? We must have a dispute or tribunal committee, within the law, that stipulates that the two parties must sit and agree before they take other steps. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

4.03
MS SYDA BBUMBA (NRM, Nakaseke County North, Nakaseke): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to add my voice to those who have thanked the committee for a job well done. 

Madam Speaker, we need to start debating this Bill knowing the housing status in this country. In the last census, we had a deficit of 2.5 million houses in the market. About 2.5 million people could not be accommodated in the existing houses. Knowing that our population is growing at three per cent, the deficit must be much higher by now. Therefore, whatever relationship we are debating, it must be in such a way that it is going to promote construction of more houses to help our people access this specific need because housing is a basic need.

Having said that, I would like to pick up from where hon. Latif Sebaggala has stopped; on payment of rent in foreign currency. We have a shortage of investment funds on the market. What we have readily available is Ugandan Shillings, which is on excessive interest rates. Those who have access to fairly low cost money normally get this money in dollars yet our shilling has been depreciating. Unless tenants who have borrowed in dollars peg their rent in dollars, they will never be able to pay the dollar loans. I, therefore, think that we need to take that into consideration.
Secondly –(Interruption)

MR KAKOOZA: Thank you, honourable colleague, for giving way. I think we need to consider hotel accommodation. If you make a law that will implicate hotel accommodation, which is charged in dollars, what will happen? Will you change and say that they pay the tourists in local shillings?

In addition, we must put into consideration the fact that this is private sector-led growth. The people who invest this money know what rate they get it at. Therefore, the cost input is determined by the owner of that house. The moment you make a law and say, “no, I want you to pay in local shillings” they might not like it. Will you object to that? You cannot.

MS BBUMBA: Thank you very much for that information, hon. Kakooza. Madam Speaker, I think the agreement for rent is between a willing buyer and seller. When we are looking at it, we need to take into account that principle. Are people being forced to enter these agreements or not? We need to take that into consideration.

On the issue of payment of the deposit security, I remember when we were in boarding schools years ago, we were charged caution money and this money was refundable as long as you did not cause any damage in school. 

Madam Speaker, landlords are suffering; many tenants are destructive and yet, they do not make repairs. Normally, in the tenancy agreement, there is a provision to leave the property in a state you found it. However, these tenants run away at night and leave a lot of destruction on the properties. Really, there is need for some protection.

However, it should not be excessive. A security deposit of three months’ rent is on the high side; one month should be reasonable. If the damage exceeds three months, then they can take it up in different ways.

On the issue of increment, this should be left to market forces. There are a lot of inputs including the maintenance costs, rates and rents, which are charged. If it is restricted, the landlords will be unfairly treated. Let it be subject to market forces.
 
On pre-payment, it should be on agreement because I know that some landlords and ladies use their payments to mortgage instalments with the bank.

If a mortgage is quarterly, they may wish to have their tenants pay quarterly so that they do not have a mismatch with the payment of their loans.

One area, which we need to handle carefully is on the default by the tenants. Tenants default quite a lot and the landlords and ladies are weak to handle this. Somebody told me that if one defaults, they must stay for three months and that they cannot be chased out till those three months end. However, during those three months the landlord is losing because the tenant is not paying and the landlord cannot put that property on the market. Therefore, we need to have something, which is fairer between the two.

The last is about services that must be provided by the local governments. I checked with one of the landladies - I went to her to use the toilet and she gave me a key and a piece of toilet paper before asking for Shs 100. I asked, “why do you charge” and she said that the people who mainly use the toilets are not her tenants. 

She said most of the people pretend to be customers but because they have nowhere else in town to ease themselves, they come and use those facilities. At the end of the day, for instance, in Kampala, if one is on the public drainage, they pay double; the sewerage is twice the cost of water. So, they are trying to minimise some of those costs by charging for the facilities. Anyhow, the important thing here is that the local authority should provide the facilities. 

Many tenants stay under unhygienic conditions and in houses, which are not fit to be inhabited by human beings and this is due to the weakness of the local authorities.

If somebody puts up a property for rent, the local authorities should inspect and clear them fit for human occupation before they are let out.

Otherwise, I support the idea of having a law only that it should not be skewed against the landlords and ladies. Otherwise, it will kill the incentive for development in this important sector. Thank you.

4.12
MR ROBERT MIGADDE (NRM, Buvuma Islands County, Buvuma): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have heard colleagues express their unhappiness on the issue of landlords versus landladies and I was asking myself whether the word “lord” refers to men. If yes, what will happen one day when the Lord Mayor of Kampala is a lady? Shall we call her the Lady Mayor? Therefore, I think “lord” applies to all - (Interjections) - maybe for the judiciary.

When you look at what is in the Bill, we should also ask ourselves, who is going to make this agreement. The person making this agreement must be well informed about what is in the law. Is it going to be a tenant, the landlord, local council or a law firm? This is important to understand because it comes with some penalties and therefore, it must be a competent authority to make this agreement. Anyhow, like hon. Sebaggala said, there must be fairness. I am more of a landlord than a tenant.

Many landlords are suffering at the hands of the tenants. The tenants go when they feel like. It is very difficult to throw someone out of your house even after failing to pay for six months. You plead with the person to go without paying so that you get a new client. 

When you look at the cost of taking this person to the courts of law, you rather forego what you demand but what the tenant is losing, if they go out, it is only the deposit of three months. This person can actually –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: One minute to conclude.

MR MIGADDE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. We have tenants in the islands who are renting those temporary structures in that setting of the landing sites. There are also landlords there and the problem is that we are not specifying - what is this landlord, lording. It is a house, land and to that person, that is a house. Are you only talking about a permanent house? When it comes to a temporary house, isn’t it renting? That is why I am saying we are taking about an issue, which we need to clearly understand. 
My last issue is about the threat to law income residential units. The landlords would be more comfortable to abide by this law if they are dealing with a certain class of tenants and those particular tenants are also willing to go by what the law is saying. 

However, there is the low income class where people are only interested in one month so that they find their next journey. Every other day, they are finding out, who is charging less.

Lastly, is the issue of the middlemen. Nowadays, in every business the landlord does not look for customers; it is the middlemen that do that. In most cases, they even determine how much you should charge because there is a percentage that goes to them. Where do these middlemen fall?

My worry is that at the end of the day we may see a tax at a certain point. We may see Government bringing tax because they will know that - of course, everyone is ready to pay tax but what is the purpose of this?

There is also the issue of minimum balance on somebody’s bank account, which is what they cannot withdraw. Will this deposit be taken as the tenant’s minimum balance when they rent somebody’s house. What I want to say is that by all means, there are certain things, which will not remain the way they found them whether the landlord wants it or not. There is no tenant who will go into a house and leave it the same way he or she found it.

If this is to fix then no tenant will ever take back any amount –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think you should look carefully at the Bill because many of these things are provided for. Anyhow, I would like members to look at clause 2 on the question of landlord and landlady.

If you are not satisfied, you can change it but it says, “a landlord means a person who lets premises under a tenancy and includes his or her duly authorised agentS or a person who is in lawful possession of the premises.” If that is not satisfactory make some proposals.

4.19
BRIG FLAVIA BYEKWASO (UPDF REPRESENTATIVE): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would also like to thank the committee for the report. My first observation is on the issue of keeping the premises habitable and free of health hazards.

The committee recommended that this should be deleted because it is too skewed towards disfavouring the landlord. However, it is my humble opinion that this responsibility lies somewhere. It cannot be left on its own. We need to only improve it. We should not delete it completely but see a way to improve it or state conditions under which each of the parties becomes responsible for the health concerns around the premises.

The question of landlords annoying tenants is real and there. If you listen to CBS every day, they have air time where they talk about landlords annoying or interfering with their tenants. So, it is my considered view that the question of annoyance should not simply be discarded. We can think or improve on it.

On clause 9 (4) and (5) which talks about allowing agreements that are not formal because there are high illiteracy levels in Uganda. In 2012, literacy levels stood at 70.2 per cent with women standing at 61.9 per cent and men at 79.12 per cent. We have seen more enrolments since that time.

So, the question of illiteracy levels being high in Uganda may not be correct. So, it is my opinion that we encourage formal and written agreements because this Bill is coming to cure certain situations. The country is moving forward, so, we cannot remain looking backward instead of focusing on what is actually coming and the rate at which we are growing. So, I think we should maintain formal and written agreements.

To me, it also brings in a contradiction because when they are giving a threshold, they say a certain threshold must be written. At the threshold of Shs 500,000, don’t you think there are some people who are illiterate but have the money to construct houses where they are going to charge beyond Shs 500,000 or Shs 100,000? So, to me, there is a contradiction there. 

On the advance payments, we should allow a quarterly payment, especially where someone has asked for re-modification according to their needs. You come to my premise but maybe, you would like me to remodify it for you. Therefore, you must give something that you are going to take it. So, in that aspect, it should come to three months’ rent but in other circumstances, it should remain rent of one month. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: I want to say something about the literacy levels. You know, our people may not speak English but they write agreements even in their vernacular. Nze, I have sold to so and so. Ababaddewo; those who are present are the witnesses.
So, they are not as illiterate. They sell land and other property and write simple agreements, not in this format, but short agreements that constitute what they have done.

4.23
MS BETTY NAMBOOZE BAKIREKE (DP, Mukono Municipality, Mukono): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Our Rules of Procedure demand that we declare where we have interest. I have not heard anyone declaring here, either as a tenant or landlord. However, I sensed presentations by landlords and consulted hon. Cecilia Ogwal, who gave me a nice proverb that whenever you sit when they are talking about prison, you should always be on the side of prisoners because anytime, all of us are potential prisoners.

Even some of us who have houses are potential tenants at one time or another, either as residents or where we do our businesses. 

This is your law. I have been following this matter since the 9th Parliament. People have been coming here, especially Members of Parliament from Kampala, with problems to do with rent. It is not fair for anybody to say that this law was demanded for. Many times, the Speaker is called upon to arbitrate between landlords and tenants, especially with the business community of Kampala. So, this is our law, we demanded for it and we should accord it the necessary support.

Madam Speaker –

THE SPEAKER: Information, hon. Nambooze. Kampala City Traders Association (KACITA) had threatened to come and demonstrate here; that if we do not bring this law, they are going to come and demonstrate here. So, I told them to go to the Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Development down there. (Laughter)

MS NAMBOOZE: Madam Speaker, we have a Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Development but as Government, we no longer provide houses for our people. It is a pity that now, we are now moving to regulate people who have built houses, when we do not assist them to regulate those who give them loans to construct these houses in terms of interest or building materials like cement.

In future, we shall have to consider this. What economic policy do we want to follow because it is very difficult for us to regulate only one section of trade when the others are not regulated?

Going to the law itself, I was in Kampala Capital City Authority meeting today and the major problem there was about property tax. Landlords say that they are paying double tax because they pay to the local authorities six per cent of the rent fees in terms of local Government taxes while Uganda Revenue Authority charges 22 per cent in rental taxes.

The idea is that we have to scrap one of the taxes because it is double taxation. For sure, what does Central Government do for landlords that require them to pick money from them? It is the local authorities that have the responsibility to provide for street lighting, collection of garbage and local Government roads. 

Therefore, Madam Speaker, as we discuss this law, let us also look at this. We need to revise the law in relation to property tax and rental tax charged by URA.

This Bill exempts tenants for educational purposes. In my constituency, hostels are a major business. If we exempt them from this law and they are not regulated under this law, people who own hostels will suffer. I beg that clause 2 (3), which puts accommodation for educational purposes as an exempted item in this law, is revised and we include issues to do with hostels because it is a major business and involves students and parents. This is an area we cannot afford not to regulate.

The other issue is that the Bill also gives the minister powers, by statutory instrument, to exempt some premises from the provision –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Where is the provision on educational institutions?

MS NAMBOOZE: It is clause 2 (3)–

THE SPEAKER: Clause 2 is interpretation.

MS NAMBOOZE: It is Clause 1(3)(a). It states, “Without limitation, the general effect of sub-section (2) of this Act does not apply to the following arrangements...” One of them talks about religious, medical, educational, recreational and similar services. I think most of the hostels are rented for residential purposes like in my area. 

THE SPEAKER: Do the people make agreements with those owners? Anyway, the minister will respond. 

MS NAMBOOZE: Madam Speaker, I also would like to talk about a provision on Clause 1(2), which allows a minister, by statutory instrument, to exempt particular premises from the operation of this Act. That provision can breed abuse because we have not specified which premises in particular. If he says, “We have exempted houses in Mukono or Kampala or persons doing such business,” it is so open that it is prone to abuse.

Lastly, I would like to talk about destruction as opposed to wear and tear of premises. If I rent your house and pay you, by all means, that House will under wear and tear. You should not hold me liable because I am paying you. For instance, if I am traveling in your car, when it gets a problem, you do not make me pay for the mechanical problems. Why are the landlords earning money if they cannot repair houses and instead put that burden on tenants? 

This law would talk about those tenants who deliberately cause destruction to a house. However, with wear and tear, it is a natural process which is bound to occur. In any case, that is why we pay rent. 

I would like to use this opportunity to remind the Minister of State for Lands, Housing and Urban Development (Housing) that Ugandans are still looking at Government to provide housing for low income earners. We cannot run away from that obligation. Thank you.

4.31
MR JAMES ACIDRI (NRM, Maracha County East, Maracha): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity. I thank the committee. I, however, also would like to say that this law is long overdue. I join those who have been agitating for it. I have been both a victim, as a tenant and I have also experienced the reality of being a landlord. So, when we are making laws, we should really try to balance but also look at where the country is going. We have pronounced ourselves as a middle income country now. Therefore, we should begin to behave in that manner.

In my view, we cannot bend the law. I have seen observations by the committee where they are saying for certain categories, let the negotiations be left out to the two parties when at the same time, we are already saying, as a middle income country, we must have certain characteristics. 

During my tour of duty out of this country while I was living in Namibia, we used to pay two months security deposit, to take care of any damages or unpaid utilities by the time you leave. I think, in my opinion, we should really maintain the issue of security deposits, regardless of the income levels. 

We have complications in Kampala because the residential areas are really disorganised. In countries like South Africa, these residences are graded according to income status. There is even no reason for you to go to a place where you know you cannot afford. We even have policies that address inequality. In this case, for example, in Kololo, the residents there will pay more for electricity than the people who are in Katanga. 

In my view, we should maintain the law and let it apply across the board as a country aspiring to attain a middle income status in one or two years’ time.

Finally, Madam Speaker, we are transiting from informal to formal management of this sector. That is why property agents are becoming critical in managing properties for landlords –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, as I invite hon. Edward Otto, join me in welcoming a delegation from Busia Municipality. They are Imams, chairpersons of mosques and the chairperson of the Western Division of Busia Municipality represented by hon. Macho and hon. Nabulindo. You are welcome. Salaam-alaikum (Applause)

4.35
MR EDWARD OTTO (Independent, Agago County, Agago): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Allow me to also add my voice to those thanking the committee for this important report before the House. 

First of all, I would like to say that I have seen the recommendation of the committee that there should be one Act the end of the day to deal with both commercial and residential tenants. I would like to disagree with that recommendation. When it comes to eviction, it is a very different thing when you throw a family with young children on the streets as opposed to a commercial tenant. I think this distinction needs to be put in place; notice’s period among other things could be varied. Many countries do that. I litigated on Landlords and Tenants Act issues in Canada and this Act is separated for some of these reasons.

When we find families being thrown in the streets, it is going to cause a lot of problems. It is a different thing when you are dealing with goods and business and more so, when they are insured. So, that is my view on that matter.

Madam Speaker, equally, I recognise that condominiums are coming up in this country. The issue of reserve funds where these rental units are being shared among people. It needs to be factored in. I have not seen a provision for that. Maybe they are in other legislations but I need to see that captured somehow.

Somebody talked about the issue of rental tribunal. I know there are small claims courts but the whole idea of the tribunal is that the rules of civil proceedings need to be relaxed to accommodate access to justice. So, when we have a rental tribunal specifically for these issues, it will – I agree with my colleagues who have expressed their concern that we need a rental tribunal to deal with some of the landlord-tenant’s issues. 

Madam Speaker, other than that, somebody alluded to the issue of knowing - What is a rental unit; whether for tax purpose or protecting the tenants at the end of the day? We need to have a register so that somebody does not just throw a family in some desperate rooms somewhere –(Member timed out.) 

THE SPEAKER: Please, conclude.

MR EDWARD OTTO: I will run through this very quickly. The issue of criminality needs to be left to the criminal court. I think it is timely for the Law Society Act to be amended to allow paralegals to come in to help in some areas. I know that we have not opened this field. The cost of litigation for lawyers is very high and I see a problem in that area. 

Other than that, Madam Speaker, in the interest of time, it is important for Government to look at affordable housing. We need to invest in that and put money aside to try to get that kind of accommodation. Thank you, Madam Speaker for the opportunity.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have a condominium law; maybe, you might like to check whether there are areas that are efficient. However, we have a condominium law.

4.39
MR GAFFA MBWATEKAMWA (NRM, Kasambya County, Mubende): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I picked my interest in clause 9(11) on unlawful eviction of tenants, where it compels a landlord to go to court and get a court order. We are trying to look only at landlords who are in towns and they can access court orders and justice easily.

I am just trying to look at someone in my constituency of Kasambya who rents a house of Shs 10,000 or Shs 20,000 and he is seeking for a court order where he needs to inject more than Shs 60,000 on a boda boda to reach the court for someone to draft for him or her - he could be demanding Shs 150,000 only and he has to look for a court order.

Madam Speaker, my opinion is that at least the tenant tribunal or local council would be very important to assist our people in the village. Getting a court order in the village is not easy; where and when? We even do not have courts.

Madam Speaker, these tenants are so funny. One time, I was compelled to remove a roof because -(Interjections)- yes. And the law here must be clear. If you are saying that I should not evict my tenant - I am not going to evict tenant them but what do I do when the tenant is stubborn? Would you charge me when I am trying to fix my roof or to remove it? At one time, I removed it because she was very stubborn; she stayed until I removed it that is when she decided to go away. (Laughter)

Therefore, we might —(Interjections)- yes; when the law is so strict, we shall also bring other tricks to make sure that we can evict them instead of protecting them. However, we need a tribunal that can assist our people in the villages.

Lastly, the issue of paying rent in dollars; honestly, I cannot support that. We have been talking about Pan-Africanism; President Museveni has been preaching Pan-Africanism but what kind of Pan-Africanism is that where we cannot even promote our local currency? What kind of pan-Africanisms is that, which is cheating Ugandans? I thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

4.42
MR MOSES KAHIMA (NRM, Ruhaama County, Ntungamo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have picked interest in security deposit and the proponents are contending that it is meant to cater for the damages and utilities that will have been left unpaid. However, when you look at international accounting standards, they provide for the depreciation of various components of a house.

When we talk of property, plant and equipment; there are various components of property. You may have land or buildings and in the building, you have the fixtures and the furniture. Therefore, the standards give four years for the furniture and fixtures to be depreciated to zero. However, you are making somebody to make security for those depreciated components of the property.

My view is that the committee should account for the depreciation aspect of the property such that it is not let at the discretion of the landlord to determine how much the tenant can compensate for. Instead, it should be clear in the legal provisions that this security fee that has been deposited with the landlord should have a consideration of the components of the property that depreciate.

Secondly, I am seeing that this provision leaves it at the discretion of the landlord to determine the damages that he needs compensated. However, in this law, we should provide for a tribunal or an arbitration arrangement where the landlord and the tenant can sit and agree on the magnitude of the damage and on the amount that suits as compensation such that the balance is given to the tenant leaving the house after his tenancy expires.

However, if we leave it ambiguous in this manner, it means, that nobody will ever get the security he deposited with the landlord like my colleague has contended. Therefore, we should provide for a tribunal or an arbitration arrangement where we need to determine the level of the damage vis-a-vis that of the security that was deposited with the landlord. That is my submission.

4.45
MS LOWILA OKETAYOT (NRM, Woman Representative, Pader): Thank you, Madam Speaker for the opportunity and I would like to thank the committee for the elaborate report. I would like to submit on two areas; the issue of paying rent in Uganda Shillings and then the issue of eviction of tenant.

On the issue of paying rent in Uganda Shillings, I see that what has been provided in the Bill under clause 23(2) is almost what is taking place now. If they say it should be the transactions, the obligations shall be expressed, recorded and settled in shillings unless otherwise provided under any Act, enactment or when lawfully agreed to. This is more or less what is taking place and it renders the provisions under this clause redundant.

Secondly, on the issue of evictions of tenants, I agree on the issue of fairness to both parties. However, in this case we should look at who the weaker party is. I totally agree that there are some tenants who are very difficult and we must be fair to the landlords in this law.

However, what has been provided is not saying you will not evict the tenant, but where a tenant proves to be very difficult and becomes a problem to you the landlord, you can still go ahead and evict them but only after obtaining a court order. That should be fair enough to the landlord.

To me, between the landlords and the tenants, I consider the tenants to be a weaker party and in this case, our interest should be more to protect the weaker party.

Otherwise, I thank the committee for the elaborate report and I agree with my colleagues who have said that we need to pass this Bill; we need this law in place. Thank you.

4.48
MS LILLY ADONG (Independence, Woman Representative, Nwoya): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the report that they have given. 

I would like to state that this issue has been bothering me. I remember that we raised it here some time back; why rent is paid in dollars and how it is affecting our economy. In some countries within the region, you can hardly buy anything in dollars. The reason is, if we keep using only foreign currency, particularly dollars, we are subjecting the Uganda shilling to pressure and our currency will keep on losing. 

Supposing I have money and I am paying rent, I have to go and buy dollars. This puts a lot of pressure on the demand for dollars hence increasing the dollar rate in the country. We are aware that rent charges, particularly in the city as well as in other towns, are so exorbitant. This means that every month, Ugandans who are renting will have to buy dollars. This is affecting our currency.

Therefore, I strongly agree and support the position that let the rent be paid in Uganda shillings. Foreigners should use our money to pay rent. Maybe then our shilling will gain value against the dollar and traders will also benefit.
Madam Speaker, when it comes to the issue of regulating the relationship between tenants and landlords, there are two people who are supposed to be protected here; landlords also have to be protected. I would suggest that they put a minimum amount of rent which would require court intervention. If we leave it open by saying when a tenant refuses to pay then, I have to go to court for even Shs 10,000 or Shs 50,000, it will not make sense. 

However, if it is rent of Shs 3 million and above, accumulated for a certain period of time, the rate should be set so that the lower ones can maybe go to local councils for mediation.

When we are looking at rent, we should not only look at houses. In Nwoya District, for example, we have so many big scale farmers who are renting land from the local people. Therefore, if we over protect them, we may subject the local people who are renting out their land like those in my place, including me – I am renting out land from the community. This is where you rent and put up a large farm, say for five or ten years. When they refuse to pay after a certain time, it may turn into something else.

Therefore, I suggest that there should be a minimum amount of money where such disputes can be subjected to court and not all forms of rent. I beg to submit.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the law relates to premises and not open land.

4.52
MS EMMANUEL KALULE (NRM, Gomba County East, Gomba): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to focus my attention to the moral part of this Bill. I think one of the problems we have in this country is that we have a limited stock of houses as opposed to the growing population of 3.2 per cent per annum. As a result, landlords tend to oppress tenants. If we had a reasonable stock of houses in this country, this problem would not have arisen.

Therefore, it is my appeal that Government should think of availing more funds to banks like Housing Finance Company so that more houses can be constructed and landlords stop oppressing the tenants.

Madam Speaker, this law touches on private property. Once we talk of private property, it is not normally easy to start legislating on someone’s private property because as Government, we have not put money into the housing sector. 

I have no quarrel with people paying in dollars; it is normal. What I have in mind is, most of these people who pay in dollars are foreigners and they have the money. It would be very easy to tell a foreigner, I am charging you rent of $ 2,000 per month. However, if you tell him that you are charging Shs 7 million per month for the property, it will scare him. When you talk of $ 2,000, he will agree – (Interjections) – Okay, let me have the information from the honourable minister.

MR ARIDRU AJEDRA: Thank you, honourable colleague, for giving way. Madam Speaker, if you are somebody who invests in the real estate sector, there are two possibilities: you either take a mortgage in Uganda shillings or one in United States dollars. Of course, the rate in dollars is much cheaper than if you took a mortgage from a commercial bank in Uganda shillings.

If the bank gives you a mortgage in US dollars, it is only reasonable that the bank will be expecting you to pay back the mortgage principal plus the interest in US dollars. Due to the fluctuating rate of Uganda shillings against the US dollar or the major currencies, it is only reasonable that the tenant pays in US dollars. Some of us have one or two houses where we have borrowed on US dollars. Therefore, we insist that the tenant pays in US dollars because of the fluctuation risk associated with Uganda shillings.

Therefore, that option should be left open as the committee has recommended. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I would like to know whether the people who sign those agreements read that it is in dollars, still sign and then complain. If I bring an agreement and say, “Hon. Amongi, my house is for $ 5000.” It is written in US dollars and she signs, will she complain? I would understand if I drew the agreement in shillings and then said,  “now, I have changed, pay in dollars.” 

However, if you sign an agreement, you have consented because you have a contract. I would understand if they are hoodwinked that it is in shillings and then they change. 

MR KALULE: Madam Speaker, I am sorry but the honourable minister’s information has not added much to my argument. As you said, it is a willing buyer and a willing seller. If you do not want to pay in dollars, look for another house that is charging in Uganda shillings.

At one time, a colleague of mine was up in arms against Government for insisting that people should not pay in US dollars. In fact, he had petitioned Parliament until I went to the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and told him that insisting that people should not pay in dollars would not be good for Ugandans. The minister had to agree that people pay in dollars. 

Otherwise, if I own a property and I insist that you pay me in dollars, who are you as Government to force me to accept Uganda shillings? This is a liberal economy and after all, dollars are everywhere. You can go and buy them from forex bureaus and pay in dollars. 

Therefore, Madam Speaker, I agree with the chairperson of the committee because he says you can either pay in Ugandan Shillings or any other currency.

If we are to help this economy to grow, let people pay in dollars but at the same time, let Government find a way of financing its institutions like Housing Finance Bank so that we have a larger stock of houses and by so doing, then the prices will stabilise. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

4.59
MS JESCA ABABIKU (NRM, Woman Representative, Adjumani): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the good work done.

On the eviction of the tenants, I support the proposal that we should have tribunals because this Bill, when enacted into a law, is not going to be segregative. We have the rural community and the urban but also the accessibility to court serviceS has not been decentralised well but even where they are, there are many things that are happening; it is not easy to access justice.  

Madam Speaker, on the deposit of a security fee, I support this because at time there are damages that are caused.  We have a lot of challenges as people who border South Sudan. People have different cultures and behaviour. Some tenants bury people in in landlords’ houses and they discover it after. Others destroy certain items in the house and disappear without even their notice. Therefore, if this deposit is there, in one way or the other, the landlord will be able to make some recovery.

Madam Speaker, I support the formal agreement regardless of the literacy level. This is going to help both the landlords and the tenants in case there are grievances that may arise.
In relation to the currency to be used, my view is that it should be open because any person that would wish to offer business for you may have a determinant factor. They may say that they are interested in paying using this currency of the other and it might be of the either’s advantage. Yes, it might not be favorable to either party and so it should be open.

Madam Speaker, as a Member Public Account Committee, when we visited some of the missions, we realised the effect of being so restrictive. We give them money in Ugandan Shillings but when they are meeting their obligations, they use dollars and there are effects of the exchange rates, which at times cause them audit queries. 

Therefore, Madam Speaker, because the liberal economy is at play, let us leave it open to be determined by the two parties - the tenants and the landlords. Thank you very much.

5.02
MR JOSEPH KASOZI (NRM, Bukoto County Mid-West, Lwengo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the report presented and the indepth analysis of the Bill. However, the committee seeks to abolish the remedy of distress for rent in its report and wants it substituted. 

On page 17, the committee is recommending that instead, we empower the local council committees to arbitrate and/or adjudicate between the landlords and the tenants instead of the tenant using this remedy. 

However, Madam Speaker, if we empower the LCs in this law to adjudicate between the tenants and the landlords in cases of default of rent - remember there is the principle of pecuniary jurisdiction in law especially in adjudication. There is an amount of money, which the local councils cannot exceed when adjudicating. Therefore, my concern is what if the amount that the landlord is demanding goes outside the ambit that the local council courts should adjudicate over, what the happens? 

Therefore, in effect, this provision would really make the landlord lose out because the local council chairpersons cannot go outside a certain amount of money if we use that principle.

Madam Speaker, on the controversial issue of charging rent in dollars, there is a present trend under international transactions - they call it de-dollarising, which is coming up. Some states are coming up now to de-dollarise their transactions. This means they are pushing for conclusion of transactions in local currencies; that is the present trend now. An example is Russia, India, Turkey yet for us now in Uganda, we are legislating to keep the dollar in play –(Member timed out.)

5.06
MR PAUL AMORU (NRM, Dokolo County North, Dokolo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee. By and large, I am in agreement with most of their recommendations. 

However, the first observation I would like to make is that as a country, we still have a huge deficit of housing units. Some reports put it at about 1.7 million as a deficit and Kampala alone is put at 550,000 housing units. When you look at that - if some of the existing unfair practices - if subjected to the market forces, you find that people do what they are doing now, would definitely be out of business. 

However, because of this distress and deficit, which we should work out to cover up - we might be legislating and then fail in the real market forces. Unless we demand for more regulations that at the growth stage that Uganda is in, it might end up stifling. I wanted to mention that and probably call upon Government to invest more in affordable housing units to accommodate that gap because we have a citizenry that is not sleeping well. 

I was seeing reports that lack of good sleep is so detrimental to your life. It actually cuts your life by almost a half. Therefore, it is at the heart of the health of the nation.

However, I think it is in certain circumstances that we could legislate for dollars to be allowed, for example for certain categories of commercial rentals. Otherwise, by and large, we should encourage this economy to operate on our local currency. In my view, that will help to actually grow our economy. 

Secondly, on the issue of distress rent, I think it is going to be a tall order to expect the LCIs to come in and handle matters like this. When you are proposing these kinds of laws, you should look at enforceability. It is not enough for you to have goodwill and have serious LCI committees to sit and talk. What happens after that? They cannot enforce. 

I think when a tenant enters into an agreement and takes over somebody’s house, the commitment to fulfil that agreement should not be compromised. Therefore, the present law could still be incorporated in the new amendments, where landlords have the ability and capacity to deal with errant people. There are people who will be moving from one house to the other and they will not be paying and at the end of the day, you are going to stifle the economy. The construction industry is still growing. For most of us, our people upcountry and in these upcoming trading centres are struggling to put up structures but –(Member timed out.)

5.10
MS VIOLET AKURUT (NRM, Woman Representative, Katakwi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the report. I would also like to add my voice to about three issues.

The first one is on the currency to be used in terms of payment of rent by the tenant. I would like to just pose a question: whom are we legislating for? Are we legislating for foreigners or we are legislating for Ugandans? Like colleagues have said, honestly we are weakening our Ugandan currency. If we continue making transactions in dollars, then we give the dollar precedence vis-à-vis our local currency. If we are talking of promotion of Buy Uganda Build Uganda (BUBU), it should cut across. We should encourage payment of rent in local currency if we are actually talking of building Uganda and buying Uganda. This means that we should be able to use our own currency for these. 

There is the requirement of a court order to effect an eviction just in case a tenant has defaulted or failed to pay. I would like to give an example. In my own district, we have mud and wattle houses that are rented. The rent goes as low as Shs 5,000 a month and if it is high, then it is Shs 10,000. Now you are telling this person that if the landlord wants to evict a tenant, then they should be able to get a court order. You are forgetting that this person has to travel about 30 kilometres to do so and sometimes they are not even able to get these court orders. 

In my district, we have court days, which are about two in a week. We have one magistrate running two districts and they do it in turns. I would actually recommend that we empower the local – (Interruption) 

MS ANITE: Madam Speaker, I would really like to beg the honourable colleague to show us which part of the report she is quoting when she says that we are legislating against the locals and charging in dollars. 

If you look at the proposed clause 23 in the report of the committee, it is very clear to me and it is written in very clear English; it says, “All rent obligations or transactions shall be expressed or settled in Uganda shillings.” They further go on to say, “Notwithstanding subsection (2), the parties may mutually agree to settle and express rent in any other freely convertible currency.” 

Therefore, I do not see what she is talking about in this report of the committee. Is she in order to misled the House when the report is very clear and states different things? 

THE SPEAKER: Member, can you substantiate the source of your problem? 

MS AKURUT: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I think there has been a debate here that any currency can be used for transaction. That is why I rose on that. I think we need to legislate for Ugandans and we need to promote our own currency for any transaction. 

We are talking of landlords and tenants and the terms of payment. If you are paying for accommodation or in a hotel, most of the hotels in Uganda take payments in dollars. Are we then promoting the dollar vis-à-vis our own currency? That is why I am saying in that case, I think there is need for us, going by BUBU – Luckily, it is the minister who has risen on that and she is the very one who was telling us to promote BUBU. We are saying that in order for us to promote BUBU, all transactions should be in the local currency –(Member timed out.)  

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we should concentrate on landlords and tenants. The hotels are not here because if you are going to tell hotels like Serena not to touch dollars – Let us concentrate on landlords and tenants.

5.15
MS AGNES AMEEDE (NRM, Woman Representative, Pallisa): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me the opportunity. Unfortunately, I am going to dwell more on the US dollar issue. 

Countries construct themselves and position themselves among other countries under three pillars - social, economic and political. These have to be negotiated. The identity of Uganda is the Ugandan currency. I cannot go to the United Kingdom and trade in the US dollar or even go to the US and use the pound. You have to change it. 

Our economy is already uneven; it is working for a few people. The people who are most affected by this issue of paying rent in dollars are being pushed out of business. I concur with hon. Violet Akurut when she asked, “Who are we legislating for?” Is the US dollar working better for the Ugandan economy? Does it further the Ugandan interest? 

Yes, we are liberalised but the US, UK and other states are also liberalised. How do they do it? Liberalisation does not mean you withdraw from your basic responsibilities and interests as a country. It is very wrong for a Parliament to demean its national currency by endorsing this and saying that it stands. 

We were told that Government contracts and grants are negotiated in dollars because of depreciation. It is because those people are giving us the money in dollars and that can stand. However, where a transaction is within, it is wrong for a country to continue promoting it in dollars.

If someone has borrowed money in US dollars, can they have a grace period when they finish their loan repayment? The tenants have to pay in Ugandan shillings. I stand to present. Thank you.

5.18
MR BENARD ATIKU (Independent, Ayivu County, Arua): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the Committee on Physical Infrastructure for the report. I do agree with most of the submissions but I would like to request the committee chairperson to assure the House on two or three issues.

The first one is in regard to a Bill that is before you – the Physical Planning (Amendment) Bill. I think it is important for us to have these Bills passed within the same period because it will ease work for agencies on the ground and help the country resolve the manner in which we are handling the housing sector. Kampala is almost a slum. Without the Physical Planning Act amended, it will be difficult. We would like to request the committee to expedite that Bill and present it before this House so that when we are implementing this landlord and tenants law, we have these two moving hand in hand.

The second issue is in regard to the currency. If we are legislating for Uganda and we are a country that is independent, we should not even be talking about other currencies. We know that if somebody needs dollars, they know where to go, and that is to the forex bureaux –(Interruption)

MR ACIDRI: Thank you, hon. Atiku. Madam Speaker, I will go back to the emphasis of us becoming a middle income country and I would like to give an example of South Africa. We all know that when you go to South Africa with your dollars, you are charged a commission to convert them into rand. The idea is to give confidence to their currency. They want to assert their sovereignty and we must also do that for ourselves. That is the information I wanted to provide. Thank you.

MR ATIKU: Recently, I was in Italy and they emphasised the use of euros; even though you had dollars or pounds, you had to change them into euros. The same applies when you are in the UK; if you have euros or dollars, you must change them into pounds for you to be able to transact business. Therefore, I do not see any reason as to why we should debate over this. We are legislating for Uganda and anybody who is investing in the housing sector should be able to know how to play around with issues of rent when that comes up.

The last aspect is the involvement of the LC I. I think we know where the limits are. The LC I is important in a village setting for the sake of providing security. When it comes to matters of arbitration, that should be left to the courts. There are very many jurisdictions that deal with issues concerning arbitration of any disagreements. Local councils are important but they should be limited to providing security and registering the tenants who have come in and those that have left. (Member timed out)

5.22
MR JAMES KAKOOZA (Independent, Kabula County, Lyantonde): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to also add my voice and comment on the committee report. 

There is a very good recommendation under paragraph 9.6. It says, “The committee observes that clause 23(2) seeks to create a balance of interests of both landlords and tenants by protecting tenants who may not wish to pay rent in dollars while at the same time allowing room for flexibility for landlords and tenants who may wish to transact in foreign currencies to do so. While the committee is content with the spirit of the provision, it proposes that the same be recasted for better clarity.”

Madam Speaker, in strong economies – it is true that in South Africa they use the rand - Government is able to subsidise the housing component in the country. Uganda does not have that. When you buy an investment in Dubai, you pay for it in Dirhams. For the last 15 years, their economy has been strong and the Dirham has been at 3.6 to the dollar. However, here, wait for 10 years and the dollar will be at a different rate. 

You cannot therefore fix a price for somebody who has brought money here. The cost input of making an investment depends on the source of the interest - where you have got the money. If you borrow money from the East African Development Bank at a dollar rate, that means that when you are going to pay back, you will pay back in dollars. Look at the contradiction; you are saying that people, who are going into the tourism industry, should pay in dollars yet you want anybody who has invested in dollars to pay in local shillings. 

If you allow a Foreign Direct Investment (FDI) in any economy, you are not the determinant of the currency they will pay in. We have passed a law here that those who are coming to invest must have $20 million. What do you expect; that I come to invest and I take the local shilling, which is fragile? What will I do with my business? You cannot do that unless the economy is strong.

President Donald Trump of the USA is fighting with China over trade deficits; why? It is because the US economy is strong and they can project that within 10 years, the dollar will not be inflated and they can fix a price. However, in Uganda today, we are in a rainy season and the economy is growing at a rate of 6 per cent but when it comes to the dry season, you will find it inflated; what will somebody who has money do with that? That is why most of the people who invest here are obliged to say, “If a dollar rate changes to the worst, I must pay mortgages in the bank by…” - (Member timed out.)       

5.25
MR ALBERT LOKORU (NRM, Tepeth County, Moroto): Thank you, Madam Speaker. In one way or the other, each one of us here has been either a landlord or a tenant. Based on that experience, we should be able to come up with a law, which is suitable for all Ugandans. 

We are legislating for Ugandans. When you talk of dollars and Uganda shillings, it means that we are legislating for two different peoples yet we are supposed to come up with a law, which is applicable to a Ugandan in Kampala, Karamoja, West Nile or western Uganda. The law should be one for all Ugandans.

When you come to the issue of the currency to be used, our neighbour, Kenya, does not accept our currency whether for rent or hotel accommodation. They only accept Kenyan currency. However, in Uganda, we have a second option. When will our currency ever be strong? In the whole of East Africa, it is only the Uganda shilling, which is very weak. Rwanda too does not accept our currency.

Madam Speaker, my appeal is that when we come up with a law, let us begin by strengthening our currency. You are now talking about Hotel Africana but there is no Hotel Africana in Karamoja. It should be Uganda shillings for all. If there is any possibility, let that person convert the dollars into Uganda shillings. The law should be for all Ugandans. However, this means that we are discussing for two different peoples in Uganda. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, how do you strengthen the currency of Uganda?

MR LOKORU: By emphasising that any transaction should be in Uganda shillings. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, 24 Members have contributed to this debate. I want to put the question that the question be put. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE LANDLORD AND TENANT BILL, 2018

Clause 1

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 1 do stand part of the Bill – 

MS NAMBOOZE: Madam Speaker, I wish to propose that we delete clause 1 (2). The justification is that it is so open and it is prone to abuse. It provides thus: “The Minister may, by statutory instrument, exempt particular premises from the operation of this Act.” Those are very wide powers and they are prone to abuse. 

THE SPEAKER: Can I ask the minister for the rationale of that provision?

MS AMONGI: Thank you, Chairperson. There are circumstances under which, even in the current law related to the bailiffs and all that, exemption may be required for certain premises. If a Member feels that it can be prone to abuse, we can include, “with the approval of Parliament” just like in many other Bills because there will be circumstances under which that will be required.

MS NAMBOOZE: This is about exempting people from the whole Act. It does not touch any particular clause of the Act but the entire Act. It does not provide for any circumstances under which such powers can be exercised.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, it refers to particular premises; for instance, she might say that All Saints Church should not be subject to this law. 

MS NAMBOOZE: Madam Speaker, under clause 3, those premises which this law does not touch have been listed as religious, educational and medical. However, you might find a minister who can move to exempt the provisions of the Act on buildings that would ordinarily fall under this law and the law gives him those unchecked powers. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the minister said that if you are not comfortable, we can add, “with the approval of Parliament” so that we can share the responsibility. Is that okay? Honourable members, I put the question that clause 1 be amended as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 1, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 3

MR SSEKITOLEKO: Madam Chairperson, the committee proposes that we insert a new sub clause immediately after sub clause (1) to read as follows: “Notwithstanding subsection (1), a tenancy agreement of ten currency points or more shall be in writing.”

The justification is: to ensure that contracts of ten currency points or more are in writing for ease of enforcement. A written tenancy agreement gives parties more certainty and minimises risks by making the agreement clear from the outset and ultimately reduces the risk of disputes that may arise. 

Secondly, the reduction of the currency points from twenty-five to ten is to cover a majority of the landlords in Uganda who offer housing solutions that are largely in the range of ten currency points.

Madam Chairperson, the committee proposes to delete sub clause (2). 

The justification is that the format of the tenancy agreement in schedule 2 is not exhaustive. We also need to allow the parties to a tenancy agreement contract freely as long as the terms are within the ambit of the law.

We also proposed to substitute sub clause (4) with the following: “The landlord shall give the tenant a copy of the record kept under subsection (3) prior to the tenant taking vacant possession of the premises”. 

Justification: to avoid disputes that may arise after a tenant has taken vacant possession of the premises.

Under clause 3 (5), we propose to substitute paragraph (a) the following: “(a) with an individual, unless the individual provides his or her identification document or alien’s identification card or passport.”

Insert a new sub clause immediately after sub clause (5) to read as follows: “For the purpose of this section, ‘identification document’ includes the national identification card, driving permit, passport or certified student identification card.”

The justification: to broaden the provision to allow other forms of identification documents since national identification cards are not owned by every Ugandan. It is also to allow foreigners to use passports in addition to aliens’ identification cards. 

MS AMONGI: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I would like to start with the committee’s proposal to insert a new sub clause (1) on ten currency points to be only in writing. 

The experience we have at the ministry is that there are so many people who come with issues of conflict, if they have not had an agreement on a housing or land matter, with as low as Shs 50,000 or Shs 70,000. So, when the committee talks about ten currency points, the committee seems to imply that you can only make a written agreement with the amount of Shs 200,000 onwards. 

I think that is not proper because there are so many other people, even in slums around Kampala, that pay rent of less than Shs 200,000 but they have an agreement. If they did not have that agreement and they disagreed, even the LCI would fail to resolve that conflict. Therefore, I would like to request the committee to drop this. Let us allow to have what we have provided for under clause 3.

What we have provided for in clause 3(1) is that the agreement may be written, oral, in form of a data message or implied. What we have in the Bill is broad enough to cover all forms of agreement. However, for them to isolate and restrict it by saying that the agreement for Shs 200,000 onwards must be in writing will disadvantage many people, not only those upcountry. Of course, the majority is upcountry but within the Greater Kampala Metropolitan Area, there are many people paying Shs 50,000, Shs 70,000 and Shs 100,000 and they have agreements.

In clause 3(2), we have made a proposal for a simple format for writing an agreement, which is in the schedule; one can just go, photocopy and fill in the form. We brought this proposal because we felt that there are many people out there who might not have lawyers or people to help them make an agreement. If we delete that schedule, it will disadvantage people who do not have the capacity. 

If the committee feels that we should have leverage and that the proposal is not exhaustive, let us replace the word “shall” with “may” so that clause 3(2) will read: “A tenancy agreement in writing may be…”. In that case, people who may not be able to go to a lawyer can just go, photocopy and fill in – (Interjection) - No, you said we should delete sub clause (2), which has a schedule.

The committee also proposed that we substitute clause 3(4) with the following: “The landlord shall give the tenant a copy of the record kept under subsection (3) prior to the tenant taking vacant possession of the premises.” This will presuppose that even if the landlord is not around and makes a call to a neighbour saying, “Okay, you can allow the person to enter; we will come and sign an agreement tomorrow or in two days”, which is very common, someone will not be able to enter the premises. 

The amendment would mean that even in an emergency situation, somebody will not be able to enter the premises because the amendment is saying there must be a copy of a record prior to taking possession. However, there are also circumstances where somebody says, “Okay, the house is empty, the other tenant is leaving tomorrow but I am upcountry, you can enter and we will sign the agreement when I come.” 

If you feel that we do not need to take care of such circumstances then we can go with the committee’s proposal but it will be strictly, “prior to”. Those are the key areas of concern that I had.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Nsereko, you were not here during the debate.

MR NSEREKO: I have been following. I was very far but I rushed to be here because this is one of the things that has caused danger in the city. I plead with you, Madam Chairperson. 

Thank you, Madam Chairperson. Regarding clause 3 of the Bill, my prayer is that, just like what was adopted in the European Union, we should let the agreement be narrowed down in writing. This is because an agreement has very many disclaimers, even in its format. What we are facing today in commercial agreements is that those which are made by word of mouth are hardly enforceable.

In downtown Kampala, for example, people are told to deposit money. The landlord calls and tells you to deposit a certain amount of money as rent and they only write “paid” on the receipt without stating the sum. Therefore, unless that thing is narrowed down to in writing, no agreement made by word of mouth is going to be enforceable, mainly commercial agreements. 

In the European Union, it was there in the archaic law and then they said every agreement of tenancy shall be narrowed down in writing. That is why even for short-term tenancies like in hotels, you sign a document when you check in because you are bound to sign. As a House, we should resolve that the only respectable tenancy agreement shall be an agreement in writing and signed by both parties.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I understand the Member for Kampala and I understand his special problems. However, if you go to Koboko, in the trading centres there, supposing someone wants to rent and the owner just says, “This is my house, pay Shs 20,000”?

MR NSEREKO: With due respect, Madam Chairperson, people will adapt because there is a format. We can even translate the format into local languages. This is a contract that deals with two people. People normally change words; somebody will come and say, “I did not tell you that. Probably, you heard it wrongly when we were speaking on phone.” However, when something is written down and signed – 

We have land agreements even in the villages and people narrow them down in writing. Anything written down in ink and on paper is hard to change. In any case, it is easily traceable during taxation as well.

MR AJEDRA: Madam Chairperson, actually I came here to support my colleague, hon. Nsereko. You asked what happens when you are in Koboko. In the villages, the LC I leaders witness agreements between people who have had disputes and they write them in the local languages. I have witnessed this in my village. They write that so and so has agreed to pay five or three cows for a, b, c, d. It may not be detailed the way the lawyers would do it but there would be some kind of agreement that you and I came to for you to rent my house and you will pay me Shs 100,000 per month. 

I think one of the ways in which we could resolve this is to have a simple agreement drafted for our local people and then a complex and sophisticated one where the value of the rent is a bit high. However, I agree with my colleague that all agreements should be in writing.

MR PENTAGON KAMUSIIME: Madam Chairperson, I am happy that this issue has come up and Members are concerned. In the villages, even where you find those who have not gone to school, they have adopted a system of contracting lawyers to make agreements between parties. I noted an incident where one party, using a lawyer, can take advantage of the other because they do not understand the language. 

I will give you an example. I had cattle keepers who had an issue in the lowlands – the kisenyi. This person came and made an agreement in English but they had agreed with the village and the chairperson that indeed this man has been here and has been using this area and so no one should interrupt. However, they stated in writing in English that, “I accept that I do not own a kisenyi here. I do not do anything…” At the end of the day, somebody put a thumbprint. When I was reading it, I got confused and we had to bring back everything. 

In the same way, people can make agreements and use many statements that may injure the other party. If we come up with unanimous format of an agreement like the Member suggested, we can translate it into local languages and it will be witnessed by the local authorities, as the minister said, and no one will cheat the other. Let me take the information –(Interruption)

MR JAMES KAKOOZA: Thank you, for giving way. I wish to reflect on what the chairperson has said. The best way to go about this is if we standardise it. 

Look at the passport forms, even if you are in Kampala, in the village, learned or not, the format is standardised in the law. However, in these kinds of agreements, anyone can twist any word and disadvantage the landlord or the tenant. The moment we have the format in the schedule – that is what the chairperson was saying – supposing one is in Koboko and they do not have a lawyer but the format is in the schedule, it will inform such people that anyone who wants to make a tenancy agreement has to reflect on that. That is why the Ministry of Internal Affairs has one standard form for a passport. The moment you put it in the law, it becomes a standard tenancy agreement that is acceptable. I think what is in the schedule and what you are elaborating is correct.

THE CHAIRPERSON: What we are trying to discuss is whether we are excluding oral agreements. That is what is happening and that is why I am saying, if one is sitting in the village in Koboko -

MR KAMUSIIME: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. Please protect me from hon. Betty Nambooze. As we move forward, this is a new era and we have to accept to change with the changing environment. Many people are not sure of what they have said; let us put it in writing and have a simple format. Otherwise, if you say that it may be partly in writing and partly oral, we will not be able to regulate this thing. Let us make a format and it will stand the test of time. I thank you.

MR KAHIMA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. Accepting the oral agreement does not negate the will of those who may wish to have written agreements enforced. Therefore, I concur with the chairperson of the committee that those who are interested in having written agreements, it is at their discretion. However, we should allow our population that may wish to have their agreements orally to do so. Otherwise, the law is very clear that agreements may be in writing and oral. Therefore, we cannot stand here and begin legislating on something, which is very clear. That is my submission.

MR AMORU: Thank you, Madam Chairperson, for giving me the opportunity. I would like to inform the chairperson of the committee and my colleague here that we are in the business of offering leadership and shaping traditions and practices.  Therefore, in this day and era, if we still find it attractive to encourage the population to engage in transactions based on oral agreements, it is very worrying. This is because one can make an agreement orally now and tomorrow they might not be there or be too sick to speak yet there is nothing on record to show that there is any form of agreement.

In 2019, if our people have been used to this kind of practice, I think this Parliament should put its feet down and we completely expunge that practice of oral agreements. We do not need it and it has no place in our society.
	
MS KARUNGI: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. I am sorry but I do not agree with hon. Amoru because we represent people who are educated and those who are not. We also represent people like those in Kanungu, who live in the mountains and do not know these things. We also represent people in the city here. So, we have to make a law, which sustains both sides.

Madam Chairperson, in my view, the way clause 3 is drafted is good. We have had it for long and it supports both sides. I can assure you, like hon. Pentagon said, when we say we have to put everything in writing, you find that there are people who are being duped. They may sign something they do not understand.

We have had tenancy agreements, which are implied and written and it has been working. We have given them discretion that if they want to put it in writing, it is okay and if they feel they cannot manage writing, they should do it the way they wish. There are people in the villages who are renting houses for only Shs 5,000. You cannot tell me that because in Kampala here we have people who rent houses of Shs 5 million per month, we subject everyone to writing a contract. I think that will not be fair. We need to look at the people in the villages who do not know much.

Madam Chairperson, the other issue I would like to state is that we went to clause 3 before we could finish clause 2. 

THE SPEAKER: Clause 2 will come last because it is on interpretation. 

MS KARUNGI: Thank you, Madam Chairperson.

MR MBWATEKAMWA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. If we leave it open and say people can use what is implied or expressed by writing or sending a message, I think it is not fair at all.  If we leave it open, the landlord will take advantage and say, “We did not agree. I cannot write; as long as I have said I am giving you my house”. 

No one should say that this is because we have people who have not gone to school. In villages when you go to the police, there is a standard form you are given to fill. The moment we have this in the schedule, it will be standard. I know my local person in Kasambya will go and fill that form. Otherwise, we just need to have it translated into different languages. I thank you.

MR AOGON: Madam Chairperson, I agree with hon. Elizabeth Karungi. First of all, landlords have the right to allow you to enter their house or not. You either enter into an agreement with the landlord or not. That is their freedom. I would like to give an example. If we decided to legislate on issues of marriage and say that before you take a woman as your spouse, you must wed, do you think our population by now would have not gone down completely? 

Let us give people liberty to choose what they want in this law. Otherwise, I feel that the landlords are in control. You can have the form but it should not be mandatory. We should use the word “may” like the minister has said. That is very critical. I will take the information from hon. Pentagon. 

MR KAMUSIIME: Thank you, my brother, for the opportunity to give you information. The agreement serves two parties - the tenant and the landlord - and everyone has a right in his or her own capacity. It is not necessary to keep treating or pushing ahead ignorance. We have to legislate to bring our people to the current times so that they can match.

MR AOGON: Madam Chairperson, he has given information which is totally off-road; I do not take it. The issue is, let us rely on making our people free to take what they know is right. We are not in a foreign land.

MS ALUM: Thank you, Madam Chairperson, I support written agreements. The idea of saying that our people are not educated in this case to me does not hold water. When there are land transactions throughout the country, whether by an educated person or a poor person, there is always a written agreement involving the LC I chairperson and witnesses. 

This and many other examples tell us that a written agreement can work for this country in this issue of landlord and tenant agreements. I do not know where the fear is coming from that some of our people are not educated –(Interruption)-

MR AMORU: Thank you, honourable member, for giving me the opportunity. First of all, Ugandans are out there looking at us in the face. This country has invested heavily in numeracy and literacy in the Universal Primary Education (UPE) and Universal Secondary Education (USE) programmes. As we speak, from one corner of Uganda to the other, at least we cannot say in public that Ugandans can no longer write a half page agreement to secure their tenancy arrangements. In Uganda today, we now want to move towards a culture of keeping records so that tomorrow when those two parties do not exist, we are covered. 

The second point is that our tax base is very low because most of our transactions are not known and you cannot even trace them anywhere. For us to stand in 2019 and still support a practice that you cannot trace in the air is unfortunate. Thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I would like to remind you that this relationship between the landlord and tenant is a contract and under the Contracts Act, a contract may be oral or written. You cannot change the law in this form. The Contracts Act is very clear; it can be oral or even implied or written. Those are the principles of the law of contract.

MR NSEREKO: Madam Chairperson, I have an alternative view on that because it has been practised and enforced elsewhere. I will give you contracts that cannot be enforced orally. A contract for aviation cannot be enforced orally –(Interjections)-

THE CHAIRPERSON: What is the contract for aviation?

MR NSEREKO: If you want to travel form one point to another using a commercial airliner, there is nothing like an oral ticket to board; it must either be on paper or print. Whereas it is a contract, it must be narrowed down to a print in writing. 

In this case, we as a Parliament owe the people a duty of protection. The only way to protect them - I would like to persuade honourable members that if you want to protect a tenant, please narrow down things to pen and paper and with signature. 

Anything oral shall lead to hiding taxes and fraud by some people. The reason is that there will be no trace of what people agreed. That is the loophole the very same landlords in this city have been using, not only to defraud the tax system but to also cheat the very same tenants they depend on.

MS NAMBOOZE: Madam Chairperson, we all appreciate that our colleagues, especially those representing people from rural areas, will find problems with the provision in this law where we require a written agreement. However, I would like to persuade colleagues by recalling where we are coming from. Rich landlords in Kampala and the metropolitan area who know how to write just dodge writing contracts because it makes them able to mistreat their tenants and to avoid taxes. 

In some cases, people rent premises in urban areas out of desperation. I propose that we amend this law and say, “in a language understandable by both parties”. None of us was voted by mouth; people voted for us on paper. Some of them ticked and others used their thumb. That is a contract in itself; so you cannot say that those people cannot write anything even in the villages. We are here because people went and executed something on paper. I would like to persuade colleagues that for us in towns-

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, by the time you agreed to an oral contract, you have agreed. If you agree then you have accepted the condition of no writing.

MS AMONGI: Madam Chairperson, if you have the Bill, you will see that in clause 3 (3), we provided for the records that the landlord should keep where an agreement is made orally. It says, “Where a tenancy agreement is not in writing, the landlord shall keep a record – 

(a) 	of the particulars of the parties to the tenancy; 
(b) 	of the premises comprised in the tenancy; 
(c) 	in the case of a non-citizen, of the details of the immigration status of the non-citizen; and 
(d)	 of the details of the rent payable and the manner of payment”. So, it helps for the verbal.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Nsereko, that is why I told you that you were not here during the debate. We are wasting time. Under this law, the landlord is required to give you that record.

MR NSEREKO: Madam Chairperson, in that case, that plays into what we are talking about. When we stick to the fact that it is written, we have no objection. However, you cannot say that it is oral when it is written; it is a pure contradiction. In this case, you give the leverage to only the landlord to write. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable member, if you agree to an oral contract, you have agreed.

MR ATIKU: Madam Chairperson, in this case, we will be one sided. If it is the landlord that is going to keep all these records and the tenant has nothing, should there arise any dispute between the tenant and landlord - 

THE CHAIRPERSON: It is there. It has been taken care of. 

MR KAFEERO: Madam Chairperson, based on the minister’s proposals, I would like first of all to withdraw the proposal to delete clause 3(2) and we reinstate it. We also agree that clause 3(1) remains as is in the Bill.

However, on sub-clause (2), let us amend and replace the word “shall” with “may” so that we say: “A tenancy agreement in writing may be in the form of the prescribed schedule 2”. I beg to submit.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 3 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 3, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 4

MR SSEKITOLEKO: Madam Chairperson, originally, the committee proposal was to delete clause 4. However, consequent to what has happened in clause 3, we would like to withdraw the proposal of deletion and maintain clause 4 the way it is in the Bill. However, we still want to cause an amendment by replacing the word “twenty-five” appearing in line one with “ten”. It should be ten currency points.

Our justification, Madam Chairperson, in the reduction of currency points from twenty-five to ten is to cover a majority of the landlords in Uganda that offer housing solutions that are largely in the range of ten currency points. Also, it will consequently widen the tax base.

We also want to delete clause 4(b). The justification to that is that it is impractical to have a party against whom an oral tenancy agreement is being enforced admit, especially if such admission may be detrimental to his or her case. This makes the implementation of this provision difficult.

MR JAMES KAKOOZA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I think if you delete (b) then you have to delete (a) because it is the same sentence. The Bill reads as follows: 
“A tenancy agreement of the value of twenty-five currency points or more shall not be enforceable by action unless-

    (a) the agreement is in writing or in form of a data message; or 
    (b) the party against whom enforcement is sought admits that the agreement was entered into.”

If you delete clause 4(b), you must delete 4(a). So, it must remain because it is the same sentence although it is a sub item. It remains the same unless you are deleting the whole of clause 4.
 
MR AOGON: Madam Chairperson, I would like to support what the minister had initiated. This issue of talking about currency points may not be very helpful. There are many people whose money may be little but to them, that is their one million shillings.

When Jesus Christ received something from a certain old woman one time, he said she had given the highest amount and yet her money was very little. Why don’t we consider leaving it open? Stop talking about currency points because her Shs 5,000 might be my one million shillings and yet that is very little for you. Therefore, I think that the best thing to do is to stop talking about currency points there. Eliminate the ten currency points. Thank you.

MR MBWATEKAMWA: Madam Chairperson, thank you very much. I think the word “little” is relative. Hon. Ssekitoleko might think that maybe Shs 200,000 is little or much but to me, Shs 100,000 might even be much more.

Therefore, I think even if someone pays less than Shs 200,000, which is ten currency points, he or she deserves to get an agreement - whether it is ten or twenty-five currency points. After all, if I am to get a photocopy of that draft, how much would it cost me? Whether I have paid fifty or twenty currency points, I deserve an agreement. I thank you.

MS BABA DIRI: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I had earlier mentioned that there are some people who are renting a room in a house and may be paying Shs 50,000 or Shs 70,000. Those people must also have the agreement. That is why I feel that the agreement must cover everybody. We should not put any threshold or currency point. Thank you very much (Applause)

MR AMORU: Madam Chairperson, whereas the idea of leaving it open appears attractive, I thought we could still cure that because most of the times that I have come across the issue of currency points, it is a measure of something. In criminal law, if the sentence is supposed to be ten years, you find the currency points will be commensurate to the number of years.

I think in business terms, we could acknowledge that most of the businesses we are trying to regulate definitely fall within the scale of Shs 200,000 and above. However, we could still take this into consideration, so that it is subjected to the measure of the contract amount, either per annum or one that is going to accrue.  So, for those who fall within the scope of the contract amount they have in that agreement, if it exceeds a certain amount, that is when the Shs 200,000 applies. Below that, it is left for jua kali and it can still work. So, you cater for both –(Interjection)– They will not. 

I am now agreeing with you that you leave the jua kali open but at least you regulate above that by indicating the contract amount that begins from this. That could be determined, and then the Shs 200,000 would apply, other than leaving it completely open because it might then affect the size of businesses we are targeting.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Minister, what is the rationale for this provision? What was your rationale for clause 4?

MS AMONGI: Madam Chairperson, the current clause 4 in the Bill states twenty-five currency points, which is Shs 500,000. We indicated that if you are paying rent of Shs 500,000 and above, at least the agreement must be in writing or in form of a data message. This is because a majority of the downtown KACITA members who came to our office pay Shs 500,000 and above. Their complaint was that most of the landlords downtown do not give them receipts and tenancy agreements. That is why we have put Shs 500,000 as currency points but Shs 500,000 and below would cater for the urban poor. However, for most business people downtown that pay Shs 500,000 and above, the landlords do not give them receipts. When URA goes downtown, they are not be able to give them documents. Therefore, the reason – (Interruption) 

MS NAMBOOZE: Madam Chairperson, is the minister in order to start promoting discrimination in this House? She said some people can compulsorily have written agreements and others not. The same reasons you used are still important here. Even some people who can pay Shs 500,000 do not know how to write; so, this would be a discriminative law. If we want written agreements, let them cut across. If we do not want written agreements, let it also cut across. Do you want to legislate for KACITA only?

MS AMONGI: Madam Chairperson, in society and even in our current legal regime, we have thresholds. You who are seated here have a threshold for tax. There are certain amounts of money that are not taxable; you cannot pay income tax on them. Therefore, that principle of a threshold is also what we wanted to apply; that when it is Shs 500,000 and above, somebody should at least have some form of data, message or writing because –(Interjections)– let me finish the rationale –(Interruptions)  

MR NSEREKO: Madam Chairperson, I will give a simple example of stalls. Assuming we went downtown and I had 20 or 30 stalls but I am the same landlord renting out to different people – I want to show you the principle of proportionality now - in these stalls, everyone pays a face fee of Shs 400,000. However, I have 90 stalls and all this revenue comes to me and yet we are basing on that type of agreement, in your case. In any case, the tax would not be traceable because I have denied you the right to write.

That is why we are telling you that if you want to capture taxes and catch the people who hide in safe havens to evade taxes, narrow everything in writing or at least a receipt. We may not even be able to write too much by issuing a receipt that I have received money of this amount. Do not specify the currency points of the amount of money received because every contract is a contract for as long as there is even consideration of one shilling. Therefore, it would be prudent that an agreement be done -

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable member, you are taking us back to clause 3. We have passed that where there is no written agreement, the landlord is required to write, keep a record of the particulars of the party to the tenancy, of the premises comprising the tenancy and in the case of foreigners, details of the immigration status, details of rent payable and the manner of payment.

MR NSEREKO: Now, we are talking about the currency points that she is talking about, particularly that in case of certain agreements and you asked what the rationale for choosing this was. We are saying that whatsoever the agreement, whether it is one currency point or not, let it be narrowed down into something traceable. 

MR KAFEERO: Madam Chairperson, the proposal of putting a particular threshold, say 25 or 10 currency points, does not stop the landlord from capturing the other details we have agreed upon in clause 3. It will be captured. When we say above 25 currency points, it is a must to write. It does not stop the landlord, where it is not in writing, to capture what the chairperson has just read. I thought I should make that clear. 

MR NSEREKO: What is the rationale? What are you trying to cure in this case? The reason you bring a law is to cure a defect; what defect are you curing? 

MR KAMUSIIME: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. When this Bill came up, I remembered what has been happening in Kampala, where landlords have been squeezing the tenants. I thought that this Bill would cure that completely. 

In addition to that, Government would cater for security everywhere because we have the details. Government would also have an opportunity to get its taxes. The way I see it now, we are still receiving the same and we are going to have the same confusion in Kampala now and then. 

Madam Chairperson, if it does not break any rules, we need to assert ourselves that we need some form of documentation for any agreement entered into. Secondly, we do not need to segregate and say that at this amount, have an agreement because my Shs 50,000 can be more than a rich man’s Shs 1 million. Therefore, at whatever level, let us have it that way. Let us capture everybody. 

MS AMONGI: Honourable chairperson, I cannot concede on a matter that has already been decided. The Rules of Procedure are clear; if you want to open a matter that the Speaker has ruled on and it has been handled, - clause 3 has been resolved and you can [MR NSEREKO: “You are running away.”] no, hon. Nsereko, let me complete. I gave you all the leverage. We debated very well on clause 3(3) that let us give leverage to people who are willing to have oral contracts. Let us give leverage.

However, we are also saying that let us protect a certain threshold of - the proposal we have put is Shs 500,000, which is 25 currency points. The rationale I would like to bring you – as a minister, I do not sit and dream of what to bring on the Floor. We sat with most of the business-people in municipalities, in this city and we got complaints of connivance, where landlords sit and say, “We are not going to give you any record or accept to give you an agreement.” 

Therefore, in such circumstances, we wanted to balance to say the law of contract is very explicit, that you should also permit non-written agreements. In all the other legal frameworks, you are also allowed to give a threshold. Therefore, if most of the ordinary people who might want oral or written agreements by choice - if the amount of money is a bit lower, we can entertain that. From Shs 500,000 onwards, we said they should have a written agreement or a message – (Interruption)

MR KAKOOZA: Actually, what you are stating is what Parliament passed here recently in the tax laws. What you did was to identify people who are involved in rentals and you gave them a threshold. You are trying to become consistent in this law. In the VAT law, the people who are above the Shs 50 million threshold must go for VAT and claim it. If you are below, you do not. 

Therefore, if you make a law in Parliament, you must be consistent with other laws. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I would like you to carefully read clause 4, which says, “A tenancy agreement of a value of 25 currency points or more shall not be enforceable by action.” You cannot go to court on it unless it is written. That is what the law is saying. In fact I do not want you to interfere with this because you are also interfering with the Contract Act.

MR SSEKITOLEKO: Madam Chairperson, I concede and therefore withdraw the proposal of reducing it to 10 currency points and we maintain 25 currency points.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 4 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 5

MR NSEREKO: Madam Chairperson, this law is very important and we have been coming to your office. (Interjection) Yes, I know what it entails. Every other day, people have been running to the Speaker’s office to seek redress in the matter of dealings between landlords and tenants.

Madam Chairperson, we are deciding questions when this House is not fully composed and our Rules of Procedure are very clear. As per rule 24, the quorum of this Parliament shall be one third of all members of Parliament entitled to vote. Under rule 24(2), the quorum shall be prescribed under rule 24(1) and shall only be required at the time when Parliament is voting on any question.

Madam Chairperson, we are voting on questions that you are putting before us to adopt clauses of this Bill. I only have a proposal. The Landlord and Tenant Bill, 2018 shall touch every constituency and people have been coming to you. We can have more time to consult on this and come back to vote when we are properly constituted.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the House is properly constituted. I would like to remind you, honourable members, that these people have been asking for this law. It is me who they are -

MR NSEREKO: Yes but we do not have the quorum, Madam Chairperson.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Have you counted?

MR NSEREKO: Yes. I would like to move that we count the members that are present.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, let us go to clause 5.

MR SSEKITOLEKO: Clause 5, Madam Chairperson -

THE CHAIRPERSON: You were not even here. You came late.

MR NSEREKO: Now I am here.

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, please. Honourable member, sit down. You came late. You did not start the debate; take your seat.

MR SSEKITOLEKO: We propose to redraft clause 5 as follows: “A landlord shall, after a tenancy agreement is signed by the landlord and tenant, give a copy of the tenancy agreement to the tenant prior to the tenant taking vacant possession of the premises.” 

The justification is to ensure transparency in the dealings between the landlord and the tenant.

MR AOGON: Madam Chairperson, should it be mandatory that prior to somebody entering the House, copies should have exchanged hands? There are certain conditions like what the minister raised here. I remember when I came to Kampala that I owned a house for the first time. I agreed with my landlady that I could enter the house and pay the following week after which we would sign the attendant documents. How can we complicate issues and say ‘prior’? I do not think that is in good faith.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Are you still insisting that it should be prior?

MR SSEKITOLEKO: Madam Chairperson, we thought that ‘prior’ would be the best because after entering the premises, you may discover that what the landlord was telling you and what you paid for in form of rent is not consistent. What do you do then?

MR KAKOOZA: Madam Chairperson, I do not see any problem with what is in the Bill because a tenancy agreement is about the two parties that have agreed on the terms and conditions. It says, “The landlord shall, immediately after a tenancy agreement is signed by the landlord and tenant, give a copy of the tenancy agreement to the tenant.” 

There is no way I can sign a tenancy agreement without knowing what I am signing. If I am going to occupy a house, I would have known. What is important is to give a copy of the agreement. If I sign an agreement, that is done. You cannot turn around and say, no, what I have signed - By the way, it creates dishonesty because when you agree with someone, you have agreed.

MR SSEKITOLEKO: Madam Chairperson, we are removing the word “prior” and we are consistent with the redrafting without the word “prior”.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Are you reverting to the provisions in the Bill?

MR SSEKITOLEKO: Madam Chairperson, when you delegate to an agent and the landlord is not readily available, maybe they have to take the agreement to him for signing after the tenant has signed. Therefore, when you say ‘immediately’, like it is in the Bill, it may not be easily enforceable.

MR KAKOOZA: Mr Chairman, this is a headnote. The spirit of this is for the tenant and the landlord to have a copy after agreement. That is the meaning; it does not have any other meaning. It says, the landlord should give a tenant a copy of a tenancy agreement. If I sign with you and we finish today, I have to give you a copy. I do not need to wait and you go and say, no, I have reached the house and I have changed my mind.

What it means is that I must give you a copy of the agreement. If you go back then you are creating other conflicts in the agreement; it will be a breach of the agreement.

MR SSEKITOLEKO: Madam Chairperson, I concede. Let us maintain what is in the Bill.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 5 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 5, agreed to. 

Clause 6

MR SSEKITOLEKO: Madam Chairperson, in clause 6(4), we propose to substitute the words, “twenty four hours” appearing in line two with the words, “at least forty eight hours.” 

The justification is to require the landlord to give reasonable notice to the tenant.

MS AMONGI: Madam Chairperson, we would like to retain what is in the Bill because there are circumstances where tenants have got information that somebody is digging a grave in their house and they want to enter the premises. 

The committee is proposing that you give 48 hours’ notice. You, the landlord, should wait after 48 hours if you want to inspect the premises. I think that 48 hours is a bit too long. In the Bill, we have proposed 24 hours and I would like to inform the chairman that there are people who disagreed on the 24 hours. Now to move it to 48 hours is too much on the side of the landlord who wants to access the premises because he or she has got urgent information on what the tenant might be doing in the house.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I think it will be oppressive to the landlord to make it longer.

MS KARUNGI: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. Even 24 hours is long. There is a saying and I suspect it has been happening that – those who have houses are saying that some Sudanese - I am sorry but some people have been getting problems of death and they bury the people in the houses. By the time the tenant leaves, there are graves in the house.

When you hear that they are digging a grave - maybe when the neighbours inform you - do wait for 48 hours? It will not be fair. We should talk of at least four hours because within those four hours – 

THE CHAIRPERSON: No.

MS KARUNGI: Madam Speaker, because within four hours, in case they are digging a grave, they will not have finished burying and putting back the titles; otherwise if one has to wait for 48 hours, they will find when the tiles have already dried. That is too much. Let us make it four hours because the conditions are different. If it is that case, we should not wait; there are other incidences also. 

Secondly, there are some tenants who are ill mannered. Let us assume that they are fighting and the man has beaten the woman badly or done something wrong to her, do you wait for 48 hours? Or if you have been told that they are killing somebody in your house, do you have to wait for 48 hours? 

Four hours are enough for you to prepare and see what is happening in your house. Thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, let us look at the purpose for which the landlord wants to enter the house. They may want to view the state and condition of the house; so, 48 hours will be too long; it will be infringing on the rights of the landlord. Let us take 24 hours.

MR AOGON: Madam Chairperson, we have the Uganda Police Force and in case of a criminal act being suspected, the person affected can always report to police and go with them immediately. We do not need any hours. 

Why do we talk about 48 or 12 hours when somebody is doing something bad in your house? The landlord only has to report the matter to the LCI or contact the relevant authorities, like the police to come and check the house; the house belongs to the landlord.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, this is not about emergencies. The landlord may come to inspect if the paint is still on or if the tiles are okay; it is only about inspection.

MR AOGON: Then the 48 hours becomes okay, if that is the case. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: If it is 48 hours, you are oppressing the landlord. Does it really need two days for one to come and check on the condition of the house?

MR AOGON: Madam Speaker, the person has to prepare their house. They may wish to put their clothes in order and allow you passage to go and check on the bedroom. 

MR KAFEERO: Madam Chairperson, I beg to withdraw and we maintain 24 hours as it is in the Bill.

MS KARUNGI: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I think we need to put both alternatives to take care of both an emergency and any other reason.

THE CHAIRPERSON: It is not the landlord. This is just about inspecting the premises; are the doors working, is the main gate okay?

MS KARUNGI: Then 24 hours are enough.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Yes. 

MR AMORU: Madam Chairperson, at first, I was worried but with the explanation I am satisfied with the 24 hours. However, I would like to know whether the interval for that sort of inspection is catered for. I have had scenarios where the landlord can inspect your house every week; it becomes unbearable. There are others doing that.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I think there is another provision dealing with that somewhere. 

MR AMORU: Thank you for the clarification.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 6 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 6, agreed to.

Clause 7, agreed to.

Clause 8

MR KAFEERO: In clause 8 (1), the committee proposes that we redraft it to read as follows: “(1) The duty of the landlord to maintain the premises in good repair does not apply; 
(a) 	to repair of the damage caused to the premises by the tenant’s negligence or failure to take reasonable care or 
(b) 	where there is an agreement between the landlord and the tenant to the contrary.” 

The justification is to create room for parties to mutually agree on how to handle their dealings.

And in clause 8(3), the committee proposes to substitute it with the following: “The notice under (2) shall specify the scope and nature of repairs.”

The justification is to remove the requirement for the minister to prescribe the form of notice by regulation, since the prescribed form might not be easily accessible by all.
In clause 8(6), the committee proposes that we substitute for the words, “Offset from the security deposit” provided for in Section 32, appearing in line 3, with the words, “borne by the tenant.”

The justification is to ensure that the cost of repair incurred by a landlord is not off-set from the security deposit but charged on a tenant. The security deposit should be used at the end of tenancy. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: I do not know whether you are now not managing the tenants on behalf of the landlord.

MR AOGON: Madam Chairperson, the problem I have with that is when it comes to the issue of negligence, in terms of repairs - I have a friend who once bought a house but within three or four months, most of the shutters were getting broken because the hinges were very weak. How shall we determine that this was due to negligence?

In Kampala, you know how people who are building for sale do it; they build substandard houses for sale. You find very nice paint on top but you do not know what is inside. These are big problems. How do we determine what is arising out of negligence?

You find water taps already cracking the walls and getting through. How do we determine that it was out of negligence? We may need to think about it critically.

MS AMONGI: Madam Chairperson, I would like to plead with the chairperson of the committee to maintain what is in the Bill. What is there is that clauses 8 and 9 complement each other.

Clause 8 gives circumstances under which landlords will repair premises. Clause 9 gives those under which the tenant repairs. If we bring in clause 8(1) and introduce (b) where the committee intends to say that where there is an agreement between the landlord and the tenant to the contrary… in the circumstance where most of these people have come to the Government to intervene under this law, it is because of this provision in (b). 

In the agreements, which are not standardised, the landlords are putting everything on the tenant - the repair of the roofs and even issues that are a result of say, leakage. If you have put a bad roof, it will start leaking yet in the provision, the committee proceeds to say that whatever the landlord has repaired must be borne by the tenant. 

Then, we will be legislating for only the landlord. We would not be looking at the fate of the tenant. That is why under clause 9, we have put circumstances where for example bathtubs, gas leakage, electrical faults and so on, a tenant can do the repairs but the expense will be borne by the landlord.

However, where the landlord can repair and it is borne by the tenant, it is also stipulated in clause 8. Therefore, I would like to request the committee chairperson - because he is even saying that under clause 8 (3) that the landlord only repairs and gives you the scope and nature of the repair. It does not even say who should then pay. The landlord will just give you notice, specify the cope and the nature of repair.

The committee is saying that you should not touch the security deposit or do not offset it from there but let it be borne by the tenant. So, why have you paid the security deposit if you are saying that the landlord should not even touch that deposit but you should pay as tenant? I think we would also be doing too much to the tenants.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Also, honourable members, I do not think we should sit here and administer the agreement - that do not touch this money, take it there.

MR AJEDRA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I would like to follow up from what my colleague has said. The standard practice is that when you hand over the premises to the tenant, there is prior inspection to make sure that all the electrical, plumbing and all other fixtures are actually in very good state. That presupposes there is a minimum standard to which the premise has been constructed.

Now there are instances where the premises may not be to the required standards and then you will have these issues of repairs coming in. I think the way it is put in the original Bill, is the correct way because before a tenant moves in, both parties have to inspect that property and have to agree that everything is working; now when it is  negligence or poor workmanship, that can be established.

Madam Chairperson, I can give you a typical example where the floor has cracked or the ceiling is sagging; surely that cannot be attributed to the tenant. That would be poor workmanship on the part of the landlord.

There are things that you can actually distinguish that yes, these are due to negligence or these are purely due to workmanship. Therefore, I think it has to be in such a way that we need to distinguish those things which the landlord would be responsible for. 

In the construction industry, the things that landlords will be responsible for are structural defects; wear and tear is expected on the fittings. You use the taps every day and therefore over a period of time, you will expect them to malfunction. That cannot be attributed to the tenant. That is the responsibility of the landlord.

There are those fittings, which would last for five years, and those – I am sorry to say - which come from China, will last for a year and therefore, you cannot say that it must be the responsibility of the tenant. That would be the responsibility of the landlord because if he had put the fittings that would last for five years, certainly that issue would not have arisen.

Therefore, there are those structure defects that the landlord must take responsibility for - wear and tear is expected and therefore, I think we have to draft the law and include that aspect of quality and also the structure defects which are really the prime responsibility of the land lord.

If a tile is lifting off the floor, surely that cannot be the responsibility of the tenant but the landlord. I have had similar examples where I have had to rip the entire floor at the expense of the landlord because the landlord did not use the appropriate adhesive or it was not properly done.

Therefore, I would like to propose that we need to distinguish between those things which the tenant has to do. It has to do with negligence, wear and tear which is expected but structural things must be responsibility of the land lord.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, you know under the Landlord and Tenants’ Law, there are particular obligations for the landlord and particular obligations for the tenants; so, let us not engineer them.

MR KAFEERO: Madam Chairperson, with your guidance not to engage into micro management of what is in the agreement, I withdraw the amendments on clause 8 and we maintain what is in the Bill.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 8 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 8, agreed to.

Clause 9, agreed to

Clause 10

MR KAFEERO: Madam Chairperson, in clause 10, the committee proposes to delete sub clause 2 and the justification is that the sub clause is redundant since payment of rental tax is the responsibility of the landlord.

MS AMONGI: Madam Chairperson, sub clause 2 is an exception in circumstances where for example, the landlord is in Dubai and the Uganda Revenue Authority (URA) comes and wants to close the building because of tax, the tenant then decides to pay the tax since his business is housed in that building and when the landlord comes, he refunds the money. That is what the provision is saying and I object to the deletion of the provision.

MR KAKOOZA: I am in agreement with the minister because most times when you pay money in advance to the landlords, they do not care. This is now the interest of the person who is in the house.

When you take the money, the tax collector comes in like for rentals, the landlord will say I do not care. Therefore, the best way to do it to protect the tenant in the house will be if he gets his receipts from URA. It is in the same spirit as clauses 8 and 9. You can even offset the charge fee in advance. 

MR KAFEERO: Madam Chairperson, with the clarification by the minister, I withdraw the committee proposal and maintain what is in the Bill.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 10 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 10, agreed to.

MR KAFEERO: Madam Chairperson, the committee proposes to delete clause 11. The justification is that the clause restricts freedom of contract of the parties. In addition, sub clause (2) will hamper lawyers from securing legal fees for preparation of tenancy agreements.

THE CHAIRPERSON: What clause 11 is saying is that you are not allowed to make provisions that modify this Act in your tenancy and you cannot say that you are not interested in the Landlord and Tenants’ Law because the tenancy is made under this law. Therefore, you cannot say that this law does not apply in some aspects of what we are doing.

MR KAFEERO: With the guidance of the Chairperson, I would like to withdraw this committee proposal and maintain what is in the Bill.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 11 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 11, agreed to.

Clause 12, agreed to.

Clause 13

ENG. KAFEERO: In clause 13, we propose to:
(a) Insert a new paragraph immediately after paragraph (f) to read as follows -
"(g) all utility charges in common user areas."

The justification is to ensure that utilities in common user areas are paid by a landlord to minimise conflict among the tenants.

(b) Amend clause 13 by renumbering it as sub clause (1) and introducing a new sub clause as follows -
"(2) notwithstanding sub section (1), the landlord shall not be liable where -
(a) 	tenants who share common premises agree to collect and pay utility supplies as invoiced by a utility supplier or 
(b) 	he or she mutually agrees with a tenant to make any alterations to the premises to meet the tenant's specific requirement in relation to the premises under occupancy.

The justification is to allow for flexibility in the law as long as the parties have mutually agreed and also to cater for situations where a tenant may require some specifications to be made to the premises beyond what is provided by the landlord.

MR NSEREKO: Madam Chairperson and honourable members, regarding utilities, I would like you to interest yourselves in these commercial buildings now. You realise that when you go downtown, landlords are overcharging people on electricity. 

The different shops are not given particular meters and what happens – I recently went down to one of the buildings called Qualicel, we interested ourselves in the electricity bill alone. We realised that the landlord charges every shop Shs 200,000 for having four lights. The reality in downtown now is that they charge people for every light put up. 

We realised that the landlord was collecting over Shs 86 million in form of power tariffs, yet the actual bill paid to Umeme was only Shs 12 million. This has been used as another source of revenue. 

We are trying to cure the defects that are there right now in downtown using this law. Every single tenant must have their own meter mainly for power. In this regard, I do not know how we are going to fix it in so that we protect these people. 

The second thing is that they are meant to pay for toilet facilities as well as water bills. Those are also put on top of what they use. How do you calculate the water bill that an individual uses on a public building? This is the reality we are facing and these are some of the things we ought to cure using the law. 

Now that it has come to utilities, let us look at the commercial buildings. We are now partly looking at residential buildings. With residential buildings, it is so sure that everyone pays for their bill; when you have a meter, you pay for it. 

Can we shift to the commercial buildings? The reality is the landlords have a mentality or are right now using a certain trick that I have disclosed to you. That is the reality; even if we had a public hearing of people to disclose this. 

As regards toilets, someone must pay Shs 500 every time they go to the toilet in every building. That has also become a business. In the public facilities hallways, they do not even put lights for them. At least, this has been cured here for the common area where you see the hallways but if we made a tour downtown, you would really see that it is unsustainable. Therefore, how do we protect them? That is what we seek from the minister. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: I would like clarification about the common user areas because I was thinking about the stairs which everybody uses to walk. There are no metres there. 

MR AJEDRA: Thank you, Chairperson. I would like to supplement what hon. Nsereko has said. I think part of the problem really goes to KCCA and those who approve plans. Where there are multiple tenants, the expectation is there will be a metre for Umeme for each unit; whether there are three or four people in that shop. They will know how to handle it. That will be referred to as a common bill. 

Therefore, the expectation is that each unit will have a Umeme metre, which will generate – if it is prepaid, then, they will have to collect money and pay for it. Alternatively, if it is receipted, the receipt will come to that unit and that – (Interjections) - I am saying that in case there is a prepaid metre, it is easy because all those who are in that particular shop will be able to contribute equally to pay for the prepaid meter. That is very easy. 

Water is in the toilet facilities, which are common facilities for those in that building. The expectation is that the metre, which feeds the toilets and washrooms, will be common to everybody in that building. In that case, National Water and Sewerage Corporation will generate a bill and that bill will be brought to that particular unit, where people are. Then, they will be able to share it. That is the easiest way to address it. 

Therefore, let us now see how we can capture that in the Bill so that we do not have so much involvement of the landlord. The expectation is that if you rent premises, the bills are for the tenant not really the responsibility of the landlord.  

THE CHAIRPERSON: Clause 13(b) reads, “all charges in respect of supply or use of electricity, gas or oil by the tenant at the premise that are not separately metered…” if they are metered, it is the tenants to pay but if not, then it is the landlord’s responsibility. This is what the law says here. This is the proposal from the Member. 

MR AJEDRA: That is true but I think it goes back to what my colleague said - standards. If you do not have a common standard, you are going to face that problem. That is why I am saying that part of the problem is actually created by KCCA. Where you expect common facilities, there will be one meter and the bill will be generated. You will not have a prepaid meter for it but instead generate a receipt and the bill on the receipt will then be shared equally among the tenants. 

However, where you have a common area, which has to be lit, that is the responsibility of the landlord. I think there has to be that distinction between a common facility and exclusive units of the tenants. 

MR KASULE: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I think we should read the headnotes and then we shall make the clearance therein. Clause 12 reads, “Utility charges for which the tenant is liable.” and clause 13 reads, “Utility charges for which the landlord is liable.” Let us first consider the one where the tenant is liable – 

THE CHAIRPERSON: We have already passed that one. 

MR KASULE: Then, let us look at the one where the landlord is liable. We probably need to create an exception that, “where they are not metered, then there must be an agreement between the tenant and the landlord of common user facilities.” If the law says so, then we should go with that.

MR KAHIMA: Madam Chairperson, I think hon. Nsereko raised a pertinent issue, especially on areas where tenants share the common facility and we need to protect them. Like he has stated, the landlords have got a habit of using the other common facility to levy an extra charge. I think that we should insert it in our law that the bills for those common facilities should be shared between the landlords and the committee constituted by the tenants such that the tenants pay exact bills other than paying exaggerated bills. For example, hon. Nsereko has indicated that in all circumstances, he has highlighted a building where a tenant was charging Shs 86 million when the actual bill was Shs 12 million.

We must make it very specific that the bill should be shared between the landlord and tenants so that the tenants pay the exact amount. 

MR NSEREKO: Madam Chairperson, that is why I did not want this debate to arise. I wanted to move that every tenant, who holds a tenancy agreement shall be accorded a metre for power tariffs, gas and where reasonably possible for water. That would cure everything because I have given an example that we have discussed here and we brought both bills; the official bill from Umeme and what the people were paying. When you realise, over a thousand arcades and common user facilities that we have commercially in the city is what is prevailing. 

If you issue a tenancy agreement for every person, you can accord them a specific metre for prepaid and then they can foot their bills. If we add that even if these clauses remain as they were, it would be amazing. 

MR KAFEERO: Madam Chairperson, when the tenants appeared before the committee, they expressed their views. One of the main sources of conflict was who takes care of utilities in the common user areas like corridors and staircases. That is the spirit of our proposal to insert paragraph (g) to say that the landlord will take care of the common user areas. 

However, our proposal in clause 2 takes care of what hon. Nsereko has just said. Kampala City Traders Association told us that one of the landlords charged them Shs 3,000 for a unit of power where Umeme charges only Shs 800. In light of the above, they suggested that in some cases, they should be allowed to pay direct to the suppliers. For example, if they bring a power bill of Shs 1 million and they should pay direct to Umeme instead of paying through the landlord, who will exaggerate the bill. That is the spirit of the second proposal where we say, tenants who share common premises can agree to pay direct to the suppliers and in that regard, the landlord would not be responsible. 

MR NSEREKO: Mr Chairman, there is no way – unless you are the client to Umeme. In this case, the only client to Umeme is the landlord. The only way you can become a client to Umeme is when you are accorded a prepaid metre. I agree with the committee chairperson but unless we legislate that every tenant shall be accorded a metre on the basis of which they shall pay their utilities and bills, there is no way Umeme will accord the tenant a client number.

MR KAFEERO: Madam Chairperson, I agree with hon. Nsereko in principle and that is only if the suppliers of the metres, for example, will be able to do so. This is because even now where we have all gone to Yaka, they cannot sustain it everywhere. If you go there, they will say, “We do not have the metres right now.”

THE CHAIRPERSON: I think what hon. Nsereko said is that landlords should be obliged to facilitate metres for each tenant.

MR AJEDRA: Madam Chairperson, to cure this problem, I had said that where you have multiple units for rentals, particularly in these arcades, let us legislate that each unit will have a prepaid metre. The landlord will apply for the metres on behalf of the tenants in that unit. Umeme will come and install the metres and it will be up to the tenants to either be in darkness or load the metres. It is very easy for the tenants to say that “for each week, let each of us pay Shs 20,000”. When the power goes off, they must reload the metres. This will cure all the problems. 

For us to say that tenants pay the supplier directly – the bill will be in the name of the landlord. It cannot be in the name of the tenants because the metres are registered in the names of the landlords because tenants move in and out at any time.

What we need to do is to legislate and say that “every unit will have a prepaid metre” and that responsibility will go to the landlord so that when he is handing over that unit, it must have a prepaid metre. When it comes to the common areas, the bill will be in the name of the landlord and in that case, we will not need a prepaid metre. That bill must come in printed form and it will become easy for the tenants to say, “We are in this unit and this is our contribution for the common areas.” Otherwise, the same problem will persist.

MS BABA-DIRI: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I think it is very important for the utilities to be paid by the tenants. This is because there are some tenants who are very extravagant and use many electrical equipment and the bill becomes high. 

Who uses the common places such as corridors and toilets using these facilities? They are to facilitate the tenants so that they live in a good environment. Therefore, they should be paying for those toilet and corridor lights.

I agree that every unit should have prepaid metres for water and electricity. However, there are circumstances where you may have a big house and people are renting rooms and they have to pay for electricity. 

I can use my own experience; I have my house and there is only one meter but the tenants are in rooms. Therefore, even if the bill comes in my names, I will go to the tenants and say, “Here is the bill, it has come in my names. Can you agree on how to pay it?” They sit down and collect their money and pay on my behalf and it is working very well. 

If you push these utilities to the landlords, it will be too much for them. Please, let the tenants pay. If their own meters are to be put, well and good. If there is no way of putting different meters, let the tenants collect the money and pay. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, this is an area that we need to reflect on and see how it can be satisfactorily put together because I am still at a loss on how to handle the common user areas. If you put a meter on the stairs, what happens? 

MR AMORU: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I am interested in clause 13. I suggest that (a) is enriched; “…the installation costs and charges in respect of the initial connection to rented premises of any electricity, water, gas, sanitation and others.”  

Madam Chairperson, most landlords want to escape the initial costs of installing these meters, especially for commercial buildings. Like hon. Nsereko said, when discussing this, let us separate the two categories. There is tenancy for residential and for commercial premises. When you try to debate without separating those two, you might get mixed up because their experiences are different. 

When you come to business premises, the reason most of the units are not separately metered is because there is a huge initial cost of installing them and the landlords do not want to bear that cost.

If it is indicated in (a), it becomes a requirement. Failure to meet these initial connection costs for landlords would mean that you do not go ahead to abuse it later and charge people exorbitantly. You now bear the cost that comes with it.

THE CHAIRPERSON: The issue of the installation cost is here; the law is putting an obligation on the landlord to pay these initial costs in 13(a).

MR AMORU: Madam Chairperson, that is true but you will find that there are scenarios where they have not done it in all the units for two reasons. One, they will benefit when they come and charge Shs 200,000 or Shs 100,000 on each of the tenants towards the utility bills or they are cutting down on the cost of metering all the units within the business premise. 

It is a real cost to install all those meters in all the units in a commercial building. Therefore, they would rather put the lights, switches and sockets and only a few meters. The tenants will then bear the burden of dealing with estimated costs that are exorbitant from the landlord. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, as I said, I think this is an area we need to reflect on. In fact, as we were discussing, I remembered what hon. Otto said; that we should have separated residential from commercial. We may want to put some small sections to distinguish the commercial from the – We may have to. Move the House to resume.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

7.20
THE MINISTER OF LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (Ms Betty Amongi): Madam Chairperson, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the question is that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto.

(Question put and agreed to.)

The House resumed, the Speaker presiding. 

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

7.21
THE MINISTER OF LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (Ms Betty Amongi): Madam Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled, “The Landlord and Tenant Bill” and passed provisions 1, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11 and 12 with amendments. I beg to report.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

7.22
THE MINISTER OF LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (Ms Betty Amongi): Madam Speaker, I beg to move for the adoption of the report from the Committee of the whole House. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the question is that the report of the Committee of the whole House be adopted. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I suggest that we go and do some more reading so that on Tuesday, we are able to answer the questions that are lingering in our minds, especially in the area of the utilities and also whether we may need to create another section of residential vis-à-vis commercial.

7.23
MR MUHAMMAD NSEREKO (Independent, Kampala Central Division, Kampala): Madam Speaker, I have a suggestion that given the sensitivity of this Bill, we can even go back for further public hearings on the matter, with your indulgence. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, there was an opportunity. The committee advertised; they called for hearings. There is a very long list of people who came, especially from Kampala. You can consult this weekend and be ready on Tuesday.

The House is adjourned to Tuesday at 2.00 p.m. Thank you very much.

(The House rose at 7.23p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 25 June 2019 at 2.00p.m.) 

