

Tuesday, 17 June 2014

Parliament met at 2.27 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

ADMINISTRATION OF OATHS

The oaths were administered to Ms Brenda Nabukenya

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Congratulations. (Applause) It is my pleasure to receive you back to this House. You are the only member who has had the luck of taking oath twice in one Parliament and so, welcome. You know the rules and the games we do here; you know we represent this country at the highest level; we make laws for everybody in this country; we handle the interests of all the citizens of this country – you know that already and so, welcome again.

Again, to remind you, these are the Rules of Procedure which you will continue using and also the Constitution. Good luck and welcome. 

Yes, the Leader of the Opposition, do you have something to say?

2.36
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Phillip Wafula Oguttu): Thank you, Mr Speaker. You can see that I am very excited having welcomed our honourable member back to the House. I would also like to welcome the Members from the long recess. Welcome back. I hope that you have had enough rest. 

Hon. Nabukenya, you are welcome back. You have gone through the odds, you have been demeaned by some of our leaders saying you are a child and a girl. You were harassed and tear-gassed but God was on our side and we thank Him that you are here. I thank you very much –(Applause)– because you deserve to be in this House. You are one of our energetic and resourceful members of Parliament and we are glad that you are back.

Mr Speaker, I would like to take this opportunity to say something about one of our colleagues on the opposite side who was very active in Luwero – hon. Todwong. I know that he is a minister without portfolio but he was very active. We would like to know the role of this minister and his ministry; we would like to approve his budget in this House. We would like to get his policy statement so that we know exactly what he does. It is only fair that a minister of government must get his budget approved by this House. We have never seen that but we hope this time we shall have his budget presented to us for approval so that we know what exactly he does. 

Otherwise, I hope we are not going to court because there is no need to go to court; you were resoundingly defeated and you should accept that because it is the honourable thing to do.

Mr Speaker, thank you very much for the opportunity to welcome back hon. Nabukenya.

2.39
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Justine Kasule Lumumba): Thank you, Mr Speaker. On behalf of the NRM Parliamentary Caucus, I take this opportunity to congratulate hon. Nabukenya for having – (Applause) – got a second chance, which is rare – to take oath twice in the same term. And I advise her that if she was praying to thank God while standing or kneeling, she should instead lie down because that is a rare opportunity. (Laughter) 

I take this opportunity to inform the Leader of the Opposition that the Minister in charge of Mobilisation has his budget under the President’s Office. So the policy statement comes from the President’s Office. Therefore, you should wait and look at it.

When the Leader of the Opposition says that NRM should not go to court, I think he is overstepping his mandate – that is the work of court – to prove whether someone’s complaint is right or not. (Interjections) And yet at the end of it, hon. Nabukenya came here after winning a court petition, which we lost as a party. So, Mr Speaker –(Interruption)

MR SSEGGONA: Mr Speaker, I always restrain myself before I put my colleagues to order, especially hon. Lumumba, my friend. It is a fact that the first by-election was caused by a petition lodged by one of their own – Ms Nabatanzi Lugudde – and that is how hon. Nabukenya came to Parliament – after winning that by-election. At no time has the hon. Brenda Nabukenya ever lodged an election petition against anybody before coming here. 

By the Chief Whip speaking for the NRM Caucus, stating a fact which is not correct – that hon. Nabukenya is here because she went to court, is she in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, now you have your facts corrected. (Laughter)

MS KASULE LUMUMBA: Mr Speaker, hon. Brenda Nabukenya came to Parliament as a result of a court petition. 

I also want to take this opportunity to congratulate hon. Sam Kutesa for having scooped this big post for Uganda. And I want to encourage all Ugandans to look at this as a victory for us as a country and a continent and we should jubilate and get the maximum benefit out of it. (Applause)

Lastly, I welcome back colleagues from the long recess and I thank everybody who has been able to serve this country in the different areas wherever you have been. As we begin this session, I know that as politicians, we have several people warming up in our constituencies but we have this job to do for this session. So, we should balance our time to serve the country at this level and our constituencies. Thank you.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Hon. Members, I welcome you to this sitting after a very short recess; I would like to correct the Leader of the Opposition who said it was a long recess. I hope it gave you the opportunity to do your constituency work and also get a bit of rest. I hope that you are very ready to embark on serious parliamentary business as we draw towards the end of this Parliament.
As highlighted by the Speaker during the State of the Nation Address, Parliament, during the Third Session did put up a very good performance – better than the first and second sessions. I congratulate all of you upon this achievement. That achievement is, however, collective and all of us can boast about it. 

On critical analysis, however, you will find that it is specific committees which are responsible for that success and good performance. I challenge the other committees in this session to pull up their socks so that Parliament’s performance can be improved.

Hon. Members, I do not need to elaborate this; the work that was done by the last Parliament – you can point to certain committees that were able to deliver. That means all of us, as committees, should do the same.

Sectoral committees have not yet been constituted as expected; I am calling on the party whips to urgently constitute the sectoral committees. Without committees processing work, the Parliament business will be paralysed. 

My office is responsible for deploying Independent members of Parliament and I have been advised by the Clerk that only 20 Independent members have so far registered. I urge those who have not done so to urgently contact the Clerk’s office and do the needful.

Hon. Members, this is our second last session and going by the past experiences, it is an important session for handling business. And this is for very obvious reasons; the last session of a term of Parliament is not very productive as many Members will already be up and down in the countryside trying to solicit for another mandate. It is, therefore, paramount that all of us commit and dedicate ourselves to do our best during this particular session. 

I, therefore, call upon the Executive to submit, in a timely manner, all the parliamentary business that they require to be handled. The chairpersons and committee members must also concentrate and devote time to assignments given by Parliament. The whips also have a very important role to play in ensuring that business is coordinated and considered in a timely manner. I, therefore, call on all Members, in their various capacities to do their best so that we can fulfil our legislative, representative and oversight roles.

Hon. Members, this is my plea to you; I call on all of us to exhibit dedication, commitment, effective attendance, time management and resilience. Once again, I welcome you back and wish you a fruitful fourth session. Thank you for listening to me.

Hon. Members, as you can see on the order paper, for today, there is business that has been scheduled for two Bills to come – the Public-Private Partnership Bill, 2012 and the Public Finance Bill, 2012. The information I have, which I was given immediately after I authorised this order paper to be released, is that the two Bills will not be ready for handling today. So, we have received a report, which I hope by now has been uploaded on your electronic systems; the report of the select committee on salary anomalies in the Uganda public service. That report is ready. I hope by now it has been uploaded. 

So, I am using my authority under the rules to bring this matter for expeditious handling since the matter has already taken too long to be handled. So, that matter will be placed in place of the next item after my communication so that we can handle this properly and then we go to the motions and other business.

We also think that, if possible, this week, we should commence the general debate on the State of the National Address so that we get that out of the way and concentrate on the issues that will be taking most of our time and that is the budget. We do hope that committees will be very active this time so that we finish with the budgetary process that means all the committee reports should be concluded in time and have their recommendations adopted and also handle the financial Bills before the 31st of August. That is my hope.

Therefore, I encourage and urge you Members to use this time so that we do not have to extend the time provided for by the law; that is 31st of August. This year, we should be able to finish by that date. Thank you very much.

2.50
MR GILBERT OLANYA (Independent, Kilak County, Amuru): Mr Speaker, I rise on a matter of national importance concerning insecurity – looting, robberies and killings going on currently in the areas of Acholi and parts of Lango, mostly in the districts of Gulu, Kitgum, Amuru and Lira. 

We have a group of robbers who are moving around with guns. Their major target is boda-boda riders. We have lost over 15 boda-boda riders and over 150 motor cycles have been stolen at gun point. A case in point, which is very serious, happened on Saturday 14th of this month; Andrew Rwakikara, a lecturer from Gulu University, was gunned down as he entered his gate in the night. 

We had two business men who were shot dead in Kitgum at the beginning of this month. Currently, the security in the districts of Acholi is not good. In Gulu, people close up their houses by 8 p.m. Gulu Town used to be very active where people could move all night long. However, for the last one month, people close up their houses by 6 p.m. and by 8 p.m., you cannot find anybody moving on the streets. 

Mr Speaker, my prayer is for Government to take very serious steps to control the security in Acholi and Lango sub-regions. And it looks as if there are very many untrained people wielding guns in the districts of Acholi. Not only that, Government should also look very seriously on the welfare of the people handling guns. 

If you look at this critically, you will find that our UPDF privates are paid less than Shs 250,000; they are the least paid personnel. So, it is very risky for someone handling guns to get such a meagre payment. So, Government should find ways of motivating our skilled personnel. 

In addition, if you look at the so called security agents; there are so many young boys who are picked from the villages and trained as “Securicos” without proper skills. When they are fired from their jobs, they go home and are redundant. Government should find ways of helping such people because they may turn out violent and cause a lot of chaos. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, for purposes of the Hansard, what are securicos? 

MR OLANYA: Securicos are private guards –(Laughter)– we commonly refer to them as securicos. We also appeal to Government to take very serious steps towards removing illegal guns from the communities. 

At the moment, you can find the LC chairperson from the ruling party having a gun in his home. We do not know why Government is giving guns to such leaders. LC III chairpersons are not trained but just because he is an LC III chairperson from the ruling party, you find him moving with a gun and having a gun in his home; we have failed to understand –(Interjections)– we have clear evidence for that. 

Mr Speaker, I appeal to Government to take very serious steps so that our people are protected and their properties kept, more so the boda-boda riders who struggle to look for money. Their lives and properties should be well kept. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Any response from the government on this issue of insecurity?

2.56
THE MINISTER, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (GENERAL DUTIES) (Prof. Tarsis Kabwegyere): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the honourable member for the report on the situation of insecurity in the area. Certainly, we do not want any part of Uganda to be insecure and every effort will be made - the only thing I would like to do is to ask the honourable member to avoid imputation of motives when you do not know exactly what is going on. I think the information you have gathered is better presented into a security system so that we do not start criminalising people who may not be part of the problem. We need to put all our efforts together; your knowledge and that of all of us will help in solving that problem. But avoid making it a political question. (Interjections) Thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR WAFULA OGUTTU: Mr Speaker, what did the representative of Government say? This is a very serious matter, involving deaths; lives have been lost and it is a serious matter. The minister has not told us what Government is going to do about it. He is instead reprimanding a messenger. 

Mr Speaker, we demand that the minister or somebody else gives us some clearer explanation on this matter. 

MR SSEWUNGU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I think the honourable minister is not fair enough to himself. In most cases, he would stand and say, “I will deliver the message to the right person” If you are not sure that you can produce such information about what has been said, you reserve it for somebody else.

So, Mr Speaker, the honourable minister should be fair to himself and tell us that he will deliver the message to the right people other than bringing here politics. We are talking about lives of people –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What is the procedural point?

MR SSEWUNGU: I have already raised the procedural point –(Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What was it?

MR SSEWUNGU: That would it be okay – is he the right minister – so, I think – otherwise, the professor -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members and the honourable ministers, the matter raised by the honourable for Kilak County is indeed a serious matter. I was in Gulu over the weekend and these are serious issues and they should be taken as such. I did not want to respond now but when I go out, I will make some telephone calls to get some better responses rather than the ones that have been given by the minister. (Applause) I did not want to challenge it but certainly that subject has got to be treated seriously. It is a matter of great concern to the people in that area. There are even day light robberies taking place. So, the matter is serious, please.

MR SSEMUJJU: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. When matters of this nature are raised, ordinarily the Leader of Government Business takes note and assigns ministers. The procedural issue I am raising is: now that one minister has volunteered to give the answer, vague as it was, and yet as the Speaker, you have said that this matter should be addressed adequately, wouldn’t it be procedurally right to have the Leader of Government Business to make the undertaking before this Parliament as to when this matter will be attended to?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I was actually hoping that one of the members of the Frontbench would pick it up from what I have just said. (Laughter)

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Mr Speaker, I listened to you, Sir and I have listened to the presentations of other Members of this House. I do not have to repeat this because I am sure you know how concerned we are, as a Government, with the security of our people –(Interjections)– if a point of order could solve this matter, I would have no problem. (Laughter)

So, we have taken note and the solution is not in this House now; the solution is in the field from where we shall get the culprits. 

3.02
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR NORTHERN UGANDA (Ms Rebecca Amuge): Thank you, Mr Speaker. As you said, I agree with you that the matter is very serious and it has gone on for some time. But you may recall that some time back, it was so much in Lira until the Ministry of Internal Affairs and the Inspector General of Police took it up; the IGP pitched camp in Lira.

Recently, when it started in Gulu, the RDC in that district, Mr Lamwata, has been trying to move up and down and I can inform you that most of the policemen have gone into the villages to establish what is taking place.

However, I would like to inform the House that some arrests have taken place only that we also have information that these people are still within the district. But I also would like to request you, Mr Speaker, that since this has just come up, you allow us to do an undertaking on behalf of Government so that the Minister of Internal Affairs comes up with the right information.

Otherwise, I would like to inform you that something is being done. The security is up and Government is trying to see what can be done; Government has not kept quiet. Thank you.

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: Point of information, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You know that points of information and clarification have to be allowed by the Member holding the Floor and since it has not been allowed –

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: No, I am standing as the Shadow Minister for Internal Affairs. Mr Speaker and this House, the cardinal principle and function of Government is to protect people’s lives and property. There is no way a casual undertaking can be accepted by any Parliament from Government, on this matter. Even if it were to be a single Ugandan, it is a failure of a sitting government – it is a function and therefore, if a single Ugandan loses life, somebody out there must answer and to the government. For that matter, the Executive is ultimately responsible.

Therefore, this is not a matter we can simply wash away because, I mean, this is not happening only in Gulu; it is happening all over Uganda. There are many people dying casually. We live in a country where death of people is taken for granted as if life is not that precious. 

Therefore, Mr Speaker, I would like to appeal to this government to, for once, make a firm undertaking of protecting people’s lives. And when it comes to Northern Uganda, the matter becomes a little more solid because it is a region where people have suffered for the last 20 years. Therefore, I want to urge Government –(Interruption)

MR WADRI: Thank you, hon. Muwanga Kivumbi, for yielding the Floor. Whereas your passionate appeal is that the Executive should commit itself fully into addressing this problem, there is ripe information in the media to the effect that some of our colleagues in that part of the region are involved in the recruitment of rebels. So, I think it would be proper if we heard from them whether that issue of recruitment of rebels is part of the causes of the suffering of the people as far as insecurity is concerned. And that is what I would have expected from the Executive because members of the Executive and some MPs have had their names mentioned. This would be the time for us to hear from the horse’s mouth. Thank you.

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: Mr Speaker, our humble prayer is that this matter be given the concern it deserves and Government commits itself to coming back to the Floor of Parliament with a comprehensive statement on Tuesday next week –(Interjections)– what? I would propose Tuesday because the Minister of Internal Affairs is not here. [HON. MEMBERS: “He has come.”] Oh! He has come in. No, that is the state minister. I can understand why hon. Prof. Tarsis Kabwegyere has had issues – we know you are in a good mood but you cannot – he is in a good mood and therefore it is understandable for good reasons. 

Anyway, our serious note is that we need a serious undertaking by the Minister of Internal Affairs so that for once the people of Northern Uganda, and Gulu in particular, are given the hope they deserve. I beg to move. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Minister of State for Internal Affairs, matters have been raised about the security concerns in Gulu and other parts of that region. [HON. MEMBERS: “The whole country.”] The specific matter that was raised by the member for Kilak County relates to the issues in Gulu District and other places around that area – the attack on the bodo-boda riders, the killing of a university lecturer and several other incidents that have taken place in that region. Take interest and report to the House on Thursday at 2 O’clock on what is going on and what measures you have taken to deal with this situation.  Thank you. 

LAYING OF PAPERS

ADDENDUM TO SUPPLEMENTARY EXPENDITURE SCHEDULE NO. 2 FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2013/2014

3.08
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Mr Speaker and colleagues, I beg to lay on Table the addendum to supplementary expenditure schedule no.2 for financial year 2013/2014 budget. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. It stands committed to the appropriate committee for expeditious handling. Let the clerk extract it and forward it to the committee.

THE EQUAL OPPORTUNITIES COMMISSION ANNUAL REPORT ON THE STATE OF EQUAL OPPORTUNITIES IN UGANDA – 2010/2011

3.09
THE CHAIRMAN, COMMITTEE ON EQUAL OPPORTUNITIES (Mr Wilberforce Yaguma): Mr Speaker, I wish to lay on Table the annual report by the Equal Opportunities Commission on the state of equal opportunities in Uganda, for the period 2010/2011 to 2012/2013. I beg to lay on Table. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. It is referred to the Committee on Equal Opportunities to look through that report and brief the House on what has been reported.

REPORT OF THE SELECT COMMITTEE ON SALARY ANOMALIES IN THE UGANDA PUBLIC SERVICE

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the order paper was amended to allow this report to be presented today. This is a report of the select committee on salary anomalies in the Uganda public service. It arose from that report from the Committee on Public Service on the issue of delayed salaries and it was referred to a select committee.

MS OSEGGE: Mr Speaker, you had earlier on alluded to the fact that it is expected to be on our iPads. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It is there now, proceed.

3.11
MR RAPHEAL MAGYEZI (NRM, Igara County West, Bushenyi): Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on Table minutes of the meetings of the select committee on salary anomalies in the civil service, which have been held since the committee was constituted up to date. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture the minutes.

MR MAGYEZI: I beg to lay on Table a copy of the report of the committee; it has been uploaded on the iPads but I did not lay the hard copy on Table.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture the full text of the report. 

MR MAGYEZI: I beg to lay on Table appendices of the report, which we found to be important. They may not be on the iPads but they are available in hard copy; the report of the Committee on Public Service and Local Government, which formed the backbone of our investigations.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is already on the record.

MR MAGYEZI: I beg to lay on Table a copy of the special audit of the Government of Uganda salaries and wages report submitted by Price Water House Coopers to the office of Auditor-General in June 2012.

I beg to lay on Table the rest of the appendices including the submissions by a number of witnesses, whom we interviewed during our course of work. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. They form part of the report.

MR MAGYEZI: Mr Speaker, the sessional committee on public service and local government of this august House carried out investigations into salary and payroll anomalies in the Uganda public service and on 30 April 2014, this year, the committee presented the report on the Floor of Parliament. The report was debated and adopted. During the debate, Parliament in its wisdom decided to set up a select committee to review the recommendations contained in that report and to propose realistic and tangible recommendations for the way forward. I now present the report of that select committee.

Background

Over the years, the Government of Uganda has implemented various reforms aimed at improving public service management. In 1988, Government set up Public Service Review and Reorganisation Commission, which recommended various reforms including, among others:
    a) Pay reforms.
    b) Restructuring of government institutions.
    c) Payroll management and reorganisation.
    d) Pension review.
    e) Training and staff development.
    f) Performance management, reward and recognition.
    g) Review of the legal framework.

The most recent reforms have focused on systems and procedures including:
    a) Computerisation of human resource management under the Integrated Personnel and Payroll System (IPPS);
    b) Modernisation of records and archives management;
    c) Payment of salaries directly to bank accounts of individual employees;
    d) Contract agreements of senior managers;
    e) Result oriented management; and
    f) Capacity building under the Civil Service College.

In spite of all these initiatives, management of the Public Service, particularly, payroll management and salary payment continues to pose serious challenges to the country. These include, among others; 
    a) Non-payment of salaries
    b) Delayed payment of salaries
    c) Over-payment of salaries
    d) Under-payment of salaries
    e) Unexplained deletions from the payrolls
    f) Inclusion of ghost workers on the payroll. 

The above challenges have led to a demoralised public service work force, inefficiency, absenteeism, abscondment and desertion. 

In an attempt to address these challenges, there has been a shift from decentralised to centralised and back to decentralised system of managing the payroll and salary payments. In January 2014, Government introduced the decentralised Payroll Management System in a phased manner to address the challenges, which were persistent under the centralised payroll management system.

The phases were in January;
    a) Phase 1 (January 2014) - 27 Central Government ministries and agencies.
    b) Phase 2 (February 2014) - 37 Central Government ministries and agencies plus two districts.
    c) Phase 3 (March 2014) – eight agencies (five public universities, Police, Prisons and KCCA)
    d) Phase 4 (April 2014) – 37 Local Governments (34 districts and three municipalities)
    e) Phase 5 (May 2014)- 19 municipalities
    f) The last batch of 75 districts is expected to be covered in July 2014.

Under the decentralised arrangement, payroll management and salary payment is supposed to be the responsibility of the accounting officer of each Vote. This is envisaged to result in the triple objectives:
    a) Paying salaries on time;
    ii) Ensuring that salaries are paid on time;
    iii) Paying the right amount to the employees;
    iv) Elimination of ghosts;

Mr Speaker, as a committee, we were given the following terms of reference:
    1) We were required to review the recommendations contained in the report made by the Committee on Public Service and Local Government on salary anomalies in the civil service.
    2) We were required to propose realistic and tangible recommendations on the way forward.

In terms of our methodology, the committee proceeded as follows:

    1) We reviewed a number of documents. These included the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, the Local Governments Act, Public Service Standing Orders, Circular Standing Instructions and Treasury Memorandum.
    2) The report of the Committee on Public Service and Local Government on investigations into the salaries and payroll anomalies in Uganda formed the backbone of our investigation.

    3) We also reviewed the report of the special audit of the Government of Uganda on salaries and wages 2012 which was from the Office of the Auditor-General, a copy of which I have laid on Table.

    4) We received written submissions from various witnesses and we went through them.

The committee held meetings and discussions with a number of people: the Auditor-General and his technical staff, a number of chief administrative officers, their financial officers and human resource officers from the districts of Bushenyi, Kabale, Kasese, Lira, Mbarara, Tororo and Wakiso. These were districts identified in that report of the Committee on Public Service and Local Government.

We also had discussions with the permanent secretaries from the ministries of Internal Affairs, Health, Education and Sports, these being sector ministries with the biggest workforce.

We also had discussions with the PS and the staff from Public Service and Finance, Planning and Economic Development.

Thirdly, the committee carried out a comparative study visit to the neighbouring countries of Rwanda and Kenya where the problems of salary anomalies have been minimised. Mr Speaker, we found these visits absolutely required so as to enable the committee benefit from a comparative review of best practices within our region. The experiences shared in Rwanda and Kenya have assisted the committee in developing practical proposals to improve salaries and payroll management in our country.

Finally, the committee also made on spot site visits to the ministries of Public Service and Finance, Planning and Economic Development, specifically the data processing centres in those ministries.

Findings and observations
Mr Speaker, on capacity, we found that there was a challenge of capacity gaps and this is human resource capacity and capacity in terms of office equipment and connectivity.

With regard to human resource capacity gaps, the committee observed capacity gaps both in terms of competence and adequacy of staff at different levels of payroll data management.

At the Ministry of Public Service, the committee observed that the human resource personnel were indeed overwhelmed by the number of submissions made by various local governments for validation. Our on-spot visit revealed that only three staff in that ministry were designated to verify pay change reports of all teachers in the country while another three staff were responsible for handling submissions for traditional civil servants.

One staff was expected to handle, on average, 3,000 forms per day, which was humanly impossible. As a result, we found that there was a backlog of pay change reports dating as far back as 2010/2011.

The data entry clerks especially in the Ministry of Public Service were of varying competencies. Some were not properly trained while others lacked appointment letters and some had not been paid for several months.

We also noted that there were disparities in the remunerations of these clerks who were entering the data from the various local governments. We interviewed these clerks and found out that some of them who were on temporary terms and those who were diploma holders were actually paid more than the degree holders who have been there for more than six years. This was quite demoralising especially for those staff that have been under the establishment for so long.

The committee observed that at local government level, there was limited or no capacity to handle human resource management issues. Mr Speaker, on our visit to the Ministry of Public Service, we witnessed a number of officials from the local governments submitting forms for salary arrears of 2005 and 2006 and others with a lot of errors.

We witnessed some of them from Rubirizi, Mitooma and other districts and we established that there are only 46 out of 111 districts, which have qualified human resource officers. The human resource department of a district has between one and three staff to manage a work force of 3,000 to 5,000 staff.

In terms of office equipment and connectivity, the committee observed that there was an acute shortage of IT equipment such as computers, printers and photocopiers. In addition, most local governments lacked internet connectivity and reliable networks. This made communication between the centre and local governments extremely difficult.

District officials have to travel to Kampala to input their own data into the IPPS computers at the Ministry of Public Service. 

Mr Speaker, the above two capacity gaps have led to delays in submitting and processing pay change reports, preliminary pay rolls and other documents.

The second challenge, which we found was in the area of implementation of the payroll reforms. The committee noted that whereas the decentralisation of the payroll was appreciated as a good policy by most stakeholders and consistent with the policy of devolution, its implementation had a number of flaws. It was done hurriedly without adequate planning and indeed, members of staff were trained for half a day and they were told to start implementing within three days. The training of implementers was inadequate. 

There was no feedback mechanism especially between the centre and the sites; local governments and ministries, on errors and complaints raised.

There were no clearly laid out operational guidelines and coordination between especially the Ministry of Public Service and Ministry of Finance. Similarly, the implementation of the Integrated Personnel and Payroll System had been characterised by a number of challenges mainly associated with transition from managing the government payroll on the old system, which is called the legacy system at Uganda Computer Services now managing the payroll on to the IPPS.

The committee found out that in the process of changing from the old system; the legacy to the new system and the migration of employee data from the old system onto the new system resulted into massive errors leading to non-payment of salaries, delayed payment of salaries, over payment of salaries, under payment and unexplained deletion from the payrolls. This partly resulted in the existence of unknown employees called ghosts on the payroll.

I will give you the instance of the Chief Administrative Officer of Tororo who informed the committee about cases of unknown names, which appeared on the district payroll of Tororo with very strange salary scales. In Mbarara, the salaries of 50 staff were bounced due to invalid records as a result of errors in employee data. In Kasese, during the month of May, 52 workers with a wage worth Shs 31 million were discovered on the payroll when they were not bona fide employees of that district. These anomalies have persisted in spite of the complaints and mainly, it is because the data is entered manually.

The third challenge is the roll out of the IPPS itself and the IFMS to the various payroll processing sites. Mr Speaker, Government uses the Integrated Financial Management System which is called IFMS to process salary payments and it has now developed what is called the Integrated Personnel and Payroll System (IPPS) to process payrolls.

The IFMS was introduced in 2003 and to date it is operational in 115 sites or accounting votes of which 75 are ministries, departments and agencies of Government and 40 are local governments. 

The IPPS project was introduced in 2008 but to date, the system operates only one module, that is the payroll module, out of the nine modules procured. This represents only 11 percent of the procured functionality of that system. The system has been rolled out to 39 votes; that is 31 at the centre and only eight in local governments. 

Mr Speaker, the eight unutilised modules which we purchased and are available in our system but are not being used at the moment are; recruitment and selection, performance management, establishment control, training and development, succession and career development, time management, leave management and records management. In Uganda, it is only the model on payroll management that is currently functional.

Our study visit to Rwanda revealed that whereas Uganda and Rwanda started almost at the same time to implement IPPS, the Ministry of Public Service and Labour of Rwanda developed an in-house system and to date, they have rolled out all modules to all sites including all local governments. In addition, the IPPS in Rwanda interfaces with other national databases such as social security, national identity card, the central bank, finance (IFMS) and revenue authority. So they interface but ours is a stand-alone.

The strides made by the public service of Rwanda clearly indicate that Uganda could have put to use the full system within a much shorter period. This would have sorted out the current impasse in managing the payroll and salary payments.

The fourth challenge is the unpredictability of our wage bill. The committee found out that the total number of the current workforce in the public service of Uganda is not known by both Ministry of Public Service and Ministry of Finance. (Laughter) Even the sector ministries do not know the actual number of workers under their respective sectors. So, when we had a discussion with the ministry permanent secretaries’, we found that the Ministry of Health does not know the actual number of health workers in the country, the Ministry of Education and Sports does not know the actual number of teachers and the Ministry of Internal Affairs does not know the actual number of police officers. (Interjections) They only use estimate figures to budget for the wage bill.

As a result, hon. colleagues - and I would like you to listen to this one - some votes had wage bill surpluses while others are in deficit. The committee was informed that this was the reason some staff were unpaid; that is, their votes for the wage got exhausted before the end of the financial year and that is the reason we have endless requests for supplementary budget for wages. 

Surprisingly, some of these votes where there are salary arrears, the committee found out that some accounting officers have requested the Treasury to reallocate funds for wages to cover non wage items and I will give you two examples. The Ministry of Local Government, where at the moment, we are lacking substantive CAOs in a number of districts, requested to reallocate funds amounting to Shs 700 million meant for wages to finance rent and Commonwealth conference debts. This is on the letter head of Ref ADM/348/349/01 dated May 13 2014. 

The Uganda Police Headquarters where we found a lot of complaints of failure to pay salary to their workers, requested to reallocate funds amounting to Shs 5.5 billion meant for wages to finance construction of a camp site at Bujagaali. This is on a letter head of Ref. FAP 25/131/01 dated May 6 2014. 

Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on Table a copy of the letter from the Acting Permanent Secretary of the Ministry of Local Government to the PS/ST dated 13 May 2014 requesting for reallocation of Shs 700 million for wages to cover the rent and debts of a Commonwealth conference. I beg to lay on Table.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

MR MAGYEZI: I beg to lay on Table a copy of the letter from the Under Secretary of Police, Mr Rogers Muhirwa to the PS/ST Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development dated 6 May 2014 requesting to reallocate Shs 5.5 billion meant to pay salaries of police officers to pay for construction of a campsite at Bujagali. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

MR MAGYEZI: Mr Speaker, the unpredictability of the wage bill for the Public Service of Uganda contrasts very sharply with the experiences of our neighbouring countries in the East African region we visited. For example, in Rwanda, the officers informed us that they could predict the wage bill of the country with a 5 percent margin of error over a period of 15 years and a 3 percent margin of error over a period of five years. In Kenya, the Public Service Commission can predict the wage bill of the country with a 5 percent margin of error for five years.

The fifth challenge we have identified is that of ghost workers. The committee observed that the inclusion of ghost employees on the payrolls was a reality in many institutions within the Public Service of Uganda. For example, in the Police force, the Under Secretary confirmed removal of up to 3,000 ghost employees from the payroll after an internal payroll cleaning exercise.

The special audit of the Government of Uganda Salaries and Wages of June 2012, carried out by the Auditor-General confirmed that there were duplicates on both the teachers’ payroll and traditional civil servants’ payroll. In addition, the payroll still had employees who were over 60 years of age contrary to the Public Service Standing Orders. 

For example, in the Ministry of Public Service itself and also custodian of these Standing Orders, there were four staff above 60 years. In the Ministry of Works and Transport, there were 10 staff above 60 years, in Uganda Police Force, there are 219 and in Tororo District Local Government, there were more than 10 staff above 60 years on the payroll.

The committee established that there were instances where more than one employee shared the same bank account number which is an indication of possible connivance by commercial banks with some civil servants. I will give you some examples; under bank code 13002, bank account number 205101 is shared by one Aliyinza Juliet of computer number E54210008514 and Ssensalire Godfrey of computer number E54210005881 - these are two different and distinct employees sharing the same bank account number. Similarly, under bank code 37001, bank account number 0825001879 was shared by one Kworekwa Moses of computer number E50694009223 and Rutahindwa Charles of computer number E50693017399.

Mr Speaker, the committee was also informed that there were cases of impersonation leading to these ghost workers where funds meant to pay salaries of some employees end up in wrong hands. For example, in Bushenyi, the salary of Kamusiime Annet a head teacher with a bank account in Stanbic Bank Bushenyi, was paid to another Kamusiime Annet an employee of Ministry of Public Service through a bank account in Centenary Bank in Kampala.

The committee found out that lack of biometric data for civil servants and vital national ID database and incompatibility or lack of linkage between the payroll system and the existing systems leads to poor identification of employees. This results in cases of duplicate names on the payroll, forgery and proliferation of ghosts. In Rwanda and Kenya, the existence of ghost workers has been greatly minimised due to the linkage between payroll data and biometric data from their national ID databases. 

The committee was informed that the office of the Auditor-General was carrying out a comprehensive national payroll verification and clean-up exercise. To-date, biometric data of 150,000 civil servants has been captured. This exercise will establish the total picture of the current workforce and irregularities on the payroll.

Peculiar Features of the Police Force

The committee observed that Uganda Police Force had special or peculiar features such as special force numbers, disciplinary measures, classification of their duty stations referred to as police districts, abrupt transfers and promotions. These need to be considered in the decentralisation process. 

Recommendations

In view of the above observations and having reviewed the recommendations of the Committee on Public Service and Local Government, the select committee hereby recommends the following:

1. Payment of Arrears

In order to ensure that all outstanding arrears are paid, the committee recommends that:
i)	All accounting officers should submit to the Ministry of Finance genuine lists of all arrears of their respective institutions by 30 June 2014.

ii) 	Ministry of Finance should ensure that all arrears are verified and paid not later than 30 July 2014.

iii)	The Minister for Finance, Planning and Economic Development should submit a status report on the payment of salary arrears to Parliament by 15 August 2014.

iv)	Accumulation of salary arrears must stop henceforth. Any accounting officer or head of department who causes accumulation of salary arrears must be penalised by the appointing authority.

2. Decentralisation of the Payroll

In order to ensure that decentralisation of the payroll is expedited without any further delay, the committee recommends that:

i)	Processing of the payroll and payment of salaries should be fully devolved to the accounting officers. For clarity, we mean that the owner of the payroll should be the accounting officer who will be held accountable for any payroll irregularities. 
ii)	The ministry responsible for public service should retain the responsibility of policy guidance, hosting the IPPS, monitoring the payroll, maintaining standards and implementing system security and controls. Honourable members, you will note that we are saying “The ministry responsible for public service”. I will later explain why.

3. Capacity Building

In order to ensure adequate capacity for successful implementation of the reforms, the committee recommends that:
i)	For all local governments lacking human resource officers, the Public Service Commission should centrally recruit at least one qualified and well trained human resource officer within the first quarter of FY 2014/2015.

ii)	Every Government institution should have a strong human resource department with adequate and qualified personnel to handle human resource related issues.

iii)	The ministry responsible for public service should procure IT equipment and ensure availability of connectivity for the human resource departments of all local governments, ministries and government agencies.

iv)	The Ministry of Finance should provide for adequate budgetary provisions for recruitment of human resource personnel and IT equipment within the financial year 2014/15.

4. Rollout of the IPPS and IFMS

To ensure successful implementation of the decentralised payment and payroll management system, the committee recommends the following:
i)	The ministry responsible for public service should ensure functionality of all IPPS modules within the first quarter of FY 2014/2015. We have talked to the technical officials of that ministry and they have assured us that this is possible.

ii)	Full rollout of IPPS to all sites within a period of one year. Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should provide the necessary resources for the full rollout in the financial year 2014/2015. The financial implication is estimated at Shs 23 billion.

iii)	Comprehensive training of all staff involved in payroll management.

iv)	Implementation of the interface between IPPS-IFMS by the 31 July 2014. We have talked to both the Ministry of Public Service and the Ministry of Finance and they have given us this assurance. This will enable automatic transfer of data without human intervention that has been causing delays and errors.
v)	Implementation of the interface between IPPS, IFMS and national databases such as the national ID, Uganda Revenue Authority taxpayers’ database and social security.

Members should note that the requirement of using Tax Identification Numbers (TINs) as biometric data in the IPPS should not be a hindrance to staff to access the payroll in the medium term.

5. Cleaning up the Payroll

In order to eliminate ghosts and other illegitimate salary payments, the committee recommends as follows:
i)	The Auditor-General should submit the 100 per cent cleaned up payroll to Parliament by 30 August 2014.

ii)	The ministry responsible for public service should adopt the cleaned up payroll database as verified by the Auditor-General as soon as it is availed by the Auditor-General.
iii)	The ministry responsible for public service should set up regional centres to capture the biometric data of all new entrants.

iv)	The Government should implement what we learned in Rwanda called “a pay as we see you” policy. This entails the following:
•	Payment of all employees should be based on their availability at work.
•	The accounting officers should put in place local mechanisms to ensure that this requirement is strictly adhered to; for example, supervisors at all levels should implement clock-in registers.
•	The Ministry of Finance should avail a statement on the status of payment of salaries of each institution to the respective accounting officers on a monthly basis. This is very important because currently, payments go directly to individual accounts so the accounting officers say they do not know who has and who has not been paid.
•	Accounting officers should equally give feedback on a monthly basis to all unit supervisors on payment of salaries of staff under their units.

6. Budgeting for the Wage Bill

In order to ensure predictability of the wage bill and to minimise the need for supplementary funding for salaries, the committee recommends that:
i) 	Budgeting for the wage bill should be strictly based on the approved staff ceilings across all government entities, not on employees in position.

ii) 	Budgeting for the national wage bill should take into account all anticipated promotions, salary increment and other remunerations of government employees expected during the year as provided in the Standing Orders.

iii) 	Ministry of Finance should desist from forwarding to Parliament supplementary expenditure requests for wages with effect from financial year 2014/15 and that henceforth, Parliament shall not approve supplementary budget requests for salaries. 

7. Enhancing Integrity in Public Service

In order to promote accountability, transparency and integrity in payroll management, payment of salaries and general management of the public service, the committee recommends the following:

i) 	Strict enforcement and adherence to the laws, Public Service Standing Orders, Public Service Code of Conduct, rules and regulations. The Head of Public Service should submit a biannual report to Parliament detailing the disciplinary measures taken on specific cases of non-adherence to the Public Service Standing Orders and applicable laws. 

ii) 	There should be an annual audit of the payroll by the Auditor-General and the report should be presented to Parliament by the 30thof August every year. 

iii) 	Identification of all overpaid staff by the accounting officers and recovery of all funds paid in excess of one’s mandatory pay.

iv) 	Statement from the Minister of Finance to Parliament by 15 August 2014 on the status of recovery and disciplinary action taken on those persons involved. We are talking of those who were over paid. The money should be recovered and disciplinary action should be taken. On 15th August or before that, the Minister of Finance should submit a report to this Parliament on the recoveries made and action taken. 

v) 	The Auditor-General should carry out a forensic investigation on the payroll to establish persons involved in the creation and perpetuation of ghosts and other anomalies on the payroll. 

vi) 	All persons involved in the creation and perpetuation of ghosts on the payroll should be dismissed with disgrace and prosecuted with a view of making good the loss. (Applause)

8. Peculiar Features of the Uganda Police Force 

In order to address the concerns of the Uganda Police Force, the committee recommends that the payroll system should be customised to meet the peculiar requirements of the force in terms of force numbers, police districts, disciplinary measures and transfers. 

9. Restructuring of Ministry of Public Service 

Mr Speaker, given the challenges noted by the sessional Committee on Public Service and Local Government and given the observations we as your select committee have made, and in view of the need to streamline the institutional framework for the successful implementation of these recommendations we have made here, the committee strongly recommends as follows:

i) 	The Ministry of Public Service should be restructured into a directorate under the Office of the President with highly technical experts to carry out the following functions:
    • Provide human resource management and policy guidelines;
    • Provide technical support to the implementing agencies;
    • Coordinate the service commissions;
    • Host the IPPS; and 
    • Develop and monitor the implementation of standards of service. 

The reasoning is given in the observations - the fact that we are decentralising and that we need to build institutional frameworks. 
ii) 	Establish regional service commissions at appropriate levels to replace the current district service commissions. This shall no doubt require a constitutional amendment of Article 198 because that is the article that establishes the district service commissions in each district. The committee regards this as absolutely necessary because of the following:
    • Inadequate capacity of the district service commissions;
    • Politicisation of recruitment, promotion and other human resource management functions by the district service commissions;
    • The need to remain consistent with the devolution principle at the appropriate levels. In other words, we are not against the principle of devolution but it should be at the appropriate levels. 
    • Cost efficiency for the human resource management and development function. 

At the moment, it is costly to maintain a district service commission for each district; the proposal is for appropriate levels. “Appropriate” does not mean the four traditional regions, but we are saying a cluster of districts in an appropriate regional setting can have one district or regional service commission to manage this function. 

In conclusion, human resource is the most important factor for the development of this country. The current challenges in the management of payroll and payment of salaries of civil servants have had a demoralising effect on the public service generally. The biggest losers are the people of Uganda who are denied quality service. The committee urges Parliament to adopt the recommendations of this report and government to implement them to the letter for the good of our country. 

The committee wishes to register its appreciation to the Rt Hon. Speaker for availing the necessary facilitation in time, which enabled us to do our work and enabled us to perform it to the end during the recess. We wish to thank Parliament for entrusting us with this responsibility. 

We also thank the witnesses for providing the necessary information. We thank our technical team in Parliament as well as the Auditor-General for their input and the staff of our embassies in Kigali and Nairobi for coordinating the study visits. We also thank the government officials of those two countries for accepting to share with our committee their experience. 

Special gratitude goes to the Committee on Public Service and Local Government for carrying out a good, detailed investigation whose recommendations were the basis of this report. As the chair of this committee, Mr Speaker, I wish to commend to you the members of the select committee, hon. Alum Santa, hon. Benjamin Cadet, hon. Jack Sabiiti, hon. Latif Ssebagala for the job well done, expeditiously with proficiency and a lot of patriotism. I beg to report. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I thank this select committee. 

Honourable members, you will recall that when the debate on the main report from the Committee on Public Service and Local Government was being debated and we were coming to a conclusion, there were issues that could not be resolved. It came to the wisdom of the presiding officer then to direct that this process should take place so that we find a way forward in terms of resolving this matter in a more comprehensive way. I am happy that this has happened and I want to thank the members of the select committee for the job. 

From listening to what the chairman has presented and from reading the report, they surely did a good job. Can I ask you, in a special way, to rise in your places and we recognise you properly – (Members rose_) -Not you, honourable members; I am asking members of the select committee to rise. Thank you. Can I now ask the members of the Committee on Public Service and Local Government to rise in their places also for recognition because they had done a really good job. (Applause) Thank you very much. 

Honourable members, you remember we had a very detailed and lengthy debate on the report of the Committee on Public Service and Local Government. Most of the issues were raised already. For the issues that could not be resolved because of their difficulty at that time, we agreed to create this select committee to help us process those other issues. This is because we could not resolve them then. I am glad that it has come out this way. 

Honourable members, we can now debate this, bearing in mind that we had already spoken on all the other issues related to the old report. We can now speak on the specific issues here and actually take an immediate decision on this matter so that we do not continue delaying this matter anymore, so that we move to implementation. Can we agree on the time for each one to contribute? – (Interjections) –  Okay, three minutes.

4.01
MR EMMANUEL DOMBO (NRM, Bunyole County East, Butaleja): Mr Speaker, I thank the members of the committee for the exemplary work they have done within a limited time because this is unprecedented in this Parliament. Credit must be given where it deserves. 

However, on a more serious note, what is happening at the Ministry of Public of Service and the Ministry of Finance is deliberate fraud. There is no way these recommendations are going to be implemented when the people who are doing this have not been taken in by the law. This is deliberate collusion. 

There have been many studies carried out. We have approved funds in this Parliament to ensure that people are trained to implement pay change reforms in order to integrate retirement with current service, so that when a person retires they automatically get onto the pension payroll. That is a system that was deliberately killed by the officials at the Ministry of Public Service.

People have been got robbing a lot of money but to date, nothing has happened. Apart from interdicting the PS and the accountants, I do not think much is happening. There was connivance with Cairo Bank. This fraud that has been mentioned in this report shows deliberate action done consciously. They are also going to deliberately do this to fail us as Parliament and ensure that our recommendations are not implemented if nothing has happened to the people who have done this.

If in the Police over 300 people were got as ghost workers, what happened to them? What happened to the person who was paying salaries to those ghosts? We have not made any recoveries. The Auditor-General has been conducting audits for so many years, has he ever come up with all these issues in the previous reports or have they been partially reported on? This is a fundamental issue that we must deal with. 

Whereas I may not directly support the recommendation that there should be no approval of supplementary payments for salaries, the issues that cause supplementary requests may be genuine and valid. There may be recruitment of new people along the way, for example; in which case, we cannot pass a resolution to say that Parliament will not approve supplementary requests if they are legitimate. 

However, how do we deal with the people who have been stealing this money? I do not want to imagine that the Front Bench is a beneficiary of the issues that have been happening, but they should demonstrate so by coming out strongly to condemn what has been happening. This is because they are the supervisors of these people who have been stealing this money.

Mr Speaker, we are talking about salaries of existing workers but do we know how much suffering pensioners are going through? We are talking about people who still have the ability to access the ministry, but go to the Ministry of Public and see how many people who diligently worked for this country have not been compensated for their services. (Member timed out.) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, your time is up. Honourable members, in the public gallery this afternoon we have the Tororo District chairperson, Mr Emmanuel Osuna, together with his district executive members. They are represented by the hon. Jacob Oboth Oboth, hon. Fox Odoi, hon. Sanjay Tanna, hon. Geoffrey Ekanya and hon. Sarah Opendi. They are here to observe the proceedings and I think they came at a good time when this debate is taking place. (Applause)

4.02
MS OLIVIA KABAALE (NRM, Woman Representative, Iganga): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also would like to thank the committee for a good job done. However, there are some areas where recommendations have not been made.

I do not know whether the committee, having travelled to Rwanda and Kenya, managed to visit the camp sites which cost the taxpayers Shs 5.5 billion, and whether there was any explanation for the transfer of police salaries to the camp sites. That is one of the issues I am concerned about.

Secondly, in the recommendations, the committee says that instead of having district service chairpersons, we should regionalize the system. However, I notice that this would bar the purpose of decentralisation. So, I would like to appeal to the committee to revisit that recommendation. This is because decentralisation means that people are served from near their centres.

I also wonder whether these two ministries do not have internal auditors. Why does the issue of ghost workers come up all the time? The committee should tell us, when they interacted with officials from these ministries, what was said about the excess money that was got from ghost workers? What happened to that money?

Another concern is that in paying people who are not qualified, those who are qualified were denied their rightful pay. So, what recommendation have you made for such?

Lastly, as I commend the committee I expected the Minister of Public Service, as promised, to bring here a report on why, recurrently, this ministry is has issues to do with ghost workers, underpayments and people being unnecessarily kicked off the payroll. Mr Speaker, I would like to appeal to you that in the process of responding, the responsible ministry handles that. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

4.05
MR GERALD KARUHANGA (Independent, Youth Representative, Western): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I also appreciate, highly, the efforts of the committee. The report is highly commendable because it is a wonderful report.

There is one particular recommendation on restructuring the Ministry of Public Service that I would like to comment on. Indeed, the bulk of salary and payroll management has been taken over by the Ministry of Finance. Since that bulk has been taken over, I want to very keenly support the committee that indeed this ministry should now be reduced to a directorate. This is because we have been suffering a huge cost of administration in this country and I am certain that if we reduce that whole ministry with its entire staff and the ghosts, we shall certainly have a smaller directorate. That would also be a lesson to other ministries that may not be necessarily doing their work properly. I know that might sound radical but I insist that this time round, parliamentarians, let us stand firm. 

Secondly, Mr Speaker, on the ghosts, there are those particular individuals that have been consistently involved in ensuring there are ghosts on the payroll. I would love to appeal to fellow colleagues that we should insist to see real, strong and heavy punishments for the individuals that have ensured the consistency of ghost workers on the payroll. On this, we must stand firm. 

We must get a clear report because many times we make wonderful reports and recommendations, Mr Speaker, but the implementation is almost zero. So, we must get a clear period as to when we get results, as to when we see heads roll and when we shall see people being punished for the wrongs they have been done. If all this can go to enhancing quick, fast and effective payments of public servants, certainly everybody should embrace it. (Member timed out.)

4.11
MR JACOB OBOTH (Independent, West Budama South, Tororo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. When this matter came up for debate, I posed a question as to whether Ministry of Public Service is still serving the public. One of the findings was that they do estimation of the employees. Anybody who estimates the number of his or her children is not worthy of being a parent. We cannot get to a point where the number of workers in this country is merely estimated. In every ministry, we have auditors, at local government there are auditors. Is it a ploy or a play? Is it a fraud or just a falsehood?

I know many civil servants who are suffering and I also know those who benefitting. It is very painful to get the revelation today that the workforce in this country is merely estimated. I hope the Members of Parliament are not estimated. I hope other things are not estimated when we have a fully-fledged ministry in charge of economic planning and a fully-fledged ministry in charge of public service. It is painful, to say the least.

Mr Speaker, the debate on whether to decentralise or centralise payroll management is overdue. The earlier this is done the better. You find a worker in Tororo, Ntungamo or Amuru having to travel to come to Kampala when there is a matter and they have not been paid a salary. I do not think the restructuring of the Ministry of Public Service would be an advantage. We have done a lot of restructuring. In 2004/2005, I sat on a committee doing restructuring in public service. -[Hon Member: How old were you?] - In 2005, I was old enough to sit on a committee. 

I think we need to identify the real problem and I think the committee was going in the right direction. If we cannot begin by knowing who the workers are, then whether you put a directorate or department - (Member timed out.)

4.11
MR BERNARD ATIKU (FDC, Ayivu County, Arua): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I join my colleagues in congratulating the committee for doing this work expeditiously.

While I was on my way here last evening, Mr Speaker, a teacher called me and from his tone, you could hear that the man was in tears. The question he asked was: “Hon. Atiku, what should we do because I have gone without salary for the last three months and my children have now been sent home; should I also go tomorrow and teach other people’s children? Don’t you think this is going to affect the quality of education in this country?” I had to park by the roadside because the whole issue was very traumatising. 

This report is genuine enough for the powers that be to swing into action. If in Rwanda and Kenya where these initiatives - the IFMS and IPPS - were introduced they are getting it correct, what has happened to Uganda? We have civil servants who are being paid by the taxpayers. We have ministers seated here to supervise the implementation of these initiatives that should help us.

On point 3.3 - the rollout of IPPS and IFMS to various payroll processing sites – it was noted that out of the nine procured, they have selectively and deliberately decided to operationalise just one. You can imagine, you cannot operate only one and get it correct when the other eight are not in action. For me, it is deliberate action. This report is straight to the point, and without operationalising the remaining eight we cannot get it correct.

Therefore, I would like to support the committee and add my voice to say that let us give whatever resources are required to ensure that this system that Government procured is used. We need to ensure that we know who our civil servant is, what he is entitled to and when this person is supposed to become a senior citizen to be able to earn his pension. (Member timed out.)

4.15
MS LUCY AJOK (UPC, Woman representative, Apac): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am here to support the motion. 

My district submitted to the committee problems that they had. Apac Hospital is in a bad physical state but also the staff have been so demoralised that they are nearly leaving there. My assistant District Health Officer has not been paid salaries to the tune of over Shs 4 million. A District Health Officer (DHO) runs the services in the district and if they are not paid, I think it is very serious. 

There are teachers in Apac who are not on the payroll. They are put on the payroll and then removed before they are paid and they are put back and before payment they are taken off. What is happening in the Ministry of public service?

I know of pensioners from Lira whose pension has been paid to somebody in Hoima. Somebody should take a stroll to the Ministry of Public service and see the old people who built this country suffering there trying to get their pension. Some of them have even ill health and they need that money for medication. 

This is theft. If it were not, when money is paid to the wrong person, it should come back and that money should be in the ministry; but if it does not come back, then it is theft. The rural districts are the ones suffering most, whether it is from public service or any other ministry, because the money gets stolen and it takes time for anybody to know. There are vouchers in those ministries claiming they have given services or done something in those districts, which is not true. 

What should really happen is that some of these people have to pay the price. We are all citizens with equal rights, so why should some people be denied these services? Why should some people be denied their rights? Education services in Apac are rotten. The first motivation for any public servant is the wages. (Member timed out.)

4.18
MR JACK WAMANGA-WAMAI (FDC, Mbale Municipality, Mbale): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the committee for the work well done and for unearthing all this rot in the Ministry of Public Service and in the Ministry of Finance. 

At times I keep wondering, and I have raised this issue on this Floor before, why we have two or three ministers in a ministry when they see all this rot happening. The people being cheated, especially the people who served this country diligently and have retired, travel long distances to come to the Ministry of Public Service. Mr Speaker, if you went to Ministry of Public Service, you would see people seated miserably, teachers who have travelled for ten hours from Arua, Budadiri, from everywhere, coming to look for a pension of Shs 30,000 and then they are not paid this little money.  

The money is being taken by greedy people and the ministers are looking on. They are supervising and handling those ministries. These people have no sympathy for the poor. At times, I keep wondering when Government will, for once, come up and apologise to the people of Uganda for cheating them for the services they have rendered to this nation. The Government has no sympathy at all for these people.

I keep wondering. You see young countries that have come up and you find only three percent mistakes in the payroll. You find a country like Kenya with only five percent mistakes but in Uganda, we have been singing that there is corruption but you do nothing and the payroll continues like that. People are being cheated and then you come on this Floor every time to ask for supplementaries. Because of the numbers, the supplementary is just given.

This government must have discipline in budgeting. Without discipline in budgeting, we shall continue with the same song every time. You can imagine one police officer from Isingiro appeared on the TV some time ago and he had gone without a salary for 15 years. Can you imagine, 15 years! The man had not been paid and you can imagine the money for the salary is being transferred to go and build a camp. Can you imagine this! So, what feelings does this government have for our people? 

As I talk, my people have not been paid their pension and they keep travelling to Ministry of Public Service and the ministers are here looking on and they pass them seated there. They have no feelings for these people. Many people in Mbale have not got their pension. What is Government doing about this? (Member timed out.)

4.22
MS KABAKUMBA MASIKO (NRM, Bujenje County, Masindi): Thank you very much, Rt Hon. Speaker. I want to thank the committee for the good work. 

Mr Speaker, Parliament is being dragged into the mess of payroll management, lack of payment to pensioners and the like. I have been in this Parliament for some time and these issues have kept on coming up now and again. I am wondering why Government up to today has not managed to clean up the payroll.

Mr Speaker, the PS/ST thought that decentralising the payroll is the solution. I want to assure you that this is not going to be the solution. I was in my constituency over the weekend and I met two interesting cases. In one, the teacher is on the payroll but she is not receiving her salary. She has an account in Barclays Bank but when she went to check as to why she was not being paid, she was informed that her salary is being sent to her account in Stanbic Bank. She has never opened or owned an account in Stanbic Bank and up to now, she has not received her money and yet it is being managed by the district.

In another case, a head teacher has the same number with another person - I do not know how that happened but he mentioned something to that effect – and his money is being paid to another person who is a teacher. You know that they have different grades and head teachers earn slightly more. So, the head teacher is stuck, he is not being paid and yet the payroll is being managed at the district level.

We are going to be told that it is a transition period but I do not think so. These are simply careless mistakes and they are deliberate. I say they are deliberate because the data in these computers is input by human beings. The committee did not go to that desk to trace who is creating these ghosts.

I support the view that we do not pass supplementary budgets for wages. It may be a contradiction because we are really punishing the innocent - the teachers and others - but who are we appropriating money to? We do not know the numbers; are you surprised? If we do not know the current workers, would you be surprised that we do not know the pensioners and that the pensioners are not being paid, yet the wrong pensioners are receiving this money?  (Member timed out.)

4.25
MRS ANNET OKWENYE (NRM, Woman Representative, Otuke): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for this opportunity. While listening to my colleagues lament about the rot in public service, I was really touched deep inside and I will not hesitate to add my voice to condemn the practice that is deliberate in that ministry.

There is a point the chairperson raised; he talked about pay as you see, and I think it is an interesting statement that he made and it is high time we actually took this up. As Government or as Ministry of Public Service, you need to pick that example from the chairperson and use it, that you pay the workers that you see and that you know and not those that are created for your convenience because you want to eat something.

The underutilisation of the IPPS is deliberate. It is deliberate that a public servant who is in charge of thousands of pensioners in this country can only decide to use one out of the eight modules that were created. Members, this is deliberate. They know that they cannot use the other seven because once implemented, it will catch up with them. So, the only thing they have to do is to isolate the seven and use only one for their benefit. This has to stop, Mr Minister; you are the supervisor of that ministry.

Mr Speaker, the chairperson mentioned that the Ministry of Public Service should actually be restructured and made a directorate under the Office of the President. This is a bit contradictory or rather interesting, actually. First of all, I do not know the rationale behind this. The chairperson needs to explain this to us. 

I know that it is because of the problems that are in the Ministry of Public Service that have not been solved over a very long time that you have come up with this. However, you need to give this House the rationale so that you convince us and we support you but it seems a very good idea. As I conclude – (Member timed out.)

4.28
MS JOVAH KAMATEEKA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mitooma): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also want to thank the committee for the good report and recommendations. 

It is indeed a shame that the Ministry of Public Service cannot clean up the payroll and it gets worse as the years go by. It is a shame that in this 21st Century, with computers and all that, we cannot clean up the payroll. However, we all know that with the computer, as hon. Kabakumba Masiko said, it is garbage in, garbage out. So, we should try and get those that are involved in feeding the computers with the ghosts.

It is a shame that our people out there are crying because they are not being paid their salaries and indeed, as someone said, they are being cheated because you work from the first day of the month to the 30th. You are rendering your services to Government on credit and you receive your pay at the end of the month as a right. As we deny these people their rights, we are denying their children the right to go to school and we are denying their families the right to food and wellbeing. 

One of the recommendations is that we should stop approving supplementaries. I think our concern should be that we should make sure that the Ministry of Public Service gives us the correct payroll rather than refuse to approve supplementaries and deny the rightful people their pay. 

I think that estimation could not be that bad. Estimation is necessary, but to what level? It should be minimal. We cannot completely do away with it but as in the case of our neighbours, three percent and five percent should be acceptable. Going beyond this, the individuals in the Ministry of Public Service should be held accountable but approval of supplementaries is necessary.

In the case of pensioners, I was travelling from Ibanda after the Women’s Day celebrations presided over by the First Lady just last week and there was an old man walking with his stick. He came running after the vehicle and he said, “Please, go and tell His Excellency the President that I have come here looking for my pension and it is not there -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Did you say an old man walking with a stick was running after the bus? (Laughter)

MS KAMATEEKA: He was doing both. He was walking but because of need, he was driven to run – (Interjections) – Yes! He said, “Go tell the President that I have been here several times but my money is not there and I have no money to transport me back.” (Member timed out.)

4.32
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (PRIMARY HEALTHCARE) (Ms Sarah Opendi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the wonderful report. I would also like to inform Members who may not have been here that Tororo was mentioned in the report for being transparent and providing useful information to the committee.

We have had various reforms and I am only surprised that despite the various reforms that have been undertaken, the situation of these ghosts has moved from worse to worst. We have had ghost public servants, ghost pensioners- we have had ghosts receiving gratuity and the actual people not receiving. Of course, there is a racket within the government system that we actually need to get to and take action against. It is not the entire government but just some individuals within who are trying to do this.

The chairperson of the committee did indicate in his report that the local governments have been submitting arrears and some arrears date as far back as 2005/2006. Even these submissions that are being made are with errors. In the report, it is also indicated very clearly that only 46 of the 112 districts had qualified human resource officers and I wonder; with 46 districts having qualified human resource officers –

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Mr Speaker, I stand on a point of order. We are discussing serious issues concerning the Ministry of Public Service; is it in order for the Minister of State for Public Service, who should be seated here very attentively listening to the Members discussing the issues, to walk out? Is she in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, first of all, the substantive minister responsible for the sector is here. Secondly, Members do not give me reasons as to why they want to step out. I cannot predict why, under these circumstances, a minister can still walk out –(Laughter)– so, I cannot rule her out of order.

MS OPENDI: Mr Speaker, I was talking about the report where only 46 districts out of the 112 are reported to have qualified human resource officers. It is a bit unfortunate that the list of these 46 was not presented but I think it is important that we prevail on these district local governments to ensure that there are qualified human resource officers. Even the current reforms like the IPPS and the decentralised system will not serve the purpose if we do not have qualified people in these positions.

Lastly, I want to talk about what was in the report about the Ministry of Health. The committee reported that the Ministry of Health does not know the number of health workers that it has. I want to inform the House that the health workers in this country are all registered with the councils; they either belong to the Allied Health Workers Council, the Nurses and Midwives Council or the Uganda Medical and Dental Practitioners Council –(Interjections)-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The honourable minister is protected. Please, finish your statement. Oh, I think that your time is up.

4.37
MR EDDIE KWIZERA (NRM, Bufumbira County East, Kisoro): Thank you very much, Rt Hon. Speaker. Honourable members, we want to make sure that when we are making substantive appointments, we expect substantive performance. You will recall that the one who is heading the Ministry of Public Service had issues with approval in the Appointments Committee. So, this is an indication that this august House had foreseen the problem.

How do we measure performance? Performance of ministries is measured from the output by the ministers. So, I am very disturbed to see that even with all these problems, it is Parliament and not Cabinet that has come up to say that there is a problem. Where is Cabinet in this, since a Cabinet minister is supposed to oversee the performance of the ministry? Also, if you do not have a substantive Permanent Secretary in the Ministry of Public Service for over two years, what do you expect?

Another thing is that they are now going to have institutional conflict - the Ministry of Finance is fighting with the Ministry of Public Service and now with the Ministry of Local Government. They are now going to apportion blame on the Ministry of Local Government because they have failed to pay. So, be prepared to have a worse situation because there is already a war between the Ministry of Public Service and the Ministry of Finance.

I get disappointed when the committee recommends that the Ministry of Public Service should be restructured and taken to the President’s Office. Will the President do everything? The one who heads public service is resident in the President’s Office. So it is erroneous for the committee to recommend that we take the Ministry of Public Service to the President’s Office when the Head of Public Service is in the President’s Office and all the permanent secretaries are appointed by the President, who knows what they are doing. However, the question is: do they make reports? If they do, are they read? 

We had the Public Service Sector Reform Programme, which has been running for 10 years and has now ended after spending more than US$ 100 million; have we benefited from it? The situation then is worse because the Public Service Sector Reform Programme then was recommending that we have a public planning function, which does not exist. In human resource, we have a planning function; when you do not know the people you are using, you do not know when they will retire. When you do not know when they retire, you cannot prepare for their pension. So hon. Kajura, as a minister, does not know how many people are going to retire in a given time. So they give poor information to the Minister to use for planning. That is another problem we have. 

When you look at these conflicts, what do we do? We would recommend that the people who have failed – the two senior ministers - be relieved of their duties. (Applause) That way, other people who are more energetic could come in, not those who retired long ago and are getting pension from somewhere else and they are here making other people suffer. 

I suggest that we come up with a recommendation to that effect because these ministers have not performed. Look at the mess we had regarding the public service pension and the current mess. Even we, in the NRM party, the biggest challenge is that we shall be fought by the people who are not being paid their salaries and pension. So, let us amend the recommendation and call for the sacking of those ministers. Thank you. (Applause)

4.39
MS EVELYN ANITE (NRM, Youth Representative, North): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Please allow me thank the committee for a job well done. 

The issue of public servants is touching because it is not only an issue of teachers but all civil servants. Each one of us here at least has a civil servant related to us, directly or indirectly.

Mr Speaker, last Friday I was in my constituency; as you all know, I represent eight districts of Northern Uganda, so I was in one of my constituency districts, Koboko. (Laughter) While there, there was an abrupt call made to civil servants to bring their academic papers for verification and they were only given one day for the entire exercise. So, it was the day for verification and also the closing day. 

Koboko is a district that borders DR Congo and South Sudan and so you can imagine, it was approaching a weekend and some civil servants may not have been in the district at that time but they were given one day for verification. These are people who have not been receiving their money but they were asked to rush there; it was from 10 O’clock to 5 O’clock. Very many of them were therefore left out of the verification exercise and I am sure that it will affect the payment of their salaries.

I have had to come to the Minister of State for Public Service with not only complaints from teachers but even from politicians; LC III chairpersons of three sub-counties, Koboko Town Council, Dranya Sub-County and Ludara Sub-County, have not been paid. When I brought it to the attention of the Minister of State for Public Service, she promised to look into the issue. That happened last year but up to today those people have not received any single shilling. As politicians, they are supposed to contribute towards burial expenses, church buildings and others but they cannot send their children to school anymore like the teachers.

Some teachers are saying that once they go without salary for three months and then it is paid, all that money is used up in clearing loans. This is because in the process, they would have gone to the banks and picked loans and since the interest rates are high, even if salaries are paid, civil servants end up with zero balance. So this is a very serious issue. 

I recommend an overhaul of the Ministry of Public Service and not just restructuring alone; it will not help. I can even propose a very radical measure of the Army taking over just like they are now set to take over NAADS. –(Interjection)– Yes, if you want me to say that, I can say it –(Member timed out.)

4.45
MR JAMES MBAHIMBA (NRM, Kasese Municipality, Kasese): Thank you, Mr Speaker. We are here making recommendations for reforms but something has crossed my mind: who will drive these reforms? It must be somebody vibrant and energetic. Sometimes we must be honest to ourselves. According to the report, we need somebody serious to run these affairs. Our health and age sometimes determine what we do; why don’t we be honest to ourselves?

I have wondering about the 3,000 ghost Police officers. Somebody sees them every day; there are management meetings in this sector and they are informed of this but what are they doing? Who has done this? Has he or she been reprimanded or taken to courts of law? We are just discussing 3,000 ghosts; so what? The files are before one officer – 3,000 to 5,000 per day. Is that practical? You are a minister, heading a sector and charged with a supervisory role and every week you must be holding management meetings and these continue appearing before you. We must be honest to ourselves and to the rest of Ugandans.

I come from Kasese and in 2013 we were hit by floods and the Kilembe Hospital nursing staff quarters were swept off. All our staff – about 80 of them - were affected. Their property was lost but after few months, they disappeared from the payroll; they had no property and they are not receiving salary. They depend on loans with exorbitant and prohibitive interest rates. Some of them have not even managed to take their children to school. We have officially written to the Ministry of Public Service and I have personally been there several times asking for a special arrangement for the Kilembe Hospital staff.

Mr Speaker, I have some recommendations. As also suggested by my colleague, it is time we informed Government to style up and the ministers responsible to take charge and be responsible for the errors that are being mentioned here. That is my simple comment. 





4.47
MS ROSEMARY NYAKIKONGORO (Independent, Woman Representative, Sheema): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the committee for bringing out these issues. 

We usually complain about corruption and all these issues surrounding the Ministry of Public Service. However, how are we going to fight corruption given the fact that people take months without being paid? 

Mr Speaker, I want to believe that the IPPS system was heavily bought. I believe that a lot of money was put into this system and up to now, this system has failed to rectify some of the challenges that we thought would save this country. At the end of the day, we blame Government for these issues and we pass the budget but who is responsible for failing that system in which Government injected a lot of money to solve the problem?

Look at the complaints here; why would someone who was recruited in July last year not be paid up to now? How do you expect that person to perform their duties and how do you expect them not to touch the money, particularly in the local governments where they say there is a lot of corruption, which is meant for service delivery? At the end of the day, we shout here that there is no service delivery at the grassroots but it is because we are not paying attention to the people who are supposed to be paid on time. So, Mr Speaker, I think there is a big problem –(Member timed out.)

4.49
MS RONAH NINSIIMA (Independent, Woman Representative, Kabale): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for this opportunity. I want to start by inquiring from the committee whether they also encountered people who have payslips but do not find their money in the bank. If they did not, I would like to give them one example: Twinomugisha Enoch, employee no. 437224, whose payslips come to the personnel’s office and indicate that his money goes on account no. 7020234564, Centenary Bank, Kabale Branch, but whenever he goes there, the statement indicates otherwise. 

Having heard what is happening in the Police and realising that salaries are diverted for other business transactions, isn’t it time for us to recommend that interest be charged for some of these anomalies? Some of these workers have loans in banks and they get charges on interest yet their salaries do not come on time. 

Mr Speaker, the revelation that about Shs 5.5 billion was diverted for construction of a campsite in Bujagali shows a lot about what happens in the security circles. I want to expound on this by giving you a scenario. Recently, when the President said that the Army officers will be involved in NAADS activities, a senior officer - I do not know his rank, but it was Mr Kulaigye - was interviewed by the media. He was asked why the Army should be involved in community projects. You see, in the Army there is this infamous slogan that order ya jeshi ni umoja. This means that a soldier gets one order and they know it has to be implemented. So he said that in the Army, they do not mind about the means they use but what they want is for the services to be delivered. 

This means that in the Army they suppress these people because they know that once they have been sent to do a certain assignment, that is it; they do not care what happens to them. He said, “In the Army, we do not talk about allowances like the civilians do.” So it is against that background that I think they could abuse the Shs 5.5 billion of Police officers and use it for the Bujagali Project. 

This brings me to the other concern; isn’t it high time we stepped up our effort to ensure that the plight of the security personnel in this country is improved and put penalties on those officers that abuse their rights –(Member timed out.)





4.52
MS JESCA ABABIKU (Independent, Woman Representative, Adjumani): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for this opportunity. I want to join the rest of the Members in thanking the select committee for the wonderful work. 

I am now three years old in Parliament –(Interjections)– I have already finished the first three but I have not concluded the fourth one. I started hearing about this mess from the time I joined Parliament. We have a fully-fledged Cabinet, we have commissioners and we have directors, therefore I do not see any justification for failure of this system. This is because we are paying people whom we have entrusted to handle our finances and do justice.  

Mr Speaker, as politicians, ours is to oversee the enforcement. We have the laws in place; how long does it take for one to trace the source of the ghost staff? There is a point at which people are enrolled? Is it worth a whole year just to trace that so and so is the one who recruited his brothers and sisters? I think we need to take measures and remove people from their positions. 

It is us who pay the taxes. After paying taxes, those whom we pay very highly are still the ones eating this money. We have commissioners and directors sitting in big offices - those in charge of the payroll. Mr Speaker, this is foolery to us as policy makers. We have been saying all this. What is Cabinet doing? What do you want us to do so that you can enforce the laws? 

A lot has to be questioned about the implementation of these reforms. We expected the Ministry of Public Service to come out with remedies on how to iron out this mess. What we heard on the Floor here is a reform, which was not properly planned for. So, what remedy has it provided? This is a reflection of how civil servants in our ministries plan to implement specific models through which they can eat our money. What did we achieve in rushing to have this reform? How can you handle the issue of payroll without handling the issue of recruitment and selection? Where do you begin? How did you get there?

Mr Speaker and honourable members, on the number of staff, if we do not know how many they are, why then should we budget for them? Why should we even approve their budget if we do not know the number of staff we have? (Member timed out.)

4.57
MR MEDARD SSEGGONA (DP, Busiro County East, Wakiso): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I think I should thank this committee out of courtesy because having listened to hon. Eddie Kwizera, my son, I think the committee left out a lot and I want to associate myself with hon. Kwizera in addition to what I am about to say.

Two, Mr Speaker, where is the culture of naming and shaming the corrupt in this country? This is a select committee and so it ought to have been more specific on the particular individuals that have led us into this mess. What we are dealing with is a cancer called corruption. This is corruption and nothing beyond corruption! It is incompetence and it is impunity that in Uganda people continue to do things the way they want and nothing happens to them.

Under Article 117 of our Constitution, it is stated that, “Ministers shall individually be accountable to the President for the administration of their ministries and collectively be responsible for any decision made by the Cabinet.” So, where is the role of the ministers in this? By the way, we should not be dealing or working with the civil servants. What business do we have with them? When we have an issue like this, we should be asking the responsible minister to explain to us. But it now appears that the ministers either don’t have the facts or were participants and they just kept quiet.

Why do we talk about re-organizing the ministry and taking it back to the President’s Office? A host of Articles in this Constitution places these ministries under the President. For example, he chooses the ministers, names and re-organizes his ministries the way he wants. If he wants more ministers, he comes to Parliament and we approve. So, what are we talking about? The principle is decentralization. The ministers are supposed to oversee but the corrupt are not named. So, what are we doing in this whole thing?

Mr Speaker, my view is that if we need to re-organize, we do so to all ministries. We cannot do this thing in piecemeal to the effect that wherever there is a problem in a ministry, it is placed under President’s Office as if it is the most effective in this country. We have seen examples where the President’s Office has been named in corruption scandals, incompetence and all sorts of vices. What is happening in KCCA that was placed under President’s Office?

Last time I heard the Inspector General of Police appeared before the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs and he said that no single police officer is unpaid. I just want to challenge any colleague – walk out of here; we have policemen and officers here at Parliament, ask them about their salaries. And these are the people we have entrusted our security with. It doesn’t surprise me that they keep shooting at people left, right and centre. I think the system is bad. We simply need to reorganize the recommendations moved by my colleague, hon. Raphael Magyezi, who this time I would like to thank for working with others to produce a report. (Laughter)

So, let us re-organize those resolutions and among others, we must see some people out. It must not stop at the ministers. We must name and shame the people involved in all this; we must see them out. I thank you.

5.01
MR JOSEPH SSEWUNGU (DP, Kalungu County West, Kalungu): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also would like to thank the committee. However, let me start by correcting the record; that the UDPF also has corrupt officials and there is a lot of theft in the UPDF. That is a fact because the Police and the UPDF always have identification numbers. One can never be a member of those forces without getting a number. That number trails all that you do.

Secondly, let me talk about education. When I had just joined Parliament, I raised a matter of national importance here about ghost workers where Government spent Shs 5.0 billion to investigate the mismanagement of UPE funds. But up to date, that report has never come out yet that investigation was to look at the mismanagement of funds given as capitation grants and ghost teachers. According to the information I got, Sembabule District was discovered to be having over 300 ghost teachers.

Yes, we may continue talking about these ministers but I would like to tell you that the problems of Uganda are not about these ministers. Are they given the mandate to play their role as they are supposed to? I know that there are powers sitting on some of these ministers. There are people in these ministries that have stolen money and this is a big racket that you cannot fight. It is a big racket and these people have no autonomy to fight those people. 

Let us look at the Government of the late Dr Milton Obote; I was a young man then and I know what the ministers were doing and what is happening now. As we talk, the Police have been given an extra Shs 80 billion to recruit police officers. You are giving them extra money when the others haven’t been paid salaries. While in the Public Accounts Committee, we look at all the reports from ministries and the main issue is understaffing. But how can they be talking about understaffing when there are ghost workers?

If I had the authority, Mr Speaker, and I don’t have it because we abolished corporal punishment, I would first cane some of those witnesses who come to the committee meeting to make them tell the truth. For example, how does someone say that they don’t know the number of teachers in Uganda and also that they don’t know the number of policemen in Uganda yet they are paying them? Such people need some bit of caning before they tell you the truth –(Laughter)– because this is information that is entered and it is on the basis of that they make policy statements –(Interjections)

MS KAMATEEKA: Thank you, Mr Speaker and thank you, hon. Member, for giving way. Is the honourable holding the Floor in order to misinform this House that the Uganda Police Force has been given Shs 80 billion while knowing very well that we need recruitment to run the forthcoming elections? Is the honourable member in order to feed this House on misinformation?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think what the Member said was that Shs 80 billion has been given for recruitment of more policemen but why give that money when the few who are there have not been paid? That was his concern and I think it is a legitimate concern, hon. Member.

MR SSEWUNGU: Mr Speaker, I know that if some Members here are not dozing, they are chewing some orbit while the budget is being read and she might want to find where her category is. (Laughter) Anyway, the issue of recruitment and failure to pay workers is not a simple something.

Mr Speaker, let me share this with you. In my village, we have witchdoctors but there are those who normally tell people that they have bad luck and ask them to bring money so that that bad luck is washed away. And in most cases, they will tell the victims to leave all the money and clothes with them and they will tell them that they have been cleansed. The witchdoctor later comes back and picks the money and everything else for their personal use. This money is rotating somewhere. Members of this House, I want to assure you that you might be playing with the same money that will fight you - whether you are on this side or the other side because you must ask where this money that people spend uselessly comes from. This is the type of money that is –(Member timed out.)

5.06
MS ANGELLINE OSEGGE (FDC, Woman Representative, Soroti): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. My gratitude to the committee for a good report; however, I have a number of questions to raise. The report points out the fact that there is low capacity in the Ministry of Public Service yet when you further read the report, you realize that there was a plan to update and upgrade workers in that ministry. Have we asked ourselves – and I know that to put down this programme some money was put away. Some money was expensed for this ministry to be able to secure this plan. Have we benefited from this plan?

We are losing money more than twice. We plan for something, use taxpayers’ money to do it but we don’t implement what we have planned yet we have spent money on it. Mr Speaker, we are talking of the lack of capacity in this ministry. It brings a question: what kind of graduates are we churning out in the country? It raises a question about our education system. Are we raising people with skills? I assume that in these positions we have graduates, we have diploma holders, all kinds of people who are supposed to be qualified. At the same time you have 46 human resource offices in all the 112 districts and yet we are talking of unemployment in Uganda. We have people who are qualified, they do not have jobs but we have offices that are not occupied - it is an irony! Can somebody answer why such a scenario can occur in the same country in the same ministry?

As far back as 1988, there was a recommendation for capacity building. How many years are they between 1988 to today when we are lamenting that the ministry has not done what they were recommended to do. I will support the recommendation that this ministry be disbanded. 

Mr Speaker, the development of a campsite by the Police. I want to assume that this programme was budgeted for and that it had its finances. I wonder how money that was meant for salaries can just be shifted to another programme; a development programme for that matter and yet there are policemen who are sitting without payment for 10 years or 15 years. How are we going to manage this?

I also know that it is the first time that we are hearing of excess money that was meant for wages being allocated somewhere else. Every budgeting time we say that there is a shortfall; there is no money for wages, where has the excess been going in the previous years before this select committee - (Member timed out.)

5.09
MS KEVINA TAAKA (FDC, Busia Municipality, Busia): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I stand here to second the recommendations of the committee. We are talking about salaries of civil servants. Government is the biggest employer and salary is paid to somebody for having performed a job he was given to do and it is his sweat. If somebody has done a job, you must pay him. I wonder why we normally sit here and say the Government is bringing a budget and there is always a vote for Public Service. How do they budget when they do not know what they are budgeting for? They do not know the employees that they have. That is very sad. 

I recommend that everybody who has arrears should be paid. One time when the Ministry of Finance was fighting with the Ministry of Local Government here on the Floor of this House - I think all workers of the ministries of Finance and Public Service should not be paid until all civil servants are paid in Uganda.

We are talking of capacity building, every year graduates come out of universities in this country and 85 percent of those graduates are not employed and yet in the Ministry of Public Service, they lack human resource. I do not know why they do not employ these people. And secondly –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, for the readers of the Hansard you said 85 percent. Would like to quote the source of your statistics?

MS TAAKA: Mr Speaker, I normally get these from the papers and from UBOS that 85 percent of our graduates are not employed and I do not see why the Ministry of Public Service does not employ these graduates. They are everywhere and mostly, they are the youth and they are on the streets. I think it is a deliberate move to include ghosts on the payroll so that they do not employ and so that they distribute the money among themselves, which money should have been used to employ other civil servants. That is why normally Government puts a ceiling and yet when you look at the doctor-patient ratio, it is very high. The teacher-pupil ratio is –(Member timed out.)

5.13
MS BETTY NAMBOOZE (DP, Mukono Municipality, Mukono): Thank you, Mr Speaker. You recognised people here when this report was laid before us but I want to humbly request you, Mr Speaker, that we thank hon. Eddie Kwizera, the person who raised this matter first before it went to the Local Government and Public Service Committee and before this select committee was formed by this House. It is such cases that bring a reasonable person to ask if we are really a Government. We cannot talk about service delivery when we do not pay the people who are supposed to carry on the work, to offer services to our people.
If we cannot pay our civil servants - and they are not many; they told us sometime back that we have a work force of about 300,000 people. If we do not have a system that can trace, identify and communicate with 300,000 people once every month, how can we tell Ugandans that we can identify and relate with the 35 million Ugandans in this country.

Mr Speaker, how come that money meant for salaries for policemen end up in construction of campsites? No wonder this afternoon we heard from Gulu that people are being gunned down. What else do you expect from an armed man who is not paid or how else can he survive apart from turning on the very people he is supposed to protect? How come that money meant for civil servants in the Local Government Ministry ended up in conferences? This is so absurd and I think it is time for names to be mentioned. Who are these people who authorised these diversions? I think this is the reason why this select committee was set up to do those particular things that the Local Government and Public Service Committee failed to do, and it is a bit sad that they were not able to dig deeper into this problem.

It seems that there is a plot to recentralise this country against the provisions of Article 176 of the Constitution of Uganda. That wherever we fail, there is a proposal that this ministry be disbanded; these powers should be called back from the districts to the centre. We called back the powers to appoint CAOs, we are now saying that districts can no longer even pay their people but do we equip these districts? The districts are operating without the necessary staff. Some districts like Serere only have eight percent of the required staff. We learnt during the review of decentralisation that districts on average are operating with about 30 percent of the required staff -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, can I make a proposal that we do the debates and not take a decision for the simple reason that very many Members still want to speak, and I need to give sufficient time to the Leader of the Opposition to comprehensively respond to these issues and the minister from the sector to speak, and possibly people from the Government side. 

The Leader of the Opposition will be making his response tomorrow so that he has sufficient time to respond to these issues in a comprehensive way, and the minister will also respond tomorrow after looking at what has been raised now. For now, we will continue with the general debate until we possibly close. 

5.18
MS SARAH NYIRABASHITSI (NRM, Woman Representative, Kisoro): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the report but I have some issues. From the report, I wanted to know what is going to happen in the short run to those that have not yet got their salaries and will continue not to get it. I want clarification especially on Kisoro District where staff in Kisoro Hospital are not getting their salaries. No staff is getting salaries in the whole town council. It is even interesting that the Chairman, LCIII of Kisoro Town Council was given a pay slip that he is an askari. He got the salary for only one month and now he gets the pay slip as an askari but does not get any payment of an askari. So, something needs to be rectified regarding that.

I want to inquire from the committee whether you visited the office where they submit the pay change reports because if you go to that office, you will find that they have pay change reports, which are heaped and which were submitted from the districts since last year. You will find that a personnel officer comes from the district and submits and out of the 10 batches that are submitted, they only work on one batch. I think that is where the anomalies come from. Either they do not have enough staff or they do it hurriedly and at the end of the day, they enter wrong information.

Mr Speaker, on the issue of recruitment of human resource officers, I think it is very important that the qualifications of these human resource officers are stipulated because anybody can get out of university and they go and give you that job. I think that is where we lack the capacity when they recruit these people.

Finally, I want to inquire, do we really have ghosts or are we removing the genuine workers? Thank you.

5.20
MR EPHRAIM BIRAARO (NRM, Buhweju County, Buhweju): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want also to thank the committee very much for the good job done. When the report was being made, some people who were across me were murmuring as to whether what was being read was really true. I want to affirm that it is very true. These things are happening and ghost workers do exist. In some places especially remote areas, we have workers on paper but not on the ground.

What happens is that we have got human resource officers who crave to be recruited and they are the ones who get involved in helping people to access the payroll. After three months, they withdraw either to go to private business or some other people’s businesses. This is what is happening and as leaders - MPs, councillors and chairmen - we should act as whistleblowers and initiate another investigating team to where this is happening.

Mr Speaker, we call these people thieves which in my view, is an understatement because someone who places ghost workers in the Police and other security forces is compromising the security of the country and our own security. He is more than a terrorist, more than a man-eater. I think we should get better words to describe such people.

Secondly, Mr Speaker, if someone places ghosts in health services, is his action not tantamount to killing patients? So, I think we should get better words that would describe these people so that when they come for trial, they face the right charges.

There is a case which is actually coming up. In my constituency, people are ringing me day and night; I do not know how they were recruited. These people are working on the ID project - I do not know what the magic is about sharing bank accounts - that their money that was sent from Government or the ministry to Buhweju strayed to a different account and that they are only able to access a portion of it to pay them piecemeal, and the rest of the money is deposited on an unknown account.

So, I think there is heavy collusion with the banks and this is where we call upon the committee or maybe Mr Speaker, to create another committee to go back and find the names because the moment we balkanise – the Ministry of Public Service, Finance - we are talking about ministries and the real perpetrators are simply relaxing because they are very happy that no one will be touched individually. We should go for individuals. 

The fact that Kazinda is in prison, I think we should go for names, we should go for people and punish them heavily because they are destroying our country, they are destroying our credibility, they are killing even our Government. I think they should be charged with a case higher than treason –(Member timed out.)

5.23
MS ANNE AURU (NRM, Woman Representative, Moyo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to appreciate the committee for the report and I am very happy that we are debating the salary issue today because as Members of Parliament, when we address rallies in our constituencies, we do not miss the questions on pension payment, salary arrears, the veterans’ scheme and salaries. The public’s perception of MPs is people who do not really care about the salaries of other people. So, it is my prayer that the recommendations given will be implemented and everything will be settled.

I have a question on the issue of the Bujagali site camp. Shillings 5.5 billion is a lot of money and I would like to know whether Bujagali site camp is a project of the Ministry of Internal Affairs and if it is, was it on their work plan? If not, these are the ways in which some of our monies get lost in this country. The Ministry of Internal Affairs - that is the Police - are fond of planning charges on people so a charge of attempted theft can even be placed in such a case. I think we really need serious answers to these questions.

Mr Speaker, on the committee’s recommendation to regionalise the Public Service Commission, it is not a bad idea but I do not think it will really serve any good purpose because where will the Members of these regional service commissions come from? They will come from the different districts and if we say that they have low capacity in the district service commissions - according to the report, they have low capacity; how about these regional people if they are also going to be picked from the different districts?

So for the purpose of benefitting the decentralisation policy, it should really remain at the district level but I would also want to propose that certain cadres should be centralised like in the Ministry of Health. There are places that do not attract certain levels of cadres so if they are centralised and they are deployed from the centre, I think all the parts of Uganda will receive services in those areas.

The committee gave us a report that Rwanda –(Member timed out.)

5.26
MR JOHN AMOS OKOT (NRM, Agago County, Agago): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the committee for the report that they have produced. To me, this report is better than the first report that was debated in previous times. Given what they have recommended, I support these recommendations except only one which appears on page 16; to form a directorate under the Office of the President. 

We already have a political wing in the Ministry of Public Service. We have to wake up and be proactive. All the people who are responsible under them should be put to task especially the corrupt. This is real corruption. You cannot just say that somebody is doing something because somebody is incompetent. It is about being incompetent – these are people who have learned and trained themselves on detecting fraud and masterminding fraudulent acts and we need to act on them. You should not push your responsibility to other persons but otherwise all that Members are talking about on overhauling the Public Service, I think we will be compelled to do it.

Mr Speaker, issues about regional governments – I have a concern about Clause 13 and I need guidance here. If I may be allowed to read it, “Regional governments shall commence on 1 July 2006.” Article 178 (3) indicated different sub-regions: Buganda, Bunyoro, Acholi, Lango and even went further by saying in the First Schedule and above all for them to form a regional assembly which can perform all these functions you are talking about. My question or guidance is that since that time mentioned in our Constitution, who is responsible in making these regional governments to perform and work? It is silent and people are running from one corner of the district or country to another one looking for their pension and many things. If these regional governments are working, most of these ‘Bazeeyi’ would not be dying. 

I want to raise issues about acting in positions. In Agago, almost all civil servants or public officers there are in acting positions –(Member timed out.)

5.29
MR MICHAEL MUKULA (NRM, Soroti Municipality, Soroti): Mr Speaker, I would like to associate myself with the report and say that it is very well submitted and written. However, there are two very key points in the recommendations that I thought needed to be reviewed if not put aside. The first is the recommendation to the effect that the District Service Commission should be disbanded. This could be seriously in variance with the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda. It will entail the amendment of the Constitution and a number of other infectious combinations in the Constitution that will need amendment.

The second one is on the recommendation to the effect that this ministry be anchored under the Office of the President. This will not work in my view because I sincerely believe that you cannot move one arm or sector of Government to another sector with a view of improvement. I personally think that the biggest problem with Government and particularly the civil service structure is evaluation. The evaluation of the civil service structure is not regularly carried out and will lead to inefficiency. It is important that you look at a country like Rwanda that has developed a very effective and efficient civil service structure because they carry out regular evaluation every year. There is no way that you can carry out and have performance evaluation even in your own private sector in the company, and there is nowhere you can be able to propel the civil service structure if regular evaluation is not carried out.

I was looking at the internet here on the reference from UBOS. The civil service structure is estimated to have had or having a total number of about 275,157 workers. Again, these are estimates. But how can we work on abstracts and estimates? This is not right. I think that it is important that we come up with a very comprehensive and effective way regularly attached to the recommendations that have been made to ensure that the civil service structure in this country and systems –(Member timed out.)

5.33
MS HARRIET NTABAZI (NRM, Woman Representative, Bundibugyo): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. I know that most of the issues have been mentioned by my colleagues but mine is to thank the committee and identify some of the recommendations which had been left out. 

On 30th April when they presented this report, a debate ensued and many issues arose. One of the contentious issues that came up was the hard-to-reach areas and I thought that a recommendation would be made but I have not seen any in the report yet there are many workers’ complaints that we receive from civil servants on the issue of hard-to-reach areas. 

Last week we were in Bukwo and the issue came up very seriously in Bukwo, Kween and Kapchorwa – leave alone Bundibugyo where I come from but the whole of Bukwo is really hard to reach, Kween is hard to reach; when you look at the roads whether in the town council or elsewhere, it is all hard to reach. But the workers within the town council gave a serious complaint – it is a hard to reach area, hard to stay and they said, “hard to enjoy”. So, leaving out a worker who is in Bukwo Town Council because he is in a town council, I think was really unfortunate. We brought out that issue and my colleague who are on the Committee on Government Assurances are here and we picked out that issue and we said that we are going to really support the Members of Parliament who come from Bukwo to look into the issues of workers in those hard to reach areas. This issue has not come up anywhere to reconsider or look into the issues of hard to reach areas.

The other one is, and although we are Members from the ruling party, we know that there are many things that our colleagues are doing wrongly and sometimes we do not want to talk but Minister for Public Service, you are really doing us a disservice. We must talk about this and expose you because this ministry was given to you as the prime minister because it is crosscutting to every sector. It was given to you as a prime minister and a prime minister is supposed to supervise other ministers but to really take us to this point of regretting and looking at you and we do not want to see you, is a problem! (Laughter) We want you to –(Member timed out.)      

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I have the list of the people who are supposed to speak and I am going to roll the list to tomorrow. I think that there are Members who will be speaking tomorrow, including the hon. Member for Dokolo. But for now, I am going to allow the Members for Budadiri West, Jinja Municipality East, Lira District, Workers, Member for Busia you have spoken and the Member for Kapchorwa will speak. Then the Member for Luuka will speak tomorrow – no, the Member for Moroto Municipality will speak tomorrow. 

5.37
MR NATHAN NANDALA-MAFABI (FDC, Budadiri County West, Sironko): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Today I was in Mbale town and a car almost knocked a certain gentleman. And the reason was because he had just come out of the Stanbic Bank ATM where he failed to find money on the account. This man was a teacher and was walking while throwing his hands in the air, saying his children had been sent away from school. He was lucky that I was around and as Chairman of the Bugisu Co-operative Union, I was able to come in and rescue the situation. (Applause) Nevertheless, there are many of that nature. 

Mr Speaker, the reason people steal is because they are not sure; that is why you see the current old men who were the original civil servants are very poor. So, the younger ones say to themselves, “I have seen that man suffering and I am not ready to suffer like him.” And that is why you find them eating away our roads, schools and services. Over the weekend, the chairman LCV of Kotido resigned because of salary. He said he had better things to do but because the teachers have nothing else to do, they cannot do much.

I want to agree with my sister from Bundibugyo; for you who are not aware, the Ministry of Public Service is headed by people who are retired officers. Hon. Mbaguta, who is the State Minister for Public Service is a retiree; she was working for that ministry which had already failed and she is now heading it, promoting incompetence. The Minister of Public Service, who is the First Deputy Prime Minister, is also a retiree. He worked up to the rank of a regional something and he is now heading the Public Service ministry.

Public service is a fast-moving and vibrant sector. I cannot compete with my son –(Interruption)

MRS SEZI: Mr Speaker, I have been listening carefully and I think hon. Nandala has no evidence at all that I was promoted with incompetence. If he has that evidence, he should table it. Is he in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, if you cannot substantiate what you have just said, you will be forced to withdraw the statement you made in relation to the Minister of State for Public Service.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have evidence that we would not be debating about the Ministry of Public Service now if she was competent. We must be honest and realistic and call a spade a spade; how can somebody leave an active payroll and instead of simply moving him to the pension payroll, you take years? And this minister is here looking at people suffering. 

Mr Speaker, this is very serious. Pensioners are suffering on the road and yet they left the public service payroll a year or two years ago but have not accessed the pension payroll. That is total incompetence. Mr Speaker, this speaks for itself; if –(Member timed out.)

5.41
MR PAUL MWIRU (FDC, Jinja Municipality East, Jinja): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to add my voice to that of my colleagues to thank the committee for the report. I will first raise the issue of how our children and brothers in the armed forces – I am of the considered opinion that we create a special place where these officers can go and report their complaints. I had the benefit of speaking to one police officer and he told me that from June to October last year, he missed salary. He was told to photocopy his statements and when he took them to their offices, he was told to forget about getting that money. So I asked him to give me his documents but I saw that he was afraid to give them to me. I suggest that the Ministry of Public Service should create an office where these officers can take their documents so that their matter is handled without necessarily being reprimanded by their bosses.

Secondly, Mr Speaker, I was in my constituency the time teachers were threatening to go on strike. I saw – I do not know whether it was the Ministry of Finance or that of Public Service that gave out cash to NOTU to go and clear teachers’ salary arrears. I went where they were registering from and I asked why they were getting cash and they told me it was payment for their arrears. I was surprised how NOTU had come into paying teachers hard cash. So, I think this should inform us that maybe some of these colleagues of ours –(Interruption)

MRS LUMUMBA: Mr Speaker, the issue at hand is of great importance and we all need to co-operate to find a solution. My suggestion is that the Member holding the Floor should mention the name of the minister because that will help us.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Proceed.

MR MWIRU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I do not know whether my good friend, hon. Lumumba, was listening attentively. I said that I was at Main Street Primary School – I did not say I saw a minister but rather that I saw a vehicle of NOTU where people carrying cash were paying teachers their salary arrears. That can be verified because I was there myself. That is why I was wondering because I saw the aspect of cash coming in, which was bringing a pointer –(Interjection)– She knows it that is why you are seeing the minister going to consult; she knows what they were doing. And actually I was wondering if these people had taken the teachers’ money and were only paying when the situation got worse. I think, hon. Minister, you need to clarify on that matter; where did that money come from, which they were paying people in cash? 

The other thing is that when it comes to the budgeting process, it is very clear that the Ministry of Public Service has a structure. But –(Member timed out.)

5.45
MS JOY ONGOM (Independent, Woman Representative, Lira): Mr Speaker, I want to thank the select committee for their good report and I want to associate myself with the recommendations they made.

Mr Speaker, the issue at hand is huge; when you talk of Public Service, we begin to imagine that some of these things are deliberate. We are talking of salary payment and I think it is a business or a form of deal because you will find that the medical staff are not paid for maybe two or three months. Then next time when they are paid, it is police staff that are not paid for another two or three months. And when they threaten to go on strike then they are paid. Then the next group to miss payment for another period of two or three months is the teachers. When they go on strike then they are paid. That is the routine. I wonder if they convert that money into a business venture and then it is returned after making interest. I do not know if that is the case and so, more investigations need to be carried out.

Mr Speaker, it is funny that since I joined Parliament – this is my fourth year in Parliament but the last two financial years have seen us approve supplementary budgets for the Police Force. I remember standing on this Floor and asking: Why do we approve a supplementary budget? Where is the emergency? Today you have heard that Eskom used up Shs 5 billion plus and the accounting officer of Police is asking the Ministry of Finance to go construct a camp. 

Mr Speaker, I have a neighbour who is a police officer; this man has gone without salary payment for over eight months now; he has 12 children –(Interjections)– they are not all his; some are orphans he takes care of. When I talk of 12, others would not keep 12; but the man is desperate. And the accounting officer of the Police wants to construct a camp; something which is not even in their plan? 

There is a doctor in Mulago; he complained to me and said, “What are you, honourable members, doing? For the last eight months, I have not been paid my salary.” And when he refuses to work our people suffer. This is embarrassing. Ministry of Public Service, what are you doing? How are you helping this government? I think we have suffered enough. 

Mr Speaker, in a situation where two people share the same bank account – when I talk of a bank account, I know them. How can people with the same bank account have two different faces and one person benefits? It is embarrassing. The head teacher gets a payslip yet it is an officer in public service benefiting from the money. This is very serious. When you stand up to respond, let us know that particular officer and –(Member timed out.)

5.49
MS MARY NALUBEGA (Independent, Workers’ Representative): Thank you, Mr Speaker, and my commendations to the committee because this is my docket – for workers - but I would like to say that this has come very late. The workers of this country have suffered a lot. So, I would like to request you to come to our office as well as Workers’ representatives. We are in this House to represent workers and we have so many grievances in our office. 

Mr Speaker, workers of this country get meagre salaries and at the same time, they get their salaries very late. When I was young, I was told that when something happens once, it is an accident; a second time, it is a coincidence; and for the third time, it is a habit. So, what is happening to the workers of this country has become a habit. They have not been considered; they are treated as secondary citizens in this country. 

Hon. Members, we as workers’ representatives have had a cold war with the public service. Some of us represent the public service and the private sector. For us we say it is better to negotiate with the private sector because they know that workers are workers. But Government thinks workers are secondary in their priorities. For example, we have said that decentralising the payroll would be the most effective thing to do. And we have the public service negotiation machinery; why do you fear to negotiate? Do you fear that those unions will unearth the things which are happening in the public service? The machinery is in place, the population is in place, the tribunal is in place yet nothing is going on. The workers have a lot of problems and we are saying that make sure that the negotiating machinery is in place and ensure that the workers also get a negotiating procedure so that their problems are handled appropriately like in other institutions. 

Thirdly, restructuring has delayed since 1991 – what is public service doing? What are we supposed to do? Why are all these things taking so long? They retrench workers so that those who remain can benefit but the workers are suffering. So, Mr Speaker, let all the recommendations of the committee be considered so that the workers of this county do not suffer any more. Thank you. 

5.52
MS PHYLLIS CHEMUTAI (Independent, Woman Representative, Kapchorwa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the committee for the good work produced, their concerns are very true and the recommendations are very good. I have suffered a lot in taking teachers to the Public Service ministry to make corrections in their payments. Some of them miss out on payment; others have their names deleted from the payroll without reasons and so on. 

Recently, there was an exercise which was conducted by the Ministry of Public Service; this was a validation exercise. I happened to have been in Kapchorwa when they came. That validation exercise took only very short time. It was supposed to be a day’s exercise but they spent half a day. The following day they were supposed to be in Kween and the other day in Bukwo. This exercise needed more time. Even the people carrying out this exercise were young men. I wonder why the public service employed young people with little experience about the payroll systems; salary scales –(Interjections)– I made a follow up in the Ministry of Public Service because some of the people who missed out are still there and those who managed to come to me, I took them to public service. 

They told me that the organisation that undertook the exercise, Ernst & Young, were employed by public service but I wonder why public service could employ another company instead of using their staff that are well acquainted with the salaries of teachers and civil servants. So this is a big problem. 

I recommend, therefore, that next time when carrying out an exercise like this – it is a very good exercise, it helps to iron out all these problems but the people who carry out this exercise should come from the Ministry of Public Service and should be acquainted with the system of public service. Thank you very much. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, thank you very much for this debate. We have extended the time because the matter is important and urgent and affects service delivery in this country; when the people who are supposed to do these jobs are not paid and they complicate things. That is why we are concerned and that is why this debate has taken the time it deserves, and a permanent solution to this problem should be found. And this House and its Members should stop being a stop gap measure from concerned people to find solutions because we have no capacity as Members to deal with these things. There are institutions that should be doing this. 

Hon. Members, some of you have not been able to speak now you will make your contributions tomorrow. I have noted the Member for Bukwo, Member for Luuka, Member for Bubulo, Member for Youth National Female, Moroto Municipality, Dokolo, Tororo County, Ntenjeru lost his chance, and I now have Ajuri, Gulu District and Kaberamaido.

So those of you, whose names I have read should be punctual tomorrow so that we can start with you, we finish your debate so that we can conclude. 

Hon. Members, when the Minister of Finance was making her statement on the budget, she made a statement that I found very challenging. If I can paraphrase it because I do not remember it very well she said: “The ghosts are with us; they are our parents, they are our children, they are our friends, relatives and in-laws. So, the task of exorcising the ghosts rests with all of us.” That is what she said. So we need to take responsibility and make sure the pay roll is cleaned up and those who deserve to be paid are paid and those who don’t deserve to be paid are not paid.

Hon. Members, I have been asked to remind you that there was an invitation extended to many of you by the Archbishop of the Church of Uganda, the most Rev. His Grace, Stanley Ntagali, for a meeting at his place this evening. Please don’t forget. Make sure you attend because that is an invitation from the Archbishop.

Hon. Members, this House is adjourned to tomorrow at 2.00 O’clock.

(House rose at 5.58 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 18 June 2014 at 2.00 p.m.) 

