
PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA

Tuesday, 14 June 2022

Parliament met at 2.15 p.m. at Kololo Independence Grounds, Kampala.

The National Anthem

The East African Community Anthem

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Anita Among, in the Chair.)

The House was called to Order

PROCLAMATION BY THE RT HON. SPEAKER OF THE PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA

THE SPEAKER: “WHEREAS His Excellency the President has, under Article 101 (2) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, indicated to the Speaker his intention to address Parliament and the nation on the National Budget for the Financial Year 2022/2023;

AWARE that the Financial Year 2021/2022 will end on the 30th day of June 2022;
  
NOTING that it is important that the President addresses Parliament and the nation on the National Budget for the Financial Year 2022/2023;

NOW, THEREFORE, in exercise of the powers conferred upon the Speaker by Article 95(2) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda and Rule 17(1) of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament of Uganda, I hereby proclaim that: Parliament shall sit at Kololo Independence Grounds on Tuesday, 14 June 2022 at 1400 hours, to receive the address of His Excellency the President on the National Budget for the Financial Year 2022/2023; and the Kololo Independence Grounds to be the precincts of Parliament for the above mentioned purpose.
 
Given under my hand at Parliament House, Kampala, on the 27th day of May 2022.

Anita Annet Among
Speaker of Parliament. “

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Your Excellency the President of the Republic of Uganda; Mama Janet Museveni, the First Lady, also Minister of Education and Sports; Your Excellency the Vice-President; His Lordship the Chief Justice; the Rt Hon. Deputy Speaker; His Lordship the Deputy Chief Justice; the Vice-Chairperson of NRM; the Rt Hon. Prime Minister and Leader of Government Business in Parliament; the Leader of the Opposition in Parliament; Cabinet ministers and ministers of state; my colleague, Members of Parliament; Your Excellencies, the Ambassadors and High Commissioners; leaders of political parties and all public servants present; distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen.

I welcome you to today’s sitting of Parliament, whose main objective is to receive the Budget Speech for the Financial Year 2022/2023.
 
As you may recall, when we gathered here a week ago, on 7 June 2022, to receive the State-of-the-Nation Address, I adjourned the House to today, 14 June 2022, for the purpose of receiving the Budget Speech.
 
Preparation of the budget is a constitutional obligation of His Excellency the President of Uganda, imposed under Article 155 (1) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, which states that: “The President shall cause to be prepared and laid before Parliament in each financial year, but in any case not later than the fifteenth day before the commencement of the financial year, estimates of revenues and expenditure of Government for the next financial year.”

The Budget Speech that we are going to receive today is a culmination of the budget formulation and approval process, which began with a budget call circular for the Financial Year 2022/2023 issued on 15 September, 2021 in line with Section 9(3) of the Public Finance Management Act, 2015.

Parliament received and considered the National Budget Framework Paper for the financial years 2022/2023 - 2026/2027, in accordance with Section 9(5) and (8) of the Public Finance Management Act, 2015.

Your Excellency, the ministries, departments and agencies submitted their ministerial policy statements for the Financial Year 2022/2023 in accordance with Section 13(13) of the Public Finance Management Act. The ministerial policy statements were considered together with the budget estimates of FY 2022/2023, which culminated into passing of the Appropriation Bill, 2022 and we must thank you for signing the Appropriation Bill.

Honourable members, the Budget Speech is the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development’s statement on the overall budget policy of the Executive, for the forthcoming year and a summary of the key budget policy proposals. 

The importance of the budget process is anchored in the legislative’s philosophical and historical power that is provided for under Article 156 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda.
 
The power of appropriation denotes the constitutional mandate of the legislature to authorise the expenditure of public money for purposes proposed by the Executive. This authority is elaborated under Chapter 9 of the Constitution, specifically Articles 152 - 159 that are operationalised by the Public Finance Management Act, 2015. Indeed, the exercise of this power is manifested in appropriation as a mandate of Parliament.
 
Budget implementation will commence on 1 July 2022. I urge all the eligible accounting officers to ensure that value for money in whatever expenditure is as per approved budget. I call upon all accounting officers to be accountable for all the resources brought under their charge in line with Article 164 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda.
 
In this regard, I reiterate the commitment of the 11th Parliament to effectively play our oversight role in examining the economy’s efficiency and effectiveness in the expenditure of public funds.
 
The budget reading process offers the country and citizens an opportunity to know the Government priorities for the next financial year. It informs us of how the desired revenue will be raised and forms the basis upon which the accounting officers or implementing authorities shall be held responsible. I therefore urge all of you to listen attentively so that we can be able to move together. 
 
Honourable members, with today being a very important day where the Budget is going to be read, I urge all of you, after Budget reading, to go to your constituencies for two weeks to monitor the implementation and preparatory activities of the Parish Development Model so as to ensure its success. A lot of money has been channelled to your constituencies and it is upon the leadership to ensure the success of that money. Therefore, we will go and monitor that for two weeks.
 
Honourable members, as we start the Second Session of this Parliament, we shall dedicate the First Meeting to consider the Bills; the Second Meeting to consider reports, petitions and motions; and the Third Meeting to consider the Budget process. This time round, we must start the Budget process early.
 
I, therefore, urge the Executive to table in the Bills enumerated in the State of the Nation Address by His Excellency the President, as quickly as possible, so that they can be handled expeditiously. I also wish to remind the chairpersons to ensure that these Bills are presented in the House as soon as possible so that we pass them. It is through these Bills that we are able to legislate well.

Finally, honourable colleagues, the leadership has organised a three-day induction workshop for Members of the 11th Parliament from the 15–17 June 2022 at the Imperial Royale Hotel. I urge all of you to attend the sessions of this important workshop. We no longer want an excuse that we were not trained. The training is on. I want to thank you all for coming. 

PRESENTATION OF THE BUDGET SPEECH 

THE SPEAKER: Your Excellency, it is my great pleasure to invite you or your delegatee to present the Budget Speech. Your Excellency, please.

2.34
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Matia Kasaija): Madam Speaker, can I remove my mask?

THE SPEAKER: Please go ahead and remove it but first sanitise.  
  
MR KASAIJA: Your Excellency the President of the Republic of Uganda, Mama the First Lady and Minister of Education and Sports; Your Excellency, the Vice-President; the Rt Hon. Speaker of Parliament; Your Lordship, the Chief Justice; the Rt Hon. Deputy Speaker of Parliament; Your Lordship, the Deputy Chief Justice; the Vice-Chairman of the NRM party; the Right Honourable Prime Minister; the Honourable Leader of the Opposition; Honourable ministers; Honourable Members of Parliament; Your Excellencies, the Ambassadors and Heads of Diplomatic Missions; Distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen. 

Madam Speaker, in fulfilment of Article 155(1) of the Constitution, I have been delegated by His Excellency, the President, to present to Parliament the Budget for the Financial Year 2022/2023. My statement today highlights the Budget as approved by Parliament on 20 May 2022. 

Madam Speaker, on 20 March 2022, we lost a gallant son and Speaker of this august House, the late Rt Hon. Jacob L’Okori Oulanyah. I request that, once more, we observe a minute of silence in his memory.

(Members stood and observed a moment of silence.)

The NRM Government’s overriding goal is to achieve socio-economic transformation for the benefit of all Ugandans and thus improve their lives. We must, therefore, quickly accelerate the economic recovery that we began in the Financial Year 2021/2022, integrate more Ugandans into the money economy, and speed up growth in the country’s productive sectors. 

The theme of the Budget for the Financial Year 2022/2023 is therefore: “Full Monetisation of Uganda’s Economy through Commercial Agriculture, Industrialisation, Expanding and Broadening Services, Digital Transformation and Market Access.” 
This theme summarises our Budget strategy and the priorities that I will later elaborate. The theme is in line with that of the East African Community (EAC) which is, “Accelerating Economic Recovery and Enhancing Productive Sectors for Improved Livelihoods.” 

To achieve Uganda’s socio-economic transformation, the NRM Government has resolved to pursue the following goals in the forthcoming year and the medium-term: 

    i. Kick-start the process of getting the households still engaged in subsistence into the money economy. 

    ii. Support businesses and the overall economy to recover from the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic and restore the lost jobs and livelihoods.

    iii. Protect households from the rising prices of food, fuel, and other essential commodities using prudent economic policies. 

To achieve these goals, the following key strategic actions will be undertaken:

    i. Maintain peace, security and stability, which jointly are the foundation of all other Government, business and household plans. 

    ii. Full implementation of the Parish Development Model (PDM) to accelerate the transition of the 39 per cent of households still engaged in the subsistence economy into the money economy. 

    iii. Step up implementation of the relief and recovery funds to support the recovery of businesses and restore the lost jobs and livelihoods. 

These relief funds include the Small Business Recovery Fund; the Emyooga Fund; Microfinance Credit to SACCOs; the Uganda Development Bank and Uganda Development Corporation, debt and equity funds respectively. 

    iv. Implement appropriate fiscal and monetary policies to mitigate the impact of price shocks on the wellbeing of ordinary Ugandans, without causing long-term distortions in the economy. 

    v. Enhance investment in infrastructure to facilitate increased production, value-addition, and national and regional market access and entry. 

Madam Speaker, in this Budget statement, I will do the following: 

    i) I will report on the performance of the economy and review our future economic prospects. 

    ii) I will provide progress in the implementation of the development programmes that we promised the people of Uganda during the last financial year, which is ending this month, and the priorities for the next Financial Year 2022/2023. 

    iii) I will highlight the revenue and expenditure framework for the next Financial Year 2022/2023 as approved by Parliament.

Recent Economic Performance and Outlook 

Madam Speaker, I now wish to give highlights on the performance of the economy and accountability for measures I announced in the Financial Year 2021/2022 Budget. The details can be found in the Background to the Budget of 2022/2023, which has been published. 

Economic Growth 

The size of our economy is projected to expand to Shs 162.1 trillion for the financial year ending 30 June 2022. This is equivalent to US$ 45.7 billion. Economic activity has been more buoyant at the growth rate of 4.6 per cent per annum this financial year, up from 3.5 percent of last year. This shows that the economy is on a path to full recovery from the COVID-19 disruptions. 

With this buoyant recovery and resilience of the economy —induced by our deliberate and prudent economic policies — Uganda’s GDP per capita has increased to US $1,046 in current prices, which is equivalent to Shs 3.7 million per person per year. 

The services sector is expected to grow by 3.8 percent up from 2.8 percent growth last financial year. This is on account of continued recovery in wholesale and retail trade, education and tourism services; coupled with growth in real estate activities and ICT. The services sector is projected to contribute 41.5 per cent to our GDP. The industry sector is expected to grow by 5.4 per cent up from 3.5 per cent growth last financial year, largely on account of recovery in manufacturing and construction activities. The industry sector is projected to contribute 26.8 per cent to our GDP.

The agriculture sector is expected to grow by 4.3 percent, largely as a result of growth in food and cash crop production, livestock, as well as recovery in fishing. This is the same rate at which the agriculture sector grew last year. The sector contributed 24.1 per cent to the total economic output. 

Prices 

In the second half of the Financial Year 2021/2022, however, there has been a significant increase in prices for some of the essential commodities and services. These include: bar laundry soap, petrol and diesel; cooking oil, some food crop items such as wheat, sugar, potatoes, and onions. Education services and building materials such as cement and steel have also experienced price increases. As a result, the overall inflation has increased considerably from 2.7 per cent in January 2022, to 6.3 per cent in May 2022, causing considerable discomfort among the public. 

This recent increase in prices of essential commodities is a result of events that have occurred outside Uganda. These are:

    i) The effect of COVID-19 restrictions across the world, which disrupted supply-chains, which has consequently caused a shortage of intermediate raw materials used to produce some essential commodities.

    ii) In the recent past, the global economy has faced high shipping costs arising from limited availability of containers, and higher fuel prices; all together leading to supply shortages globally.

    iii) The full opening of economies globally following relative containment during the COVID-19 pandemic lockdowns has led to a rapid rise in aggregate demand for a number of fast-moving-goods beginning with oil, yet production levels have been constrained by COVID-19 restrictions.

    iv) The situation has been worsened by the Russia-Ukraine conflict, which has further disrupted supply of oil, cereals such as wheat, maize, and sunflower oil, as well as essential metals like aluminium and nickel. The two countries are major producers and exporters of these commodities.

Madam Speaker, appropriate measures to curb the rising prices in the short, medium and long term will be implemented. These measures include:

    i) Supporting farmers to grow more fast-maturing food and oil seeds to ensure sufficient domestic supply.

    ii) Maintaining a market-based determination of prices to support a continuous supply of the goods and services. This is intended to ensure that demand does not outstrip supply.

    iii) Expediting improvement of alternative fuel import routes across Lake Victoria to avoid possible unnecessary supply disruption.

    iv) Using appropriate fiscal and monetary policies to mitigate the impact of price shocks.

    v) Construct additional fuel storage infrastructure in the medium term, and stock them adequately.

    vi) Expediting commercial oil production and development of the oil refinery.

Madam Speaker, Government cannot influence price levels whose changes are driven by external shocks that are outside its control. We will, therefore, not be applying measures, which can lead to long-term, and painful distortions in the economy. For example, persistent shortages of goods, hoarding, and black markets.

Exchange rate developments

Madam Speaker, over the past year, the Uganda Shilling initially strengthened against the US Dollar, appreciating by 2.3 percent between April 2021 and April 2022. This appreciation was on account of higher dollar inflows from our exports, foreign direct investment, and foreigners buying Government treasury bills and bonds. 

However, the shilling has experienced significant depreciation pressures since March 2022, on account of concerns arising from the Ukraine-Russia conflict, and related sanctions as well as the rising interest rates in advanced economies. The shilling depreciated by 1.7 per cent month-on-month, on average in the three months to June 2022 and by 6.7 percent against the US Dollar between June 2021 and June 2022. The Bank of Uganda is taking appropriate measures to avoid volatile fluctuations but not preventing the exchange rate movements.

Interest rates

Madam Speaker, commercial bank lending rates for shilling denominated loans marginally declined to 18.8 per cent in the 10-month period to April 2022, down from 19.1 percent in the same period in the previous year. Reduction in lending rates occurred in the transport and communication, building, mortgages, construction and real estate, and personal and household loans sectors.

External sector performance

Madam Speaker, total export receipts of goods and services amounted to $5.74 billion in the 12 months to April 2022, down from 6.2 billion in the previous 12 months. Merchandise exports reduced by $858 million in the same period. However, coffee receipts increased by $279.5 million to $811 million in the same period.

Private sector imports of goods have increased significantly to $6.4 billion in the year to April 2022 from $5.0 billion in the previous 12 months. This increase is attributed largely to investments in the oil and gas sector. For the same reason, foreign direct investment has rebounded strongly to $1.36 billion in the year to April 2022 from $892 million in the same period a year before.

Uganda’s international reserves at the end of April 2022 increased to $ 4.54 billion, equivalent to about 4.6 months of imports. This was an increase from $3.57 billion as at April 2021.

Fiscal performance

Madam Speaker, the revenue collection target in the Financial Year 2021/2022 Budget was Shs 22.425 trillion. Total revenue collection is now projected at Shs 21.486 trillion. This represents a shortfall of Shs 939 billion. And I will tell you a story ahead; what this effect has got on our planning. 

Despite this revenue shortfall, domestic revenue collection this financial year has improved compared to last year. This has been on account of improved tax administration and increased economic activity, following the full re-opening of the economy in January 2022. 

Madam Speaker, total Government expenditure excluding domestic debt refinancing, external debt amortisation and appropriation-in-aid is projected to amount to Shs 35.027 trillion, this ending financial year. This expenditure is equivalent to 21.6 percent of GDP. This is Shs 697 billion higher than the expenditure planned at the time of budgeting, mainly due to the need to finance the health requirements associated with the impact of COVID-19 pandemic, and to address internal and regional security threats.

Madam Speaker, the fiscal deficit this Financial Year 2021/2022 is estimated at 7.3 per cent of GDP, which is lower than the nine percent fiscal deficit registered in the Financial Year 2020/2021. Our target is to reduce the fiscal deficit to three percent in the medium term.

COVID-19 mitigation measures

Madam Speaker, the Government implemented several measures to mitigate the impact of the pandemic on households and businesses. These measures were aimed primarily at keeping Ugandans alive and also to restore business activity. To date, the outcome of these measures are as follows:

Health and social support response

Madam Speaker, Government implemented robust actions to contain the COVID-19 pandemic and its effects on households. These actions included:

    i) Enforcement of COVID-19 Standard Operating Procedures and guidelines, and free mass vaccination. A total of 16 million people, equivalent to 72 percent of the targeted 22 million persons, have received at least one dose.

    ii) Provision of Shs 53.5 billion as cash relief grants to adversely affected people, including boda-boda riders, salon workers, food vendors, private school teachers, ghetto residents and street vendors.

    iv) Strengthening health care systems, including regional and national referral hospitals by equipping 143 Intensive Care Units (ICUs), upgrading of 255 health centres II to health centres III and the recruitment of 400 health workers. And

iv) 	Funding scientific research and development, including COVID vaccine development and innovative therapeutics such as COVIDEX.

Madam Speaker, during the pandemic, learning continued with the provision of home-learning materials across the country. Following the full reopening of schools, an additional 2,900 primary and secondary school teachers have been recruited and deployed to help the learners to catch up with lost time.

Restoring business activity

To support recovery of the economy, Government has provided credit relief to borrowers as well as funding to Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises (MSMEs) and corporate/large businesses.

The following progress has been registered:

    i) Bank of Uganda extended credit relief to enable borrowers unable to service their loans during the pandemic to restructure them. Loans totaling Shs 7.2 trillion, representing 40 percent of total loans, were restructured over the period.

    ii) Domestic arrears to private sector suppliers of goods and services to Government totaling Shs 526 billion were cleared. In addition, court awards amounting to Shs 57 billion were also settled.

    iii) The Microfinance Support Centre (MSC) was funded to support micro-businesses through the Emyooga Fund - Shs 100 billion, and support to SACCOs Shs 27 billion.

Consequently, 6,600 SACCOs and 205,000 savings groups have been established across the country. These are operating a total of 4.1 million accounts. As a result, savings worth Shs 63 billion as at the end of April 2022, among the lowest earners of this country, have been realised;

    iv) For small businesses that do not fall under “Emyooga” and at the same time do not qualify for the Uganda Development Bank funding, the Shs 200 billion Small Business Recovery Fund has been established in partnership with Bank of Uganda supervised financial institutions to offer credit at a subsidised interest rate of 10 percent per year per annum.

    v) To support the recovery of medium and large-scale businesses, Uganda Development Bank (UDB) was capitalised to the tune of Shs 636 billion, which was fully disbursed by May 2022 at an interest rate of 12 percent per annum. 

In addition, UDB plans to disburse a further Shs 351 billion by December this year.

    vi) For private sector enterprises engaged in strategic industrial development of the country, such as agro-processing, manufacturing, and minerals beneficiation, the Uganda Development Corporation (UDC) received Shs 160.7 billion this financial year to make equity joint venture investments with those businesses.

    vii) Government has also disbursed the Shs 20 billion to Teachers’ SACCO to support them to recover from the pandemic.


    viii) In the Financial Year 2021/2022, the Agricultural Credit Facility disbursed a total of Shs 67.42 billion to 1,057 borrowers as at June 2022. 

Cumulatively, the fund has financed a total of 3,120 farmers across the country with a tune of Shs 737.03 billion.

    ix) Following the amendment of the National Social Security Fund (NSSF) Act, to allow mid-term access for qualifying members, a total of Shs 420 billion has so far been paid out to about 21,500 beneficiaries; and

    x) For women entrepreneurs, I have received a US Dollar 217 million grant from the World Bank to provide funding in the coming financial year to middle level businesses managed by women to support their growth and create jobs. (Applause)

Madam Speaker, as a result of the above measures, we have begun to see positive trends in business activities. For example, during the 10 months from July 2021 to April 2022, there was a 38 percent increase in taxpayers with 686,000 new taxpayers being added to the taxpayer register.

In addition, investors’ sentiments about doing business in Uganda have remained positive in recent months as illustrated by the following indicators, between July 2021 and May 2022:

    i) The Business Tendency Index (BTI) has increased by 20.8 percent. The BTI measures the level of optimism that executives have about current and expected outlook for production, order levels, employment, prices and access to credit.

    ii) The Purchasing Managers' Index (PMI) has increased by 48.8 percent. The PMI is an indicator of business activity both in the manufacturing and service sectors. 

    iii) The Composite Index of Economic Activity (CIEA) has increased by 4.3 percent. The CIEA represents the monthly underlying forces in the national economy.

Medium Term Economic Outlook

Future prospects for our economy are very positive, with medium-term growth projected at 6.5 percent per annum. The positive economic outlook is dependent on the following:

    i) The full reopening of the economy.

ii) 	The increase in the global demand for some commodities we produce and export such as coffee, livestock, tea and other food products.

    iii) Commercialisation of oil and gas following the announcement of the Final Investment Decision (FID) in February this year.

    iv) Active import substitution for goods that Uganda can produce and export competitively, such as pharmaceuticals.

    v) Support to private sector industries particularly in agro-industry, light manufacturing and value-addition to our minerals.

    vi) Improved access to affordable credit for micro, small and medium enterprises to enable their businesses revive and create jobs. 

    vii) Fast-tracking the implementation of the Parish Development Model, which targets increased production of strategic commodities for domestic consumption as well as export. 

viii) Digitisation of the economy to realise efficiency gains in business and Government.

Financial Year 2022/2023 Budget Strategy 

Madam Speaker, the budget strategy for Financial Year 2022/2023 and over the medium term seeks to restore economic activity to the pre-pandemic levels and subsequently accelerate the pace of socio-economic transformation. The three broad objectives of the strategy are:

    i) Sustaining peace, security and stability as well as macro-economic stability as key foundations for recovery, growth and socio-economic transformation.

    ii) Mitigation of the COVID-19 impact on business activity, livelihoods and the overall economy.

    iii) Speeding up socio-economic transformation by repurposing the budget towards wealth and job creation as well as other impactful investments.

Imperatives for implementing the Financial Year 2022/2023 Budget

Madam Speaker, in order to achieve these three key objectives, the following imperatives must be adhered to:

    i) National budget reform to make it more re-distributive and responsive to national priorities.

    ii) Enhanced fiscal discipline to limit supplementary expenditure to only the unforeseen and unavoidable spending within the three per cent provided for under the law.

    iii) Enhanced domestic revenue mobilisation to increase the revenue-to-GDP ratio to our target of 18 percent over the medium term.

    iv) Limit borrowing to restore the debt-to-GDP ratio to within 50 per cent over the medium term, as provided for in the Charter for Fiscal Responsibility.

    v) Continued alignment of the Budget to the National Development Plan to ensure that our development priorities are adequately funded.

    vi) Automate Government processes and systems to enhance
efficiency, save money and fight fraud and other forms of corruption. 

    vii) Rationalisation and restructuring of Government to eliminate duplication, overlaps, mandate wars and resource wastage.

Financial Year 2022/2023 Budget priorities 

Madam Speaker, the key priorities for the Financial Year 2022/2023 Budget are the following:

    i) Enhancement of security, rule of law and fighting corruption.

    ii) Sustaining economic recovery.

    iii) Implementation of the Parish Development Model to create wealth and jobs.

    iv) Promotion of agro-industrialisation, standards and market entry.

    v) Commercialisation of oil and gas.

    vi) Enhancement of transport, energy and ICT infrastructure.

    vii) Enhancing human capital development, science, innovation and knowledge transfer.

    viii) Enhancing public sector effectiveness and efficiency.

Enhancing Security, the Rule of Law and Anti-Corruption

Madam Speaker, peace, security and stability as well as rule of law are the bedrock of socio-economic transformation – we all know that – and, thus, must remain key Government priorities.

Peace, Security and Stability

Madam Speaker, the recent surge in cattle theft and cross-border conflicts in Karamoja sub-region have been and will continue to be addressed – I am sure the President will make a comment on this. In a recent supplementary budget, Government provided Shs 112.5 billion to facilitate the UPDF to carry out operations and the Ministry of Works and Transport to construct security roads in Karamoja sub-region.

The UPDF will also continue with the pacification of the eastern Democratic Republic of Congo, in line with the agreement with the Government of the Democratic Republic of Congo.

With respect to the capacity and wellbeing of our security forces, Government will, in the medium term, embark on enhancement of pay for our gallant men and women in uniform –(Interjection)- I am talking; I always talk. (Laughter)

Madam Speaker, the construction of the Military Referral Hospital in Mbuya is on schedule and within budget.
 
In order to enhance surveillance and improve crime detection, the first phase of the CCTV camera project was successfully implemented with the installation of over 3,000 cameras countrywide. The second phase is now 95 per cent complete and targets all cities and major highways.

Madam Speaker, Shs 3.987 trillion has been provided for improvement of security and security infrastructure.

Rule of law

Madam Speaker, in order to enhance the rule of law, the priority will be to improve the dispensation of justice for all. The Judiciary will be supported to allow for speedy dispensation of justice and address the backlog of cases.

In terms of systems that enhance the judicial process, the Electronic Court Case Management Information System (ECCMIS) to improve case management is now functional in seven court circuits within the Greater Kampala Metropolitan Area. 

Additionally, the Video Conferencing System is operational in several courts across the country. The rollout of the Electronic Court Case Management Information System and Video Conferencing Systems in an additional 10 courts will also commence next financial year.

Administration of justice will be strengthened with the recruitment of more judicial officers, establishment of two regional Courts of Appeal in Gulu and Mbarara and two High Court circuits in Luweero and Soroti. In addition, three Chief Magistrates’ Courts in Alebtong, Lyantonde and Budaka and four Grade I Magistrates’ Courts in Karenga, Patongo, Abim and Kyazanga will also be established.

Madam Speaker, in order to further improve the delivery of justice, the construction of the Supreme Court and the Court of Appeal building will be completed soon. In addition, the Chief Magistrates Court buildings in Hoima, Luweero and Masindi districts, among others, were rehabilitated during the ending financial year.

Over 78 per cent of the population can now access a frontline service point within a five-kilometre radius. District coverage of justice front line service points has increased from 61.5 per cent in 2017 to 74 per cent in 2021.

Anti-Corruption

Madam Speaker, we continue to make progress in the fight against corruption. There was increased declaration of income, assets and liabilities by leaders from 25,000 to over 400,000 in 2021, with the increase in the scope of public servants who are required to declare income, assets and liabilities. This financial year, Shs 3 billion has been recovered from corrupt leaders and public servants and deposited in the Consolidated Fund. We need more.

To enhance the rule of law and to step up the fight against corruption, I have provided Shs 381.6 billion for the Judiciary, Shs 95.0 billion for the Directorate of Public Prosecutions, Shs 876.4 Billion for the Uganda Police and Shs 308.7 Billion for the Uganda Prisons Service. I have also allocated Shs 79.4 billion for the Inspectorate of Government. 

Implementation of the Parish Development Model

In order to integrate the 3.5 million households currently working in the subsistence economy into the money economy and to proactively create wealth and jobs, the Parish Development Model (PDM) is going to be fully implemented in the coming financial year. 

Madam Speaker, in the financial year ending June 2022, Shs 234 billion was provided for the implementation of the PDM. More efforts have been focused on preparatory activities to prepare for full implementation of the model. These include recruitment of parish chiefs by all districts, data collection, verification of beneficiaries, establishment of SACCOs, setting up of the PDM Management Unit in the Ministry of Local Government, and sensitisation and mobilisation, among others. 

Next financial year, I have provided a total of Shs 1.059 trillion for full implementation of the model. Each of the 10,594 parishes in the country will receive Shs 100 million as a revolving fund, earmarked for purchase of agricultural inputs by households still in subsistence. 

The Parish Development Model will be complemented by other Government programmes such as the Emyooga Fund, the Microfinance Support Centre credit to other SACCOs and Village Savings Groups, the Small Business Recovery Fund, and other wealth creation initiatives. 

Agriculture Production 
Agricultural production will be enhanced using the first pillar of the Parish Development Model that addresses production, agro-processing and marketing through enhanced access and entry to national, regional and global markets. This value chain approach allows development of sustainable linkages. The key interventions will include:

    (i) Development of key commodities value chains that have a high impact on transforming the 39 per cent of households in subsistence into the money economy. These include coffee, beef, dairy cattle, poultry, fish, piggery, fruits and food crops for intensive farming. The rest of the enterprises including cassava, bananas, rice, Irish potatoes, millet, cotton, tea, cashew-nuts, among others, will also be supported but for relatively big farmers. 

    (ii) Expansion of irrigation schemes and providing community and individual on-farm water for production to minimise reliance on rain-fed agriculture and ensuring sustained agricultural production.

    (iii)  Enhancement of research, breeding and appropriate technology development through the National Animal Genetic Resources Centre and Data Bank and the National Agriculture Research Organisation. 

    (iv) Investment in and effective regulation of production, multiplication and certification of quality agricultural inputs including seeds, seedlings, stocking materials, and fertilisers. 

    (v) Enhancement of enterprise selection through enhanced farmer education and general agricultural extension, as well as pest and disease control at parish level.

    (vi) Promotion of appropriate land use, mechanisation, cooperatives and development of partnerships with large-scale farmers to produce for export and industrial value addition.

    (vii) Supporting fishing communities by developing hatcheries, fish ponds and equipping them with engines, nets etc.

Madam Speaker, I have allocated Shs 564.39 billion to increase production and productivity through the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries.

Climate Change and Environmental Degradation 

Climate change is a significant risk for agriculture production and food security. In order to mitigate environmental degradation, we have set a target to increase the national forest cover from the current 12.4 per cent to 15 per cent. Central Forest Reserves will be protected from encroachment by re-surveying and marking of 6,200 square kilometres of boundary. 

Madam Speaker, 850 square kilometres of wetlands and forests will also be restored by having them demarcated and gazetted and by evicting all encroachers. 

I have allocated Shs 268 billion - (Report says Shs 628 billion) - in the next Financial Year 2022/2023 for actions to mitigate and adapt to climate change. 

Promoting Agro-Industrialisation, Standards and Market Entry

Madam Speaker, promoting agro-industrialisation, enforcing product standards and enabling market access and entry are key aspects to creating wealth and jobs. Next financial year, the following interventions will be prioritised: 

    i)  Expanding storage and processing capacity for agricultural commodities within the 18 zones of the country. 

    ii) Enhancing the use of the Warehouse Receipt System to improve commodity storage, reduce post-harvest losses, improve value chain management, and increase income to farmers.

    iii) Providing funds for private sector investment in key commodity agro-processing value chains through soft and patient debt from UDB and equity from UDC. 

    iv) Strengthening of standards for quality assurance to improve access to markets. 

    v) Establishing a system for issuance and management of internationally recognised product bar codes, branding, packaging and labelling of Uganda’s products for visibility. 

    vi) Enhancing implementation of the Export Development Strategy including carrying out negotiations for access and entry to regional and international markets. 

    vii)  Establishing fully serviced industrial parks. 

    viii) Promoting investment in strategic industries such as manufacture of pharmaceuticals, industrial sugar, starch, herbal extracts and cotton-based medical sundries. 

    ix) Finalise the enactment of pending legal instruments, for example, the Competition Bill and the Consumer Protection Bill, Anti Counterfeits and Quality Product laws. 

    x) Developing a master plan for the Zombo Tea Factory and establishing enabling infrastructure, including water and electricity.

    xi) Expanding the Soroti Fruit Factory by installing additional processing equipment. There is also a factory in a place called Kakooge, which is handling mangoes and pineapples. I visited it last Friday so that will also definitely help. 

    xii) Supporting establishment of 200 Aggregation and Collective Marketing Societies with cleaning, drying, grading and processing equipment. 

I have allocated Shs 1.449 trillion to promote agro-industrialisation, standards and market entry.

Supporting economic recovery and commercialisation of oil and gas 

Madam Speaker, as I reported earlier, we have taken major steps to revive business activities, which we shall continue to do in the medium term in the following sectors:

Tourism 

Tourism was severely affected by the Covid-19 pandemic. The good news is that the sector is recovering very fast. Government shall support the sector to return to its pre-pandemic levels and beyond by prioritising the following interventions: 

    (i) Facilitation of the Uganda Tourism Board to rebrand and promote Uganda under the new “Explore Uganda” brand.

    (ii) Sustaining and upscaling investment in tourism infrastructure like roads, electricity, Internet and security.

    (iii) Easing access to recovery financing at the Uganda Development Bank. 


    (iv) Intensifying promotion of domestic tourism. 

Madam Speaker, I have provided tourism activities with Shs 194.7 billion to complement private sector investment and support its recovery.

Commercialisation of Oil and Gas

The construction of the East African Crude Oil Pipeline is expected to commence in the coming financial year. The capacity of the Uganda National Oil Company to invest in oil and gas development has also been enhanced. While there have been negative campaigns against the development of the crude oil pipeline, the Government will develop Uganda’s oil and gas resources in a responsible and sustainable manner for the benefit of all Ugandans. 

Madam Speaker, I have allocated Shs 904.1 billion towards the development and commercialisation of minerals, oil and gas.

Enhancing Human Capital Development

Having successfully contained the COVID-19 pandemic over the last two years, our efforts are going to be focused on improving the quality of life of the people of Uganda by prioritising the following:

Health

The emphasis now is on mass vaccination of all eligible persons and community disease surveillance by strengthening Village Health Teams (VHTs) with training and equipping them with a smartphone and a bicycle. Additional health assistants and surveillance officers will be recruited to support the VHTs.

The development of health infrastructure nationwide will continue. The rehabilitation and expansion of the following general hospitals will be undertaken: Itojo, Kaabong, Abim, Kambuga, Masindi, Kanungu, Kapchorwa, Bugiri and Amudat. 

In addition, 43 health centres II will be upgraded to health centres III and 17 new health centres III will be built in the sub-counties without health facilities. Seventy-five (75) staff houses will be built in the Karamoja Subregion.

Madam Speaker, next financial year, the Ministry of Health will start implementing the Uganda COVID-19 Emergency Response and Preparedness Project supported by a grant from the World Bank amounting to $180.3 million (equivalent to Shs 667.1 billion). This grant will finance the rapid detection, prevention and quick responses to threats posed by the COVID-19 pandemic. It will also finance the strengthening of national systems for public health preparedness.

Madam Speaker, the construction and equipping of a modern health facility will commence in the coming financial year, to be located in Naguru. This US$70 million facility will be funded by the Arab Bank for Economic Development in Africa (BADEA); the Saudi Fund for Development (SFD); and the OPEC Fund for International Development (OPEC Fund).

I have allocated a total of Shs 3.722 trillion for healthcare delivery in the Financial Year 2022/20223.

Water

Madam Speaker, national safe water coverage now stands at 69.8 per cent, with coverage in rural areas at 68 per cent and 71.6 per cent in urban areas. Our target is to increase safe water coverage to 81 per cent over the medium-term.

Madam Speaker, during the Financial Year 2021/22, the following major water projects were implemented:

    i. Five medium-scale irrigation schemes in Ngenge (Kween), Rwengaaju (Kabarole), Tochi (Oyam), Mubuku II (Kasese), and Doho II (Butaleja);

    ii. One hundred and six (106) small-scale irrigation schemes in the districts of Bugiri, Bukedea, Tororo, Iganga, Mbale, Kapchorwa, Pakwach, and many others;

    iii. Substantial completion of Katosi Water Treatment Plant, which will produce 160 million litres of water per day;

    iv. Upgrading of Kapeeka Water Supply System to 5 million litres per day which is double the current capacity; and

    v. Rehabilitation and expansion of the Sembabule Water Supply Project. The plant is now able to produce 30 million litres per day.

Madam Speaker, the following water projects, which are ongoing, will continue to be implemented:

    i. Constructing 80 kilometres water supply infrastructure from River Nile to serve 484,000 people in Acholi and Lango subregions;

    ii. Constructing Water Infrastructure from River Kagera to serve an additional 75,000 people in Isingiro, Mbarara and Masaka subregions;

    iii. The Wakiso West Water and Sanitation Project;

    iv. The rehabilitation and expansion of Mbale water supply scheme;

    v. Construction of the wastewater treatment plant targeting Kiruddu Hospital.

Madam Speaker, I have allocated Shs 1.027 trillion towards the water and environment sub-programme.

Education

Madam Speaker, education is a key opportunity equaliser for human beings. During the COVID-19-induced lockdown period, many teachers abandoned the profession, and classrooms got dilapidated in several institutions. Now efforts have started to revamp the education sector. Priority will be put on improving the quality of education to enhance learning outcomes. The following will be undertaken:

i) 	Staffing gaps will be filled in primary and secondary schools;

ii) 	Training of teachers and instructors on the new abridged curriculum will continue, and the lower secondary curriculum will be rolled out;

iii) 	Continuous assessment will be fully rolled out;

iv) 	Inspections across all learning institutions will be strengthened using the Teacher Education and Learning Assessment (TELA) system;

v) 	Operationalisation of the Moroto Constituent College of Agriculture, Mountains of the Moon, and Busoga Universities will take effect. Consultations to operationalise Bunyoro University will commence next Financial Year 2023/2024;

vi) 	Construction and equipping of two-unit laboratories in 21 secondary schools currently without any, in line with the Science, Technology, Engineering and Math (STEM) Policy; and

vii) 	The construction, upgrading and equipping of Vocational Education Centres of Excellence in Bushenyi, Lira, and Elgon technical institutions will be completed.

Madam Speaker, I have allocated Shs 4.14 trillion towards the education and skilling sub-programme.

Science and Innovation

Madam Speaker, we are developing three prospective COVID-19 vaccines which are undergoing animal trials. Human trials will commence next financial year. In addition, clinical trials for COVID-19 treatment for viral respiratory diseases are ongoing. 

Next financial year, research into medicine development will be expanded to cancer, diabetes, sickle cell anaemia, and malaria.

Madam Speaker, in September this year, Uganda will launch into the Lower Earth Orbit its first-ever satellite from the International Space Station in collaboration with the US National Aeronautic and Space Administration (NASA). A ground station at Mpoma, Mukono will receive data from the satellite. 

The data from this satellite will be used for meteorology, environmental monitoring, urban planning, mineral exploration, and disaster management, among others.

Madam Speaker, I have allocated Shs 274.4 billion towards advancing innovation and technological development in this country.  

Enhancing the transport and power infrastructure  

Madam Speaker, the following achievements have been recorded in transport infrastructure development: 

    i) Construction and up-grading of 20 national roads covering a total distance of 1,437 kilometres has been done;  

    ii) Rehabilitation has commenced on 160 kilometres of Tororo-Gulu Meter Gauge Railway and 265 kilometres of Tororo-Namanve railway line section. The procurement of locomotives is ongoing;  

    iii) Continuation with the compensation and acquisition of right of way for the Kampala–Malaba Standard Gauge Railway line;  

    iv) The rehabilitation of the Entebbe International Airport stands at 75 per cent completion and the Kabaale International Airport is at 72 per cent; and 

    v) Maintenance of 5,200 kilometres of paved and 15,350 kilometres of unpaved national and city roads, and 21,631 ///(the report has 21,831) kilometres of unpaved local Government and community roads have been undertaken. 

Madam Speaker, next financial year, the following interventions in transport infrastructure will be implemented: 

    i) Construction of 400 kilometres equivalent of roads to bitumen standards; rehabilitation/reconstruction of 200 kilometres equivalent, and construction of 30 bridges on the national roads network;

    ii) Rehabilitation of 922 ///(in report 928) kilometres of district roads and 126 kilometres of local government roads; 

    iii) We shall continue with the development of the Bukasa Inland Port; and 

    iv) We shall commence Uganda Airlines’ flights to London and China. 

Madam Speaker, I have allocated Shs 4.3 trillion next financial year for transport infrastructure development and maintenance. 

Power infrastructure

Madam Speaker, national electricity access today stands at 57 per cent shamefully, of which, 19 per cent, is on the main national grid, and 38 per cent is off-grid, including solar power. Uganda’s total electricity generation capacity has increased from 1,269 ///(report has 1,268) megawatts in the Financial Year 2019/2020 to 1,347 megawatts in the Financial Year 2021/2022, on account of the completion of the 42 megawatts Achwa 1, the 21 Megawatts Nyamagasani, and the 15.5 megawatts Sugar Corporation of Uganda Limited (SCOUL) plants. 

The transmission network increased from 3,100 kilometres in the Financial Year 2020/2021, to 3,431 kilometres, as at the end of the third quarter of the Financial Year 2021/2022, as a result of the commissioning of the Karuma-Kawanda 400KV and Karuma-Olwiyo 132KV transmission lines. The Luzira substation was completed and will be commissioned after completion of the 15 kilometres 132KV transmission line.  

In the next financial year, the following interventions in power infrastructure will continue to be implemented:  

    i) Commence the unit-by-unit commissioning of the 600 megawatts Karuma Hydro Plant in September 2022, with the plant being fully available in June 2023;

    ii) Complete the Opuyo-Moroto, Lira-Gulu-Nebbi-Arua, Lira-Gulu-Agago and the Mutundwe-Entebbe 132KV transmission lines; and 

    iii) Commence feasibility and design studies for the 400KV Uganda South Sudan transmission line between Olwiyo- Nimule-Juba; the 400KV Uganda–Democratic Republic of the Congo interconnection and the 400KV Uganda–Tanzania transmission line. 

Madam Speaker, I have provided Shs 1.573 trillion to ensure the above are undertaken. 

Information and Communication Technology Infrastructure 
 
Madam Speaker, the geographical coverage of broadband services (3G) stands at 66 per cent, allowing digital access for 74 per cent of the population. Next financial year, the Government will support the Fourth Industrial Revolution Technologies: these include artificial intelligence, the Internet of Things (IoT) and the use of robotics. We shall also extend Broadband ICT infrastructure to enable connectivity to facilitate public service delivery. 

Madam Speaker, I have allocated Shs 124.2 billion towards digitalisation.

Enhancing public sector effectiveness and efficiency 
Madam Speaker, public sector effectiveness and efficiency will be improved through the following measures:  

    i) Continued rationalisation of Government and public expenditure;  

    ii) Automation of Government business and service delivery. This includes e-Procurement, the Parish Development Model, Information System, Government Asset Management, Education, Information Management, Electronic Document Management, Integrated Health Management Information System, e-Payment Gateway, and the e-Post Digital Platform; 

    iii) We shall also embark on decongesting the Citizenship and Immigration Office in Kampala by establishing centres in the Kampala Capital City Divisions, commencing with Nakawa Division; 

    iv) The salaries of medical workers, scientists, and science teachers have been enhanced to a figure which is about Shs 900 billion; very big.  In addition, to incentivising scientists, this will also help to improve the functionality of education and health facilities by addressing absenteeism and low morale of personnel; and

    v) Madam Speaker, to enhance the decentralisation policy, a total of Shs 5.1 trillion has been provided as direct financing to local governments.

Fiscal framework and the financing strategy for the Financial Year 2022/2023 

Madam Speaker, the Financial Year 2022/2023 budget priorities I have just elaborated will be financed from the following sources:  

    i) Enhanced domestic revenue mobilisation;  

    ii) External financing in the form of loans and grants from our development partners and private creditors; 

    iii) Public-Private Partnerships that mobilise private sector financing for public projects.

The resource envelope for Financial Year 2022/2023 

Madam Speaker, the Resource Envelope for the Financial Year 2022/2023 amounts to Shs 48,130.7 billion, and is comprised of both domestic and external resources as detailed below: 

    i) Domestic revenue amounts to Shs 30,797.3 billion, of which, Shs 23,754.9 billion, will be tax revenue, and Shs 1,795.9 billion will be non-tax revenue.  

    ii) Domestic borrowing amounts to Shs 5,007.9 billion. 

iii) 	Budget Support accounts for Shs 2,609.2 billion. 

iv) 	External financing for projects amounts to Shs 6,716 billion of which Shs 4,625.7 billion is from loans and Shs 2,090.5 billion, is from grants; 

v) 	Appropriation in aid collected by local governments amounts to Shs 238.5 billion; and 

vi) 	Domestic Debt Refinancing will amount to Shs 8,008.0 billion. 

Madam Speaker, the total expenditure will be Shs 48,130.7 billion or it could be said as Shs 48.13 trillion. Excluding domestic debt refinancing and appropriations in aid, it amounts to Shs 39,884.2 billion of which wages and salaries are Shs 6,366.9 billion, interest payments is Shs 4,691.9 billion, non-wage recurrent expenditure is Shs 14,254.4 billion and development expenditure is Shs 14,565.9 billion. 

Tax Measures for Financial Year 2022/2023 

Madam Speaker, no new taxes will be introduced in Financial Year 2022/2023. I heard people disputing this and I am repeating it for the fifth time. Let me read it again that no new taxes will be introduced in the Financial Year 2022/2023. 

We will achieve revenue targets by improving the efficiency in tax collection and enhancing compliance with tax laws. The capacity of the Uganda Revenue Authority will be enhanced by recruiting and training staff and deploying appropriate equipment and ICT to aid the enforcement of tax laws.

I wish to report that Parliament has made amendments to the various tax laws intended to simplify them, clarified previously ambiguous provisions and closed loopholes that may have led to revenue leakage; but we have not increased taxes. 

Madam Speaker, the amendments that have been made are in the Income Tax Act, Value Added Tax, the Stamp Duty Act and the Tax Procedures Code Act. I will now highlight the major amendments. 

The Income Tax 

The corporate income tax exemption for Bujagali Hydro Power Project has been extended for one year, up to 30 June 2023, in order not to increase electricity tariffs for power that the project will generate. 

The Income Tax Act has been amended to streamline the rental income tax regime for individuals and non-individuals as follows: 

    i) Introduce a zero rental income tax rate for individuals that earn annual rental income not exceeding Shs 2,820,000 and a rate of 12 per cent of rental income exceeding that amount; and 

    ii) For rental business, introduce a 30 per cent rental income tax rate on rental income with expenses capped to 50 per cent for each year of income. In addition, any excess expenses shall not be carried forward to the subsequent year of income. 

Value Added Tax

Madam Speaker, under the Value Added Tax Act, the following amendments have been made:

    i) Exempted the supply of oxygen cylinders or oxygen for medical use to reduce the cost of the supply of oxygen for medical use;

    ii) Exempted the supply of assistive devices for persons with disabilities to reduce the cost of the equipment used by persons with disabilities; 

    iii) Exempted the supply of airport user services charged by the Civil Aviation Authority to reduce the cost of transiting through Entebbe Airport; 

    iv) To allow for cash-basis accounting for suppliers who supply goods and services to Government to facilitate them to hedge against the risk of interest and penalties arising from delayed payments by Government; and 

    v) Repealed the exemption on VAT on imported services used in the provision of an exempt supply to encourage businesses to use local suppliers of services such as Information and Communications Technological services. 

Tax Procedures Code 

The amendments under the Tax Procedures Code Act, include the following: 

    i) Introduced penalties for failure to provide information for purposes of Automatic Exchange of Information to improve compliance; 

    ii) Introduced penalties for failure to adhere to Electronic Fiscal Receipting and Invoicing Solution and Digital Tax Stamps. This is intended to combat tax evasion, smuggling, and other vices. 

Stamp Duty 

Madam Speaker, under the Stamp Duty, the following amendments have been made:
  
    i) Provided for NIL stamp duty on the following instruments:

    a. Agreements relating to the deposit of title deeds or personal property or goods to another as a pledge or as security for a sum of money borrowed; 

    b. Agricultural Insurance Policy to encourage the uptake of agricultural insurance services; and 

    c. Security Bond or Mortgage Deed executed by way of security for the due execution of an office, or to account for money or other property received by virtue of security bond or mortgage deed executed by surety to secure a loan or credit facility. 

    ii) Clarification of the rate of Shs 15,000 applicable on the transmission of property from the administrator of an estate to the beneficiary. 

Excise Duty

Under the Excise Duty Act, the Government has undertaken the following amendments:

    i) Clarification of definitions of various products that attract excise duty such as spirits and juices to enhance taxpayer compliance; and
 
    ii) Reduced excise duty applicable on opaque beer and fermented beverages made from locally sourced raw materials to 12 per cent or Shs 150 per litre, whichever is higher. This is intended to promote value addition and the use of locally sourced raw materials.

The Medium-Term Financing Strategy 

Madam Speaker, the financing of the budget will be generated from the implementation of the following revenue and public debt measures: 

Domestic Revenue Mobilisation Strategy

The objective of the Government in the Financial Year 2022/2023 is to increase revenue by 0.8 per cent of GDP. The major assumptions that underpin this goal are: 

    (i) Expected increase in taxable economic activities;

    (ii) Gains from revenue enhancement measures; and 

    (iii) Increased employment and aggregate demand for goods and services arising from the full reopening of the economy. 

Public Investment Financing Strategy

Madam Speaker, the Government will implement the Public Investment Financing Strategy starting next financial year, to achieve the following objectives: 

    i) Improve alignment of suitable financing options to government programmes and projects; 

    ii) Minimise the cost and risk exposure of financing modalities;

    iii) Ensure prudent loans acquisition to avoid debt accumulation in a short period and timely disbursement of loan funds; 

    iv) Long-term fiscal sustainability;

    v) Increase financing from traditional and other innovative sources to meet the development financial requirements; and 

    vi) Provide a framework for partnership with the private sector in the implementation and financing of public investment programmes.

Public debt management

Madam Speaker, as at the end of December 2021, Uganda’s total public debt stock stood at Shs 73.5 trillion (equivalent to $20.7 Billion), of which external debt amounted to Shs 45.72 trillion (equivalent to $12.9 billion) and domestic debt amounted to Shs 27.77 trillion (equivalent to $7.84 billion). This represents a nominal debt-to-GDP ratio of 49.7 per cent.

The rise in the debt stock was mainly on account of the need to support the economy and preserve the welfare of households as a result of COVID-19 and other external and domestic shocks. Debt was also used to finance the shortfalls in domestic revenue.

Madam Speaker, the Government is implementing the following measures to ensure long-term public debt sustainability:

    i) Reduce the level of domestic borrowing over the medium-term to an average of 2.2 per cent of GDP per year. This ratio will be reduced further to a policy target of 1.0 per cent of GDP of the long-term;

    ii) Implement the Public Investment Financing Strategy. This strategy will ensure the alignment of suitable financing modalities with the nature of Government programmes and projects;

    iii) Implement the Financial Year 2022/2023 borrowing strategy, which is consistent with our medium-term debt management strategy, to avoid risks associated with unsustainable debt; 

    iv) Borrow largely on favourable terms and for projects that enhance the productivity of the economy;

    v) Sequencing new projects in a manner that makes the Government service its debt obligations without the risk of default. This means the Government will only mobilise debt financing for ready projects and will cancel projects with poor performance. I will repeat this: this means the Government will only mobilise debt financing for ready projects and will cancel projects with poor performance;

    vi) Increase domestic revenue by implementing the domestic revenue mobilisation strategy.

Conclusion

In conclusion, Madam Speaker, the budget for the next financial year presents a set of strategic choices and the Government’s commitment to stimulate economic recovery, enhance productivity and competitiveness of enterprises and, most importantly, wealth creation and jobs for the ordinary Ugandans.

Substantial resources have been earmarked for the implementation of the Parish Development Model. This model will be the vehicle for socio-economic transformation at the parish level and the monetisation of Uganda's economy. Successful implementation of the Parish Development Model ushers in a mass socio-economic transformation movement in our society with better-sustained outcomes. 

I, therefore, urge all leaders and Ugandans to ensure that these resources are effectively used to bring about the desired change. I repeat this: I, therefore, urge all leaders – whatever level and whatever sector – and Ugandans to ensure that these resources are effectively used to bring about the desired change. It will really be a very big shame to hear that this money we are sending down for the Parish Development Model – some of it has gone for cam cam cam. It is very shameful.

Please, this is our country. We should stand firm. There is nobody who is going to come to help us when we cannot help ourselves. When we get resources, let those resources go for the purpose for which they have been given.

To the Ugandan scientists and health workers, the Government has fulfilled its commitment to enhance your pay – you have heard. Ugandans expect better services in return. Kankademu. Tit for tat; Mpa nkuwe. You give me, I give you. I have enhanced the scientists’ salaries by a figure which I mentioned. I expect to get a better return.

To the Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises (MSMEs), I implore you to take advantage of the economic recovery programmes and the opportunities that come with petroleum and other public infrastructure investments to re-strategise, recover your businesses, expand and formalise. This way, you will be able to benefit more from the now bigger EAC market and create decent and better-paying jobs for our children.

For women entrepreneurs, the grant from the World Bank will support the growth of your enterprises, create better-paying jobs and enable you to exploit the opportunities in the economy to enhance your incomes. Abakyala. Nze ndese. (Applause) For me to be happy and to believe that you have responded, you must be productive. You must be productive – more wealth and bigger businesses both internally and externally – and you give me taxes so that I do not have to borrow and be abused as an old man, and being asked: “what have you come here for? Go back to Uganda”. This has happened to me in one case. 

Madam Speaker, I dedicate this budget to delivering the Ugandan households still in the subsistence to the money economy. 

I thank you all for listening. May the good Lord keep you in good health so that we see this Uganda becoming a much better place for everybody to live in. Thank you. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you so much, honourable Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development.

REMARKS BY HIS EXCELLENCY THE PRESIDENT

4.01
THE PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF UGANDA (Gen. (Rtd) Yoweri Kaguta Museveni): Her Excellency the Vice-President, the Rt. Hon. Speaker, His Lordship the Chief Justice, all the other leaders and honourable Members of Parliament.

You have heard the speech by the minister; it is clear enough. I just want to introduce two words. One is “wake”. Those who speak our Acholi language know that “wake” means boasting. The Banyankore call it “Okwesiimirana”. When you are at a beer party, among the Banyankore, you can boast: “I have got more cows than all of you.” The Banyankore just laugh, they do not take offence because they also want to be rich like you. But I am told that among the Acholi, they may spear you; that if you “wake”, they may spear you; but since I am a bit far from Gulu, I can “wake” here.

The other one is “poko marom” in Acholi or “okugabula obulungi”; to distribute food fairly; in Acholi, we call it “poko marom”. By 2005 and 2006, the country was getting into a problem.

Our people in the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, without consultation, had agreed with the donors that all the Government revenue should go for expenditure of running the country; salaries and so on, what they call recurrent expenditure, and that the development budget would only be supported by the donors. 

They did not know about this because they did not consult with me and you remember by 2005, we had a big shortage of electricity. That is when load shedding started. After the 2006 election, I called a conference of the Cabinet and also the NRM caucus and said, I cannot accept this. We must budget for both the recurrent and development expenditure. We agreed and that is when we put more money on roads and electricity, apart from whatever we were putting in education, health and water.

I was checking the results of that decision, which was “poko marom”. If you go on the roads - I have the whole list here - Kapchorwa-Suam, there was Government funding together with some other funds. Bulima-Kabwoya Government funding with others and Nyakaita-Kazo, Government funding with others. Bumbobi-Ruhaha Government funding and Kigumba-Bulima, Government funding.

Rukungiri-Kihihi, Government funding with others, Masaka-Bukakata, Government funding with others, Hoima-Butiaba-Wanseko Government funding with others, Buhimba-Nalweyo-Bulamagi Government funding with others and Masindi Park-Paraa-Buliisa, Government funding with others. Hoha-Nyairongo-Kyarushesha-Butore-Kabale-Kyiziranfumbi, Government funding with others. Atiak-Laropi, Government funding with others, Kampala Northern bypass, Government funding with others. 

Kampala-Gayaza-Zirobwe, Government funding alone; Matugga-Semuto, Government funding alone; Busega-Mityana, Government funding alone; Busega-Mityana II, Government of Uganda funding alone. Fort Portal-Bundibugyo, Government funding alone; Ishaka-Kagamba, Government of Uganda funding alone; Mubende-Kakumiro-Kagadi, Government of Uganda alone. 

Lwakhakha, Government of Uganda alone; Moroto-Akisim, Government of Uganda alone; Soroti-Katakwi, Government of Uganda alone. Rushere-Nshwere - that is near my home - Government of Uganda alone. Kashenyi-Mitooma-Kitabi, Government of Uganda alone; Kitala-Gerenge, Government of Uganda alone, Mbarara Municipality roads, Government of Uganda alone; Mpigi Town roads, Government of Uganda alone.

Kira-Matugga, Government of Uganda alone - this one is ongoing. Moroto-Lokitanyala, Government of Uganda alone; Entebbe Paediatric Hospital, Government of Uganda alone; Najjanankumbi-Busabala, Government of Uganda alone. 

The list is so long. I will send this list to the honourable MPs so that you can see it. This was constructing new roads or reconstructing old ones; but there is rehabilitation.

Mityana-Mubende, Government of Uganda alone; Katunguru-Kasese, Government of Uganda alone. Soroti-Dokolo-Lira-Kamdini, World Bank and Government of Uganda. Tororo-Mbale-Soroti, World Bank with Government of Uganda. Masaka Town and rehabilitation of Budo roads, Government of Uganda alone.

Namunsi-Sironko-Muyembe, Government of Uganda alone. I will send you this document. Rehabilitation of Nakalama-Tirinyi-Mbale, Government of Uganda alone. Fort Portal-Hima, Mukono-Kalagi-Kayunga-Bukoloto-Njeru, Government of Uganda alone.

Nansana-Busunju, Government of Uganda alone; Ishaka-Katungulu, Government of Uganda alone. Hima-Katungulu, Government of Uganda alone; Kyenjojo-Fort Portal, Government of Uganda alone. Sungira Hill-something, Government of Uganda alone; Bundibugyo-Nyauka, Government of Uganda alone; Mvura-Ediofe – this is in Arua, Government of Uganda alone; Iganga-Kaliro, Government of Uganda alone; Pakwach-Nebbi, Government of Uganda alone; Kamdini-Gulu, Government of Uganda alone; Kiryandongo-Karuma-Kamdini, Government of Uganda alone; Jinja-Kamuli, Government of Uganda alone; Mbale-Soroti, Government of Uganda alone; Tororo-Mbale, Government of Uganda alone; Kawempe-Kafu-Kiryandongo, Government of Uganda alone, and so on. 

These are the roads, coming out of that decision of 2006 where we said, “We must have our own money to deal with the development budget.” 

On the side of electricity, the same; Hoima-Kinyara. There are many other projects - geothermal resources, the Energy Investment Fund. There are very many other programmes here of the petroleum, nuclear energy and so on - I just want the lines, which people can easily see.

Mbarara-Nkenda, Tororo-Lira - Government of Uganda with some other people. There is some project here in abbreviation. 
Industrial parks - Government of Uganda with some other people. Opuyo-Moroto, Government of Uganda with some other people. Kampala-Entebbe, Government of Uganda with some other people. 

Karuma - because this Karuma and Isimba, we contributed. It was the Government of Uganda and China. Muzizi, Government of Uganda with some other people. Nyagak, the Government of Uganda with some other people – very many of them. I will send you the whole list.

Therefore, the point I am making here is that the poko marom, the okugabula obulungi; this money has made so much impact. In the area of science and technology, we have built the Kiira Motors. We are working on putting a satellite in space with our own money. The pathogen economy - the vaccines, which I hear you attacking Hon. Musenero about. I will come back and defend her and people will hide somewhere. God, fortunately, gave me my voice; you can talk but I also can. 

The human vaccines, anti-tick vaccine, Foot and Mouth and swine fever vaccine, Covidex, Digital Electronics and automation - all of these are funded by the Government of Uganda; either wholly or partially. That is why I thought I should wake – is it wake? 
I thought I should come here and really boast that “You see, didn’t I tell you?”

As a result of these measures - you heard in the speech of the Minister saying that the GDP per capita is now $1,046. This is what I told you here the other day. However, he did not come out to clearly say that we have got into the entrance of middle-income. I do not know what he feared. I do not know whether he feared that we may get into the entrance and then go back. 

I do not see how we shall go back because the entry point is $1,000 - some say $1,036, others say $1,039. These people can tell you the exact figure. 

These are a result of - as the Minister said in his speech - deliberate steps we take. Others, we do not take them and waste a lot of time. 

If I had not insisted in 2006, to put this money on the roads and electricity, I do not know where Uganda would be. I remember, for instance, the line from Corner Kilak to Patongo-Kalongo and maybe Abim, the Swedish had promised us to do it. However, at the last minute, they said, “We can't do it because there is war.” That is when we said, “No, we shall use our own money and do it.” We did not only take the line to Patongo, Kalongo and Abim, but also went farther to Lamwo and so on. 

Therefore, I want to advise the political leaders to know that poko marom has positive consequences. In my upcountry tour, I have discovered a problem, which I have been talking about, but not insisting - because that is my way of working; I do not want to force people to do what I think. I would rather persuade them.

Just the other day, we were in Moroto looking at UBOS figures. The primary seven completion rate in the whole of Uganda apparently is 38 per cent. The children who go to primary school and finish primary seven are only 38 out of 100, which means that 62 go back to the villages; they do not finish primary seven. In the case of Karamoja, we found it was only six children out of 100, who finish primary seven. 

Do you remember during the elections I talked about it? When we introduced UPE in 1997, the idea was for everyone to go to school – Universal Primary Education (UPE). The reason why these children drop out is because of the school charges. I have been telling you about this so many times – begging and talking as if I want people to come and work on my farm or do me a favour.

This is a big problem for the country to find that children – and you can see it in the elections because I talked about it. In the primary school, the enrolment is about 10 million, but in the secondary schools, it is only two million. Where have the other eight gone? Of course, in the 10 million, it did not come out that many of them drop out. They do not go to the secondary schools. 

Therefore, I call on the political class, especially the NRM people, to say, “No.” We must budget for free and even compulsory primary school education, and stop these greedy teachers from collecting money from these children in Government schools. This is what I wanted from the beginning but I cannot do it alone. Uganda does not belong to me. From 1997, this was my wish. 

When we introduced UPE, the idea was that everybody should finish secondary education. We should not be talking of two million children in secondary school. We should be talking of 10 million because secondary school S.1 to S.6; six years. They are almost the same as P.1 to P.7. Why should we have 10 million - almost 11 million in primary - and only two million in secondary? Where have the others gone? We may not do it this year because this budget is now finished, but in the next one or two financial years, we should really work and insist on free and compulsory primary – maybe even secondary – education and stop all these fellows looking for money through the education sector. Get out; go to the private schools and look for money there, not in the Government ones. It is disgusting. Sending children out of school because they are looking for money for allowances is disgusting. 

People talk of problems but I am used to problems. When I see what you call problems, I say “Bambi, these ones do not know what problems look like.” I feel very sorry. The real problem for Uganda and Africa is the lack of food. If there is no food - no Muhogo – when I say food, I mean Muhogo, bananas, kalo – if the Akalo was not there, I do not know what I would do. I also mean maize. Maize is important for Kawunga, animal feeds, fish meals – beans and of course, milk – Amatemunange, beef. These are the ones for which I would not sleep; if we had none or very little of this. 

There is, of course, sugar and other things. If spaghetti does not come – I do not know how those who eat spaghetti do it. You try to put it in the mouth, but it refuses and it comes out. Why don’t you do enoga? When a Munyakore gets a piece of kalo and puts a hole – (Applause)- what do they call it in Luo? Omona is a former Luo. He does not know anything. Somebody help me – oh, I am behaving unparliamentary. I am very sorry. I will find out and tell you next time. 

As long as Uganda is producing enough food, there is no problem we cannot solve, but the danger to the food is some laziness; this 39 per cent of the homes, whom we want under the Parish Model, to join the money economy and produce for the stomach and pocket. 

The other danger can be lack of rain or unreliable rain. That is why in our budgeting, there is now something about irrigation, but in the future budgets, I would like us to do more for the irrigation so that we stabilise agriculture. There is no possibility of shortage of food even if the rain is erratic. 

However, irrigation means water so we go to the environment. Please, all of us must tell these people, especially – the old problem of the wetlands which was created by the British was in Busoga, Bukedi and Kigezi, where they misled our people to go to the wetlands thinking that it is a good thing to do. 

I have a programme to get them out by compensating them because they were misled. They did not do it themselves; they were misled by the Government; but in the other areas, there are people going to the wetlands by themselves and are against our appeals.
I demand that all these people get out of the wetlands unconditionally. We do not have to negotiate because they knew it was not right but they insisted. Even here in Kampala, I see some of them encroaching a little bit in Lubigi Swamp and these other swamps. 

Therefore, once we bring back our water – because 20 per cent of Uganda is under fresh water – we are so lucky. Then we shall be able to irrigate easily and have secure agriculture and that can give us an opportunity to solve our other problems.

If there is a shortage of cooking oil from Malaysia, we can easily replace it; in fact, people have come up so very soon we shall be exporting that cooking oil instead of importing it from Malaysia. So many people are involved in sunflower, simsim and palm oil; very soon, you will see that Uganda will be a big exporter.

The only problem we may not easily solve is the problem of wheat because we do not have - in Kapchorwa, they try to grow wheat but I do not think the land is enough. I will ask the people of agriculture on whether wheat needs a cold climate; I have never really bothered with wheat myself; I have never studied it.

Then on petroleum, in the next few years, we shall have our own petroleum as you know. However, of course, even when we have our own petroleum, we cannot undersell our petroleum; it will have to be at par with the world price minus transport. 

So, yes, it somehow deals with it but not entirely; with the fuel, we may have to - I think the real answer to expensive petroleum is rail transport. If we repair our railway to Pakwach like the minister is saying and we transport many of the things on the railway, then the demand for fuel will go down, at least for cargo. And, later on, with Kasese, that is the real answer to the problem of high petroleum prices.

So, I congratulate the minister. However, I am glad you have not killed me when I wake; I have boasted a bit about the achievements of the NRM; okwesiimirana, didn’t I tell you, don’t you see how much better off we are? Apwooyo Lubanga (Applause).

THE SPEAKER: Thank you so much, Your Excellency, for laying down the various projects and programmes that you intend to implement during the Financial Year 2022/2023.

I sincerely want to thank my very able and active Members of Parliament for ensuring that this day comes to reality; thank you so much for working tirelessly and for ensuring that the day comes to reality. 

Honourable members, you have heard; as the Executive embarks on the implementation of the Budget from 01 July 2022, it is our noble duty to perform our oversight role to ensure that the funds that have been allocated are being used for the intended purpose and that there is value for money.

Mr President, as has been the case before, we thank you for having a clear vision of where the country is moving and for championing this vision with commitment and dedication.

We are happy that you have talked about free education. Members of Parliament, our first priority in the Financial Year 2023/2024 should be budgeting for free education.

I once again want to thank Your Excellency, Gen. Yoweri Kaguta Museveni, for fulfilling your obligation of tabling the Budget for the Financial Year 2022/2023; the rest is now left to the technical team.

Whereas it has always been our practice to meet and interact after such an important occasion like today, the current circumstances do not permit us to do so - (Interjection) - COVID is still with us. We shall interact while we run our workshops; you will have everything at your disposal.

In a special way, honourable members - (Interjection) - honourable members, when the Speaker is speaking, you keep quiet. (Laughter)

Honourable members, in a special way, I want to thank Mama Janet for accompanying the President to this Budget event. Thank you, so much; you make us, the women of Uganda, proud! (Applause)
The House is adjourned to 5 July 2022 at 2.00p.m.
 
 The East African Community Anthem

The National Anthem

(The House rose at 4.40p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 5 July 2022.) 

