

Tuesday, 20 June 2017

Parliament met at 2.51 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to the second sitting of the second session of the 10th Parliament. I hope that you had time to interact with your constituents and other stakeholders. 

On the Budget day, I had indicated that the Business Committee would sit to chart out the legislative programme on Thursday, 22 June 2017 at 11.00 a.m. I am, therefore, giving notice to the chairpersons again to come and we handle that.      

Honourable members, when the House was prorogued, the business pending was saved and once the committees have completed their work, we should start, at the earliest opportunity, to handle what is outstanding. However, I would like to point out a number of Bills that have stalled and are like an albatross on our heads. 

I have in mind the Biotechnology and Biosafety Bill; I would like to see it finished early in this second session. The Pension Liberalisation Bill and the Marriage and Divorce Bill should also be handled. Honourable members, the Divorce Act is part of our law; you should look at volume 6, it is there and is not being introduced. However, on a serious note, I think that it is important that we debate and take a decision either way instead of hoping that the Bill will just disappear; they will not disappear but we shall deal with and conclude them.

In addition, honourable members, our country is part of the Convention on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women but for the last seven years, there has been no country report to the United Nations. I hope that the relevant ministry will fulfil that obligation, which is a treaty obligation. 

As a country, we have not ratified the operational protocol to the convention. This means that even if there is violation, no Ugandan can file a complaint to the United Nations even where there is a breach. Therefore, I hope that the Government will address this urgently and ensure that there is a possibility of giving access to the citizens to raise their complaints for breach of the convention.

There was the Maputo Protocol which we also ratified, but again we were required to file reports to the African Union but this has not been done since its ratification. The other areas that I would like us to address is the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs). I have been speaking about this matter for some time; I do not know which minister is responsible for the SDGs. We need to know who we should hold accountable because we should know every year how far we have gone on the SDGs. However, to date, we do not know who is in charge of the SDGs.

I would like again, to ask the Rt Hon. Prime Minister - and this will be the third time I am asking - that the matter for who is designated to handle SDGs should be handled. 

About our work, honourable members, we had agreed that part of our community output would be to ensure that we have Bills, we have policies and budgets and we should indicate compliance with the SDGs but in the first session, I did not see this. Equally, I did not see any assessment on the principles of gender and equity compliance, which is a requirement under the Public Finance Management Act. I also did not see an assessment of compliance of the Human Rights Checklist.

Henceforth, honourable members and the Clerk, it will be necessary for the House to make those assessments; we may also need to make some adjustments to some of our Rules of Procedure but if we do not do that, we shall not be able to carry out proper oversight. I, therefore, instruct the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline to handle that proposal and report back to this House.

Honourable members, during the State of the Nation Address, you heard the Head of State urging the police not to arrest people for being idle and disorderly and this was under the Penal Code Act. However, that part of the law was a subject of litigation in the Constitutional court. It was invalidated many years ago.

It was expected that after the court ruling, the Office of the Attorney-General and the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs would move to propose deletion of the section from the Penal Code. This has not been done and citizens continue to suffer unnecessarily. I am, therefore, directing the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs to present before this House, a motion for amendment of the Penal Code Act, in relation to this offence so that it is removed from our laws.

Again, honourable members, on 23 May 2017, His Excellency the President extended the registration of Simcards to 30 August 2017. However, no one has yet come to explain to the country the following:

    1. What will be the fate of young Ugandans who have phones but are not eligible to hold national identification cards, mainly those who are 17 years and below?

    2. When will NIRA rollout the distribution of national identification cards that are still stuck in the stores of NIRA and have not reached the owners? We would like to know what the citizens need to do about that issue.

    3. When I was in Arua a few days ago, I was told that anyone who has lost an identity card must come to Kampala to replace it. One has to travel all the way from Kisoro to replace the card in Kampala; we would like to have answers on that. 

As we speak now, the first month of those three months is almost gone. We, therefore, need information and guidance to the population on what will happen and how they can beat the deadline or how they will access their national identity cards.

I would like to also talk about our conduct in the plenary. Honourable members, when we were electing the EALA legislators, I had restrained myself from speaking about the conduct of Members so that it does not affect the outcome of that election but I was very disturbed by what happened. 

There was gross breach of our Rules of Procedure, chanting of party slogans in the plenary, bring party flags and symbols, heckling and shouting. I think that it was not in good spirit and I hope that in future, we shall conduct ourselves in an honourable manner even if we are excited about our candidates. I think what we did was not necessary. However, I did not want to endanger the results that is why I kept quiet. 

The second part has to do with conduct of members during state functions like the State of the Nation Address and Budget Speech, where some members are so intolerant that they heckle and shout down the speech of the Head of State. Why don’t you just listen, come back here and trash the speech from this plenary? Believe me the comments I get from the citizens is that they do not appreciate that conduct. (Applause)

As I informed you of my colleagues, the Speakers in the region, each time we finish they ask me how this can happen to the Head of State because in those countries, it does not happen. Therefore, honourable members, whether you like what the Head of State is saying or not, we have a time to bash what he has said here in the plenary; so, I hope that this will not happen again. If it does, honourable members, I will do something about it. 

Last week, the members of Parliament in Zambia heckled the President and 30 of them were suspended by the Speaker of Zambia. Therefore, those who heckle here are also candidates for suspension. (Laughter) 

Honourable members, last weekend we had a parliamentary outreach in West Nile and I would like to thank the Deputy Prime Minister and the Members of Parliament from West Nile and the leaders of West Nile for hosting us. Among the things we discussed was the continued underfunding of the local governments, the decline in resources overall for them, the low payment of the districts and sub county councillors, taxation of those small earnings and the poor state of roads in the West Nile region. The other unique issue is the refugee situation.

Honourable members, this presents a very big challenge. In the West Nile region, we have not gazetted settlements so we do not have official settlements. There are over a million refugees in that region and their being there has put pressure on the vegetation, the natural resources, there is strain on the schools and strain on the medical services. It is exceedingly hard for those people to handle all those situations.

Worse still, because we have no settlements, the communities are the ones that have the refugees. The United Nations has no framework agreements with the host communities so there is no one to even pay them rent or anything for the land they have given out. 

Uganda, as a country, has borne an exceptionally high burden of the refugees on behalf of the United Nations and in my view, the United Nations should carry out greater corporate social responsibilities. For instance, after the food has been distributed, what remains in the community? Nothing remains. There is no budget for reforestation. The trees have been severely decimated because of the numbers of refugees but there is no budget to handle that. 

There are no more roads in West Nile because when the heavy trucks are trying to reach where the refugees are, they also cause destruction. That is why I am saying that the United Nations should be obliged to carry a bigger burden, including infrastructure development. 

Since the Secretary General is coming, Rt Hon. Prime Minister, I do hope that you people will have the courage to say these things to Mr Guterres so that we help our people. When the damage remains here, their life goes on but for us, things are not good. 

I also hope that we shall amend the Refugee Act because it is no longer adequate taking into account the changed circumstances, the big numbers and the impact on the population. I hope that the Government will look for an opportunity to review that law. 

Honourable members, I have been moving to different districts for your functions and one of the things I have found is that there are complaints about the guidelines for the women entrepreneurship funds. I have been told that they are very complicated. I heard it in Serere, West Nile and other places. 

Personally, I have not seen the guidelines; so, I would like to ask the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development to take an interest in that because wherever I go, I get that complaint; take an interest in what the guidelines are like and how they can be simplified to support our people. 

Finally, yesterday, we had the pleasure of hosting the Minister of Health for the World Sickle Cells Day. Honourable members, we are not doing enough for the people suffering from sickle cells. During this forthcoming budget cycle, I would like to ask the Government to put more serious interventions. It is very expensive to treat someone who has got sickle cells. The families cannot afford it. I would like to ask for the support of the Members so that we are able to help those people. 

Thank you very much. There were a few Members who had one or two issues. 

3.06
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Serere): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to comment on the conduct of the Members. I was so disappointed and taken aback on Friday evening while watching NTV when I saw and heard the State Minister for Lands, Housing and Urban Development calling her colleague a prostitute. I think that type of language and conduct should be condemned. I was waiting to hear a comment from either hon. Lokodo, or the Prime Minister or the Chairperson of Uganda Women’s Parliamentary Association (UWOPA) but I have not yet heard it.

It is very disheartening for a lady to call a fellow lady a prostitute. I remember in the last session, when one gentleman went on TV and said that colleagues here were acting like prostitutes, we took a firm position here and we asked our committee to handle it with the Uganda Communications Commission (UCC) though I do not know how far they have gone. Therefore, if this type of behaviour continues with public leaders, who are even ministers, I think this brings the ministry –(Interruption) 

THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and hon. Okupa, for giving way. I would like to inform this honourable House that Cabinet already took a decision on the matter of discipline or indiscipline. There is a very substantive subcommittee of Cabinet, chaired by the Rt Hon. First Deputy Prime Minister and other members. I am also a member and we are seriously handling matters within Cabinet, which have a bearing. 

The issue that hon. Elijah Okupa has raised concerns members of Cabinet –(Interjection)– he mentioned a minister; I do not know whether there is a minister who is not a Cabinet member. I am giving hon. Okupa genuine information and he allowed me to do so. Considering what the Speaker has just communicated, namely that we should listen to one another, I beg that I am listened to. 

I thought I should give hon. Elijah Okupa and the august House information about the efforts that Cabinet has taken to establish a substantive Cabinet committee to deal with such matters. I promise that we will go by that and make sure that we do not injure the image of Ugandans. I thank you. 

MR OKUPA: Thank you, Government Chief Whip. Madam Speaker –(Interruption) 

MR ODONGA-OTTO: Madam Speaker, you are the head of this institution and hon. Nantaba is a Member of this House; the information I would like to give my friend, hon. Okupa and the House, is that you should exercise powers as the head of this institution. 

Whatever the Executive is doing, the President is the head of the Executive. You should exercise powers under your discretion empowered by the rules to ensure that we have disciplinary action on such a member who used un-parliamentary language on an honourable colleague - hon. Nantaba. You cannot talk to a senior minister in a very casual manner in public. It is painful because she is a woman and a mother of someone; so, something should be done to discipline the other member. 

MR OKUPA: Thank you, hon. Odonga-Otto. As I conclude, I heard people whisper that the honourable Minister of State for Lands, Housing and Urban Development, hon. Persis Namuganza, was the one on TV calling our colleague, hon. Nantaba such. I do not know from where she got that from.

But also on the Budget Day, it was very uncomfortable to most of us; we threatened even to walk out when the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development used some derogatory words regarding this institution. (Applause) He claimed that this institution is corrupt; he said that if we wanted him to wash our dirty linen in public, “I can go ahead and do so. I know what you are doing in Parliament.” That was a loaded statement. 

The Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should come here and explain. He should name those people. (Applause) He should go ahead and name those people who are corrupt in this institution. Without naming them, it will remain painful to us. We thought that you, Madam Speaker, will bring the minister to order that day –(Interruption)

MR SSEWUNGU: Madam Speaker, I would like to thank the honourable member for giving way. The information I want to give is that recently, we were in the Public Accounts Committee. We had a very serious matter about permanent secretaries underrating Members of Parliament. It is painful to reduce Ssewungu to a level of just a man thinking about money for cars.

We cannot tolerate this kind of underrating the Members of Parliament. The process we go through, the people we represent hold us in high esteem but underrating us is very common. In addition to what we are saying – one time hon. Namuganza was on CBS radio. She was abusing her fellow ministers directly. I would like to bring it to the attention of the Chief Whip of Government that this matter is escalating.  We are also talking about this hon. Namuganza who is also not very common here but there are also others that are doing the same. 

As I conclude my information, I am a Member of Parliament. When I move out, I am respected. This business of civil servants, some ministers – we sit in the same House - they take us for the category of poor people, who are always languishing. We need to fight that and stop it. Members of Parliament are not small people. I am a presidential material my friend. (Laughter)
 
MR OKUPA: The Government Chief Whip has stated that they are taking that action from the Cabinet level but at Parliament level – ministers are Members of Parliament. They should be brought to book. They should face the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline. The honourable minister must tell us why she was undermining a fellow colleague. Without that, a disciplinary action must be taken on the honourable minister or we ask the President of this country to relieve her of her duties. They are embarrassing the President. We cannot have these types of ministers who go on radios and TVs abusing their colleagues. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, honourable members. I think we shall have to arrange to get the recording because I did not listen. Then we shall determine whether the committee should take them u

3.14
MR ANTHONY OKELLO (NRM, Kioga County, Amolatar): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have listened to the Bills most of which were Bills that were saved from the Ninth Parliament and brought forward to the Tenth Parliament. There was a very famous Bill that was being sponsored by hon. David Bahati. It was the Anti-Homosexuality Bill. To date, I do not hear the fate of this Bill and yet, all the Bills that were saved from the Ninth Parliament were brought forward to the Tenth Parliament. 

Could we kindly know what the fate of this Bill is? Thank you, very much.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, before another Member comes on the Floor, there is no Bill at the moment. We enacted the law; it was sent to the President and assented to and then it was nullified. We are, therefore, required to bring a new Bill for first reading. That is why I did not talk about it.

3.16
MR WILFRED NIWAGABA (Independent, Ndorwa County East, Kabale): Madam Speaker, in your communication, you mentioned two critical matters: One, the Bills which were saved by this august House; I thought that the proper procedure would be that they would be read afresh for the new Members to get copies and we proceed from there. 

The second issue you raised is the direction to the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs to come up with a motion to amend the Penal Code in the respect of the section that had been declared null and void by the Constitutional Court.

I am aware that the Constitutional Court has nullified very many sections of various laws. I do not know whether it would not be prudent to have a compilation of all the laws and the sections that have been affected by the Constitutional Court’s decision, including the recommendations of the Supreme Court in election petition no.1 of 2016 and see whether the respective committees of this House - since Cabinet seems not to be interested in implementing the judgements of court - come up with Bills to put into effect the decision of court. To me, I see that would be the way to deal with this. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, if you could present to me those which have been nullified by courts that have – I was doing this because the President addressed it, the police had also addressed it but it is still in our law books. It is up to you to bring the list of those which have been nullified and then, we can also move to formally remove them from the statute books.

3.18
MS CECILIA OGWAL (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am speaking in response to your communication from the Chair. There are two issues, which I would like to add to those that you have raised: One, it is the visit to Arua; the first outreach of the Tenth Parliament. I think that it was commendable effort by the Tenth Parliament. We were able to touch ground with the people. We were able to listen to the leaders and we were able to come back with matters of serious concern in that community.

There is one serious matter, which we should have raised; the issue of refugees. Members, the refugees are flooded in our country. That is an issue, which I appeal that we need to help Uganda – not so much West-Nilers; we need to help Uganda –(Interruption)

MR FUNGAROO: Since you came back from West Nile, there are some new developments, which we need to be put on the record on the same issue. This is in regards to the preparation for the refugee solidarity summit. I have a document with a cover letter from the Office of the Minister of Disaster Preparedness and Refugees, hon. Hillary Onek.

Madam Speaker, I do not know if you have seen this document in your office. This document has many problems. It is not worth to even be associated with the Government of Uganda, to be presented to any international conference in which the United Nations head will be in attendance. We would, therefore, like to implore this House, first of all, to call the ministry to order to look at the preparations for that summit.

Members of West Nile Parliamentary Caucus, the local government leaders are asking questions. Are they participating? Do they have anything to present on the agenda? The accreditation process is over but no Member of Parliament from West Nile has been accredited. These are some of the problems.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, this is a heads of state summit. It is the President hosting it. I, therefore, doubt whether the minister will be speaking in that meeting. It is the President who is hosting the meeting.

Secondly, the issue which was a problem there when we left has been handled. The one of the local leaders participating in the meeting; it has been handled.

MR FUNGAROO: Madam Speaker, let me give some more information on this. This letter is requesting us Members - 

THE SPEAKER: Is it written to you?

MR FUNGAROO: Yes, I think to all Members of Parliament from West Nile. It is addressed to me, hon. Member of Parliament for Obongi; Madi-Okollo and all those from the refugees hosting areas. I have got hon. Ogama talking about the same. It is saying that we should provide lists of projects or issues to be presented to the UN Secretary General so that they will be funded by the money generated from this project. 

In my view, we should have had a meeting first to look at such a project and develop a project document worth being marketed internationally.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think the President knows what to do. He is the one who is hosting and knows why the meeting is taking place.

GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: Madam Speaker, the issue came up in Arua but the present situation is that that document he is talking about has already been presented and is on the internet. The position of Government has already been finalised. Therefore, it is too late. (Laughter) I think let him prepare for something else but not this. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Ogwal, please, conclude.

MS CECILIA OGWAL: Thank you, Rt Hon. Prime Minister. Madam Speaker, I thought it would also be important to add another important matter that concerns climate change. You know that most parts of Uganda suffered a lot of famine and hunger due to climate change. We have raised questions on this Floor of Parliament to the Prime Minister and other relevant sectors in the Government, to update us about the status of the negotiations that are done every year that would help us address the issue of adaptation or mitigation of climate change disasters. We have been asking all these things.

Madam Speaker, if you could help Parliament to get a comprehensive report addressing the crisis related to climate change. These are things, which are lacking. We also pleaded with Government to bring a Bill that would specifically address the issue of environment and climate change - Interruption)

MR OKUPA: Thank you, hon. Ogwal. Madam Speaker, I think since the Paris Agreement was signed – we are now at the implementation level – no agreement has been laid in this House for the information of Members. I wish the Minister of Water and Environment could also go ahead and bring that agreement to be laid on the Floor to enable people understand. We are now at the implementation level and we are again going for UN Climate Change Conference COP 23 in Bonn this November 2017. We are expected to report on how far we have gone in implementing the issues that were agreed on in the Paris Agreement. 

It is very important and urgent that the Minister of Water and Environment presents to this House the agreement and the steps they have taken in those areas of mitigation and adaptation before we go to Bonn, Germany in November 2017.

MS CECILIA OGWAL: Madam Speaker, to conclude, I have just come from a meeting addressing those issues and we have been told that there are very many projects, which are being funded by different agencies, costing many millions of dollars. Those projects are scattered all over the country. I have been asking: do we have one in Dokolo or in the neighbourhood of Dokolo, which I can go and see? I have no idea. I do not think even you can stand before Parliament and say, “in Kamuli, there is a project, which is being funded by climate change” either green fund or whatever. We really want to know as parliamentarians. These millions of dollars are coming to help us. Can we know those projects? Where are they? What are those projects addressing and who are the drivers of those projects in our respective areas? 

Madam Speaker, this thing is happening now and we are not addressing it. These people are just going ahead thinking we just talk politics and are not interested. We are very interested in developing this country as well as the welfare of our people. 

Really, it is important that as Parliament, we address the issue of climate change. Climate disaster is affecting our people. The Government must come and tell us how much millions of dollars we have received and from which donor and for which projects. In addition, where are these projects and who are driving these projects?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I hope the Government can tell us what difficulty they have in bringing those agreements here. I have been talking about it since the Ninth Parliament. We have never seen the Paris Agreement here. We have not seen Marrakesh Agreement here and Bonn is coming. What is the problem? Why don’t you want to bring those things here? Why do you attend those meetings and just keep quiet? We want some answers. 

3.27
MR JOHNSON MUYANJA (NRM, Mukono County South, Mukono): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand to bring a matter of national importance concerning the motor vehicle inspection centres. I have been hearing over the radios that the deadline for motor vehicle inspection is at the end of June. 

I am worried because as I stand here today, Namanve inspection centre is not yet operational. Nabbingo inspection centre is not yet operational. Kisubi inspection centre on Entebbe Road is not yet operational. It is only Kawanda inspection centre which is operational but the other regional centres are not yet ready and yet, they are declaring a deadline of inspection of vehicles.

Secondly, Madam Speaker, I went to Uganda Revenue Authority (URA) and when you look at their database, Uganda currently has 635,656 private registered vehicles. This does not include Government vehicles. They are charging Shs 120,000 per vehicle for inspection annually.

What I am requesting is for the minister concerned to let us know – when you look at the budget, we do not have any income that comes from this, whereas the collection is over Shs 72 billion annually. (Applause) Does this SGS motor vehicle inspection belong to the Government or an individual? (Applause)

Madam Speaker, I thought it is important for the inspection deadline to be extended for some good time. Secondly, I request for a special audit and comprehensive report to be laid on the Floor of Parliament. Otherwise, we are losing money –(Interjections)- They are collecting. I went there myself with my two vehicles –(Interjections)- Information allowed.

THE SPEAKER:  No, honourable members. I think what we want is for the minister to explain to us whether there is a deadline. If there is a deadline, what will happen to those who will not have registered? Thirdly, where are the proceeds from that inspection? Do they go to the Consolidated Fund? We want to know.

MR MUYANJA: Let me conclude, Madam Speaker. When I went to Namanve, I was referred to Kawanda. I went to Kawanda because I wanted to establish exactly what was happening. The vehicle I took was a new one. I told them this is double taxation. As you import the car, you pay for inspection. Why am I paying again? After noticing that I was likely to be troublesome, they said; “Okay, your car is well done.” They cleared me immediately and 
I left. However, I saw people suffering on the inspection machines. You can spend a whole day there and yet they are doing nothing but cheating Ugandans. I thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: We shall require a statement from the Minister of Works and Transport. I even remember when it was starting, there was a controversy here. Does the Government Chief Whip wish to say anything?

3.31
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank hon. Muyanja for raising this important issue. 

Yes, the Minister of Works and Transport presented a statement here in December 2016 but that was then and we are now in June 2017. Therefore, the honourable member is right to demand for an update, first of all and also an explanation on issues of revenue collection and the general preparedness of the station.

I would like to commit myself that the Minister of Works and Transport will come with a statement responding to what the member has raised and if there is need to extend the deadlines – these deadlines are put by us – because we are not ready, then I have no objection to an extension. What we want are services to the people of Uganda.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Ruth Nankabirwa, maybe you can add one more thing. You know, the Police used to handle that exercise. I do not know whether we are now replacing Ugandans with these foreigners to do that work. Yes, we are taking away training and skills from the Police. We would like to know what will happen to the Police inspectors.

MR MUKITALE: Madam Speaker, I am from the transport and logistics background. We have in the Ministry of Works and Transport a department responsible and also a government run Inspector of Vehicles (IOV). 

When Government has just declared BUBU (Buy Uganda Build Uganda), to stop importing companies to do business for Ugandans when we have capacity - I am wondering how Cabinet even cleared this. We cannot be talking of promoting Uganda while we are making our Ministry of works and Transport redundant and we are bringing SGS from France and killing capacity of our Police and Ministry of works and Transport. 

Madam Speaker, before the minister talks about revenue, he should know that this revenue can be generated by other Ugandan companies. The bigger question we should ask is why a foreign company and not a Ugandan company especially if we are talking of local content and promoting Uganda. 

THE SPEAKER: Let the minister come and answer all those issues. It is important.

3.34
MR WILLIAM NZOGHU (FDC, Busongora County North, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The SGS company that hon. Muyanja has just talked about was simply handpicked as it did not compete with any other company and nobody even knows how it won the tender.

The other critical issue is about the charges. The small cars are charged more and less for the buses. Buses pay about Shs 40,000 and Shs 80,000 and above for small cars. Therefore, the question is, what formula or design is SGS going to apply that someone who has a Toyota Premio is paying above Shs 90,000 and a bus operator pays Shs 40,000?

Madam Speaker, when you pay and take your vehicle to SGS for inspection and they find that there is a fault, you are asked to return the car later but you have to pay again. Therefore, the number of times they find faults on your car is the number of times you will pay. Therefore in one year, if they find 10 faults, you pay 10 times. That is the issue I wanted to bring up.

3.35
MR SEMAKULA LUTTAMAGUZI (DP, Nakaseke South County, Nakaseke): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance. 

Recently the Government instituted a commission of land inquiry headed by Justice Catherine Bamugemereire. The commission visited my constituency of Nakaseke South which is one of the major victims of land grabbing and evictions by people who are highly connected to the power centres in Uganda. The commission visited the following sub counties in my constituency: Kapeeka, Nakaseke, Kasangombe, Semuto and Ngoma. 

Given the sensitivity of this matter affecting everyone in this country, Madam Speaker, through your office, I pray that the commission be accorded more time of at least one year instead of the six months.

Madam Speaker, I know the commission was instituted by the Executive but your office can liaise with the Executive such that the time lag can be extended. 

I am optimistic that if this commission is given enough time and resources, it can do better work for the benefit of Ugandans. Otherwise, everyone in the country is crying of land grabbers who are highly connected to the power centres. These land grabbers come with guns and when you try to follow up the matter, you end up almost not being assisted anywhere. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, my office will consult with the lands minister and see the terms of reference and how the matter can be handled and get back to you. 

Hon. Mutonyi, you wanted to raise something but your Bill will be here for first reading tomorrow. I have checked with the printery.

3.38
MS SAFIA NALULE (NRM, Persons with Disabilities): Thank you very Much, Madam Speaker. I would like to bring to you a matter of national importance. The requirement for a Certificate of Gender and Equity Compliance requires us to ensure that we observe the principles of gender and equity when we are planning and budgeting in this country.

Madam Speaker, the 9th Parliament passed the Public Finance Management Act which came with four provisions requiring us to ensure gender and equity budgeting and planning. On top of that, it came with sanctions for institutions which do not comply to this requirement.

Madam Speaker, you remember that the passage of the 1995 Constitution came with provisions of affirmative action and indeed Chapter Four of the Constitution is a Bill of Rights and since the enactment of this Constitution, we have never had an innovation from this Parliament to ensure that we comply with issues of human rights, gender and equity.

It was an innovation by the Speaker and I for this certificate. For her, she was concerned as to how we can implement the provisions, the convention and elimination of all forms of discrimination against women thus the certificate of gender. I was personally concerned with how issues of persons with disabilities and other marginalised groups could be implemented.

Therefore, we came up with these provisions in the Public Finance and Management Act, 2015. 

This innovation, Madam Speaker, is only here in Uganda and countries like Gambia have come to benchmark. I am happy that we Members who entered Parliament on the affirmative action ticket like the women representatives and persons with disabilities came up with this innovation. 

To us persons with disabilities, the first time we came into political representation, we were called Museveni’s people and that we have come to fill up space and nothing more. But at least we have disproved this kind of thinking. 

Madam Speaker, I would like to bring to your attention that last week, the finance minister launched a project worth over Shs 31 billion on gender and equity budgeting which is a capacity development plan which I would like to interest you in following up.

This capacity building plan is a five-year plan which is going to build capacity of local government leaders, Parliament and every key player to ensure that we accomplish the gender and equity plans. 
Madam Speaker, you came and officiated at this function. However, one commissioner from the Equal Opportunities Commission told me to leave the group preparing to take photos because they wanted to have a good group photo.

I was so upset knowing that I have the brains to initiate something important but I was asked to leave members taking a group photograph –(Interjections)– I know. At one time, the United States had a disabled President but it has never been erased in the history of the United States.
Honourable members, gender, equity planning and budgeting is a process of allocating resources, programmes and decision making fairly to the various categories of people without any discrimination. 

I know that gender and equity planning is a sure route to transforming Uganda from a low income to a middle income country. Why? Because it does not leave anybody behind in view of the SDGs.  

Honourable members, countries which have undergone transformation like Malaysia have given themselves very difficult tasks. And if we would like to transform, we have to ensure that we take very difficult decisions like doing away with corruption, changing the mind-set and getting everybody on board.

I would like to impress you with the saying of His Excellency President Barack Obama who said, “If we want change, we should not wait for any other person or any other time. We are the change that we want and we are the ones we have been waiting for.”

The Tenth Parliament should leave behind a legacy of setting the goal to transform Uganda from a low income to a middle income country using this tool.

I am sure there is no honourable member here who would not like members of his or her constituency to benefit from the transformation process like having good roads and health facilities among others.

Madam Speaker and honourable members, I would like you to read and understand this five-year project so that you can get on board of the transformation process.

We also need ourselves as Members of Parliament to set indicators for our constituencies and for the whole nation so that we can be on board. 

My other prayer is that can you kindly document your work because at the end of the term, you will have to account to your constituency. We do a lot of work and by the end of the term if you have not documented anything then nobody will know.

Madam Speaker, I would like to request the Tenth Parliament to start documenting the work we are doing. We could probably write a quarterly bulletin so that we can report to the people. 

I would also like to request the honourable members to know the budget calendar so that you can follow-up the budgeting process. (Laughter)

Finally, I would like to thank the Speaker, the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development who vowed that he would not allow any budget to pass through his ministry when it does not have the provisions for gender and equity. I thank you very much. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, hon. Safia Nalule. I am sorry that someone tried to push you away because they thought you would not look nice in the photograph. We need to sensitise people that we are all human beings and that we should accept people as they are. We should continue advocating for equity.

Honourable members, the new directory is out and you will get one in your pigeonhole. 

Please join me in welcoming in the public gallery the students and teachers of St Elizabeth Secondary School Kidetok, in Kasilo County, Serere District. They are represented by hon. Elijah Okupa and hon. Hellen Adoa. (Applause)

We also have the children of Apapai Primary School, hon. Elijah Okupa’s primary school. They are here to observe the proceedings of this House. The teachers and students you are welcome. (Applause)

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS

THE SPEAKER: Agriculture minister, you have two statements but I do not know which one you would like start with. 

3.47
THE MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES 	 (Mr Vincent Ssempijja): Thank you, Madam Speaker.

Honourable members, allow me to invite the state minister for animal industry to handle the issue of acaricides and then I will handle the next one. 

3.48
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (ANIMAL INDUSTRY) (Ms Joy Kabatsi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. This is an information paper on the steps we are taking in as far as acaricides or tick resistance in the country is concerned. 

The problem of tick resistance to acaricides was first reported around 2010 when farmers from Kiruhura District observed that ticks were not dying after regular application of acaricides.  Reports at the time indicated alarming rates of cattle losses attributed to tick borne diseases. For example, up to 60 head of cattle were reportedly dying from tick borne diseases daily in Kiruhura District between 2012 and 2013.

This represented a gross loss of Shs 48 to Shs 60 million per day or about Shs 18 billion annually. It has been established that the high tick borne disease incidence was widely due to acaricide failure as a result of the development of tick resistance. 

This was corroborated by a preliminary finding by Makerere University that confirmed the presence of a tick population that is resistant to commonly used acaricides. Many farmers including the President in Kisozi also experienced the same problem. Tick resistance has been officially recognised to exist in up to 27 districts in central, western and southern parts of the country. The districts are named in this report. 

The purpose of the information paper is to provide an appraisal on the current situation of tick resistance to acaricides in the country. It is also to inform of the measures the Ministry of Agriculture is proposing to implement or tackle the problem. It is also to apprise you on what the Ministry of Agriculture has done so far to address the problem. And it is further to brief you about the challenges the Ministry of Agriculture is facing.

Ministry of Agriculture response to the ticks and tick-borne disease challenge: 

The ministry has identified the districts with a problem of tick resistance and developed a proposal to comprehensively deal with this challenge. The proposal involves short-term, medium-and long-term measures.

Short-term measures

During my trip to France last year, I met and held discussions with top officials with Ceva Sante Animale, a French pharmaceutical company engaged in the manufacture of acaricides. The company offered us 600 litres of an acaricide called Vectoclor to help address the tick-resistance challenge. It is reported to have been successfully used to eliminate the acaricide-resistant tick in many parts of the world, including Tanzania and Democratic Republic of Congo.

Vectoclor is a combination acaricide which contains two pesticides (Chlorpyrifos and Cypermethrin) and one insecticide synergist which enhances the activities of the two insecticides, making it stronger. The acaricide arrived in the country a couple of weeks ago and will be used for efficacy tests in Kiruhura District on selected farms.

The Ministry of Agriculture has undertaken sensitisation of farmers and the district leadership in Kiruhura in preparation for the cleansing exercise. In addition, two community-based young individuals, known as the Animal Resource Key Persons from each of the 82 parishes were enlisted. They will be trained and equipped to spearhead the cattle-cleansing exercise in their respective parishes under the supervision of district technical staff with backstopping from the Ministry of Agriculture.

The model will be repeated in all the severely affected districts and the ministry has already enlisted the Animal Resource Key Persons in those districts. 
The ministry has contacted FAO for technical and financial assistance to the Government to tackle the problem. FAO has promised to collaborate with the Ministry of Agriculture in finding the solution. 

The ministry has ordered for a further 6,000 litres of Vectoclor, expected in July, to cleanse ticks in the other severely affected districts.

Medium-term measures

The main effect of ticks on livestock is attributed to the deadly diseases they transmit. The climatic condition in most parts of Uganda provides ideal conditions for the survival of different species of ticks namely: Rhipicephalus appendiculatus the vector for East Coast Fever, Boophilus decoloratus which transmits Babesiosis and Anaplasmosis and Amblyomma variegatum, which is the vector for heartwater. Out of these diseases the most dangerous and costliest to control is East Coast Fever.

This disease kills up to 30 per cent of indigenous calves and close to 100 per cent of untreated exotic and cross-bred cattle. It is estimated that the country incurs annual losses of up to $86.3 million due to livestock diseases and 70 per cent of this is due to tick-borne diseases mentioned above. Treating a single case of East Coast Fever can cost more than Shs 200,000 with no guarantee of recovery. 

A vaccine called the trivalent Muguga Cocktail which can be used to immunize susceptible cattle against East Coast Fever now exists. Due to its high cost and technicalities involved in its delivery, it is only available in a few areas and farmers. As a medium-term measure to address the East Coast Fever problem, the Ministry of Agriculture will upscale and out-scale the use of this vaccine as a way of protecting the sensitive herds.

My ministry in collaboration with the private sector will train its field staff as well as interested private veterinary practitioners in the delivery of the vaccine. We shall also increase sensitisation of farmers to make them aware of its availability in the ministry and the ministry will ensure that all affected districts have centres where the vaccine can easily be accessed. As for other tick-borne diseases, namely: Anaplasmosis, Babesiosis and heartwater, a technical evaluation showed that their vaccines are not satisfactorily safe and managing these diseases through treatment is more applicable since they are relatively cheap to treat. Therefore, the Ministry of Agriculture will concentrate on vaccination against East Coast Fever.

The Ministry of Agriculture will undertake acaricide zoning and rotation, through compartmentalisation into “acari-zones”. Each acari-zone will be allocated a specific class of acaricide and only that class of acaricide will be allowed in that acari-zone. From time to time, as will be prescribed by the Ministry of Agriculture, we will rotate the classes of acaricides used in the different acari-zones. This is premised on the fact that the longer an acaricide is used in a given place, the higher the chances of ticks in that area developing resistance to that acaricide. Therefore, acaricide rotation will delay development of acaricide-resistance.

As part of the strategy to introduce acari-zones, the Ministry of Agriculture will undertake tick-resistance studies in all parts of the country to develop tick-resistance maps on which the acari-zones will be based. 

Long-term measures 

For the long term, the most commonly used methods to control ticks and the disease they transmit is through use of chemicals known as acaricides. They are applied on the body of the animals through dipping, spraying or use of pour-on preparations. 

The effects of prolonged exposure of these chemicals to people who use them; the long-term effect on the environment in which they are disposed; the long-term effects on the animals on which they are applied; and the effects on humans who consume animal products containing residues of these chemicals are dangerous and yet to be quantified. 

Therefore, as a long-term measure, the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries intends to reduce use of chemicals as a measure to control ticks and tick-borne diseases. The Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries is collaborating with the Government of Cuba to explore the development of a vaccine against our indigenous tick species. Cuba itself has managed to reduce the chemical use against ticks by over 50 per cent through use of anti-tick vaccines. Candidate tick antigens are already available, which can be tested and modified where necessary to achieve this. 

Here, I want to report that the Cuban scientists with the vaccine will get here on 22 June 2017, which is on Thursday this week, with the vaccine for us to try.

The Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries is implementing a single spine extension system and has stepped up recruitment of technical staff at sub-county level. We now have veterinary doctors and agriculture assistants at every sub-county level. This is expected to improve management of ticks and tick-borne diseases in the country by stepping up the regulation of the acaricides supply chain and improving monitoring of their use at farm-level. 

A draft policy on control of ticks and tick-borne diseases has been developed with clear integrated strategies that include zoning of the acaricides. The draft policy recommends a review of the Animal Disease Act, 1964 to update legislation related to control of ticks and tick-borne diseases. The draft policy has been submitted to Cabinet for consideration.

The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is to approve funds as requested by the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries to implement emergency control of ticks and tick-borne diseases in the country. 

Cabinet is to expeditiously review the policy and legal framework for management of ticks and tick-borne diseases. 

Conclusion

The problem of tick-resistance to acaricides has been gradually developing over the last two decades and cannot be overcome in a short time. The methods and approaches to solving the problem have been ad-hoc and fire-fighting type. There is need for systematic and scientific approach to deal with the problem. The policy and institutional environment required to implement the strategies above calls for urgent review. I submit. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, minister. I would have wanted to begin with hon. Bafaki, who first raised this issue, but he is not here so let us go to Kiruhura. 

MR ODONGA-OTTO: Madam Speaker, I rise on a point of order under Rule 73 of our Rules of Procedure that relates to dress code. I rise to challenge the dress code of three honourable members in this House; hon. Kiiza, hon. Nzoghu and hon. Anthony Okello. 

Madam Speaker, I seek your guidance on the interpretation of Rule 73 and as I read the rules, I beg that you help me so that they do not get out of the House or probably they stand up for inspection. (Laughter) 

Rule 73 reads, “A Member shall dress in a dignified manner that is to say: a) a suit, a pair of long trousers, jacket, shirt and tie.” 

Madam Speaker, I seek your indulgence on whether the three Members are appropriately dressed. Hon. Abiriga has just moved out so I would like to know if the four Members are appropriately dressed in the spirit of rule 73 of our Rules of Procedure. 

THE SPEAKER: Is it Rule 23? 

MR ODONGA-OTTO: It is Rule 73. I would like to know if they are appropriately dressed because they are wearing shirts without ties on Kaunda suits and whether they are dignified, decent or look honourable enough. Let us start with my colleague, hon. Nzoghu, if he may stand up. (Laughter) 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Nzoghu, please stand up. (Laughter) Let all the Members stand up. Honourable members, under Rule 73 (a), they are wearing safari suits so they are in order. Honourable member, please use three minutes. 

4.09
MS SHEILA KABAIJE (NRM, Woman Representative, Kiruhura): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the honourable Minister of State for Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries for the presentation on the action being taken by Government on the issue of ticks and tick-borne diseases and the resistance to acaricides that has been prevailing for a long time now. 

It is important to note that this case has been going on now for over seven years. I still would like to know why it has taken Government so long to come up to where we are. They say that they are going to start the exercise but they should have started it yesterday or even the other day. It is still not satisfactory because the report does not indicate the exact start date. 

It is also surprising that Government could import only 600 litres well aware of the number of cattle that we have in this country. Six hundred litres litres is really painful; they are going to find the herd gone. Therefore, I would like to know; did it necessitate reaching this alarming level before any action could be taken? 

The people’s livelihood has been depleted and destroyed. People are starving; they have no money for fees and health care. Is there going to be restocking of their herds? Is Government ready to do some restocking? 

Finally, there is an even more urgent need for vaccines for Foot and Mouth Disease. What is Government doing about this? I thank you. 

4.10
MR FRED MWESIGYE (NRM, Nyabushozi County, Kiruhura): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to appreciate the report of the minister, but I feel like shedding tears because there is nothing practical helping the farmers of Kiruhura and all the other cattle keepers in this country. We are only seeing proposed implementation; we are only seeing praises for MAAIF in what they do; and we are seeing the challenges yet this problem has been with us since 2010, as she has stated.

Uganda has 15,000,000 cattle yet this Government has been here. I would like to agree with my colleague when she wonders what this ministry has been doing. We have talked about this for several years. It is absurd and it is very shameful. 
As a cattle keeper and a person who represents cattle keepers, I would like to report that we are suffering. The 50 cows you are talking about is not the correct number; they are more than that.

East Coast fever has 40 different diseases and they all kill cows. Now there is Foot and Mouth Disease, which she has not even talked about. Farmers are not selling anything, any cows, not even milk. Their incomes are in jeopardy and I said it here before. People have no money to pay for their children’s fees but the minister is not talking about that.

Honourable minister, you need to – the senior minister is here - Government has to give you money. Don’t talk about 600 litres. What is 600 litres against 15,000,000 head of cattle? You are talking of 600 head of cattle in the country. What is 600 litres of milk? You are not even ashamed to talk about 600 litres in this august House. It is embarrassing for a minister of Government to talk of 600 litres of milk being exported from this country.

Madam Speaker, I think Government must wake up and handle this problem as an emergency. It is absurd that I talk like this against my Government, but farmers in the entire cattle corridor are suffering and they are not very few. Fifteen million head of cattle is a big asset that brings revenue to this country. 
Therefore, I expect the minister to come up with a concrete and practical report to this House. I pray to you, Madam Speaker, that the minister comes back here, maybe within one week, and tells us the practical way forward and if he has received funds because he has said he has no funds and that finance must provide those funds. Why can’t we get a supplementary, if there is need? I have not seen the minister of agriculture request for a supplementary to tackle this problem head-on. 

MS CECILIA OGWAL: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The person that has been holding the Floor, the hon. Col Fred Mwesigye, is emphasizing the fact that the ministry should come and explain this shortfall. However, I would like to get a clarification. Has this problem just emerged? If not, why was it not in the budget? Why wasn’t it properly budgeted for? You give a challenge to the Members of Parliament because many of us, although we are not Balalo, we keep animals. And we must ensure our animals do not die. If it were in the budget, it would definitely be a matter that would have been supported by all of us. Therefore, I would like to know whether this problem has just emerged. Is it a sudden problem or it has been there before? Why did the ministry not put it in the budget?

COL. MWESIGYE: Thank you for the clarification. As my colleague has stated, and also as the minister stated in her report, this problem started in 2010. It actually came about a long time ago yet Government has been here. This matter has been talked about for several years. Can you imagine saying that they are developing a policy on disease control? It is really very shameful. You better tell us the practical steps that you are taking.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, you know that I have been here for some time and it is really unfortunate. I think the Government should apologise to the cattle farmers in this country –(Applause)– because this matter has been on the Floor of this House several times and in every Parliament. How can a district be under quarantine for five years? How do cattle keepers live?

4.16
MR HENRY KIBALYA (NRM, Bugabula County South, Kamuli): Thank you, Madam Speaker. With due respect to the minister – and if members would agree with me - I would like to request the minister to withdraw this statement and present another statement with a solution to the problems of cattle farmers in this country.

When you look at this statement, you realise that it is titled thus, “Information paper on steps taken so far to address acaricide resistance.” In the same statement, the minister says, “as part of the strategy, the ministry will undertake tick resistance studies in all parts of the country.”

Whatever the minister was presenting is in the future. The ministry is going to; the ministry will; and that the ministry is planning to do this and that; yet we have suffered for long. The minister says that every subcounty has –(Interruption)

MR MPUUGA: Thank you, hon. Kibalya, for giving way. The information I would like to give to my colleague is that – actually calling this an “information paper” is a misuse of the word “information.” On page 3, the minister alludes to Government having identified the districts with the problem but not mentioning them. So, where is the information? 

You go through it and you are not able to find the demarcation, because you find ticks everywhere but you have not told us if these are resistant. How do they go there? How about the others?

If you say that you have information to give us, it is actually misleading information to the farmers. Mentioning on the same page an offer of 600 litres as a grant, donation, procurement, a gift - is this information or some form of scattered knowledge on the problem?

MR KIBALYA: Thank you for that information senior colleague. If you are cautious, you will realise that the minister only mentioned Kiruhura yet the cattle corridor covers more than 30 districts, where Kamuli is inclusive. The minister said that every sub-county has an agricultural assistant and veterinary personnel. I have four sub counties in my constituency, hopefully they will be coming with time, but I have not seen them anywhere.

Therefore, I would like us to take responsibility, as Cabinet and as leaders of this country, to ensure that whatever we say and do is conclusive. We are now attacked by the armyworms and every kind of story will come out. My area now can no longer grow crops and we are only looking at cows. 

The minister visited Cuba last year but up to now, she has not come up with a clear answer. I think she will be visiting another country this year and we wait for the answer next year. I don’t know where we are going.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, before the clarifications, join me in welcoming teachers and children of Bulange Teffe Primary School in Busiki, Namutumba District. They are represented by honourable - is it you? Okay, stand up. There they are. You are welcome. (Applause) They are represented by hon. Akamba and hon. Naigaga. 

Minister, did you want to clarify on something?

MR SSEMPIJJA: Yes, Madam Speaker. I would like to clarify that before honourable members speak about things which have answers - I would like to inform the House that the funds for the acaricides for cleansing have been provided for in the budget for the financial year 2017/2018. As a ministry, we are going to prioritise the procurement of these acaricides in the first quarter, which starts on 1 July this year. So, the funds are there and you passed them here and so – (Interruption)

MS KAWOOYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Is it in order for the senior minister to stand and confuse this House more on clarification, which does not relate to today’s Order Paper? 

I have looked at today’s Order Paper and got to know that it indicates a ministerial statement yet what has been presented by the minister is just an information paper. So, I would like to know whether it is in order for the minister to continue clarifying on a subject matter that is not on the Order Paper and at the same time continue confusing us, well knowing that this was a mere information paper? Is it in order for him to continue discussing an information paper instead of the ministerial statement? Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I was hoping that nobody would go in that direction because this paper is actually not for Parliament. This is a Cabinet paper. It was meant for the Cabinet and I do not know whether Cabinet allowed the minister to bring it in this form. I did not want to go there and that is why I allowed her to read it.

MR SSEMPIJJA: Madam Speaker and honorable members, allow me to – (Interruption)

MR SSEWUUNGU: Madam Speaker, the procedural matter I would like to raise relates to this paper. Is it procedurally okay for me to give the minister some information about the misleading facts because I think it will help them discover why ticks are not dying? 

The minister has stated that there is a problem of fake acaricides. However, I would like to point out that the problem is that there was a company known as Cooper Uganda Limited, which has been in Uganda since the 1960s. Ever since it came into existence, cattle would not die after use of their acaricides. What happened is that the people who got the acaricides used their own “buyayeism” (theft/forgery) and took the trademark to China and thereafter there came on the market, fake Cooper acaricides from China, which was sold to cattle keepers. Immediately this type of acaricides was administered on these animals, they started dying.  

The hon. Dr Sematiko, who was in this House in the Ninth Parliament, under the National Drug Authority, arrested these people and gave out the information. Even the President was given that information. However, the mafias overpowered the hon. Dr Sematiko. As a result, these people continued having their animals die because of the fake acaricides. Actually, the minister has expressed it here that when she –

THE SPEAKER: What are you proposing because we need to find a solution for the farmers?

MR SSEWUNGU: Madam Speaker, first of all, let me put it on the record – the hon. Col. Mwesigye and other members, have cattle –

THE SPEAKER: Even me.

MR SSEWUUNGU: Yes, even you, Madam Speaker. People who own cattle in this country have never asked for acaricides to be provided to them by Government. This is because the acaricides were – (Interjections)– I am concluding and I think this is useful information. So, because of these fake acaricides that were coming –(Interjections)– whatever that word is. We do not teach that word in primary school classes. (Laughter)

Anyhow, Madam Speaker, I am asking the minister, through you, to take interest – (Member time out.)

4.26
MS SYDA BBUMBA (NRM, Nakaseke County North, Nakaseke): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. From what the members have said and going by the type of the paper, which is incomplete and addressed to the wrong forum, I wish to  move that the minister withdraws the said information paper and comes back with a comprehensive report, which will be properly addressed to this Parliament and not Cabinet. (Applause)

Madam Speaker, that paper should include clear causes and solutions – because this information paper does not talk about fake acaricides, which are the cause of resistance – and so the statement should also include what they have done so far. I wish to move, Madam Speaker.

4.28
MS ANNET NYAKECHO (NRM, Tororo County North, Tororo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to second the motion moved by the Chairperson of the Committee on National Economy. Given the fact that the minister seems not to have adequately prepared herself in this presentation; and having noticed that this arose out of a trip she had to France – and I think it was a business discussion - and further noting that this particular information the minister has prepared only targets a small area of the country and not the whole country, yet this Parliament is supposed to sit and legislate for the whole country, I move to strongly second the motion that the minister withdraws this information paper and prepares a comprehensive statement covering the whole country. She should withdraw this information paper with apologies for misleading this House.

4.29
MR GEOFFREY MACHO (NRM, Busia Municipality, Busia): Madam Speaker, given the half-baked information from a workshop, which the minister attended in France and which does not address the core problem facing our farmers in this country – with even a donation of 600 litres of acaricides to the minister because from that workshop, I see no substance in the document she has presented to Parliament; it can’t help our farmers. 

Therefore, I want to second and support the motion moved by Chairperson of the Committee on National Economy that the minister withdraws her workshop paper and brings a comprehensive report that will solve the problem of the farmers of this country. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

4.30
MS MARGARET KOMUHANGI (NRM, Woman Representative, Nakasongola): Madam Speaker, I would like to second the movers of the motion, but strongly move that she addresses the issue of Foot and Mouth Disease (FMD) seriously. In my district, there is a quarantine right now. The farmers are restricted from moving and selling the cattle. However, the ministry has only sent 5,000 doses of vaccines to the entire district that has thousands of animals.

Madam Speaker, when I called the ministry, the commissioner revealed that there are no vaccines in the country at all and that the vaccines can only be procured from Kenya. Animals are dying and farmers are helpless but we have no solution in this paper to address this matter. Therefore, I second my colleague and implore the ministry to really give us a solution to FMD, which is killing animals now and farmers and veterinary doctors have no vaccines at all. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

4.32
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Ms Winfred Kiiza): Madam Speaker, it is indeed disheartening that since 2010, as farmers of this country we have been having a problem, which cannot be sorted out and yet we know that the entire livelihood of individuals depends on agriculture. 

I strongly support the motion calling on the minister to withdraw his document. First of all, this is a document that the minister brought to Parliament with a view of giving us information on the steps being taken by the ministry. However, we are realising that in the document, there are no steps given to us showing what the ministry is undertaking. The only step that I have seen in this document is recruitment of staff at subcounty level, which is also not in the budget. 

The other issue that I am see very seriously is the minister’s silence on the sub-counties that the minister considers to be in the heavily infected districts. Possibly, if the minister was in a position to announce to us the districts they think are highly infected, then we would even be in position to mention some other districts that we know that are suffering from the same problem. 

Therefore, in the subsequent presentation that he will bring to the House, we would like the minister to guide us or to tell us how much money is put aside for this specific activity by the Ministry of Agriculture. The minister has told us that you have money set aside in the financial year 2017/2018 for purposes of fighting tick borne diseases. 

Madam Speaker, something else that needs to come out very clearly is the issue of this Frenchman that the minister interacted with. Was it for purposes of cracking a deal with him so that you introduce him to the country to provide the acaricides? These are some of the problems that we get. When people come here to bid for the supply of certain items in the country, some people have already cut deals with them. I would not get surprised if when a contract is forwarded for someone to supply acaricides, Ceva Sante Animale will be one of those companies that will be given this contract. 

What should be made clear in the next presentation is whether the 600 litres have arrived in the country, have been tested on our animals and possibly, have been seen to be effective. Even then, was it a donation? This is something that has not come out clearly as asked by the honourable member. 

Honourable members, the other problem that we have as a country is controlling what comes into the country. Many times we have imported chemicals into our country and we do not know whether they will be useful or useless. The chemicals that we brought in to fight the army worm became a serious issue. We were spraying but the army worm would not go. It is the same problem we are facing with ticks in animals. Therefore, we should know the steps that the ministry is undertaking to ensure that they have total control of what comes into the country. This is –(Interruption)

MR KAFUUZI: Thank you. Madam Speaker, this document or paper as presented by the minister does not indicate that there is research that has been done by the ministry. It refers to complaints from farmers in Kiruhura and findings from Makerere University. 

I am a farmer and cattle keeper and I know that for a long time, we have been trying to improve our breeds from our local long horned cattle to those that can give us better milk. However, we have found that those that can give us better milk yields have a less survival rate and are less resistant to diseases. We would have expected the ministry to have done research in this area and by now, they would be giving us solutions. However, we are now beginning to revert to our old traditional long horned cattle which give us less milk and income.

Most importantly, like hon. Komuhangi has said, my district was given 2000 doses of vaccines for FMD and yet one sub county alone has 100,000 herds of cattle. Therefore, I did not even know what to do with them. Thank you.

MS WINFRED KIIZA: Madam Speaker, all of us here are farmers in one way or the other. I lost my cattle last week. I was trying by all means to ensure that I spray but I lost them -(Interjection)- You do not have to know. You can visit my farm. 

I can also tell you that I represent cattle farmers, the Basongora, who are crying because their animals are dying. When I came into the House, I expected to get information to take to them. I expected to tell them that Government is now coming up with the strongest policy on controlling the tick, or we are now planning to ensure that this problem is sorted once and for all. 

I am disappointed and I would therefore call upon the ministry to style up, and call on the minister to take charge and ensure that Ugandan farmers are not duped and that Ugandans get what they deserve out of their hard labour. Our people are hardworking and ready to get out of poverty through agriculture but the ministry is letting us down.

Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, may I therefore pray that the minister takes this in good faith. It is not that we do not want you to perform your duties, but we would like you to do them well, as expected by Ugandans. Therefore, I wish to say this document, which seems to be shallow in nature, be withdrawn. 

4.39
MS FLORENCE NAMAYANJA (DP, Bukoto County South, Masaka): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to add my voice to the Members who are saying that this information report should be withdrawn-(Interruption)-

MR MACHO: Madam Speaker, I was consulting whether it is in order to discuss such a matter of national importance when the Prime Minister is not here. Moreover we have many deputy prime ministers in this country who supervise the minister. I am just asking whether it is in order.

THE SPEAKER: The Minister of Agriculture is here and his deputy is also present.

MS NAMAYANJA: Madam Speaker, I support the motion that the minister withdraws this document. I would like to find out whether –(Interruption)- 

MS WATENGA: Madam Speaker, I was here clearly listening when the chairperson of the Committee on National Economy moved a motion and it was seconded by members of this House. The motion was that the honourable minister should go back and come up with a clear statement and bring it to this House. Therefore, are we procedurally right to continue discussing the same statement in the House?

THE SPEAKER: Members are supporting the motion by the chairperson of the Committee on National Economy. They are speaking to that motion.

MS NAMAYANJA: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for your wise ruling. When bringing a document here, the minister should always consult the technical team. I wonder whether the ministry has technical officers who help in drafting such documents and giving technical information.

Madam Speaker, if you look at page 7, point 4.3, it says that Cabinet should expeditiously review the policy and legal framework for the management of ticks. In the concluding remarks, the minister then says that this problem has been there and has been developing gradually, without giving us information on the steps that have been taken.

I second the motion that this document be withdrawn so that technical information and solutions are given. Thank you.

4.42
MR HAMSON OBUA (NRM, Ajuri County, Alebtong): Madam Speaker, I rise on two issues. One, I support the motion; and two, we seem to be victims of a well-planned war, especially using science by our “big brothers”. This is a war on science especially on the continent of Africa because some of our “big brothers” would want to get market for their vaccines and drugs. 

I have been reliably informed that even for the army worm that recently invaded Uganda, our scientists have done the DNA tests and they know the origin of this worm. It is from one of our “big brothers” that preaches a lot on democracy. 

For these ticks we are talking about, in the subsequent statement that will come from the minister this Parliament must demand to know whether Ugandan scientists have done DNA tests on the ticks to trace their origin. For fear of contradiction, I am reliably informed that the origin of the army worm is the United States of America. 

On the question of research, Uganda is blessed with some of the best scientists in the whole world not only in the continent of Africa. Why don’t we engage them to do all these tests to trace the origin? These seeds of maize that we distributed to our farmers came with the army worm, and on a sad note we are saying that agriculture is the backbone of our economy. 

This is the second statement that this Parliament is asking ministers from the Ministry of Agriculture to withdraw. I remember hon. Kibanzanga had to be forced to withdraw a statement. Can we now involve science in our agriculture, not only come to tell us about this statement? We must be informed that we have engaged our scientists and these are their findings on the ticks and tick borne diseases that this country is experiencing.

That is my humble submission. I demand that when the minister is coming back, we must be informed whether our scientists have done research on these ticks and what their findings are; it must be embedded in the statement. There are people who want to get market in Uganda for their vaccines and they deliberately infect the continent of Africa. I beg to submit.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, a motion was read by hon. Syda Bbumba, the chairperson of the Committee on National Economy, and it has been spoken to by several Members. I now put the question that the statement be withdrawn.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable ministers, sometimes you make it difficult for us to work with you. It is almost 10 years and we are still talking about these ticks. When the President was taking oath, he said he would be concerned about the welfare of the people of Uganda, and these include cattle keepers. How can we fail to find a solution to the tick problem?

We borrow money for roads and power, why can’t we borrow money to support the sector? (Applause) We are talking about a middle-income status, how shall we get there with animals full of ticks? Please, get more serious on this issue and help the farmers. 

MR MATHIAS MPUGA: Madam Speaker, I am sorry because the motion has been passed but there is a problem. The minister makes an allusion to 600 litres of acaricides but we do not know the status of these untested acaricides, simply brought in as an offer. 

Shouldn’t this motion speak to the status of these acaricides that have been brought in without being scientifically tested? Are they being used on our animals and causing another problem? May we know what the fate of this is, scientifically? To speak the language of hon. Obua: are we importing another problem in a moment of excitement of an offer and not aware of the trouble -(Interruption)

MR SSEMPIJJA: Madam Speaker and honourable members, you have ably ruled on this matter. We feel indebted to Parliament to produce a comprehensive statement and plan on this matter, including the details that the Members are continuing to investigate on. 

Allow me to request you, Mr Speaker, to allow us to go back and do exactly what Parliament requires us to do, and we shall come back here and present in a more efficient way. I wish to request you, Madam Speaker, that even for the second paper, considering the atmosphere – (Laughter) – Allow me to go back and do fair justice and surgery to all the papers. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: The Minister of Agriculture will return with more comprehensive statements on those issues for the consumption of this House. Honourable minister, when will you bring these statements because these people are dying, they have no more money, their children are at home and they cannot sell anything?

MR SSEMPIJJA: Madam Speaker, give us one week and we shall be ready with these statements.

THE SPEAKER: Tuesday next week.

MR SSEMPIJJA: Thank you, Madam Speaker.

MS WINFRED KIIZA: Madam Speaker, I would like to talk to my brother and honourable colleagues. Something might be wrong in the ministry. There could be a cold war between the political wing and the civil service wing. You need to check your bedroom thoroughly. 

Just like hon. Obua did mention, your colleague, hon. Christopher Kibanzanga, came here with a document and he did concede to the fact that it was drafted by the civil servants in your ministry. He quickly withdrew the document because it was wanting in nature. We know every well that we are always supported by our support staff. You may not come here and say that your support staff did not do a thorough job; it is you we look up to.

However, I would like to say that before you come to present a document, first understand it. Read it and find out whether there is value and whether it will speak to the people. Therefore, as you go down to clean your house, let your staff know that they are a disaster to this country. 

Many of us represent farmers and we are all farmers. They are making you look like you are not in control. Therefore, do something to ensure that next time when you come, the staff also know that we are not comfortable with how they are making you look in the House. I would like to thank you, Madam Speaker.

MS KAMATEEKA: Madam Speaker, I am wondering whether it would be procedurally correct for the minister to come here next week yet Members have clearly stated that they want answers. The acaricides that are coming in will not have been tested by then. We have been told that they came in several weeks ago and they have not been tested. We would like him to come to the House and say that they have tested the acaricides and they are working, and therefore Ugandans can go on and use them.

Secondly, Madam Speaker, we were told that they offered us 600 litres; why would we order for another 6,000 litres when we have not tested the 600 litres to prove whether they have worked or not? All these must be answered in the response that is yet to come. Therefore, Madam Speaker, would it be procedurally correct for the honourable minister to come in a week’s time without any new information?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we are sitting here speaking for the farmers who cannot come here, and they would like to have solutions to these problems. Let us give him a week and he should come and give us answers to the farmers’ problems, concerning the animal diseases. 

Honourable members, join me in welcoming the local government leaders from Butemba in Kyankwanzi. They are represented by hon. Innocent Kamusiime and Ann Maria Nankabirwa. You are all welcome. (Applause) 

MOTION FOR PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT ON THE COMPOSITION OF SECTORAL COMMITTEES OF THE 2ND SESSION OF THE 10TH PARLIAMENT

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I am aware that the two whips are still organising themselves, but I would like to ask the UPDF representative to make their proposals, and the independents. I would like to nominate hon. Mukitale to stand in for the coordinator of the independents.

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, we know that every Parliament makes its own rules. We sent drafts to the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline and they completed their work. We have also started some work and there are some issues on which they have made some recommendations. 

Wouldn’t it be procedurally right if we concluded with the rules before we start constituting the committees? It has already been one year and the rules are there but we have only amended one item. Previously, you had promised that within a day, we should sit and conclude the rules. I do not know whether it is procedurally right for us to do so. We also have to deal with amendments and that would mean it will come in the next one year. Therefore, wouldn’t it be procedurally right for us to handle the rules in one day and then constitute the committees?

THE SPEAKER: I had received a notice from the chairperson of the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline. However, when I included the matter on the Order Paper, he said that he also needs time. Therefore, I am in a dilemma. I had wanted the rules to be handled but the chairperson said he is not ready.

MR OKUPA: The chairperson presented the report and we are now supposed to have –

THE SPEAKER: That is what I am saying; he told me that the members have said that they would like to read it first. Therefore, can we handle that on Thursday?

MR KENNETH ONGALO OBOTE: Madam Speaker, the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline has been ready with this report since 19th January and it was uploaded onto Members’ iPads. However, this morning when the Order Paper came out, Members called me and requested, and I understood because we have had recess and other activities and these are their rules. They requested that we give them time to internalise them so that on Tuesday, they will come back ready to have a debate on these rules and make rules which are appropriate for the governance of this House. 

I, therefore, agreed and wrote to you, Madam Speaker, that if possible, let us inform Members about the date we will begin to debate these rules so that they come prepared. I would like to propose that we give them a week. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Can we handle that on Tuesday next week? Can Members study their rules and we have Tuesday afternoon just to discuss the rules? They were uploaded on your iPads.

MS CECILIA OGWAL: Madam Speaker, I am uncomfortable raising this matter of procedure. When we opened the second session of the 10th Parliament, you made a statement in the full hearing of His Excellency the President, who is the appointing authority in this country. You said that one of the challenges you are facing as the Speaker of Parliament is how to get ministers to attend parliamentary sessions.

Today is the first meeting of the second session and I am wondering what has happened to the statement which you made in the full hearing of the President. Some of these matters we are discussing at this moment are very important but we are helpless; we raise very serious matters, we take decisions - I know that the Government Chief Whip will always quickly stand up and say that she will convey the message. However, if the President knew that the Government Chief Whip was a very good conveyor of messages, he would not have appointed all these ministers.

Therefore, Madam Speaker, there must be some sanctions put in place. Can the Government Chief Whip, who is a perfect conveyor, convey a message to the appointing authority that at least one-third of the members of the Cabinet must be present when we are discussing these matters because they are the implementers of all these issues we discuss?

Madam Speaker, unless they are just using us as a talking box, you made a very important statement in the full hearing of the head of state, and the ministers were all present on that day because the President was there in person. However, I am wondering what has happened to that statement. Therefore, Madam Speaker, I am uncomfortable in making this statement knowing well that without adequate participation of ministers, we will still have challenges in the implementation of all these issues that we discuss and decide on. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: I hope the Government will respond to that at the appropriate time.                

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT AUTHORISING GOVERNMENT TO BORROW UP TO UA 28.328 MILLION ($38,400,000) FROM THE AFRICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK (ADB) AND UA 41,462,000 ($ 56.12 MILLION) FROM THE AFRICAN DEVELOPMENT FUND (ADF) TO SUPPORT THE MULTINATIONAL: UGANDA/KENYA: KAPCHORWA-SUAM-KITALE AND ELDORET BYPASS ROADS PROJECT

5.00
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I beg to move for a resolution of Parliament to authorise Government to borrow up to US$ 38,400,000 from the African Development Bank (ADB) and US$ 56.12 million from the African Development Fund (ADF) to support the multinational Uganda/Kenya Kapchorwa-Suam-Kitale and Eldoret Bypass Roads Project. I beg to move. 

MR NZOGHU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. This Parliament has been cooperative with Government and it has approved the loan requests presented to it by Government. However, this very Parliament did ask Government to first give a clear picture of the PTA loan before any other loan request is presented here on the Floor. 

Madam Speaker, hon. Bahati was in the House and he conceded to that. I do not know the spirit in which you, hon. Bahati, are moving that loan request here on the Floor and yet you know very well what Parliament resolved. 

Madam Speaker, is it procedurally right for the Minister of State for Finance, Planning and Economic Development, who was in the House when Parliament passed that resolution, to behave in a manner that is not parliamentary? 

THE SPEAKER: Did we agree that we should not receive any request or we shall not process? There is a difference between receiving them and processing them for return here. What did we agreed? Did we say that they should not come here at all? 

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, we can consult the Hansard but to the best of my recollection, you requested that we make a statement on the PTA loan. We are very ready to do that at the next sitting. When we are given space on the Order Paper, we will do that. However, we never said we should stop the process of acquiring loans before that is attended to. I think hon. Nzoghu should remember that as a senior Member, and given the situation he came in this afternoon. 

THE SPEAKER: This is not for debate; it is for transmission to the Committee on National Economy. 

MR ISMAEL OROT: Madam Speaker, looking at the roads that will benefit from this loan, I would like to say that the issue of the Suam Road has been a very touchy one in our lives. I do not know whether you have travelled from Kapchorwa to Suam because it is a very horrible situation. I, therefore, suggest that borrowing is not bad but please let the money be set aside to make this road. 

Another issue I am raising, Madam Speaker- 

THE SPEAKER: No, honourable members, this is a loan request. My work is to send it to the Committee on National Economy and then they are supposed to come and report back. It is not for debate now. My question was whether we had agreed not to bring anything or not to process anything. That is what I was asking. 

MR OROT: Madam Speaker, what I am raising is this: on top of this loan request, there is a road connecting Tirinyi, Pallisa and Kumi and it is not included in the budget. Therefore, when they are borrowing, they should include that road. (Laughter) 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Orot, the matter is not before this House. Honourable members, I send this loan request to the Committee on National Economy. They will advise us whether to pass it or not. It is sent to the Committee on National Economy. 

MOTION FOR PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON HIV/AIDS AND OTHER RELATED MATTERS ON THE STATE OF THE HIV/AIDS RESPONSE IN UGANDA

THE SPEAKER: Where is hon. Alyek? She is not here. Hon. Magyezi, can you report on item No. 9?  

MOTION FOR PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE UGANDA DELEGATION TO THE 136TH IPU ASSEMBLY IN DHAKA, BANGLADESH, APRIL 2017

5.06
MR RAPHAEL MAGYEZI: (NRM, Igara County West, Bushenyi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I beg to present the report of the Uganda delegation to the Inter-Parliamentary Union Assembly, which was held in Dhaka, Bangladesh, from 30 March 2017 to 5 April 2017. 

Madam Speaker, before I lay this report on the Table, I beg for your indulgence to mention three very critical outcomes of this important assembly. First of all, the members of the Ugandan delegation were six and they included the following: Rt Hon. Rebecca Kadaga, Speaker and leader of the delegation; hon. Latif Sebaggala, who is a member of the Executive Committee on Peace and Security of the IPU; hon. Mourine Osoru; hon. Francis Mwijukye; hon. Juliet Mukoda; and myself, hon. Raphael Magyezi. 

The members of the Ugandan delegation participated very effectively in the committees and in the council. A report of this delegation and of IPU is here to be presented, with a resolution to all parliaments, including our Parliament. 

The second important issue is that at this IPU Assembly, our own leader of delegation, Rt Hon. Rebecca Kadaga, addressed the assembly on the theme, which was “Redressing Inequalities: delivering on dignity and wellbeing for all”. Her presentations were well received, especially the paper on urgent international action to save millions of people from famine and drought in Africa and Yemen. This guided the council to take serious resolutions as IPU on how to address famine and drought in the world, especially in these areas. 

Thirdly and finally, at this IPU Assembly, two of our colleagues were elected to senior positions in the IPU. One was Mrs Jane Kibirige, our Clerk to Parliament; she was elected on the Executive Committee of the Association of Secretary Generals of Parliaments of the World. We congratulate her and wish her good service on this executive committee. 

The second one was hon. Mourine Osoru. She was elected President of the Governing Council of the Forum of Young Parliamentarians of IPU in the whole world. (Applause) In the IPU, she is actually addressed as “Madam President”; so we congratulate our honourable colleague. With your permission, Madam Speaker, I beg to request the President, hon. Mourine Osoru, to stand for recognition. Thank you very much. (Applause) 

I now beg to lay the report of the Ugandan delegation to the 136th IPU Assembly held in Dhaka, Bangladesh on the Table. Madam Speaker, I beg to lay. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, hon. Magyezi. The report is now available for Members to peruse and time will be appointed to discuss it. I am going to take one week to run through the reports of all the delegations because we need to discuss them. Therefore, I will find time in one week to look at them and see the resolutions we need to take and other actions. Thank you very much. 

Honourable members, we are unable to proceed with the other matters because the chairpersons of the other committees are not there and the chairperson of the ad hoc committee is also not here. We therefore need to defer them to another sitting. 

I would like to adjourn the House to 2.00 p.m. tomorrow afternoon. Thank you very much.

(The House rose at 5.11 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 21 June 2017 at 2.00 p.m.) 

