Disclaimer: The electronic version of the Official Report of the proceedings of Parliament (Hansard) is for information purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Office of the Clerk to Parliament.




Thursday, 6 June 2019

Parliament met at 2.46 p.m. in Kampala Serena Conference Centre, Kampala.

National Anthem

East African Community Anthem

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

PROCLAMATION

THE SPEAKER:“WHEREAS under Article 95(2) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, a session of Parliament shall be held at such place within Uganda and shall commence at such a time as the Speaker may, by proclamation, appoint;

AND WHEREAS the Third Session of the Tenth Parliament commenced on the 6th Day of June 2018;

AND FURTHER WHEREAS the President of the Republic of Uganda is required, under Article 101(1) of the Constitution, to deliver to Parliament an address on the State of the Nation at the beginning of each session;

AWARE THAT it is expedient that Parliament receives the State of the Nation Address from the President at the Kampala Serena Conference Centre;

NOW, THEREFORE, in the exercise of the powers conferred upon the Speaker by Article 95(2) of the Constitution, I hereby proclaim that Parliament shall sit at the Kampala Serena Conference Centre on the 6th Day of June 2019 at 14:00 hours to receive the State of the Nation Address from the President;

AND FURTHER, in exercise of the powers conferred upon the Speaker by the Constitution, the Parliament Powers and Privileges Act, Cap 258 and the Rules of Procedure of Parliament, it is hereby proclaimed and declared that the said Kampala Serena Conference Centre, including its forecourt, the yard and the gardens, be the precincts of the Parliament for the above mentioned purpose.

Given under my hand at Parliament House, Kampala on the 27th Day of May 2019.

Rebecca Kadaga 
Speaker of Parliament.”

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Your Excellency, the President and Mrs Museveni; Your Excellency, the Vice President, Mr Edward Ssekandi; the Chief Justice; the Deputy Chief Justice; the Vice Chairperson of NRM; Rt Hon. Prime Minister and Leader of Government Business; the deputy prime ministers; the ministers; the Leader of the Opposition; the ministers of state; Justices of the Supreme Court, Court of Appeal and High Court; members of the diplomatic corps; Members of Parliament; traditional leaders; religious leaders; head of Public Service/Secretary to the Cabinet; Chief of Defence Forces; Inspector-General of Police; Commissioner-General of Prisons; and all invited guests. I welcome you to this important event, which marks the official opening of the Fourth Session of the Tenth Parliament.

Your Excellency and our guests, it is a pleasure to inform you that we have in our midst special guests from the region. We have hon. Anthony Lino, the Speaker of the National Legislative Assembly of South Sudan – if you could, stand up –(Applause); Senator Ndikuriyo, the President of the Senate of Burundi -(Applause); Senator Dr Lelegwe Steve Ltumbesi (MP), Member of the Speakers Panel of the Senate of Kenya – representing hon. Lusaka, the Speaker of the Senate of Kenya; hon. Adam Omar Kimbisa, Member of the East African Legislative Assembly – representing Rt. Hon. Ngoga, the Speaker of the East African Legislative Assembly.

We have apologies from Rt Hon. Muturi, the Speaker of the National Assembly of Kenya; Rt Hon. Nyabenda, the Speaker of the National Assembly of Burundi; the Speaker of the Parliament of Rwanda as well as the Speaker of the Federal Parliament of Somalia. They have not been able to join us but they give their regards to you.

Distinguished guests, during this function, H.E. the President will highlight the activities and achievements of the Government during the previous year and will present to Parliament the plans, programmes and strategies that Government intends to pursue during this Fourth Session. 

Since the last State of the Nation Address, Parliament and committees have handled considerable business. In comparative terms, I am glad to inform Your Excellency and the public that during the Third Session, Parliament exhibited very good performance, partly because of the realignment of the parliamentary programme, whereby, the First Meeting was assigned to handle Bills and the second one was assigned to handle reports of sectoral and standing committees, while the Third Session was dedicated to handle budget matters and other Bills that may have spilled over from the First Meeting.

The second reason was that there was more dedication to the work of Parliament, exhibited by Members. There has also been improved attendance of Parliament and committees. I thank Members for this marked improvement. (Applause)

Your Excellency, in terms of legislation, this Parliament during the Third Session surpassed all other parliaments in that we enacted 26 Bills as compared to 11 in the First Session and 17 in the Second Session. (Applause) We had the highest number in the region.

Your Excellency and colleagues, four Bills were withdrawn – if you look at page 32 of the programme, you will find the Bills that were withdrawn. However, I would like to express my disappointment that in a number of areas, there was obvious manifestation of lack of adequate preparedness and consultations of stakeholders at formulation stage of these Bills and this wasted a lot of Parliament’s time.

I am particularly disturbed by the failure by Government to process, beyond the second reading, the Kampala Capital City Authority (Amendment) Bill since 2015. I would like to advise that in future, Bills requiring Parliament’s consideration be adequately researched upon and sufficient stakeholders’ participation and involvement by respective ministries sponsoring the Bills be conducted before Cabinet approval and subsequent submission to Parliament.

Indeed, Your Excellency, our colleagues in the House of Commons and the Government of Her Majesty the Queen begin by presenting to the public and stakeholders the intention to bring a particular Bill before its first reading.

In terms of oversight, Parliament registered marked improvements compared to the previous sessions. Parliament was able to handle the following:

    1. 16 resolutions authorising the Government to borrow.
    2. 23 other resolutions.
    3. 51 ministerial statements considered.
    4. 208 urgent questions responded to – these related to the areas of representation when Members bring up issues from their constituencies.
    5. 18 questions for oral answer.
    6. 130 questions responded to during Prime Minister’s Time.
    7.  45 committee reports were adopted, and
    8.  11 of the Members made statements.

The Committees on Public Accounts for Commissions, Statutory Authorities and State Enterprises need special mention for the commendable work done during the last session.

In addition, the Committee on Public Accounts for Local Government was able to handle backlog reports from the Auditor-General for Local Governments for five years 2010/2011-2014/2015.  

Further, the Committee on Public Accounts for Commissions, Statutory Authorities and State Enterprises delved deeper into demanding for accountability, by exposing among others governance issues on the closure of commercial banks. The committee made far reaching recommendations, which if implemented will greatly improve supervision and management of commercial banks by the central bank.

At the international level, Members of Parliament have effectively engaged in parliamentary diplomacy at fora like the Inter-Parliamentary Union, the Commonwealth Parliamentary Association and the European Union, African, Caribbean and Pacific countries Joint Assembly, Pan African Parliament, among others and Uganda has been well represented. 

Your Excellency, as I reported to you with my colleagues earlier in the year, Parliament is scheduled to host the 64th Commonwealth Parliamentary Conference (CPC) and Related Meetings from 22nd–29th September 2019 in Kampala. 

The request to host was granted because of the impact, presence, track record and the respect that Parliament of Uganda has garnered at the Commonwealth Parliamentary Association over the years. Indeed, overwhelming support was given to Uganda to host this conference. Your Excellency, we last hosted this conference 52 years ago, in 1967 and I am sure many Members here were not even born. This is our opportunity to market Uganda to the new generations of members of Commonwealth and other citizens.

The Meetings will include the General Assembly, the Executive Committee, Small Branches, Commonwealth Women Parliamentarians and Meetings for the Clerks and Secretary-Generals. We have a dedicated team of Members and staff who are handling the preparations. I am confident that we shall successfully host this international event.

By hosting over 1,000 delegates coming from 54 Commonwealth Parliaments, we shall attract international publicity as well as benefit economically in terms of advertising and marketing hotels, investment opportunities and tourist attractions.

During this session, Parliament has hosted important dignitaries including, the Prime Minister of India, Narendra Modi. On behalf of Parliament, I would like to congratulate him on this landslide victory in the recently concluded elections.

We also hosted the Speaker of Hungary Parliament, Dr Laszlo Kover and the Speaker of the Serbian Parliament Hon. Maja Gojkovic among others. We received 50 delegations from 25 countries across the world including the United States of America, Austria, France, Angola and China. Many parliaments have visited to share and learn experiences from our work. 

Your Excellency, we thank you, for creating an enabling environment of peace and stability that has attracted other countries and parliamentarians to visit Uganda with a lot of confidence. In a special way, I thank you, for inviting Prime Minister Narendra Modi to officially visit Uganda and speak to the country and the whole world from the Parliament of Uganda.

Your Excellency, the Parliament of Uganda enjoys good working relations with the watchdog agencies, which report to Parliament like the Auditor-General, the Inspectorate of Government and the Uganda Human Rights Commission among others. The Office of the Speaker and Parliament will continue to engage these institutions with a view of working out better strategies of enforcing accountability by providing an independent assurance of the use of public resources, fighting corruption, abuse of authority and public office and effecting measures to promote human rights in Uganda.

Your Excellency, since the Sixth Parliament, Members and the general public have been engaged in the discussion over Article 82 of the Constitution, which concerns the Office of the Speaker of Parliament. The issue of the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker as the only officials to preside over Parliament needs to be reviewed. We need to go back on the drawing board and critically look at this issue, bearing in mind the practices of other parliaments with regard to this issue. In other jurisdictions, Speakers are supported by a panel of chairpersons - you have just met the Member of the Panel from the Kenya Senate who assist in handling part of the work. 

Your Excellency, I have received a number of reports that despite my drawing the attention of accounting officers on the need not to fund some committee activities of Parliament which are irregular, some Ministries and Agencies have continued to do so.  I wish to reiterate that the Parliamentary Commission has a budget for the activities of the committees of Parliament and therefore, they do not require additional funding from Ministries, Departments and Agencies.  In future, such abuse by accounting officers will be reported to the Head of Public Service and Secretary to the Cabinet for stern and deterrent disciplinary measures. I have written to him as well and sent copies to all the accounting officers about this activity.

Your Excellency, the 4th Session has commenced and this means that effectively, Parliament will transact business for a limited period. This is because the roadmap for the next elections is already out. Honourable members are usually uncomfortable around this time and their focus is on what is happening in their constituencies. It is, therefore, necessary that the Executive brings forward all the business it deems important within the first two months so that it can be processed by committees and later considered by the House. I urge the Leader of Government Business to expedite the process especially, the Electoral Reforms to be considered and passed in good time since they may need to budget for additional resources. Therefore, Parliament should not be made to firefight and be stampeded by late presentation of Bills by Government.

Parliament has continued to engage the public in its activities in Kampala and other parts of the country. We have carried out field visits as well as engaged the public on various Bills, policies and programmes with a view of seeking input of the citizens.  

Your Excellency, one of the new innovations we intend to introduce is an application where by the public will be able to make comments on the Bills and business before the House, so that we can get their feedback even if they do not come physically to the parliament.

We have also conducted the following:

    (i) The Speaker’s outreach programme
    (ii) The Parliament Health Week
    (iii) The Science and Technology Week
    (iv) The Parliament Week

We have partnered with various agencies to highlight the work they do and exhibit products and innovations. For instance, three weeks ago, Parliament in partnership with the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives and the African Growth and Opportunity Act (AGOA) Secretariat exhibited a number of products that have potential for markets in America by Ugandans.  All these efforts are geared at taking Parliament closer to the people. I would like to assure you, Your Excellency, that Ugandans are very innovative. If you saw some of the products they exhibited – they just need some focused policy support to be able to enter the USA market.

Your Excellency, I would like to thank you and the Government for the resources that have been availed to Parliament for it to operate. Without the financial support, what I have spoken about would not have been possible.

A few of our Members have not been able to join us today because they are indisposed. Hon. Kitaata Aboud is recovering from an operation; hon. Mary Kabanda, the District Woman Member of Parliament for Masaka is in hospital. Hon. Nokrach William is in hospital, hon. Abacacon Charles Angiro Gutomoi is recovering from a fourth accident, hon. Judith Babirye is also unwell and hon. Reagan Okumu just returned from India, where he underwent two major surgeries.

Members, as is the practice, business of Parliament we had before the committees were prorogued have been saved. There is no shortage of work. I call upon the whips to expedite the process of assigning Members to committees in line with the Rules of Procedure.  On my part, I will as usual assign the Independent Members to the committees.  

On behalf of Parliament, I welcome you all to the State-of-the Nation Address and I appreciate your kind response to our invitation. Thank you very much. 

INVITATION BY THE RT HON. SPEAKER TO H.E. THE PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF UGANDA TO DELIVER THE STATE OF THE NATION ADDRESS TO PARLIAMENT

“WHEREAS under Article 101 (1) of the Constitution, the President is required to deliver to Parliament an address on the State of the Nation at the beginning of every session;
AND WHEREAS the Speaker has just proclaimed the commencement of the Fourth Session of the Tenth Parliament of Uganda;

NOW THEREFORE, as the Speaker of Parliament, I now invite His Excellency the President to deliver to Parliament an Address on the State of the Nation on this 6th Day of June 2019.”
Your Excellency, I welcome you to address the Parliament and the country. (Applause)

3.11
THE PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF UGANDA (H.E. Yoweri K. Museveni): His Excellency the Vice President, the Speaker of Parliament, His Lordship the Chief Justice, the Deputy Speaker, His Lordship the Deputy Chief Justice, the Prime Minister, the Deputy Prime Ministers, the Leader of the Opposition, their Highnesses, the traditional leaders, honourable ministers, honourable members of Parliament, honourable members of the East African Legislative Assembly, members of the diplomatic corps, distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen.

Madam Speaker, in fulfilment of the constitutional requirement under Article 101 (1) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, I am here to deliver the State of the Nation Address, 2019.

Since my last address, a number of well-known Ugandans and other Ugandans who are not so well known have departed from this earth, some of who are: 

(i) 	The late Prof. Apolo Nsibambi, the former Prime Minister of Uganda;
(ii) 	The late Hon. Col (Rtd) Ibrahim Abiriga, Member of Parliament, Arua Municipality;
(iii) 	The late Rt Rev. Cyprian Kikunhi Bamwoze, Bishop Emeritus of Busoga Diocese;
(iv) 	The late Rt Rev. Augustine Arapyona Salimo, Bishop Emeritus of Sebei Diocese;
(v) 	The late Assistant Superintendent of Police, Muhammad Kirumira;
(vi) 	The late Ambassador Julius Onen, the Permanent Secretary - Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives;
(vii) 	More than 31 people who died when a party boat capsized on Lake Victoria;
(viii) 	The four Kenyan pilgrims who were knocked by a hit and run car when coming to Uganda for Martyrs Day;
(ix) 	Some Bududa people that lost lives in the mudslide, just last night I was told and many others.

I request that we all stand up and observe a moment of silence in memory of the departed persons. May the Almighty God rest their souls in eternal peace.

Before I forget, I would like the Minister of East African Affairs to get in touch with the families from Kenya, whose relatives died while coming for the pilgrimage so that we support them. (Applause)

(Interjection) Well, I do not govern South Sudan; I am here in Uganda. These Kenyans died under our authority –(Applause)– rationality is a requirement of Parliament. I am sure irrationality is not part of parliamentary procedure.

Today is the 6th of June, 2019. The 6th of June, 1944 was the date on which allies in the Second World War executed an amphibious landing in German occupied by France at Normandy beaches. Even now, they are there celebrating that event: Her Majesty the Queen, Presidents and others are there. This was three months before I was born.

On the 6th of June, 1981, aged 36 years and leading the Popular Resistance Army, I departed from Matugga by car, passed through Buwama trading centre and embarked into a boat at Katebo landing site to cross more than 200 miles through the lake to Kenya to proceed to Libya to look for the weapons of the struggle. 

Today, the 6th of June, 2019, here we are on the occasion of the State of the Nation Address. There is something interesting about the 6th of June. 

The NRM Government remains committed to ensuring a secure and peaceful Uganda. This has come about by promoting and upholding patriotism, democracy and good governance as core values for national socio-economic transformation. 

Significant focus has been placed on professionalising and modernising the Uganda People’s Defence Force and building the Uganda Police Force and their capabilities. 

Some months ago, killers, robbers and rapists had intensified their activities. They were committing these crimes with impunity because the Police had been infiltrated by criminals and people who had been compromised in some ways.  

The National Security Council reviewed the situation and came to some conclusions. I addressed a special sitting of Parliament on the 20th of June, 2018 where I outlined the measures we had decided to take to cope with the heightened crime. A number of those measures are being implemented. As I assured the country, that crime wave will be defeated.

UPDF works with other security agencies to deter or curtail any acts of lawlessness. The recent peaceful holding of the Martyrs Day, where an estimated 3 million people turned up, shows that Police and the UPDF already have good capacity. (Applause) 

That event of Namugongo, for people who know something about security, is quite challenging because there a large number of people coming; some walking on foot and it is pre-publicised. Everybody knows that on those days. Everybody knows that on those days, there will be a big function. 

Therefore, terrorists of all types would want to do something but our capacity is good and for the last 33 years, nothing has ever happened at Namugongo. (Applause)

Between 1986 and 2015, the economy grew at an annual average rate of 6.92 per cent, while per capita income grew at an annual average rate of 3.6 per cent over the same period. No European country, not even the USA - except West Germany between 1950 and 1980 which was able to do 3.8 per cent - has grown its per capita income at the same rate as Uganda over a period of three decades. (Applause) Abaagala kwetuga beetuge - (Laughter) - naye ono ye bwino. These are the facts. 

Let me repeat. No European country, not even the USA - except West Germany between 1950 – I am not talking about today and yesterday. I am talking about the whole period - and 1980, grew by 3.8 per cent. No other country in Europe has grown its per capita income at the same rate as Uganda over a period of three decades. Only East Asian Tigers sustained per capita income growth of 5.6 per cent during their intense period of transformation between 1960 and 1990.

The growth of the per capita income at such high rate was in spite of the high rates of population growth of 3.3 per cent annum. So, the population was growing but nevertheless, the economy was growing much faster and these are the figures. 

In order to put this issue in perspective, Ugandans should be informed that between 1951 and 1961 during the colonial system, Gross Domestic Product (GDP) per capita grew by 0.14 per cent. Between 1962 and 1970, it grew by 1.4 per cent. Between 1971 and 1980, it declined by -2.9 per cent and between 1982 and 1985, it grew only by 0.8 per cent. 

Between 1986 and 1995, it grew by 2.8 per cent and between 1996 and 2009, it grew by 3.6 per cent. This is per capita; how each Ugandan is getting better off. The other figure which you normally hear is the figure of the whole economy growing but this is per capita, per person –(Interjections)– Well, you may want to hang yourself. It is an option but these are the facts. (Laughter) 

All this, in spite of the strategic bottlenecks such as shortage of electricity and high transport costs that were not yet addressed that time. Note that per capita income is GDP growth minus population growth. You remove the rate of growth of the population then what you remain with is GDP per capita. 

To put it in a global context, between 1986 and 2015, Uganda was the 17th fastest growing economy in the world (Applause). It was the 4th in Africa. If we remove mineral-rich countries from the sample - because they were enjoying God’s or nature’s bounty - Uganda was 11th in the whole world and the 1st in Africa (Applause). This speech will be printed and every Member will get a copy. If you have got appetite to read it, it is here and you can go and crosscheck if you want.

So, what this means is that Uganda is about the only African country which has been having high rates of growth without oil and minerals. We have the minerals and oil but we have not yet used them so they are not part of this equation. (Applause) We have been using non-oil and non-mineral capacity and in spite of many bottlenecks and things which we had not done, here you are. This is written in good English –(Laughter)– and those who can read will read.

This achievement is more impressive because Uganda was in civil war from 1986 to 2005. The country is surrounded by Sudan to the north, which was in civil war for the first 20 years of Uganda’s growth from 1986 to 2005. To the west is Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC), which has been in civil war from 1996 to now. To the south is Rwanda, which was in civil war between 1990 and 1994. To the east is Kenya, which was stagnating economically between 1986 and 2002.

The size of the economy is Shs 109.738 trillion. This is in the Financial Year 2018/2019 and is equivalent of $29.5 billion. The income per person is now equivalent to $800. Although this is below the level required to attain middle income status, the renewed impetus of the economy and the large economic base being created will catapult the economy to prosperity within a short period in the future. By the Purchasing Power Parity (PPP) method of computing GDP, the economy now stands at $88.6 billion, which translates into $2,400 per capita.

If this method was used, Uganda would already be a middle income country. However, we are not going to use shortcuts. We shall use the export promotion and import substitution routes to storm across the medium income barrier, not just the purchasing power route on account of our low cost of living advantage but by the exchange route method.  It is now within reach.

There are two ways of calculating GDP; you can either use the foreign exchange method, which is the one we are mainly using whereby you get the size of the economy in shillings and you divide it by the exchange rate of that time. This is the figure I gave you. The other method is what we call the PPP method; Purchasing Power Parity. By that method, the economy of Uganda is now much bigger because our prices are not very high. So, our shillings buy more goods than it would buy in other places. If we used that method, Uganda would be a middle income country but we do not want to use it. We want to solve the issue of exporting more so that the exchange rate – we strengthen the shillings and compute according to a stronger shilling.

Uganda’s economic growth and development outlook is positive, with the economy projected to grow at, at least, seven percent in the medium term but could even be higher given that we have now sorted out the key constraints to growth. The basis for this very positive outlook is the following:

    i. Industrialisation to promote exports using primarily agriculture as the base. This includes industrialisation along the agricultural value chain, light manufacturing and processing of our minerals into finished products and further diversification of the manufacturing sector to increase exports. 

	Our problem now is that we are importing too much. We are importing things we should not be importing. If you look at this room here, it is really a foreign market; what people are putting on: the shoes and suits. Now, that is what we want to sort out. 

    ii. Increasing production and productivity in the agricultural sector by investing in quality inputs, extension services, storage facilities, access to markets by improving standards and quality of agro-processing. Government is also boosting the capital base of Uganda Development Bank to be able to lend to agriculture as well as small scale industry. In addition, Government is implementing targeted interventions in the coffee sector, for instance, the Coffee Roadmap 2020, tea and the fruit growing and processing, for example, the Soroti Fruit Factory and supporting agricultural zoning and out grower model around the nucleus farms. We are also working on stabilising agriculture through irrigation.

    iii. The commencement of oil and gas production and work on the Oil Pipeline and the Refinery will be starting soon.

    iv. Strengthening local content so that Ugandans can be integrated into wealth creation as the economy expands, including improving local production and supply capacities.

    v. Improving efficiency in the execution of public investment to improve the returns on investment especially in the areas of energy, transport, agriculture, tourism, water for consumption and production, and in education. 

    vi. Harnessing the benefits of regional integration through trade and strengthening intra-African trade. 

    vii. Improving labour productivity through skills development tailored to labour market demand.

Therefore, a firm foundation for industrialisation and especially manufacturing has been laid. We now have the fruit industry in Teso and Luweero; Dairy industry in Ankole; Vegetable Oil industry in Kalangala; and Tea industry in Toro and the Kigezi sub-regions. If you go area by area, people are beginning to listen to our message of specializing in some commercial activities in agriculture. 

Operation Wealth Creation has increased the supply and distribution of tea seedlings in the region. In the North, Government has taken up a 32 per cent stake in Atiak Sugar Factory which has a nucleus farm and an out growers’ scheme which will create jobs and promote agro-industrialisation in this region. I would like to salute the people of Atiak because they know something, in our language, called dongo lobo. Dongo lobo is development. They also know lonyo. Some of the people are not so clear about those issues. We have got a huge sugar factory coming up in Atiak developed by one of our investors, Ms Amina. We are helping the people to grow sugarcane. 

Government is prioritizing investment in industrial parks to support industrialisation and create jobs. There is also another industrial centre coming up in a place called Lakang in Lamogi. That one has delayed a bit because we had to sort out local obstacles but we never failed and in the end, we have sorted them out. Actually, we are going to have two big factories in Amuru; one sugar factory in Lakang and the other one in Atiak. Then, in the area of Nwoya, if you go there, the people are really waking up. There are big farms coming up. You will see that things are moving. 	

Notable progress has been made in Kapeeka Industrial Park where manufacturing of tiles and other products is already on, Kampala Industrial and Business Park where construction and provision of various utilities is soon starting, and Kabaale and Mbale Industrial Parks where work is on-going. 

So far, there are 284 new factories already in the Industrial Park at Namanve; 11 in Luzira industrial and Business Park; 10 in Bweyogerere industrial estate; eight in Jinja industrial and Business Park; 10 in Soroti industrial and Business Park; 16 in Kasese industrial and Business Park and 42 in Mbarara SME Park. The total factories in Uganda are, today, 4,900.

When we started Uganda Manufacturers Association (UMA) with the late Mulwana, we had only 80 factories. However, we are now talking of 4,900 factories - (Interjections) - I can organise conducted tours for those who are interested, then you come with videos; it is quite entertaining and it would cure the high blood pressure of some people. (Laughter) Some people give themselves high blood pressure because of hatred; they are angry all the time. You should consult somebody who is soon going to be 75 years of age. Never have anger in your system. (Applause) This is medical and not an opinion; I am giving purely a medical opinion.

As regards international trade, our exports revenue of goods and services grew at 8.2 per cent in 2018/2019, amounting to $7.012 billion, that is, $3.8 billion being earnings from export of goods, $1.89 billion from services, and $1.312 billion from remittances of Ugandans abroad. However, the total import bill for goods and services is still higher, although the gap is narrowing; it is now at $8.8 billion, creating a trade deficit of $1.86 billion.

Under the 2020 Coffee Roadmap, which I launched a few years ago, the volume of coffee exports reached 4.5 million bags in financial year 2017/2018, earning the country $ 492 million. The volume went up but the price came down; we used to be at two million bags of coffee but we are now at 4.5 million bags. Light industrial goods exports fetched $382 million, while tourism revenues amounted to $1.0 billion in the same year. 

If we can increase production per hectare of coffee, as an example, from the current 0.67 tonnes to 2.2 tonnes per hectare like in Brazil and Vietnam, Uganda would be earning about $2 billion from unprocessed coffee alone - if we export it unprocessed. At 2.2 tonnes per hectare, Uganda will produce 21 million bags of green coffee and if this coffee was roasted here - roasting alone - Uganda would fetch $6.7 billion. However, if it was transformed into soluble (instant) coffee, we would then generate $16.8 billion for the country. This is possible. Therefore, we are not only promoting growing more coffee and increasing yields per hectare but our farmers are underusing their land, getting 0.67 tonnes from one hectare when the Vietnamese and the Brazilians are getting 2.2 tonnes per hectare. This is not correct because our conditions are better in many cases. Therefore, it is a question of waking our people up and having the technocrats to guide them well. 

We just need to be better organised and focused on distribution of better seedlings, better harvesting, post-harvesting methods and storage. We are going to process much of this coffee. By processing 60,000 tonnes of coffee per year, through one of our investors, Ms Henrica Pinetti’s factory, this 60,000 tonnes of coffee only will earn $330 million. That investor is already on the ground in Namanve; she is the same investor who is involved in the other hospital in Lubowa –(Interjections)– The people who do not wish things well for Africa are not given a name that is not complimentary - suffering from nyeko.

The acceleration of the economic growth is partly due to the correct decision we took in 2006 of prioritising roads and electricity, the details of which I will give later in this speech. I would like to congratulate those who were in the Parliament of 2006 because they listened to my piece of advice. They are quite historical. The few who are here would be very proud because when I travel on these brand new roads - You travel on a tarmac road from Oraba on the South Sudan border all the way to Kisoro - (Applause) - or from Moroto all the way to Bundibugyo; it was the work of that Parliament. When I brought the proposal of putting more money on the roads and power, they supported it. (Applause) Whatever a man sows is what he reaps. Omuntu yena, kyasiga kyakungula. That is what the Bible says.

This Parliament should also be proud of something and I will tell you what it is –(Interjections)– That one is also there but there are some other things which I will tell you.

Although full rationalisation of the results of this prioritisation has not been fully realised, especially in connection with lower transport and electricity costs, the mere awareness that there are better roads and more abundant electricity is already causing a flood of investments. Investments are flooding into the economy.

Our efforts to promote regional integration and intra-Africa trade are yielding the desired results. Uganda now exports more to Africa than the rest of the world, with 63 per cent of exports to Africa in the financial year 2017/2018 compared to only 27 per cent 10 years ago. Exports to Asia have increased to 18 per cent now compared to only 13 per cent 10 years ago. 

Domestic revenue in the financial year 2017/2018 amounted to Shs 15.5 trillion. This is about 15 per cent of the Gross Domestic Product (GDP). In the next financial year, 2019/2020, we plan to collect Shs 19.6 trillion, equivalent to 16.1 per cent of GDP. The Government is implementing a plan to boost our domestic revenue collection to about 18 per cent of GDP. This will narrow the gap between what we spend and what we collect in domestic revenue, and in the process reduce the need for Government to borrow from the domestic market and also from outside. This will allow Government to finance a larger share of its investments using our domestically generated resources.

The high cost of capital remains – Our way of doing things is the guerrilla one or the kiyekera way. We work step by step; not trying to deceive ourselves that we can solve all problems at the same time. We are now targeting good roads and you are seeing this. We have been targeting more and also cheaper electricity. We are also targeting cheaper transport costs by the railway. We shall then remain with the cost of borrowing from the banks - the interest rates.

Therefore, I appeal to the leaders here to recognise that things do not happen by miracle but by action. What we do is what decides what happens. There is that struggle to bring down the cost of electricity and transport. The good roads are good but they cannot bring down transport costs very much because road transport is more expensive than railway and water transport. 

In terms of building the economic base, it is about abundant and cheap electricity, at least for manufacturing - I do not mind about the night clubs; those can pay more. There are also the transport costs – the railway. The internet is already much cheaper than it was. Now, I am talking about the cost of borrowing money. 

The high cost of capital remains a major challenge to the economy as a whole. To address this challenge, Government is capitalising Uganda Development Bank (UDB). So far, we have capitalised it up to Shs 272 billion, of which Shs 53 billion has been provided this financial year. In the next financial year, 2019/20, Government is providing an additional Shs 103 billion to bring the total to Shs 375 billion. On top of this, Government guaranteed loans of $15 million and $5 million dollars from the African Development Bank (AfDB) and Exim Bank of India respectively, for Small and Medium Enterprises (SMEs). We should borrow less domestically because this increases interest rates and crowds out the private sector when Government domestic borrowing is excessive. 

The cost of doing business is still high in Uganda. To address this challenge, the Government will continue to prioritise infrastructure by investing in energy, transport, water, and Information, Communication and Technology (ICT). The cost of electricity per unit used to be 10.62 US cents; it is now 7.91 cents per unit. I intend to bring it down to five US cents per kilowatt hour for manufacturing. (Applause) 

The modernisation of the railway system by building the Standard Gauge Railway (SGR) will bring down the cost of transport per 40 foot container from $3,456 by road to $1,800 per container using the standard gauge railway. Even by repairing the old meter gauge railway, the cost of transport goes down to $2,016 from $3,456. You save more than $1,400 if you used even the old railway per container of 40 feet rather than the road.

Agriculture remains the main thrust of Uganda’s economic growth. The sector contributes 25 per cent to national GDP and employs over 70 per cent of the population. In my zonal tours, I have been telling Ugandans that there are only four sectors for wealth and jobs creation. The four sectors are: commercial agriculture; industries (big or small); services such as hotels, transport, professional services and shops; and ICT - Business Process Outsourcing (BPOs); etc.

In order to regionalise the delivery of water for agriculture production services across the country, Government has opened up regional mechanisation centres in the south western region at Buwama and the north eastern region at Agwata. Using the acquired heavy earth moving equipment, Government constructed and rehabilitated valley tanks in the drought and cattle corridor districts countrywide. 

The number of valley tanks increased by 83 from 155 in December, 2017 to 238 in December 2018 with a total holding capacity increasing from 8,000,000cm3 to 9,245,000cm³. This has improved the number of farmers accessing and utilising water for irrigation, aquaculture and livestock. 

The irrigation schemes constructed/planned or repaired are the following:

    1. Doho I Irrigation Scheme
    2. Mubuku I Irrigation Scheme 
Their location is indicated here but when talking to Members of Parliament, I assume they are more informed.
    3. Agoro Irrigation Scheme
    4. Olweny Irrigation Scheme
    5. Doho II Irrigation Scheme
    6. Mubuku II Irrigation Scheme
    7. Wadelai Irrigation Scheme
    8. Tochi Irrigation Scheme
    9. Ngenge Irrigation Scheme 
10. 	Rwengaaju Irrigation Scheme 
11. 	Atar Irrigation Scheme 
12. 	Sironko/Acomai Irrigation Scheme 
13. 	Matanda Irrigation Scheme 
14. 	Pabbo Irrigation Scheme 
15. 	Namalu Irrigation Scheme  
16. 	Labor Irrigation Scheme 
17. 	Ongom Irrigation Scheme 
18. 	Biiso Irrigation Scheme 

All those are irrigation schemes that have either been implemented or are being planned. 

On the side of dams, the big ones are Kodhukul, Omatenga, Ongole, Nakiloro, Kailong, Kobebe, Arechet, Longorimit, Kawomeri, Kimiranjoga, Kagango, Mabira, Akwera, Aculawic, Alango, Leye, Kakinga and Mayikalo.

To boost agriculture mechanisation, 280 tractors were procured and distributed to farmer groups. The Government intends to procure an additional 100 tractors in financial year 2019/20. We can acquire more tractors if we get good people who can use them properly. In my tour, I was discussing with leaders - I have some ideas, which I will put to Cabinet.

Government has enhanced the production of key strategic commodities for exports and domestic value addition.

Oil Palm 

As an import substitution commodity, oil palm production in Kalangala has increased and is steadily improving farmers’ incomes and livelihoods. In financial year 2016/2017, farmers harvested 24,278 metric tons valued at Shs 13.4 billion while in FY 2017/2018, farmers harvested 37,802 metric tons valued at Shs 21.4 billion (36 per cent increase in production and 37 per cent increase in value). On average, the 1,199 oil palm farmers with mature gardens earned Shs 1.9 billion each month in 2018, up from Shs 1.3 billion each month in the calendar year 2017. 

When I last went to Kalangala, the people there told me, in our local language, that abamafuta ge ’tala banatera okusenguka (the people who are selling paraffin will have to go away because they no longer have market). They have money and they are now able to have solar power, so they no longer need paraffin. Therefore, for those who are just shouting and wasting time, if you really care about your people, there are ways you can help them wherever you are. You do not have to be in Government to help your people.

I hear people going around wasting time saying DP; DP without Museveni is not there because Museveni was the real DP and UPC. I joined UPC briefly for five months and I tried to help our elder but his people were not helping, so we had to do other things. In 1966, when I was 21 years old and in DP, I launched efforts in our area - Kiruhura. If you come there, you will find that people are no longer staying in grass-thatched houses.  That effort started when I was actually in the Opposition. I was able to work with even the UPC people. I went to Wandegeya to see Mzee Babiiha with some elders and he supported us. 

Therefore, if you claim that you are this and that but you do not care about the income of your people, you are nothing, I am telling you. (Applause) You do not have to wait to be in the Government to help your people. I helped my people when I was in DP. Uganda People’s Congress was very dangerous; it is not like here where you can abuse, shout, put up your legs –(Laughter) Therefore, do not tell me that because you are not NRM, you cannot help your people. That is rubbish and you are useless. I am speaking from good authority. I was in the Opposition most of the time; it is only recently that I have also been on this side. (Laughter)

When I was doing much of the work, I was actually in the Opposition, building NRA. Most of the capacity was built when we were in the Opposition –(Interjection)- You are only building disruption but for me, I was building wealth for my people and I can invite you to see. The people of Kalangala, for example, have totally changed and I want to thank those people who helped me with that project like Mzee Ssendawula, who was the Minister of Finance at that time, because it was a big struggle. I do not remember who we were fighting but they were against it. Kalangala is actually changed. 

The other day when I went to the ferry from Masaka, we waited for our vehicles to go on the ferry and one of our local people said, “kati wano waliwo jam”, meaning Kalangala has got so many vehicles causing a traffic jam, so we have to wait for a long time. There were no vehicles in Kalangala. They never saw vehicles before but it has now totally changed.

Cotton 

Lint bales increased from 151,071 in 2016/2017 to 202,357 bales in 2017/2018. As a result, the contribution of cotton to household incomes rose from about Shs 136 billion in 2016/2017 to Shs 188 billion in 2017/2018. You know, I do not support cotton for the small people but for big ones like Moses Ali and others - even I can join and grow cotton for the country. Therefore, I invite the big people to grow cotton for the country. However, for my small people with four acres, please, I do not want to hear about cotton because cotton only makes you money if you do it on a large scale. 

That is why I would like to go to Kasese and discuss with the farmers there because nobody discusses with them seriously. I would like to go and discuss with them whether they should continue with cotton. Cotton only makes you money if you do it on a big scale; for example, Gen. Moses Ali is adding to his wealth. He is already rich but he is adding on. (Laughter)

When we were in Adjumani, we calculated and after costs, on one acre you may end up with Shs 1.1 million in a year. If you have got only two acres and one acre is for food, then you have only one acre for money. How will you manage? However, if you have 10 acres, that is Shs 11 million after you have removed costs, which is not bad. If it is 100 acres, that is Shs 100 million. If it is 1000 acres, you actually get Shs 1.1 billion from cotton. You need to do it on a big scale. 

This is where the leaders are really letting down their people – not helping them select enterprises, which have got maximum returns. You just let the people try on their own and they are not able to decide properly because many of them are not educated. Therefore, I encourage cotton production but it should be grown by the medium and large scale farmers. The other people should concentrate on the crops, which I am going round telling them about. I do not want to waste the time of the big people here because you know what to do. When I am down there with my small people, I spend a lot of time teaching them what to do. 

Lint exports also rose from about $42 million in 2016/17 to $54 million in 2017/18. However, we intend to convert all this cotton to fabric weaving, earning more dollars and creating more jobs.

Milk annual production increased from 2.08 billion litres in 2015 to 2.5 billion litres in 2018 and is projected to increase to 3.35 billion litres by the end of 2019. The value of marketed milk has increased by 15 per cent from $716 million in 2015 to $850 million in 2018.

The export earnings of milk and milk products now stand at $79 million per annum.  This increase in milk products is in spite of still using the old method of free-range grazing (Kusetura). I am launching a campaign to change this.  We must go from free range to zero-grazing so that the planted pasture is not disturbed by the cattle trampling on it. With free range, a square mile supports 213 Friesian cattle and 320 Ankole cattle.  With zero-grazing, a square mile will support 1,280 Friesians and 6,000 Ankole cattle. Therefore, you can see how rich I am if I organise things a bit. Zero-grazing and the selection of only high milers is the only way to go.

To improve production of quality beef, Government has constructed a modern holding ground (five square miles) and an animal quarantine station (four square miles) to fatten bulls. These bulls will be supplied to the modern export abattoir in Bombo.

The fisheries subsector has, through implementation of fisheries management reforms, registered an increase by 31 per cent in Nile Perch fish stocks and the fishery is recovering on Lake Victoria. The support to fisheries enforcement interventions has led to the opening of four factories - part of the 16 which had closed - bringing the total to 12 fish factories now in operation. (Applause) This is because all the factories had closed. 

When you put a cross (musalaba) on yourself and say that you want to be a leader voluntarily, when nobody has invited you, you are bringing yourself problems. If you do not know what to do, God will ask you why you took on what you could not manage. If you do not know, try to learn. For instance, how could the fisheries sector die when there are leaders there? I quarrelled with the elders (the Bataka) and asked them how they could allow people to kill their lake by bad fishing. They had a good excuse; they said the people who do bad fishing are very strong people and they cannot be managed. I totally agree with them. The locals could not manage the killers of the lake but how about the elected leaders; why would they not stand up?

Therefore, I had to use soldiers because the lake was finished. The soldiers may make their own mistakes because they are not fisheries officers and they were trained for something else. However, now because the people who are supposed to do the work do not do it and they destroy the country, I mobilised them. They come and make some mistakes but the original sin is by the leaders who do not do their work. 

The extension workers (lamera) are employees; they are lutic. Those are bapakasi. The owners of the country are the people and you are their leaders. If the bapakasi or lutic do not do things properly, the ones who can save the country are you. 

When I was leading my people in 1966, when I was a young boy, there were veterinary people, the experts (the lutic), but they were not bothered. It was we, young people, who came up because we were from the 2people. We were not employees or bapakasi.  

You were in Namugongo the other day. People go and attend these events but do not pick the message. Over 2000 years ago, Jesus said that the hired shepherd will not stand and defend the sheep when the wolf comes. He will run away but the owner of the sheep will stand, fight and die to defend the sheep. (Applause) This was 2000 years ago and Jesus was supporting the private sector. He said the one who owns something is the one who cares more about it than the mere employee. Therefore, for lamera to wait for lutic - these lutic can work anywhere. 

It would be good if they worked but many of them do not care. It is you who needs to care about your uncles and aunties. Those people, who are poor, are not necessarily the uncles of these lutic; they are the ones who sent you to go and represent them. These people who destroy the lake – Personally, I do not eat fish and they say that I am still backward. However, I had to defend the fish for the fish eaters. (Applause) My fish eaters are now very happy and some people are criticising the soldiers. Soldiers are not fishermen and they may make mistakes; but what was the original mistake? It was the people who were supposed to look after the lake and they did not look after it.

You can see that 12 factories are now operating on Lake Victoria. These people have moved to Lake Kyoga and I heard that there are some issues there. There is also chaos on Lake Albert with the Congolese.

Concerning Operation Wealth Creation (OWC), the Government has continued to distribute key planting, breeding and stocking materials including tea seedlings in Kigezi, Ankole, Rwenzori, Mubende, West Nile and Bunyoro sub zones, where over 21,915 acres have been supplied with materials; citrus/orange seedlings establishing 109,439 acres for citrus, and this is in the Teso area; mango seedlings establishing 143,803 acres; cocoa seedlings establishing 16,459 acres, among others.

The Government continued to enforce quarantines to curtail uncontrolled movement of animals, which has reduced the spread of diseases between regions of Uganda. Vaccine and acaricide trials in various disease control zones of the country have been conducted. As a response to the tick resistance to acaricides, the Government continues to carry out trials of three molecules including Vectoclor, Bantick, Eprinometim, to deal with the resistant ticks in the country.

The acaricide zoning strategy and implementation plan to manage movement of acaricides across zones after cleansing was rolled out in the 27 affected districts. The anti-tick vaccine and other measures are in progress. Our scientists are developing a vaccine to kill the ticks; we want the ticks to die. Our scientists think that they can develop a vaccine that will enable the cow to kill the tick. The ticks have killed our cows for a very long time; it is now time for the cows to kill the ticks. It is like the rat eating the cat. 

The Government has successfully attracted the Sukulu Factory in Tororo District. The phosphate fertiliser production plant is expected to produce 50,000 tons, which are projected to grow to 100,000 tons as the demand continues to grow both locally and beyond our borders. This is in line with the Government campaign to cut down on the importation of products that can be made in the country. A comprehensive update of the national soil suitability maps is in the process to help farming communities understand exactly what kind of fertiliser is suitable for each farming region in Uganda.

Land Fragmentation: The bad practice of land fragmentation is equivalent to disabling the land. Recently, when I was talking with the councillors in the zones, I gave them this imaginary: We have had people with disability; a person is disabled by some problem but for us, we say that disability does not mean inability. Furthermore, people with disability can no longer do all the things that he would have done if he was able. It is the same with the land; when you fragment land, you disable it. Can you grow cotton on two acres of land, for example? That is why we are saying that with the two acres, you can no longer profitably grow cotton. Let it be grown by somebody who has got more land and you do something else. Therefore, we are also going to create land with disability because of bad inheritance practices.

The bad practice of land fragmentation is equivalent to disabling the land. The Government continues to encourage families to desist from this retrogressive habit. The family land, which was four acres in one generation, becomes half an acre per family because it was shared by eight children (mainly males) after the death of their parents (especially the father). What the four acres can do, half an acre cannot do.  

The Government, instead, strongly advises families to start family companies where inheritance should be by shares (emigabo). I was in West Nile in the Lugbara area; they can no longer grow food and they are now importing food from Congo. This is because all the land is fragmented and they can no longer grow food yet the Lugbara area is one of the most fertile parts of Uganda. That scenario has also happened in Kabale District. Kabale can no longer produce food but they get it from other areas. 

How can such things happen when a country has got leaders? In 1966, when I was 21 years old, I told you how I started fighting in my area. I would read the history of Europe at school and when I would go back home and check on my people. I would ask myself, “If Europe is like this, what about us?” I would read about the enclosure system in the United Kingdom - when there was this system of enclosing land. When I would go back, I would look at my father and say, “In Europe, they did this, how about us here?” Here, we have got leaders who do not help the people to know how to deal with the future. You are just there as leaders – “ekyeterero nk’amashongonzyo g’embwa” –(Laughter)- No, it is a good word – (Interjections) – No, I did not say that you are dogs. Let me tell you what amashongozyo means. It is a wild fruit and it is a good word. There are two types of the same fruit, one that is sweet and another one that is sour. The Banyankole say that the sour one is fruit for the dogs but the dogs do not eat it. So, they are just claiming that dogs eat it when they do not. “Baziwayiriza.” 

Therefore, what I was saying is that you cannot be a leader who does not help your people. That is the meaning of the proverb. (Laughter) Does that improve it? (Laughter) Okay, I withdraw it. (Applause)
The point is that you must guide the population because the major problem of our people is tradition. Many of them are still traditional but they are living in the modern age. 

My father was a traditional person. We estimate that he was born in 1916 and he was living his traditional way until I went through the school system and I started hearing about other parts of the world through studies. When I would go back, I would tell him that in Europe, they are doing this and that, how about us here? That is how we were able to enlighten those people. 

If you come to Kiruhura today, you will find that the land is not as fragmented as it is in other areas because I de-campaigned the practice. You can come and tour the place. I was there even recently, deepening the campaign during Easter. 

If you are not allergic to my writings – Molly Kamukama, please, bring me my booklets – I will give a few to the Leader of the Opposition in Parliament. If she is not allergic –(Laughter)– I am sure she will benefit.

With shares, you divide what comes from the land but the land itself or even the property should not be fragmented. Many of the African leaders like to go to Europe. If you ask Europeans how they handle the question of land, you will find out that in the UK, only the senior boy inherits land. In Germany, it is the same. In some of the states of the United States of America –(Interjections) People are always going to Europe. What do you do there? You should go there to learn best practices. What benchmarking are you doing if you are not learning these things? Why don’t you benchmark on how the Europeans solved the problem of inheritance? 

How can you allow your people to commit suicide by destroying the land on which they are living and you are just there? That is why I was tempted to quote the other proverb –(Laughter)– which I have withdrawn. (Laughter)

In some of the states in the United States – I think it is South Dakota – once a land is 25 acres, the law of that state does not allow you to sub-divide it. How can we be claiming to be leaders and even the resource, which God gave us is deteriorating and we are looking on? The population is growing – me kwan wa pwonyo lwak. I want to pwonyo lwak, lamera. 

The population of UK in 1810 was only 10 million. At that time, there was a man called Rev. Thomas Robert Malthus who was very worried because the population was growing. That is why he said that women should be terrorised because they were producing too many children. But now, lamera, the population of UK is 70 million and they are all much richer than they were in 1810 because they handled the issue of population increase vis-a-vis fixed land size. However, here, we have none of that. People are talking about the North Pole, the South Pole and not talking about their own people. 

The good news is that a new science of growing crops without soil is being developed. This is called hydroponics. Recently, some people came here and said they did not want soil. When I asked why not, they said soil is not good because it brings diseases to the crops. In fact, soil is seen as a spoiler because it harbours a lot of plant diseases. You only need water.  What I have not grasped is whether all crops can be economically grown in this way. We shall have to study that. There is that possibility now. 

Priorities

Government will provide post-harvest equipment to farmer groups at sub-county level in order to boost the quality of the produce on-farm and also avoid the increasing and harmful levels of aflatoxins. 

The Government is already undertaking strategic programmes to increase pasture production and will partner with the private sector for production of quality and sufficient quantities of animal and poultry feeds. 

More human and financial resources will be put in enforcement of quarantines in order to stop uncontrolled movement of animals. This will reduce spread of diseases between the different regions of the country. 

Lands, Housing and Urban Development

Social transformation entails access to decent shelter by the population in both rural and urban settings. Land as a factor of production is a crucial resource for transformation.

Achievements 

To save people from the cumbersome and time-wasting process of travelling to Kampala for land transactions, Government has decentralised the Ministry of Lands, Minerals and Urban Development services. There are 21 Ministry Zonal Offices in different districts within the country. This has greatly benefited the public by taking services closer to them. The ministry zonal offices offer all services previously provided only at the ministry’s headquarters. 

With the computerisation of land records, forgeries and graft in the land registration system will be reduced and eliminated; problems of missing land records have been eliminated and land transactions are more efficient and speedy, thus reducing the cost of doing business.

Energy and mineral development

Government took a strategic decision to prioritise the development of the energy infrastructure because it plays a crucial role as a major catalyst for social and economic development.

Electricity generation capacity

Over the last one year, a total of 206.6 MW was added to the power generation system. Of the new capacity, 183 MW was from Isimba Hydropower Project commissioned on 21 March, 2019 and 23.6MW was from the GETFiT (Global Energy Transfer Feed in Tarrif) projects.
The GETFiT Projects completed are: Nyamwamba (9.2MW) commissioned in August 2018; Nkusi (9.6) and Waki (4.8MW) commissioned in October, 2018. In total, eight renewable energy projects with a total capacity of 87.2 MW have been commissioned, while nine projects with a total of 69 MW are still under construction.

Karuma Hydro Power Project (600MW)

The project was 93 per cent complete as at the end of March, 2019. This project is scheduled to be completed by end of December, 2019. 

Agago – Achwa (42MW)

The plant will be commissioned in September, 2019. 

Muzizi Hydropower Plant (48MW)

This project is expected to commence in the last quarter of 2019. 

Nyagak III (6.6 MW)

This project commenced in May, 2019 under a Public Private Partnership (PPP) framework. When all these projects are completed, our generation capacity will stand at 2,300 MW. This is merely “endozo” (appetiser). In Ntungamo, when the women were selling the local alcohol and you did not have money, you would go from seller to seller, saying: “Let me taste.” You go tasting and by the time you have gone to all the sellers - (Laughter) 

You know, when the NRM came to power, that power station at Jinja was producing 60 MW but here, we are: 2,300MW -(Applause) - and I am saying this is merely “endozo.” “Lamera” what do you call it in Luo? “Abil keken”? (merely an appetiser). You know these Acholi used to backbite me. (Laughter) Whenever I would go there, they would call me all sorts of names – “opoko”. (Laughter) These days they cannot dare because everything they say - (Laughter) This is merely “endozo/abil keken.” In the medium term, we are aiming at 17,000MW.

Nuclear Power Development

Government has completed pre-feasibility studies for a 2,000 MW nuclear power project following the identification of eight potential sites for nuclear power plants in the districts of Buyende, Kiruhura, Lamwo, Mubende and Nakasongola. We must think of nuclear power because all these dams, which we are going to build on the Nile – Nyagak, Ayago, Uhuru, Kiba, Oryang – may end up with about 10,000MW. 

However, if you look at a small country like Norway of five million people only, they use 26,000MW –(Interjections)– Okay, some of it is used for warming during winter and so on. Even if you deduct that, 10,000MW, which we shall get from the water is not enough. 

Therefore, we are already training our people. There are quite a number of nuclear scientists who are being trained in the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development and at the right time – once we have used the hydro power of Ayago, Oryang, Kiba, Uhuru and others like Nshungyezi and Mitano – we shall have to go to nuclear. Fortunately, we have got a lot of uranium – a Canadian company came and wanted to export it but I said: “No.” I am not a fool. I cannot give you firewood when I do not have fire in my own house. Let me keep it here. I need it for my own cooking.

The use of various applications of atomic energy in Uganda continues to rise in the medical – nuclear energy is also used for the treatment of cancer – industrial and agricultural applications such as sterilisation of tsetse flies. To this effect, Government has established a national register of radiation sources and facilities. Currently, 850 radiation sources in 419 facilities using nuclear technology in their operations have been registered and put under regulatory control/supervision. 

The expansion of the transmission and distribution network is in progress. The other day I was in Gulu and Arua – Gulu is more interesting because there is now more electricity – Bujagali and these small dams are producing more electricity but people are still getting blackouts in Gulu. (Applause) The question was: why? The answer was that, yes, there is more electricity at source but the wires taking electricity are still the old ones, with wooden poles and all sorts of problems. 

We need a programme of transmission not just generation.

The system power demand has grown by 10 per cent from 605 megawatts at the start of the financial year 2018 to the current 670 megawatts. With the new generation plants, transmission lines and sub-stations constructed to supply new areas, the system will evacuate and deliver more power to consumers. 

During the Financial Year 2018/2019, Government commissioned the following electricity transmission line projects totalling 630 kilometers. This brings the total length of High Voltage Grid coverage to 2,258 kilometres.

The projects completed are:

    i) 132kV Mbarara–Nkenda, 160 kilometres; 
    ii) 220kV Kawanda-Masaka, 137 kilometres; 
    iii) 220kV Mbarara-Mirama Hill, 65 kilometres; 
    iv) 220kV Nkenda-Fort Portal-Hoima, 226 kilometres; 
    v) Upgrade of Queensway, 132/33kV; 
    vi) 132kV Isimba-Bujagali, 42 kilometres; 
    vii) Industrial Parks works have been completed for Namanve, Luzira, Mukono and Iganga.

Significant progress has also been registered on other on-going projects in various parts of the country as follows:

    i) Karuma-Kawanda 400kV - 264 kilometres;
    ii) Karuma-Lira 132kV - 75 kilometres; 
    iii) Karuma-Olwiyo 400kV - 60 kilometres;
    iv) Industrial Parks sub-stations like Namanve South-Namanve 132kV -10 kilometres; Namanve-Luzira 132kV; Nalubaale-Namanve 132kV; Mukono T-off 5 kilometers; Nalubaale-Tororo 132kV line;
    v) Tembo Steels Ltd T-off - 12 kilometres; 132kV Mutundwe-Entebbe - 35 kilometres; 
    vi) 132kV Opuyo-Moroto - 168 kilometres; 

This one of Moroto – these civil servants have their own way – the lotich I was warning my sister against. When we told them to take power to Karamoja, they took it but nobody told them that the power they were taking had a weaker current. I was very proud when I went because there was electricity in Moroto. Indians came from Kenya because there is a big deposit of limestone. They wanted to build cement factories in Moroto and I said, “Yes”. When we went to find out, they said the power - I told them there is electricity in Moroto, only to find that the electricity, which is there is of a weak type; 33 kV. It is just for cooling beer. (Laughter)  

I was really angry. Why would they not tell me that we have a phase to – I did not know at all. What we did was to start afresh because we knew what to do. We are now going to take electricity with a bigger current to Moroto. This is what I am talking about here.

Once it arrives, Karamoja is going to become a big industrial centre –(Applause)– because there is cement, marble and other minerals like gold there. Leaders, if you want to develop your areas, do not depend on the lotich because they are not bothered. I think they got damaged during the colonial system.

There is no patriotism or linkage with the people at all. I was linked with the people in whatever I did in my area. I was struggling for my father to become a modern person as well as the villagers around him. 
Finally, Opuyo- Moroto is going to get the 132kV, which I assumed had gone the other time when I was calling investors to come to Karamoja yet there was not enough power. Opuyo sub-station upgrade works are on-going at 40 per cent. There is also construction of Kawanda-Kapeeka, 132kV and 132kV Lira-Gulu-Nebbi-Arua Transmission Line. This will solve the problem of West Nile. (Applause)

Recently, we took diesel generators there, which are helping but the real solution is the 132kV Lira-Gulu-Nebbi-Arua Transmission Line. 

    i. Procurement of contractors is on-going for the following lines: 132kV Mirama-Kabale transmission line; 80 kilometres. We have got a big iron ore deposit in Kabale and we want to build a steel industry there. That is why we need this power there. There is also 400kV Masaka-Mbarara Transmission line and Gulu–Agago-Agago HPP 132kV Overhead Transmission Line, among others.

Completion of the projects above will make an additional 1,300kilometers of transmission lines, bringing the total power grid coverage to over 3,550 kilometres of High Voltage power lines from the current 2,258 kilometres. The primary sub-stations will increase from the current 25 to 42. These will enable delivery of power to the existing and newly identified load centres. 

Government Rural Electrification Programme focus has mainly been on grid extension projects and project prioritisation criteria putting into consideration other factors of social equity and equitable regional distribution. 

Government has consequently implemented over 10,000 kilometers of Medium Voltage power lines and approximately 9,000 kilometres of Low Voltage distribution power lines. This has translated into the connections of over 1.3 million customers onto the national grid and the increment of the rural electrification access rate from 1 per cent in 2001 to over 13 per cent in 2019. This means that a total of about 7.8 million Ugandans are now linked to the main line. Additionally, another 500,000 customers are connected to power off the grid like solar power.

There is a young American lady who is developing solar power in Soroti. That is called off-grid and it is helping three million people access power off-grid. Therefore, on-grid, we have 7.8 million and off-grid three million, which is about 11 million people who now have electricity either on the grid or off-grid, which is about 25 per cent.

With nearly all the District Headquarters supplied with electricity, the agenda is now to connect all the sub-counties by 2022. 

Government is promoting use of renewable energy technologies in the country that include solar system for lighting rural homes and for the national grid. The country now has 40 megawatts of solar grid connected systems. 

In line with the new mineral policy and mining legislation, Government developed a mechanism for biometrically registering all artisanal and small-scale miners in the country. In this regard, biometric registration for small artisans in Uganda commenced in January 2019. 

The value of minerals produced was worth Shs 158.75 billion and revenue amounting to Shs 16.7 billion was generated as Non Tax Revenue.  The investor, M/S Guangzhou Dongsong Energy Group Co. Ltd installed a phosphates processing plant in Tororo and is already developing the Sukulu phosphate resource into phosphates, they are also going to produce steel, glass, cement and brick products. 

Again, on the side of power, the ones, which will be commissioned in the near future are:

i) 	Karuma, Waki (4.8 MW), Kyambura SHPP (7.6 MW), Sindila SHPP (5 MW), Ndugutu SHPP (5.9 MW), Nyamugasani I SHPP (15 MW), Nyamugasani II SHPP (5 MW), Kikagati SHPP (16 MW).
ii) 	We have Karuma & Isimba Hydropower Stations, Muzizi and others.

One of the most dynamic ways to expand an economy is for the Government to invest in the construction of roads, airports, schools, hospitals, railways, Government offices, waterworks and power dams using labour-intensive technology to absorb some of the unemployed youth. 

Financing infrastructure development is a tested method to increase employment; accelerate growth; increase incomes and savings and investment.

The key results under roads on both the national and district urban and community access roads network are summarised below:

There are many roads here if I read them they will “kill” you.

Mukono-Kyetume-Katosi/Nyenga (74km) while, Olwiyo-Gulu Road (70.3km), Bulima-Kabwoya Road (66 km); Akisim-Moroto (50.3km), Kanoni-Sembabule and Sembabule-Villa Maria (110km) and Kashenyi-Mitooma (11.5km) this one is for hon. Otafire - he is the one who wanted tarmac. (Laughter)
Nansana-Busunju road, Fort-Portal-Kyenjojo, the Nile Bridge (525m) in Jinja. Nalakasi and Kaabong bridges and very many roads here.
 
Kampala Flyover, Rukungiri-Kihihi-Ishasha/Kanungu ,Masaka-Bukakata road, Pallisa-Kamonkoli, Upgrading of Kapchorwa-Suam. You will read all of them in here. The rehabilitation works on Entebbe International Airport is in progress.
 
Revival of the National Airline –(Applause) 

The two Bombardier CRJ900s were received on 23 April, 2019. Government revived the national carrier, which had stopped operations. 

Commercial operations are expected to commence in July, 2019. The other two Bombardier CRJ900s are expected in July and September and recruitment of key staff for the national airline is complete. 

In the transport sector, we moved to solve the issues of air-transport. Ugandans like travelling. Each year, they were donating $450 million to other countries through foreign travel. 

Besides, there was a lot of inconvenience to travelling Ugandans by not having direct flights and even being charged discriminatively air fares. Since Banks were wasting our time, we paid cash.  

Some of these banks are not serious, there was one bank - two air-crafts are ready here and another two will come in the month of July and September, 2019 as I have said. These will be for regional travels.  

We shall, straight away, go for inter-continental flights to a few high volume destinations of travellers to and from Uganda.  We are acquiring two air-buses for that purpose. Those will come in December, 2020 and another one in January, 2021. That will be just before the - some of the people should know the right address.

Government continues to fast-track the development of the Standard Gauge Railway with the expectation to improve the quality of the transport system and provide a globally competitive quality service. 

This Standard Gauge Railway took a bit of time because in Africa and in Uganda, there are a lot of flies and whenever there is some little food, they swarm all over the place so we had to struggle because of many people wanting to distort but now we have got a good package and we shall conclude so that we start building the Standard Gauge Railway. 

You will see what we will have signed when we sign but as we are waiting, we have already acquired 93.9 acres of land for the right of way and 376 project affected persons were compensated. 

The Uganda Railways Cooperation re-instated freight services across Lake Victoria and passenger train services on the Namanve-Kampala passenger line. This is the old line, which we are also repairing. Averages of 18,000 metric tonnes of cargo per month and 2,000 passengers per day were being moved using the freight and passenger train services respectively. 

The Resettlement Action Plan for the rehabilitation of Tororo-Gulu railway line was approved and procurement of a contractor for rehabilitation works is in final stages. Rehabilitation works are planned to commence during the first quarter of Financial Year 2019/2020. We need to repair that line to Pakwach because when we start building the Standard Gauge Railway, it will take some time, maybe two or three years. So, what shall be happening? We want to start using the old line because it is cheaper than road transport. That is why we want to revive it.

A hundred and seventy water vessels – this is marine safety - were inspected, of which 131 inland vessels were approved and licensed to provide transport services mainly on lakes Victoria, Kyoga and Albert. Also, 12 locations for the establishment of search and rescue facilities have been identified on lakes Victoria, Kyoga and Albert.

Four hundred kilometres equivalent of roads, will be upgraded to bitumen standard, 332.4 kilometres equivalent to rehabilitated/reconstructed and 58 bridges constructed. Again, these are the roads. You will read them; they are so many of them here like Mpigi-Kabulasoke-Kanoni town roads. 

These are the new ones like: 

    i. Luweero-Butalangwa road; (Applause) 
    ii. Muyembe-Nakapiripirit Road;
    iii. Rwenkunyu, which my people in the North cannot pronounce. They say “rwekunye”. It is Rwenkunyu. I came to learn that “enkunyu” in Runyoro – they are called “enkunguru” – is something which is like a swamp but with many small anthills. They are called “enkunguru” in Runyankore but apparently in Runyoro, they are called “enkunyu.” So, this is Rwenkunyu-Apac-Acholibur road. 

	This road was going to cause me some problems with my Langi people. They were saying that I am paying more attention to the Acholi side and have forgotten their side. However, very soon, everybody will be smiling. (Applause) Rwenkunyu-Apac-Acholibur road, 191 kilometres. These are long roads.
    iv. Busega-Mpigi. We want to make this road an expressway. (Applause) 
    v. Najjanankumbi-Busabala-Munyonyo. There are some roads there which are dusty in that semi-town area. 
    vi. Kira-Matugga; 
    vii. Nakaseke-Singo; 
    viii. Atiak-Laropi; 
    ix. Moroto-Lokitanyala.

Then the oil roads, Karugutu-Ntoroko – do not worry, you are about to survive my speech - (Laughter) – but the other man is not representing his people so I do not know. (Laughter)

So, the oil roads are:

    i. Karugutu-Ntoroko and Kabwoya-Buhuka;
    ii. Masindi-Biso; 
    iii. Hohwa-Nyarongwa-Kyarusheshe-Butore and Kabale-Kiziramfumbi and
    iv. Lusalira-Nkonge.

There are also these town roads. There is a project called the District Urban and Community Access Roads (DUCAR) network. We are doing a number of roads in Butaleja, Buyende, Luweero, Kamuli, Mayuge, Serere, Kyankwanzi, Buhweju, Dokolo, Hoima, Kapchorwa, Moroto, Kasese, Arua, Adjumani, Sironko, Bulambuli, Rubanda, Kayunga, Mukono, Kaliro and Rakai. The other man never comes to meetings so that Luttamaguzi fellow –(Laughter)– “ngenda kuloopa nti ono tagya mu nkiiko. Ngenda kumuloopa.”

Upgrade selected urban roads in Gulu. If you go to Gulu now, the area has changed. (Applause) Now, you see “lamera” claiming a baby who is –(Laughter)– I do not want to fight with “lamera” like the other women whom King Solomon had to sort out because my sister is saying the baby is hers. However, from what I heard, the baby belongs to somebody else. (Laughter) Okay, let us share by bringing up the baby together.

So, the roads are in Gulu, Mityana Municipal Council, Lyantonde, Kabarole, Kapchorwa Trading Centre and so on. This urban road programme will continue. It is a good one because it makes the towns looks smart. (Applause) 

On the side of tourism, this has increasingly become important to Uganda’s economy. It is a driving force in propelling economic growth and continues to be the leading foreign exchange earner for Uganda, generating $1.45 billion foreign exchange earnings in 2017, compared to $1.37 billion in 2016. 

In 2018, the sector registered increased performance, as reflected in the visits to Uganda’s national parks and other sites such as Uganda Wildlife Education Centre and the Source of the Nile. Visitors to national parks increased by 39,674 from 285,671 in 2017 to 325,345 in 2018. 

Although the proportion of leisure visitors to total visitors’ arrivals is still relatively small; it increased from 18 per cent in 2016 to 20.1 per cent in 2017 and tourist arrivals in Uganda have steadily increased from 850,000 in 2008 to over 1.4 million arrivals in 2017.   

The direct contribution of tourism to GDP in 2017 was Shs 2.69 trillion, which is 2.9 per cent of GDP; while the total contribution including wider effects from investment, the supply chain and induced income impacts, was Shs 6.8 trillion, which is 7.3 per cent of GDP up from Shs 6 trillion in 2016.

In terms of contribution to employment in the economy, tourism generated 229,000 jobs directly in 2017. This is 2.4 per cent of total employment. This includes employment by hotels, travel agents, airlines and other passenger transportation services. The overall goal for the Government is to attract 4 million tourist arrivals and increase the contribution of tourism to GDP from Shs 7.3 trillion to Shs 14.6 trillion at the end of the year 2020. 

To achieve this goal, the following has been done and will be pursued further:

    (i) Boundary management and surveillance has been enhanced. 
    (ii) Tourism infrastructure and products are essential in improving visitor experience and hence have a huge influence on the length of visitor stay and expenditure. 

During the Financial Year 2018/2019, a total of 1,165 kilometres of trail network and 90 bridges were maintained and 67 kilometres of trails opened in the protected areas.

Priorities

    (i) Government will continue to focus on Human-Wildlife Conflict. Whenever I go to Nwoya or Rubirizi, people talk of the elephants but the Uganda Wildlife Authority are now building the electric fence to keep the animals away. Also, Government will prioritise community engagements, resource Conservation, research and ecological monitoring and the general management of Uganda’s 10 national parks and the 12 wildlife reserves.
  
    (ii) Maintenance of museums, cultural heritage sites and conservation of artefacts will be prioritised.
   
    (iii) Government plans to promote Uganda’s tourist attractions and reach out to more domestic and potential international tourists through;

    (a) Participation in international tourism marketing exhibitions and regional marketing events to consolidate the gains so far realised in promoting Destination Uganda.
    (b) Hire 07 Market Destination Representation (MDR) firms to aggressively promote Destination Uganda in the International, African and Domestic Markets.
    (c) Design and construct the equator monument in Queen Elizabeth National Park; complete and furnish the Visitor Information Centre at Sheraton.

The tempo of Uganda’s development is, however, interfered with by the action of corrupt public servants and political actors; that is why corruption is now the No. 1 public enemy.  Hence, the Government has put in place a number of strategies to eliminate corruption and promote the principle of zero tolerance to corruption. These strategies are intended to create an even more conducive environment for good governance and the rule of law to flourish in Uganda. 

Government recuperating has provided more funding to the Inspectorate of Government to increase their capacity to verify the leaders’ declaration. Here, I heard what the Speaker said – Omanyi ebimu biswaaza, tetwagala kubyogerera wano. Nga akantu kayogedde, akantu ako - naye ekirungi, bali abalala tebakateggedde - (Laughter). We shall discuss those when we are - but some of these people do not come. You come as observers; when I call the NRM Caucus, you should come as observers so that you do not miss some of this magezi. Waliwo akantu Speaker kayoggedde, nange nali nkawulideko. Aah, sagala kukogera mu luzungu banange - (Laughter). Wale wazungu watafikiri tuko watu wa ainagani? Wacha nibaki kwalugha ya hapa alafu -

Government has provided more funding to the Inspectorate of Government (IGG) to increase their capacity to verify the leaders’ declaration. The verification exercise will be further increased to crack down on public officers who have illicitly acquired wealth at the expense of effective service delivery to the citizens. 

Prevention of corruption has been enhanced by increasing citizen participation in the monitoring of Government programmes and encouraging citizens to report cases related to abuse of public office. In this regard, the Government implemented the Transparency, Accountability and Anti-Corruption (TAAC) component in NUSAF II (Northern Uganda Social Action Fund) by engaging citizens in monitoring Government programmes.

A new Unit was created headed by Lt Col Edith Nakalema. There is a 24-hour call-centre where people can report bribery cases, embezzlement, land evictions, crime et cetera. The Unit, then, contacts the Police and the IGG so that they handle the cases. 
 
On the side of human capital, I would like to comment on education and health. Since the elections in 2016, 256 new classrooms for Government primary schools have been added. This brings the total number of classrooms in permanent materials for Government primary schools to 102,557. It really gives me a lot of pleasure because – you know when you have been around for a long time, you really enjoy some of these things. When we started, the Government primary schools’ classrooms in permanent materials were 28,000. We are now talking of 102,557 classrooms. These are the Government primary schools’ classrooms with permanent materials.  
            
The Government primary schools are now 12,437 in total. Out of 9,096 – the Ugandans really like power. They have created so many parishes. The parishes were originally only 5,000 and now they are 9,096. Can you imagine? Out of the 9,096 old parishes in Uganda, there is, at least one primary school in 6,167 parishes. The only parishes without Government primary schools are 1,100.  

The total enrolment of pupils in Government primary schools is 7,107,202. The enrolment of pupils in private schools is 1,733,387. The total enrolment in primary schools, therefore, in Government and private schools is 8.8 million children. In the Government primary schools, the teacher-pupil ratio is 1:43 - (Interjections) - you have vehicles; go and check; that is why you are given the oversight role. The ministry has told me this, so you can go and check. You do not have to quarrel because you can go and confirm.

Since 2016, 48 new classrooms in permanent materials have been added to the stock of classrooms for the Government secondary schools. The total number of classrooms for Government secondary schools is now 12,696.  There are 1,194 Government secondary schools with an enrolment of 679,000 students.  The private secondary schools are more - you see, the wisdom of the NRM; we opened - the Banyankole say when you sound an alarm for food, it should not be so loud for many people to hear and overwhelm you with the food. However, when you sound an alarm for war, it should be loud. Therefore, we sounded a big alarm and the private sector came.

The private sector has opened more schools than the Government. The private secondary schools are 8,269 with an enrolment of 778,000; actually, they have more students - (Interjection) - fine, those Banyankole of yours say that obwengye bukira amaani translated to mean that wisdom can defeat strength. Therefore, we were wise and said that let us open because struggling with ignorance is a war.

Anybody who has capacity should open - (Laughter) - a secondary school. There are many rich people in Uganda that you see when you go to Kampala Road. Our Baganda people say that silya ayolesa mubiri. You can tell by the size of the stocmach of the one who claims not to eat –(Laughter) – so, you can see the rich people in Uganda when you stand along Kampala Road and see how fat they are. Now if they are so fat, why do you have to struggle with the problem of education alone? Therefore, we opened.

In the colonial times - for those who were old enough - there was only one private secondary school called Aggrey Memorial. However, you now hear of 8,296 with an enrolment of 778,000 students and these are from you people because you have something in the pocket. Therefore, if you go we will remain with our poor people in our schools - (Interjection) - no, we shall check on how they are passing; our 1,100 schools of the poor, how many students are passing with good grades? You can check the records there.

Out of 1,167 old sub-counties, 856 sub-counties have, at least, one Government secondary school.  The sub-counties without a Government secondary school each are 311. The total enrolment of students in Government and private secondary schools is now 1.450 million.

There are 99 Government technical and vocational schools with a total enrolment of 70,000 students. There are 50 universities in Uganda today, 11 of them being public universities. 

The total enrolment in universities is 186,000; 96,000 in public universities and 90,000 in private ones. In public universities, we have been rationalising courses and emphasising Science subjects, Mathematics, Accountancy and Auditing, Quantitative Economics and Management. The school, tertiary and university systems must create wealth and job creators and not just clerical job seekers.  

The total Public Service jobs are 470,000. These do not mean much for a population of 41 million people that, moreover, will be 81 million people by 2040. It is the private sector, in the form of the four sectors that I talked about - commercial agriculture, industry, services and ICT - that will create jobs and wealth. Already, the strategic bottlenecks still around notwithstanding, industry is employing 700,000, services 1.3 million people and ICT companies employing 170,000 people.

Therefore, you can see that already the non-agricultural sectors are employing 2 million Ugandans. This is very encouraging because when you are employing one person, remember he has five people at home as family. On the issue of health, there are 19 referral hospitals including Mulago. Mulago is trying to be a super-specialised hospital.

With some partners, we are building super-specialised hospitals in Lubowa and another one by His Highness the Aga Khan. The aim of this is to stop the haemorrhage of money abroad. Each year, Uganda has been losing $187 million to abroad especially India for medical reasons. However, health is not in treatment but in prevention. The ways of prevention are well known and cost effective. They are; immunization, hygiene, nutrition, behaviour change, life-style discipline, safe-water and vector control like mosquitoes and any more. If you address all those aspects, 80 per cent of the sicknesses will be eliminated. 

By immunizing against the 13 diseases, we have eliminated polio, measles etc. By killing the mosquitoes with indoor spraying, killing the tsetse flies, we eliminated malaria and sleeping sickness. By just clean water, you get rid of cholera, intestinal worms, bilharzia and the guinea worm. Prevention has been achieved through the health centres III. 

There are 1002 Health Centre IIIs in the whole of Uganda. 331 sub-counties have Health Centre IIs to be upgraded to Health Centre IIIs and money is already found for that purpose. (Applause) That leaves only 132 sub-counties that are still lacking at least one Health Centre III.

As pointed out above, safe water is part of preventive medicine. There are now 65,000 boreholes in Uganda. My team will go to audit these boreholes; whether they are working and if not, why?  Somebody must account. (Applause) We are aiming at having at least one safe water source per village; borehole, protected spring or piped water. 

A total of 11.3 million Ugandans are now using piped water. Hitherto, we have been putting more emphasis on budgeting on the roads and electricity. Remember that we are not yet putting a lot of money in water because we cannot do everything. This year, we spent Shs 4,786.6 billion on the Ministry of Works and Transport and Shs 2,438.2 billion on the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development for electricity yet on the Ministry of Water and Environment, we spent Shs 907.73 billion for both safe water for drinking and water for production. 

This must be understood because there is no other way. You cannot do all things at a go. That confusion must get out of people’s heads. When you see somebody doing this and that, you know that they are not leaders. I have led in all situations, including the difficult ones and that is how we manage. The discipline of ‘one by one makes a bundle’, is indispensable if we are to succeed. The Banyankole would say “Kamwe Kamwe nugwo mugaanda.”

Water for drinking, production, hygiene and industry comes from one main source; rain.  Rain itself comes from water. We have got one of the cleverest tribes in Africa; the Basoga. (Applause)

The Banyankole have many words; they call rain Enjura and water is Amaizi. Amaizi also has different types; Omutunga, which is the runoff water. Then there is Omwejemure, which is the floodwater. However, the Basoga said all this is a waste of time –(Laughter)– that all that is Amadhi. (Laughter) You can see how clever they are. The rain, water running on the ground and the water itself are all Amadhi so why do you waste time? It is all water. We may need to learn from the Basoga.

Rain comes from water – yes, water comes from rain but rain itself comes from water. Listen carefully – (Interjections) - which water? Water of the lakes, swamps, forests, rivers and oceans; the distant ones such as the Indian Ocean and the Pacific. 

According to our scientist, Mafaabi, not Nandala –(Laughter)– 40 per cent of our rain comes from our local water bodies and wetlands and 60 per cent comes from the oceans. In ignorance, some of our people have been destroying the wetlands and forests hence the erratic rains like the ones we saw recently. This must be stopped and it is easy to do so. 

People in the wetlands and those encroaching on the lakeshores, riverbanks, among others, should peacefully leave these bodies and we help them with alternative livelihoods especially fish farming, which is even more lucrative than rice growing and growing yams.  

Besides, the good news is that we can even do agriculture without soil. That is what I said before; hydroponics. Apart from interfering with the rain, cutting the tree cover also causes violent, windy downpours (eihuunga and even eshato (the cyclone) as well as landslides. It also causes soil erosion and the silting of water bodies such as lakes. 

Uganda should not be a country of the uninformed; it should be a country of the enlightened. The other day at Namugongo, I challenged religious leaders to extend what Christianity has been saying since 1877 when they set foot in Uganda. In Runyankore they say, “Ediini ekareeta Omushana; ediini ekabiinga omwirima”. This means that Christianity brought light (omushana) to Africa and chased darkness (omwirima).  

Indeed, religion brought light in some aspects. My mother, an uneducated woman, rejected alcohol and the indiscipline that goes with it and learnt how to boil milk instead of drinking it raw, which was the tradition. She also learnt how to knit sweaters, how not to share cups and plates (okunywererana or okuririraana) and appreciated education, among other things. All this was on account of religion. The Christians, the Muslims and the others have all contributed in some of these areas. 

However, there is still darkness in some of the crucial areas such as land fragmentation on inheritance. These people who are fragmenting land are Christians or Muslims. They are led by people who go to Rome and come back, who go to Canterbury, Malta but don’t bring modern - because those areas especially, Europe have a lot of modern ways like on inheritance, which I was talking about. So why don’t you bring that and integrate it here among our own people. Like the issue of pur me cam keken. Some of these people do not know our languages. They are just here in Kampala. This is emmere y’olubuto yokka - subsistence farming. 

This is Obukafiri. How can you be a Christian in the modern way and you do not know that you need to make money and yet you need education, health, better clothing and then you say you are a Christian but you do not know that you need to modernize - how? 

When some do commercial farming, they do it without ekibaro (cura, aimar, otita); and attacking the environment contrary to what God had arranged. Let the religious people preach for the preservation of the environment. It is, indeed, a biblical commandment. In the Book of Genesis, God commands man to look after the environment and not to destroy it. When you come to Kisozi, you find the huge preserved rufunzho (papyrus swamp) with its brown (rusty brown) ferric oxide (ebirooro) water.  

If the Christians and the Moslems do not look after the environment well, they will be in darkness (omwirima) worse than that of the traditional worshippers that are wrongly and arrogantly called Abakafiiri. 

These bakafiiri were aware of God (Ruhanga, Rubanga, Katonda, Kankya, Kibumba) but they were also “worshipping” the mountains (Kangavve, Kampindi; Lubwama, Buyego - waliyo omusambwa gwa kawumpuli, Magara, Walusi, etc.), the rock-out crops, the rivers etc., these people were worshiping these spirits which they said were living in those areas. Each area had its ancestral spirit in addition to God. They knew God was Kankya – that is the Baruuli, Kibumba, Katonda, Rubanga.

Therefore, if the Christians and Muslims are more enlightened -they are people of light - omushana, ekitangaala, how can it be that you do not know what these people knew? When I was leading the war in the Luwero Triangle where almost all the people believe in the traditional religion as a supplement to the modern religion –(Interjections)– because you who have never worked or lived with the people; I really pity you. 

All those people especially in some of the areas, they go to the church in the morning but in the evening –(Laughter)– I was able to infuse the sciences because you see, what you should be careful about is arrogance. When you lead people, please wetowaze - be humble - this is part of the problem - (Interjection) - of course. 

When I lived among my people, I had to listen to them carefully. Then they would tell my people - temufumbira omukulu w’olutalo ensujju - do not cook for the leader of the war pumpkins - because they have a lot of water and that means tears. Therefore, if he eats pumpkins, many people are going to die and we shall be crying –(Laughter). These people would come to the camp and say, “Banange temufumbira Museveni ensujju kubanga zirina amazzi mangi.” You people are just there floating - so then I would listen and say oh, that is how you look at it. Then we would go slowly and I link with them.

However, the way you come looking up –(Laughter)- when I was leading the war in the Luwero Triangle where almost all the people believe in the traditional religion as a supplement to the modern religion, I was able to infuse the sciences into many of their activities – medicine. There is when I found one of my big supporters - he died recently, an influential man in the area and one you would think was enlightened; the leg was swollen. I asked him what happened, he said bantega ettalo –(Laughter)– that they can put certain charms in your path and when you pass there, the foot will swell. This is the most prominent member of the NRM in the whole sub-county.

He wasn’t going to hospital. They had put ash around the wound. I asked my doctors and they said this is a medical condition; it is called cellulitis. I asked the cause and they said bacteria. Can it be treated? They said yes. We gave him antibiotics and he was cured. However, you find that because of the disconnect between the educated and these people, they do not know. They just go on with their own things because you do not get to the people.

Therefore, when I would associate with them and ask, how do you call this? Then I would now bring in my idea. I was able to help those people know that ettalo, which they thought was eddogo (witchcraft), is actually a medical condition, which is treatable. I am sure that was the first time they heard of it in that area. Therefore, etalo (cellulitis) is not edogo (witchcraft) but a bacterial infection and that there was no herb that could stop bullets. This is because somebody had also started telling them that if you hold something, the bullet would not get you. I also had to deal with that.   

The only dagala (medicine) for bullets is taking cover and trying to neutralize the one firing at you. With patient political work, we can persuade our traditional believers from worshipping to respecting. They were now worshipping those mountains; the spirits but preserving them in the process. You cannot go to dig somewhere because there is a spirit there. The effect is that people do not go to destroy the forest. Now, you Christians and Muslims, have no contribution. You are just there and the environment is being destroyed.

Therefore, what I would do, as usual, is to educate my children. Temuyina Kusinza (you do not have to worship) but you can okussamu ekitiibwa (to respect) these mountains. Of course, the traditional people do not only worship the hills (obusozi/ensozi); they worship the ancestral spirits. That worship caused respect for nature. It is, therefore, wrong for the Christians and Moslems, led by more informed people, to have no respect for nature, God’s creation, than our superstitious traditional believers. 

Kangave Hill was clothed with thick forest when we were fighting that area. When I went there, recently, it is completely bare and the numerous rock boulders – amayinja - which I did not know existed beneath the trees, are all now exposed. The encroachers have even gone into the Busemba swamp, Danze etc.  

While I appeal to the leaders - political, religious, and cultural - I direct the Chief Administrative Officers (CAOs) and the subcounty chiefs to persuade these encroachers to leave the swamps and the forests after they have harvested their current seasonal crop and never to come back. (Applause)  They do not have to use force. If the encroachers do not plan to leave voluntarily, the CAOs should write to the Permanent Secretaries of the Presidency, Prime Minister and Head of the Civil Service for all of us to be involved. I do not want to use force. They have to persuade these people to move peacefully. Any CAO or Subcounty chief who does not act will be dismissed and may be charged with the relevant criminal offence after the guidance of the Attorney General and the Director of Public Prosecutions (DPP).

Regarding the long established swamp rice growers of, mainly, Eastern Uganda, I will visit the area again, after my upcountry tour. We shall discuss how to, for instance, transition from the destructive rice growing to the more lucrative and environment-friendly fish farming at the edges of the swamps (enjegoyego) and not in the centre of the swamp.

I cannot end this address without talking about the historic task of ending the market and political fragmentation of Africa, initially by the myopic indigenous chiefs and later on, by the colonialists.  Principle No. 2 of the NRM is Pan-Africanism.  This is not just a slogan or a cliché.  It is a matter of survival for the African nations. 

China has a population and, therefore, an internal market of 1.3 billion people. Yet, as you can see in the news, they are struggling for access to other markets.  Why? China has 1.3 billion people inside their own country but as you can see, they are arguing with the Americans about accessing other markets. Why? It is because the more the consumers buy from you, the more prosperous you become. 

The factories produce more, they employ more people, they pay more taxes, more taxes help the Government to build infrastructure, pay better salaries and provide better social services (education, health, welfare). That is why, right from 1963, some of us have been in the Pan-African Movement – the integration of the whole of Africa into an African Common Market and those portions of Africa that are similar or compatible into political Unions (confederations, leading to political federations).  

I am happy to inform Ugandans, the zig-zag course notwithstanding, that Africa and East Africa are now on the right trajectory.  Recently, we signed the CFTA (the Continental Free Trade Area). This, of course, is not new. We had signed the Abuja Treaty in 1991 on the same mission. Nevertheless, our Baganda people say, Addingana amawolu y’agajjamu omukutto – the one who repeatedly eats the cold food food will get satisfied eventually. I do not know why the Baganda underrated obuhooro (the cold food) because I like the cold food. I like obuhooro so much. I never eat the hot food. 

The Runyankore equivalent is, “Owaafa nagyenda amaguru tigamugaya” – if you keep travelling, looking for something, in the end, the legs will reward you by getting what you wanted.”

Therefore, the search for the integration of Africa is necessary.  It is good that we are, again, re-igniting the fire (okwenegyeza – okuseesaamu) of integration.

In the case of the EAC, all the countries have now agreed on the concept of confederation as a first step towards the Federation.  A Constitutional Drafting Committee, comprised of delegates from all the member states, is now working. It is comprised of the following distinguished East Africans:

    1. Hon. Dr Justice Benjamin Odoki 	-	Uganda
    2. Prof. Murindwa Rutanga	  	-	Uganda
    3. Hon. Amos Wako			-	Kenya       
    4. Mr Peter Kiguta			-	Kenya       
    5. Mr Theophile Mbonera		-	Rwanda        
    6. Mr John Nshunguyinka		-	Rwanda
    7. Prof. Alexander Makulilo		-	Tanzania
    8. Mr Idd Ramandhan Mandi		-	Tanzania
    9. Dr Serge Ngendakumana		-	Burundi 

“Imana” in Kirundi means God. Do not put it in your own confusion - (Laughter) - you see some of the people have got evil thoughts. “Imana” in Kinyarwanda/Kirundi means God – (Laughter)

10. Mr Salvator Ntibazonkiza		-	Burundi
11. Mrs Mary James Ajipi		-	South Sudan 
12. Mr Albino Nyler Polic		-	South Sudan

That is a good point, next time I will put a woman. I repent my sins but Christianity provides for forgiveness. Apwoyo matek. They were given seven months to produce a draft.

I was given the pleasant task of championing the cause of the East African Federation –(Applause)– under our current Chairman, H.E. Paul Kagame, the President of Rwanda. That is exactly what I am doing. I am now mobilising you for the federation. 

The political economic integration of Africa is about three things: prosperity through trade in the common market; strategic security through political integration where possible; and exploiting the fraternity (linguistically, culturally) and the linkages among the four nations of Africa: The Niger-Congo, the Nilo-Saharan, the Agro-Asiatic and the Khoisan. The speech I gave to the Committee on Constitutional Drafting on 23 April 2019 at Entebbe, plus other relevant documents should be given to all members of Parliament and sold in bookstores so that the detailed reasoning is known to all East Africans.

I wish to end this address by thanking Parliament for enacting the following legislations during the last session: They are all listed here and they are 26 Bills. The proposed legislative programme for Financial Year 2019/2020 is also here:

    1. The Uganda Institute for Diplomacy and International Affairs (UIDIA), Bill. 
    2. The Foreign Service Bill. 
    3. The Public Service Pension Fund (Amendment) Bill, 2018.
    4. The National Records and Archives (Amendment) Bill.
    5. The Income Tax (Amendment) Bill, 2020.
    6. The Value Added Tax (Amendment) Bill, 2020. 
    7. The Retirement and Benefits Bill.

All the Bills are here and they are very many.

Madam Speaker, it is now my pleasure – Am I the one who opened the session? (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: No, your Excellency, you just end your address. (Laughter)

THE PRESIDENT: Here, my people had written that I should open the session but I do not remember that. Since I have done my work, I do not want to go into other people’s Lubimbi. 

I would like to thank you very much and I hope that the coming session will be fruitful. Thank you very much. (Applause)

I always look for new people and I would like to give three copies to the Leader of the Opposition – (Applause) 

ADJOURNMENT

THE SPEAKER: Your Excellency the President, on behalf of Parliament and the country, I would like to thank you very much for fulfilling your obligation under Article 101 of the Constitution. The statement will be distributed to the Members of Parliament and they will have the opportunity to debate it. We expect the Leader of the Opposition to make a formal reply and it will also be debated.

Now, as it is our custom, your Excellency, we invite you to join us for the reception here at the gardens of Serena Hotel. It has been organised to mark this important occasion of the opening of the Fourth Session of the Tenth Parliament. I would further like to invite the guests to proceed first to the steps to take a group photograph. 

In the meantime, I adjourn the House to Thursday, 13 June 2019, when we shall receive the Budget Speech. However, I would like to advise that henceforth, guests who arrive after the President has arrived at the venue will not have access to the function. You are, therefore, advised to read the programme, keep time and arrive at your appointed time not after the Head of State has arrived. Thank you very much and have a good evening. (Applause)

(The House rose at 6.14 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 13 June 2019 at 2.00 p.m.)

The East African Community Anthem

The National Anthem




  

 
