
PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA

Tuesday, 14 June 2016

Parliament met at 9.51 a.m. at Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this morning sitting. I want to commend and thank the honourable Leader of the Opposition for graciously allowing us to share space today so that we can sit freely and do our work. (Applause) Until we make more permanent arrangements, I look forward to her continued cooperation as well as that of the shadow cabinet, on that issue.

Honourable members, the Appointments Committee is scheduled to sit from 2.00 p.m. this afternoon, tomorrow from morning until evening and Thursday, from morning until evening to vet the presidential nominees for positions of Cabinet ministers and ministers of state. 

A number of nominees have not submitted their CVs – if they could do so urgently, we can complete the work on schedule. To members of the Appointments Committee, documents for today’s meeting are in your pigeon holes. However, before we commence, there were three Members who had matters of national importance - hon. Moses Balyeku; I don’t know where he is seated. But there was also hon. Okello and hon. Adong. But please two minutes only.

9.54
MR MOSES BALYEKU (NRM, Jinja Municipality West, Jinja): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand on a matter of national importance. First and foremost, we have the East African Community, which is there to promote unity, prosperity and business growth. When the Kenyan President was here addressing the Ninth Parliament, he promised that he would work hard to ensure that Uganda and Kenya plus the rest of the countries develop together. 

It is unfair for a company owned by the Kenyan Government – Kenyan Airways – to exploit Ugandans by charging exorbitant fares making it the most expensive route in the world yet it is the shortest route – 45 minutes!

Madam Speaker, on Friday I had to buy an economy air ticket to Nairobi at $700. A business class ticket was going for $1,200. What kind of East African Community is this when we have even ministers of East Africa? We have Standard Gauge Railway coming. We are doing a partnership. It is better we pronounce ourselves, as Parliament, and ask the Minister of Works and Transport to go to Kenya and meet his counterpart to address this issue so that exploitation of Ugandans is stopped.

It is also high time this Parliament pronounced itself for us to get our own airline. This is because there are five routes in a day. You cannot charge Ugandans $1,200 each – for 45 minutes – when the flights are full yet we also have other countries we can partner with and have airlines operating in Uganda. Why should one Government, which is in the East African Community, exploit another Government? 

Even as Members of Parliament, we should stop travelling on Kenya Airways. Let us also pronounce ourselves by saying that there will be no more travelling on Kenya Airways unless they become sensible enough because for the people in the business community, who connect flights to Nairobi, what business are they doing? Even us as legislators, we travel a lot and that is our connecting airport –(Interruption)

MR SSEKIKUBO: Thank you, Madam Speaker and I thank hon. Balyeku, for giving way. The information I would like to give him is that once upon a time Uganda possessed and owned a very efficient company called “Uganda Airlines” and it was disposed of in very dubious circumstances. 

I also want to add that the airline that was started by the then President, Idi Amin, boasted of five Boeings and some were used by the then military to the extent that even the airport itself was privatised into private hands – the prominent persons are ministers and have been ministers in this Government. 

Therefore, I understand his call, but I would also like to inform the House that it is within our means  to deal with those who took over Uganda Airlines for their own use and benefit plus the airport itself where this Government and the country has committed over $200 million to expand and modernise. It is only serving private individuals.

Therefore don’t raise your call and end it at that. Let us widen it and say, as a country we are ashamed when even smaller countries such as Djibouti, Burundi and Rwanda own airlines, yet Uganda, which is a landlocked country, has nothing to show.

So, hon. Moses Balyeku, I also share your concern but as soon as we have a fully constituted Government, it should be our first priority on the agenda. Even the President has come to acknowledge that indeed it was a mistake to dispose of our own airline. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Balyeku, please close.

MR BALYEKU: Thank you, hon. Ssekikubo. Madam Speaker, I wind up by praying that we pronounce ourselves, as this Parliament, on the issue of Kenya Airways. For the ministers designate who are going to be approved, I pray that we first approve the Minister of Works and Transport to go and handle this matter expeditiously -(Laughter)- such that the country gets to know that the Tenth Parliament has begun acting. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Before I get hon. Okello, honourable members, this matter is extremely serious. Therefore, the incoming Minister of Works and Transport is directed to expeditiously handle it. 

However, as Ugandans, I think we should also be more partriotic. The Aga Khan had bought Air Uganda here, but the Government did not give it business. The only people who used to travel on that airline were I, Kale Kayihura, Gen. Otafiire – very few of us used that airline. Air Uganda had our name and our Crested Crane but Government was not giving it business. 

Therefore, if we are serious as the President said that we “use Ugandan-made” like the clothes, if we have an airline, let us direct – in Kenya, if you are a Kenyan civil servant, you cannot use any other airline except Kenya Airways. It is only here that you go dancing on any airline. (Laughter) So, the minister is directed to handle that matter expeditiously. It also reminds us of the non-tariff barriers which our traders are facing. All these must be handled.

10.00
MR ANTHONY OKELLO (NRM, Kioga County, Amolatar): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity to raise a matter of national importance.

A situation has become incumbent in Kioga County, Amolatar District graduating from bad to worse, day by day. 

Over the last four months, the climate patterns in the district have been characterised by inconsistent rainfall, high temperatures and heavy sunshine, affecting agricultural productivity very badly.

Madam Speaker, crops have withered, devastating all hopes of farmers to harvest food crops this season. The bad situation has been worsened by the outbreak of the Cassava Brown Streak Virus (CBSV) that has caused the rotting of over 80 per cent of cassava tubers in the district, making it inedible and leading to severe loss of economic value.

Madam Speaker, the problem compounded together has caused extreme famine. As I speak, there are people who go without meals in my district while some of them can have only one meal a day –(Interruption)

MS ABABIKU: Thank you, Madam Speaker and my colleague for giving way. The climate change has affected the entire country. The outbreak of the Cassava Mosaic Virus has also affected the entire West Nile region. The situation is alarming. 

Therefore, I would like to inform my colleague that the entire country needs to be attended to, in order to provide alternatives to avert the increasing level of food insecurity. 

Madam Speaker, the seasons in our country are known. We normally have two seasons - dry and rainy seasons. The situation is alarming. We, therefore, call upon the Government to come up with a clear position to avert food insecurity in many parts of this country. Thank you.

MR ANTHONY OKELLO: Madam Speaker, I would like to thank the honourable member, for giving valuable information. We can ask for food supply but this will be short-lived and in any case, it will not be sustainable. The concern here is, as we prepare and wait for the second rains in late July, what is more worrying is that the current the Government policy is limited on the provision of planting materials for some perennial crops.
 
The Operation Wealth Creation that we have at the moment is only confined to provision of planting materials for tea, coffee and citrus fruits, yet these are not perennial crops. They cannot provide solutions for the immediate required food security.

The concern is, can there be an exception to the rule so that we can have the Government providing planting materials to farmers in form of cassava stems that are free of disease and in form of maize seeds and bean seeds that are drought and disease resistant? I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, on the issue of famine, I am directing the incoming Minister for Relief and Disaster Preparedness to attend to it. I am also directing the incoming Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries, the NAADS Secretariat and Operation Wealth Creation, to consider the requests to provide other planting materials, in addition to the coffee, tea and citrus fruits, which they have been asked to do.

10.05
MS LILLY ADONG (NRM, Woman Representative, Nwoya): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I rise on a matter of national importance –(Interruption)

MR SSEWANYANA: Madam Speaker, I am rising on a point of order.  I am inquiring whether it is in order for the hon. Peter Sematimba to be part of today’s sitting when we all know that on Friday, the High Court in Kampala, announced that he is no longer a Member of Parliament representing Busiro South Constituency.  Is it in order for him to participate, as a Member of Parliament, representing the same constituency in today’s sitting yet the High Court Judge, Lydia Mugambe, declared the constituency seat vacant?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the Speaker does not rely on newspapers. The Speaker waits for the order from the court. When it arrives, I will handle it. (Applause)

MS ADONG: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The matter I would like raise is about the land conflicts in Nwoya District – 

THE SPEAKER: Can  I ask honourable members on the back row to move and create space for the Members who are standing; there is still space.

MS ADONG: Madam Speaker, the matter I would like to raise concerns the land conflict in Nwoya District. It is escalating – 

THE SPEAKER: There are also some chairs here.

MS ADONG: Madam Speaker, the matter I    would like to raise concerns the land conflict, which is escalating in Nwoya District. This conflict is almost now fermenting the tribal conflicts between the Acholi and the Jonam people.

Some time back, we had this issue between the Jonam and the Acholi. However, somehow it was cooled because the leaders resolved it but the District Land Board of Nwoya District went on to allocate over 10 square kilometers of land to a district engineer, in the very place which these people are occupying. 

We, the leaders, tried to mediate so that people could be allowed to settle and cultivate that land but we are not being listened to. 

Thirdly, now the district engineer is using the police. The District Police Commander (DPC) has now become the DPC of the district engineer. He is beating people left and right. 

Last Sunday, on 12th of this month, we planned to go and console our people whose houses had been destroyed, but they had planned to beat me up together with my colleague, the hon. Simon Oyet. Fortunately, we were informed; and we did not go there. 

In addition, now we have individuals who have been assigned UPDF escorts. The UPDF escorts are being used to put marks on civilian land. This was done on the 29 May 2016. Again, when we went to visit our people, we found about four families had been chased from their land after markstones had been put there. As I talk, our people are insecure. They cannot dig and farm yet they obtained loans to plough their land so that they can regain their livelihoods. 

Madam Speaker, my prayer to this House is to ask Government to have a human face. Let the UPDF stick to their mandate and if they have been assigned to escort individuals, they should stick to that and not to be used to grab people’s land.

Therefore, I call upon the incoming Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Development to prevail over the District Land Board of Nwoya because they are erroneously allocating communal land as leasehold. 

Currently, there is one parish where school land has been allocated to one person and that person is now chasing away the whole school that was built in the 1960s. We do not understand what is going on. I would like to request the UPDF to prevail and restrain its officers. People should also be allowed to go and dig. We now have famine, where shall we take the hungry people? Will you bring them to Parliament? It is not possible. I beg to report.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I direct the incoming Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Development to examine the issue of that land distribution and give us a report expeditiously. 

The Chief of Defence Forces (CDF) is also a Member of this House. We shall want a report from you in one week about the conduct of your soldiers in that area. What they are doing there and whether they are harassing civilians or not.

10.10
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Ms Winfred Kiiza): Madam Speaker, I wish to take this opportunity to welcome my colleagues to the Chamber. The way we are seated indicates clearly that we really need a better Chamber. I know it is within your powers and the budget of this Parliament that the Chamber will be constructed for us to sit comfortably and transact business.

Madam Speaker, the matter which I am raising has to do with the unnecessary arrests of our people. As we speak, one of our Members of Parliament, the hon. Michael Kabaziguruka, is in police custody. For the time I have been here, it has been a common practice that before a Member of Parliament is arrested, at least summons come to the Office of the Speaker so that, that office is accordingly informed.

In this situation, Madam Speaker, majority of your Members of Parliament will be sent to jail without even your knowledge. It is unfortunate they have started with our Members and it is absurd they cannot be here to represent their people. The hon. Kabaziguruka was arrested on the day of the budget when he was supposed to be in this House to represent his people. He could not make it because the police were all over his home to arrest –(Interruption)

MR SSEWUNGU: Thank you, Leader of the Opposition. Madam Speaker, it is very unfortunate that this kind of situation is taking place. I happened to visit hon. Kabaziguruka at his home. While they issued a police bond releasing him from Kireka, there was no other instrument to put him under house arrest. However, over 15 policemen were staying at his home with no toilets and water. I am very lucky to have taught many of these policemen’s children. So while there, I asked why they were really there and they said I ought to pity them because they did not know why they were there, but that they were guarding Kabaziguruka.

Now, the statements Gen. Kale Kayihura is uttering show that this Member of Parliament has no fault. This is one of the highest citizens in this country. You cannot just arrest somebody, take him to Kireka and detain him there for over 48 hours, and after that you extend the detention to his home. Why don’t you give him the right of habeas corpus?

Madam Speaker, you have to come clear on this matter. I have even heard they want to give us security guards. Why would you bring policemen to guard me? This is a serious matter that needs your attention. Thank you, Madam Speaker and Leader of the Opposition.

MS KIIZA: Thank you, Madam Speaker and honourable colleague for that information. 

On the fateful day when hon. Michael Kabaziguruka was arrested, he was put in a police van, made to sit in that van the whole day, from 8.00 a.m. to 8.00 p.m., when he was taken into the cell.

He was released on a police bond on Thursday and was meant to report back yesterday, which he did. However today, they again came for him in the morning. They have tortured him. Many people have been arrested in Gulu and in the Rwenzori Region with no charges preferred against them. They are made to stay in the police cells for even months. They are being beaten and tortured and it is unfortunate that the IGP –(Interruptions)

MR NSEREKO: Madam Speaker, according to Article 27 of the Constitution, the right to privacy is one of the paramount rights that should be enjoyed by every citizen. Article 28(3) of the Constitution, invokes the presumption of innocence that in determination of any civil or criminal charges, every person shall be presumed innocent until proved guilty or until that person has pleaded guilty.

In this matter, you realise that the way the police are acting in this country these days is to the contrary. It is like someone is guilty before they either plead guilty or they are convicted. Having people incarcerated around their houses in the name of preventive arrest, and incarceration of people beyond 48 hours, are illegal acts in this country. We should rise up, as Parliament, and stand against impunity. This is important because while today it is hon. Kabaziguruka, tomorrow it may be any Member of this House. Therefore, we must rise up and protect the rights of citizens in this country. That is the point of information I rose upon. Thank you very much.

MS KIIZA: Thank you, honourable colleague. Madam Speaker, if we do not speak for our people out there, nobody will. We come here as their representatives. So, it is unfortunate that hon. Kabaziguruka who is supposed to speak for his people is now in jail. It is our responsibility, colleagues, to speak for him.

You may think you are not in hon. Kabaziguruka’s shoes, but tomorrow, it will be your turn and there will be nobody to speak for you. Therefore, an attack on one Member of this community should be looked at as an attack on all of us, regardless of our parties. We are talking about violation of human rights and arrest of people on assumption that they are already guilty before they go through the processes of the law.

Madam Speaker, I would like to plead that the processes be followed in arresting Members of Parliament. It is unfortunate that the IGP still looks at hon. Kabaziguruka as an ordinary citizen of this country. He even said he was arresting Kabaziguruka the man, not the MP. I do not know at what stage Kabaziguruka removes the shoes of a Member of Parliament and then remains Kabaziguruka, the ordinary man. If they were arresting Kabaziguruka, the ordinary man, how come a full range of police officers attacked his home before turning it into a prison? Will the police pay rent for the time they have spent at Kabaziguruka’s house? 

Madam Speaker, this is a matter that needs maximum attention because majority of Ugandans are being arrested illegally and in most cases, at night. They may face other problems without us knowing. Therefore, it is our duty, as the people’s representatives, to speak for and defend them. I call for your guidance and direction, Madam Speaker. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, of course the matter is very serious, only that we cannot bring the Inspector General of Police here. Therefore, the Appointments Committee is going to work expeditiously to ensure that we have a Minister of Internal Affairs whom we can give our instructions to handle that issue of our colleague. It is because I do not know - is he here?

MR SSEWUNGU: Indeed you are right, Madam Speaker. I respect your ruling, but still you have those powers. If this person is under arrest for over 48 hours, it is a constitutional matter. Courts are operating. Let him be taken to court and find out what he did, but they cannot keep him because the Inspector General is out of Parliament; he is still governed by this Parliament. We are the ones who appropriate and the Judiciary is functioning. 

Otherwise, this business – the IGP was talking on a radio and we heard what he was saying. Now, if he states that he arrested Kabaziguruka who is not a Member of Parliament, where does Gen. Kayihura stay? It is even hon. Kabaziguruka who represents police headquarters in Naguru; he should give him more respect than anybody else in this country.
Thank you, Madam Speaker.

MR OKUPA: Thank you. Madam Speaker, you can help in this situation. We have a living example in this House. Hon. Mayende Dede. Remember how he suffered and he is here. But you did order in this House - up to today he has not been produced in court because he has no case to answer. However, he suffered and was incarcerated in Iganga. Today, we have a similar case. 

Yesterday, it was hon. Mayende Dede; today it is hon. Kabaziguruka but tomorrow it may be you or I. Therefore, we must stand up and defend - if there is a case, let the honourable member be produced before court. (Applause) We cannot allow this type of impunity.

Madam Speaker, we have a Vice-President who we just approved last week. He can order, direct and let our honourable colleague to be produced before court if there is a case. We ask of you to come to the rescue of the situation. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I am going to handle the matter with the Vice-President to see that our colleague is properly handled. If he has an issue, they should take him to court. I will handle it and give you an update.

MOTION SEEKING PARLIAMENTARY APPROVAL OF THE APPOINTMENT OF THE PRIME MINISTER/LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS IN ACCORDANCE WITH ARTICLE 108A (1) OF THE CONSTITUTION OF THE REPUBLIC OF UGANDA

THE SPEAKER: Can I invite the Member for Kiboga to move the motion?

MR SSEBAGGALA: Madam Speaker, given the fact that we are going to handle very important issues yet some of our colleagues are still outside, can we amend our rules and allow Members who have come late to sit in the gallery? (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: In the gallery, they resort to being spectators. They can come and stand inside here; there is still space. Those who are outside, please come in. Members, musembereyo as the say in the taxi; mwesikemu. (Laughter)

Honourable members, we are squeezing here because the air conditioners in the Conference Hall are not working. That is why we are in this situation.

10.23
MS RUTH NANKABIRWA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kiboga): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Before I move the motion, let me take this opportunity to welcome you to the Chamber and I hope the situation will be improved as we move ahead. 

I stand to move a motion seeking this august Parliament to approve the appointment of the Rt Hon. Dr Ruhakana Rugunda as Prime Minister under Article 108A(1) of the Constitution of Uganda.

THE SPEAKER: Is it seconded?

MR SSEKIKUBO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I saw hon. Ruth Nankabirwa move a motion but as you are aware, this is a Government motion, which ought to be moved by Government. However, as hon. Ruth Nankabirwa stands now, she is still a Member of Parliament and a backbencher as such. 

Madam Speaker, reading the motion together with Article 93 puts restriction on financial matters and it provides thus: “Parliament shall not, unless the Bill or the motion is introduced on behalf of the Government-
(a) proceed upon a Bill, including an amendment Bill, that makes provision for any of the following – (i) the imposition of taxation or the alteration of taxation....” In other words, Article 93 prohibits a backbencher from moving a motion that has an effect on the Consolidated Fund Account.

Madam Speaker, the position of the prime minister is so huge; he is the Leader of Government Business amongst others. His appointment has a direct bearing on our budget. Now, is it procedurally right for a backbencher, in the names of hon. Ruth Nankabirwa, with due respect, to move a motion that offends Article 93 amongst other provisions of the Constitution? Is it procedurally right for us to proceed as Parliament in that direction? I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the Office of the Prime Minister is not a new creation. There has been a prime minister from the Seventh Parliament until the Ninth Parliament and they have a budget. This is not a new charge of the Consolidated Fund Account; those people already exist and the President has powers to delegate.

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to remind hon. Ssekikubo that last week, I moved a similar motion in this august House, seeking Parliament to approve the appointment of hon. Edward Kiwanuka Sekandi as Vice-President of this country; appointed by the same appointing authority, who is appointing the right honourable prime minister; there is a precedent. 

Secondly, like you have said, the President delegates and as we discussed, the President delegated the Woman Representative of Kiboga District to move this important motion so that Parliament can begin performing the work for which we are elected. I beg to proceed.  

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I would like to remind the House that at the end of May 2016, we passed the Appropriation Bill and it became an Act. In that Bill, we provided funds for the office of the Vice-President and that of the Prime Minister. Please proceed. 

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Madam Speaker, the motion reads: 

“WHEREAS Article 108A(1) of the Constitution provides that, ‘There shall be a prime minister who shall be appointed by the President with approval of Parliament by simple majority from among Members of Parliament or persons qualified to be elected Members of Parliament’;

AND WHEREAS Article 108A(2)(a) provides that, ‘The Prime Minister shall be the Leader of Government Business in Parliament and be responsible for the coordination and implementation of Government policies across ministries, departments and other public institutions’;

AWARE that the President has appointed Dr Ruhakana Rugunda as Prime Minister and in accordance with Article 108A seeks approval of this Parliament for the appointment;

COGNISANT of the fact the Dr Ruhakana Rugunda is qualified to be elected a Member of Parliament;

NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved that Parliament approves the appointment by the President of Dr Ruhakana Rugunda as Prime Minister.” I beg to move.

 THE SPEAKER: Can you justify it? It is already seconded by several Members of the House. 

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Madam Speaker, I wish to present to you a very vibrant and youthful citizen –(Laughter)– of this country in the names of Dr Ruhakana Rugunda, who was born to Mr and Mrs Solomon Rugunda. He is a city boy, born in Kabale Municipality in the northern division in a great village called Bugongi, in 1947. 

Dr Ruhakana Rugunda started his school from Kigezi High before crossing over to Busoga College Mwiri. His journey of education is long. He went to Makerere University Medical School before joining the University of Zambia Medical School. He also studied at the University of California before specialising in paediatrics at the University of Nairobi in Kenya.

Dr Ruhakana Rugunda has been very active in leadership. Throughout all his school life, he was a leader. He took up leadership as a prefect and head boy, and did not ignore national politics.

He will be remembered, as a young person, for being very close to one of the former presidents of this country, Dr Apollo Milton Obote (RIP). He was nurtured, groomed and became a very important Ugandan.
He participated in active politics at several levels. He was part of a group of very vigilant Ugandans - I remember some of these people as the late hon. Omwony Ojok, Mr Tumusiime Mutebile, the former Prime Minister, Rt Hon. Amama Mbabazi, and hon. Tim Lwanga. 

He played a key role in strengthening the Front for National Salvation alongside H.E. Yoweri Kaguta Museveni, the hon. Amanya Mushega and the late Eriya Kategaya (RIP), people in his group. While some of them have gone to meet their Creator, their work remains to be remembered by not only Ugandans but the whole world.

Dr Rugunda also served as Chairman of the NRM Electoral Commission. He was a Member of Parliament for Kabale Municipality and President of the United Nations Environmental Programme (UNEP), where he played a key role for Uganda.

In July 2006, Dr Rugunda led the Government of Uganda peace negotiating team to Juba in South Sudan to hold peace talks with the Lord’s Resistance Army, a task which was extremely risky but because of his passion for a peaceful Uganda, he took the assignment with a huge smile. I am sure that the peace prevailing in Northern Uganda and the entire country is partly attributed to his work.

Dr Rugunda would make us smile whenever we went to persuade Joseph Kony to sign the peace agreement in the bush. Whenever there was total silence, he could call upon a certain Ndugu from nowhere to say what they were thinking about the exercise; it would make us burst into laughter. He is a man who creates an environment for everybody to work. I am a witness to that great work that Ndugu Rugunda did because I was there.

In January 2009, he was appointed Uganda’s Permanent Representative to the UN. He twice, served as the President of the UN Security Council in July 2009 and in October 2010 during Uganda’s two-year seat in that council.

In May 2011, he was appointed Minister of Information and Communication Technology and in 2013, he was appointed  Minister of Health, a position he held until 20th September, 2014.
Madam Speaker, it is very difficult to talk about where hon. Rugunda has worked; I would rather talk about where he has not worked in this country because those places are only Ministry of Gender and Ministry of Defence. Otherwise, he has served in all ministries in this country; and he has that experience.

Let me briefly talk about these ministerial appointments. After the NRM took power in 1986, Dr Rugunda held a series of Cabinet posts. He was Minister of Health, from 1986 to 1988 - but even before that in 1977, I remember he had been also appointed to a ministerial position and I think it was Minister of Health - Ministry of Works, Transport and Communications, between 1988 and 1994; Ministry of Foreign Affairs, from 1994 to 1996; Minister of Information, from 1996 to 1998; Minister for the Presidency, from 1998 to 2001; Minister of Water, Lands and Environment, from 2001 to 2003; Minister of Internal Affairs, from 2003 to 2009; and bounced back to Ministry of Health from 2013 to 2014.

If you consider the work of the Leader of Government Business who in most cases chairs Cabinet, Dr Rugunda is well qualified. 

His relationship with the heads of this institution, the Speaker and Deputy Speaker, is in no doubt a cordial one.

He is a man of respect. He listens to people of different capabilities and character, and he is one person you cannot annoy; that is hon. Rugunda.

Dr Rugunda is a forthright person and a great thinker. He does not practice intrigue. He accommodates virtually everybody but it does not mean that Ndugu Rugunda is complacent and gullible, no; he is not. He has a way of pursuing his line of thought with resilience but without being forceful.

He is gentle; he is naturally a peace maker, an attribute which he has shown in peace making, international arbitration, international leadership and currently in inter-sectoral coordination.

Madam Speaker, it is upon this background, which I have really laboured to summarise, that I present the distinguished statesman to the Members for approval as the Prime Minister of Uganda. I beg to present.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. May I now invite hon. Jimmy Akena. 

10.41
MR JIMMY AKENA (UPC, Lira Municipality, Lira): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am truly honoured to have the privilege to second a nationalist by the names of Ruhakana Rugunda for the position of Prime Minister.

Honourable members, it is not by accident that I stand before you to second hon. Ruhakana Rugunda. I believe in my leader brother, which means that his foundation on nationalism and caring for this nation are firmly rooted in the ideology and policy of UPC. (Laughter)

One of his key mentors, who groomed a young Rugunda who had climbed onto the political stage at the national level while still a student, was the late President of UPC and the President of Uganda. Therefore, I have absolute confidence and know the importance of the Office of the Prime Minister to this nation that Ndugu Rugunda is well qualified and grounded, and being a nationalist, he is accessible to all persons.

I can attest to that in that while we were dealing with the peace forces which involved some delicate and difficult negotiations, Ndugu Rugunda was readily available to receive and listen to all people concerned. In pursuit of peace in Northern Uganda, hon. Rugunda went to Nabang, lived in a tent and was in Juba in CIVCOM (Committee for Civilian Aspects of Crisis Management) and we held meetings in Juba Raha Hotel, and wherever it took us, Ndugu Rugunda was available.

However, in the process of peace, there is one important aspect I need to inform this House about. When we were trying to get the initial agreement which was the cessation of hostilities, there was a belief, especially on the Government side that members of the Opposition who were participating in the peace process had gone there to politick and to score points.

We raised it to hon. Rugunda that our issue went far beyond that and our concern was for the wellbeing of the citizens of Northern Uganda and we were seeking an honest dialogue to ensure that peace can be returned and life can be restored.

Hon. Rugunda met us on that basis, accommodated and listened to us and allowed us to participate, and through his efforts, we did secure an agreement on cessation of hostilities and people were able to reclaim their lives and return to their homes. Therefore, in my book, Ndugu Rugunda with his vast qualifications but most importantly as a nationalist, deserves the Office of the Prime Minister of the Republic of Uganda.

I also would like to point out that hon. Rugunda having spent such a long time in public office, it is incredible for somebody after all those years in holding various positions, to come out without scandals following his name everywhere -(Applause)

In public life very often when you rise, you become a target of many. However, hon. Rugunda has held very high profile positions over his lifetime and yet it is difficult to find anything negative that people can say about him. In fact, whenever people talk about him, they often say his only problem is that he is too good, too accommodative, he listens to everyone and you cannot find anybody who is an enemy of hon. Rugunda.

Therefore, as we approach our political climate in Uganda, I feel it is necessary to have people of the calibre of hon. Rugunda in the Office of the Prime Minister. 

On this matter, as a nation, I feel we need to have some serious and honest conversations, which should cut across party lines and which will deal with whatever difficulties we have in our history. However, with Ndugu Rugunda holding that position, I am confident to join such a conversation whether alone or with others. But with the key objectives, as Uganda we need healing and we need to be able to come together and forge a common destiny which works for every citizen of Uganda.

On that basis, people like hon. Rugunda give confidence to members on both sides of this House and of all political shades and opinions. I, therefore, would like to thank the President for his wise and inspired choice of my elder brother, Ndugu Rugunda, to occupy the position of Prime Minister and I second this motion wholeheartedly.

10.47
MS HELEN ASAMO (NRM, PWD Representative, Eastern): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to start by congratulating you, Madam Speaker, upon attaining that seat for yet another term. I support the motion for Members to approve hon. Dr Ruhakana Rugunda as the Prime Minister and Leader of Government Business.

I would like to add my voice to the others on why Dr Ruhakana Rugunda is the right person. This man has got rare qualities and attributes. Dr Ruhakana Rugunda is a people person. He takes care of all PWDs and when I say “PWDs”, it means people with and without disabilities and this means all of us in this room.

Madam Speaker, the person we are presenting is one with high integrity. We have already been told he has never, in all his responsibilities, even had a case involving corruption. I think that Dr Ruhakana Rugunda is the right person to ensure that we can now fight corruption in Uganda and with him in the chair, corruption will be history.

Dr Ruhakana Rugunda is a consensus builder. In the last two and half years when he was appointed as Leader of Government Business, whenever something became hot in this House, he would implore both the NRM side and the Opposition side to go out and discuss, and he would always come back with an answer that was confidently accepted by everybody in the House. We did not have challenges of fighting in the House.

Dr Ruhakana Rugunda is a Pan Africanist; he feels for others and it is the reason he left Kabale, a comfort zone, to go to Juba to lead the team to negotiate for peace for people in Northern Uganda. I think that it is rare to get people of that kind and everybody here will agree with me. 

Madam Speaker, as an international leader, Dr Ruhakana Rugunda did us proud when he represented us in the UN and when he represented us at the Security Council. I think he came out with a very good record during his time of leadership.

Dr Ruhakana Rugunda is a very humorous person and I pray that the ministers will learn a lesson from him since he is going to lead them in Cabinet. He is humorous in such a way that he will always call you, “My sister”, “My brother”, “Ndugu” or “Comrade”. Those are usually his words; he does not look at you as one who just came yesterday to Parliament or one who has stayed here for a long time.

Madam Speaker, Dr Rugunda does not have pomp and swagger despite all the responsibilities that he has had. (Applause) There are some of us, who after getting just a small responsibility, behave like they have reached heaven –(Laughter)– but that is not the case with Dr Rugunda; if you do not know him, you might think he is a common man and yet he is not. He is one of the people who have been “up there”.

Madam Speaker, the person we are supporting in the motion is a time keeper. Whenever we have sat in Parliament and it is announced that the Prime Minister is coming at 2.30 p.m., at exactly 2.30 p.m. he will enter the room; and we need leaders who are time keepers to help us move faster.

I would also like to say that Dr Rugunda is a good listener. He will always sit there and listen. I have never seen him jumping on the frontbench trying to stop somebody.

He is a team player who also delegates. When Dr Rugunda is out of the country, we shall always have somebody here, sitting in his place as the Leader of Government Business. And, Madam Speaker, ever since Dr Rugunda took over this position, we have found that the ministers are always in the House and will come running and sit here. This proves to me that he is a leader and not a ruler. A leader is somebody who causes action to be done while a ruler is a dictator.

I know that during his tenure, there was a lot of consultation among the ministers compared to the last one – because I was in the Ninth Parliament and at least half of the years were shared. You will realise that the ministers would sit there but would not even support somebody’s motion; there was cliquism. However, I think he destroyed the cliquism and made a team of people who were driving this country ahead.

Madam Speaker, as we prepare to make Uganda a middle-income country, I think the right man to take leadership of Government business is Dr Ruhakana Rugunda. I beg the House to support the motion that we approve Dr Ruhakana Rugunda to serve as the Prime Minister and the Leader of Government Business for the next five years. I beg to move. Thank you. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Let us use the next 10 minutes; each one will use two minutes.

10.54
MR JAMES WALUSWAKA (NRM, Bunyole West County, Butaleja): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I come to this Parliament with high technical competence in civil engineering. (Laughter)

Madam Speaker, when we talk about hon. Rugunda, I see the House is overwhelmingly happy. I can see my colleagues in the Opposition and even the Leader of the Opposition is laughing. My request to the House is that we move and finish that. Thank you. 

10.55
MR FELIX OKOT OGONG (NRM, Dokolo County South, Dokolo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand here to second the nomination of the Rt Hon. Ruhakana Rugunda as Prime Minister of the Republic of Uganda. 

Dr Ruhakana Rugunda is a man of class; he is a man of peace, a freedom fighter and he loves Uganda. Dr Rugunda was identified at his early age by the then President of the Republic of Uganda, as a true son of Uganda and from that time, he has risen in the leadership of this country. That is why leaders must identify young leaders; they should not kill young leaders but instead promote them. He was identified by the then president while he was still a student. He was groomed, tutored and mentored by Milton Obote and that is why we have him here as the Prime Minister.

What I am saying is that if we are to get leaders of this country, they must be identified and this is the quality of a person who was identified in his early age. Therefore, Madam Speaker, I agree that he is the right person for this position. He is a nationalist; when he is in the North, he is well embraced by everybody. At the time we were seeking for peace in Northern Uganda, he stood by us and with us and because of that we have now got peace and our people are settled. This is the right person we should approve for this office.

Madam Speaker, Dr Rugunda is a brilliant and trustworthy person. Leaders in this country – I am not going to mention them because we know them - have drained this country dry but he is not a person of that character. Members, I appeal to you to approve Dr Rugunda as our Prime Minister. I worked with him when I was the Minister for Parliamentary Affairs and also when I was a minister for youth. He is a person – 

THE SPEAKER: Point of order from hon. Okumu.

MR REAGAN OKUMU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Hon. Okot Ogong mentioned a very important thing; he said leaders have drained this country but without substantiating and mentioning even a single name. We are all leaders in this House. Is it in order for the honourable member to collectively declare all Members of Parliament and other leaders as people who are draining this country without substantiating? 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Okot Ogong, all of us are leaders; can you substantiate on who drains the country?

MR OKOT OGONG: Madam Speaker, hon. Okumu should not be scared; he is not one of them. Honourable members, we know since we have been reading in newspapers that during the time of the Peace, Recovery and Development Plan (PRDP) when our people were suffering in the camps, some people were eating the money meant for the people suffering in the camps. You have understood now? So I can go ahead? (Laughter)

Honourable members, I think this is the right time for Uganda to heal and the person who is well placed to heal Uganda is Dr Ruhakana Rugunda. We need peace and development. As the NRM, we have our manifesto, which has to be implemented. Our manifesto is very clear; that we need to transform Uganda from a pre-industrial country to a developed country. Therefore, he is the right person to trigger, head and superintend all the ministers that have been appointed in that direction so that we have peace and development in this country. 

Madam Speaker, I support his nomination and I would like to appeal to Members of Parliament to approve his nomination by the President. 

THE SPEAKER: Let us also hear from the Independents.

11.01
MS BEATRICE ANYWAR (Independent, Kitgum Municipality, Kitgum): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I support the motion that the Rt Hon. Ruhakana Rugunda be approved as the Prime Minister of this country. I am so happy that colleagues in this House and those who have spoken before me have not minced their words but have talked about all the good things that qualify hon. Rugunda as the right person for the post of Prime Minister. 

Dr Ruhakana Rugunda is a stabilising factor in this country that we cannot afford to lose. I met Ndugu Rugunda in Juba very closely –(Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Order, Members. 

MS ANYWAR: Madam Speaker, when you received the women’s peace torch in this Parliament, it found its way to Kitgum and I carried the peace torch on behalf of the women of Uganda to Juba. By that time, Ndugu Ruhakana Rugunda was leading the Government delegation on the peace talks in Juba. Honourable colleagues, the closeness I am talking about is that we worked together; that is when I actually came close to a man of such calibre and I was really – (Interjection)- Madam Speaker, I need your protection. 

THE SPEAKER: Order, honourable members!

MS ANYWAR: You cannot fail to recognise that hon. Rugunda is a man who is approachable. He is a patient, firm and admirable man of that calibre. When we delivered the peace torch, he received it with warmth and encouragement that peace was going to be achieved. We were together with the team in the jungles of Garamba, where we all slept on the ground and worked for the peace of northern Uganda. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Order, Members! 

MS ANYWAR: This is not a joking matter because in Garamba, there were no lodges and, therefore, there was no comfort. Colleagues, who were there - 

THE SPEAKER: Order, Members! 

MS ANYWAR: It was a rough time but people were pursuing peace and Ndugu was very patient. 

Most importantly, Madam Speaker, when northern Uganda was hit by a strange disease commonly known as the nodding disease syndrome, the man I sought comfort in was Rt Hon. Ruhakana Rugunda, who was the Minister of Health then. I talked to him and he had to travel to Tumangu himself with the team. What he saw there changed the perception of the country. He cried with us and ensured that a health centre was created for these children. We are, therefore, very grateful to hon. Ruhakana Rugunda.  

Much of the time he addressed us as “Ndugu”, “My brother” or “My sister.” I once told him that this country needs dialogue and he agreed with me absolutely. This is a gentleman who creates peace. I cannot afford to see us leave such an asset to this country who is a stabilising factor and who can create peace where there is no hope. 

He also knows how to prioritise his work. You have seen that he has worked in all the ministries and he is going to head the Government business. 

This is a gentleman who is approachable and is calm. Colleagues, I think with all the qualities that have been submitted about him, we cannot afford to soil him in anyway. Let us hold him in high esteem, accept him as our Prime Minister and let him have Uganda at heart so that we have peace and stability. 

With this, Madam Speaker, I hope that the House approves hon. Ruhakana Rugunda as the Prime Minister of Uganda without any reservation because we are sure he is going to make us proud. I thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Hon. Ssemujju, you will use two minutes and then we close. 

11.07
MR  SSEMUJJU NGANDA (FDC, Kira Municipality, Wakiso): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise to support the motion moved by hon. Ruth Nankabirwa and at the risk of sounding repetitive, I would like to trace the history and the training of hon. Ruhakana Rugunda. I think hon. Jimmy Akena has made that point that he is one of the few last trainees of former President, Dr Apollo Milton Obote. 

In 2004, at my former workplace, one of my colleagues went to Lusaka to interview Dr Apollo Milton Obote. At that time, hon. Jimmy Akena was not shaving his hair. I still have those pictures and I will share them with him. (Laughter) His Excellency was very proud of people he used to refer to as some of his young men; the Governor Bank of Uganda and Dr Ruhakana Rugunda. In fact, in that interview that we published in The Observer, he said that he was surprised that Rugunda was not the President because he was the brightest of that group. That is what he told us in Lusaka.  

Now that many things have been said about Dr Ruhakana Rugunda, I want to sound a caution. Hon. Ruhakana Rugunda is a very nice person. That is one of his attributes, which sometimes is also a source of problems. In the last Parliament, hon. Ruhakana Rugunda had discussions on several issues with the Leader of the Opposition then, including the conflict in Kampala. I would like to invite him as he goes to take that office to be a more assertive Prime Minister this time. This is because it is very disappointing that a Prime Minister can direct a civil servant of Government and the civil servant snubs the Prime Minister. 

For those of you who were in this Parliament, you all remember the directive he gave on Kampala Capital City Authority (KCCA). While all of us are happy that he is approachable, he needs to be an assertive administrator. You do not run Government by creating friends every day. You run Government by delivering and your success is supposed to be measured by output, not by how many friends you have gathered in a century. 

Madam Speaker –(Interruption)

MR OKUPA: Thank you, hon. Ssemujju. As a point of information, it is not only with the civil servants; even among his colleagues in the Cabinet, the Rt Hon. Ruhakana Rugunda would direct from here the members of Cabinet to come and answer questions but they would not answer the questions and by the time we concluded the Ninth Parliament, we had 55 questions for oral answer unanswered by the Cabinet ministers. Therefore, it is our prayer that hon. Dr Ruhakana Rugunda asserts himself this time round to the Cabinet members.

MR SSEMUJJU: Madam Speaker, since you gave me two minutes, I would like to conclude. I like Dr Ruhakana Rugunda and I have interacted with him many times. The President captured power and he became a President at age 42. He is now 72 years. I would have been happier with a more energetic young man or woman as a Prime Minister - and there are many here. What the President did at 42 years, he cannot do at 72 years; it is not possible. It is only human that he cannot do it.

I, therefore, would like to invite hon. Dr Ruhakana Rugunda – because he does not have the luxury - in the Government structure, the Prime Minister is the supervisor of Government programmes. With due respect, hon. Dr Ruhakana Rugunda is 69 years; the deputies, with due respect, are all of advanced age. (Laughter)

As a result, the President now begins to turn to the military. “This programme of NAADS is not working and the other is not working. I implore the military to come in and help me.” Once you assemble a team of human resources that is not in position to supervise Government programmes and you expect to go to the middle income level, as my colleagues have said, Uganda will be an experiment. I, therefore, invite hon. Dr Ruhakana Rugunda, as he takes up this office, not to turn it into a retirement nest with his other colleagues.

This office is the one to supervise Government programmes; we, therefore, must learn the humility. Hon. Dr Ruhakana Rugunda resigned from elective politics and there is absolutely no doubt that he is a very good man. However, once you are no longer full of energy, there are things that you cannot do even if you wanted to.

My prayer, therefore, is, as I second this motion, for the appointing authority to begin preparing a send-off ceremony for these elders and that could be even next year. We can organise and say thank you to you and many good things will be said about Dr Rugunda. 

I have interacted with him severally. There is a time I went to apply for a passport and hon. Dr Ruhakana Rugunda was there to help but that was personal. Therefore, there is no doubt that he is such a good man and he will make a good Leader of Government Business in Parliament but for a short while. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

11.15
MS JANEPHER EGUNYU (NRM, Woman Representative, Buvuma): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would also like to add my voice to that of the colleagues that have supported hon. Ruhakana Rugunda. I will not speak much as all has been spoken, but I know that he is a man of all seasons and has all characteristics of a good leader.

However, Madam Speaker, I have observed that the appointing authority in Uganda is one person, the President, who still has to seek the mandate of Parliament to approve the ministers and the Prime Minister. I have seen the importance of Parliament.

I have also come to observe that for the last 30 years with the NRM Government in power, we have not had any female Prime Minister or even a female First Deputy Prime Minister in Uganda. I would like to request -

THE SPEAKER: Order! Are the men excited or are they angry? (Laughter)

MS EGUNYU: Madam Speaker, since as Parliament we have the powers to approve and disapprove, I would like to request – I know the President is listening to our discussion here – that at least one position for Deputy Prime Minister be given to a woman in this country. (Applause)

In the Constitution of Uganda that we all abide with, we know what the Prime Minister does in this country. Article 108A(2) (a) reads, “The Prime Minister shall be the Leader of Government Business in Parliament and be responsible for the coordination and implementation of Government policies across ministries, departments and other public institutions.”

How do we now expect women of this country to achieve a lot - for the last 30 years the NRM Government has been in power –men also have their own interests. In addition to that, I would like to request the appointing authority, to consider regional balance for the remaining vacancies - (Interruption)

MR SSEWUNGU: Madam Speaker, the information I would like to give hon. Nantume is that she is very right because that very seat in which the Speaker is, she first fought in order to retain it. Therefore, that information is very good. Continue fighting with us. (Laughter)

MS EGUNYU: Madam Speaker, I would also like to request the appointing authority to consider regional balance when giving out positions of prime ministers. Hon. Dr Ruhakana Rugunda, according to the feelers, has been approved. Gen. Moses Ali was also nominated. In my opinion, every person on earth can act well and knows where he is best. Why don’t we also balance and get a female Prime Minister from another region and not from the regions of those two that we have already seen? I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, I have heard support from the ruling party, support from the Opposition, support from the Independents and I have not heard any objection. 
I put the question that the question be put.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we shall now take a vote – you do not want to vote? Honourable members, the Constitution requires that the approval of Parliament be given by simple majority. I, therefore, cannot determine the simple majority – should we do it by show of hands? 

Okay, honourable members, at the start of the sitting, we had 283 members and I know that others have come in. If there are more, you will definitely understand. We just need 141 Members. I will, therefore, start with the people seated in front of the Speaker. Those in favour, raise your hands – 

(Members voted by a show of hands.)

THE SPEAKER: Can I have Members in the wings that are in favour to raise their hands? Let me have Members against the nomination and then those abstaining.

I understand there are Members who are in the lobby. If there are Members in the lobby let them come in and vote. Honourable members, the question is that the Rt Hon. Rugunda be approved, we want to know amongst you those that are in favour. You can put up your hands. What is the total?

Honourable members, the abstentions are four, those against the nomination are three, and those in favour are 262. The Ayes have it. (Applause)

11.26
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Ms Winfred Kiiza): Madam Speaker, I would like to congratulate Dr Ruhakana Rugunda, “Ndugu” as he is profoundly known. He is not in the House but you can see that even in his absence people still have strong feelings for him and can still vote overwhelmingly for him. This is an indication that everybody feels for Ndugu Rugunda and I want to congratulate him upon this great achievement.

Madam Speaker, as I congratulate the Rt Hon. Prime Minister, I would like to call upon the appointing authority to speed up the process for the swearing-in of these ministers.

It is a week since we last passed the Vice-President, but he is not yet sworn-in. We are going to pass the Prime Minister - I do not know how long it will take for him to be sworn-in so that people can start working.

We have already been sworn-in that is why I am here as the leader of the people –(Interjections)- you do not have to question that because I am already sworn-in.

Madam Speaker, Members alluded to the fact that the character of the Rt Hon. Prime Minister is very good and some people took him for granted and for a ride because of his softness. Just like hon. Okupa mentioned, 55 questions remain unanswered since 2011. 

We call upon him as he takes up his office to ensure that these questions are answered. Some of them were touching matters of maternal health, agriculture, speeding up of the East African Community protocols and others on the African Union protocols. I call upon the Prime Minister to ensure that these questions are expeditiously handled. 

There are some other issues that were raised by members of the House that called for the attention of Cabinet ministers. Majority of these issues were not answered and many of these ministers have since left Parliament. 

I call upon the incoming ministers, if they are approved, to follow-up the matters that Members raised because they were of necessity to this country. Can the Leader of Government Business now ensure that these matters are addressed? 

Madam Speaker, as we usher in the Prime Minister - the other day, when we were approving the Speaker of the House, I saw Members saying, “We are approving one of our own” – even a Member of the Democratic Party like hon. Ssewungu and others like hon. Otto. They said that “We were approving hon. Ssekandi because he is a former member of the Democratic Party.” I see hon. Akena approving the nomination of Dr Rugunda because he is a former member of the Uganda People’s Congress Party. 

As my colleague said, I am yet to see a member standing here and saying, “I am standing here because I was groomed by the NRM Government”. (Laughter) That is why hon. Ssemujju Ibrahim Nganda thought that it would be necessary to also look at the young persons and give them positions of responsibility. 

If we looked at young persons and gave them positions of responsibility, then we would be having young Parliamentarians of around 30 years seated here -(Interjection)- yes, I was groomed by the Forum for Democratic Change.

Madam Speaker, we are looking forward to that moment when a woman of this country will say, “Look at me, I am the second Deputy Prime Minister” or even the Prime Minister of the Republic of Uganda.

As the Prime Minister comes into office, I would like to re-echo the words that were spoken by hon. Odonga Otto that the country is looking for someone to stabilise it. And like you have all said, “Ndugu” Rugunda is a stabiliser.

As he takes up office, can he join the Vice-President of the Republic of Uganda to send a message to His Excellency the President, that Ugandans out there want an unconditional release of Dr Kiiza Besigye? 

Can he take the message further that the people of Nakawa Division would like an unconditional release of their Member of Parliament, hon. Michael Kabaziguruka, so that he can represent them in the House?

Madam Speaker, we are aware that Dr Ruhakana Rugunda is taking up office at a time when there is instability in the country -(Interjection)- I am not so sure that the shootings in northern Uganda were by members of the Opposition. Those are the incidences that cause instability.

The shootings, arrests and killing of people in the Rwenzori Region are part of the instability in the country. When you are in a comfort zone, you should not think that everybody else is also in a comfort zone. 

The shootings and killings in the Sebei Region are examples of instability in the country. I call upon the Rt Hon. Prime Minister to take stock of these incidences and act so that Ugandans everywhere, including those in Isingiro have peace. Then we can talk about peace and talk about a Prime Minister who is a stabiliser, a peace activist and a negotiator.

Once again, I would like to congratulate him. As I conclude, Madam Speaker, across the board, I hear people referring to “Ndugu” Ruhakana Rugunda as a stabiliser and I think this country needs people of his calibre. 

I would request that he gives himself to the nation and comes as the President of the Republic of Uganda so that we can see a stabiliser coming to take up leadership at the top of this country. 

I would like to thank you, Madam Speaker, and I would like to thank everyone and wish Dr Rugunda a successful tenure in his office.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, very much, let us hear from the Government side.

11.36
THE GOVERNEMNT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Thank you, very much, Madam Speaker. Honourable members of Parliament, since “Ndugu” Rugunda is not in the House for obvious reasons, I stand here on his behalf to express gratitude to you for having supported the motion that has given him responsibility to give service to this country.

Thank you very much, honourable members. We have taken note of all the comments that have been talked about hon. Rugunda and each one of us who is a leader would wish that those nice words could be said about them. 

As the mover of the motion, I am gratified. Thank you very much for supporting my motion and as usual, I will always be there for you –(Interjections)- when there is need to visit Kiboga District and get acquainted with how the liberation struggle started, I will always be there.

Madam Speaker, I cannot sit down without mentioning that first of all I am a product of affirmative action. I am a product of women councils ushered into this country by the NRM Government. I have never belonged to any party other than the NRM Party. 

Then more importantly, yourself, Madam Speaker, you are a product of NRM -(Applause)- I am proud to say so because I have been following your footprints. We are so proud that you are seated there.

To those of you who lack such information, please take note that even the Leader of the Opposition is a product of such affirmative action - she was in the councils in Kasese. When I first interacted with her, she was very vibrant and I wished that we could work together and I am happy that we are together here in this Parliament. Thank you very much. I thought I should give that clarification. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. On behalf of the House, we congratulate “Ndugu” Rugunda. We look forward to working closely with him and to say that his coming eased work in this House and I am happy that he is coming back to continue.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO VARY THE NUMBER OF CABINET MINISTERS AND OTHER MINISTERS IN ACCORDANCE WITH ARTICLES II3 AND 114 OF THE CONSTITUTION OF THE REPUBLIC OF UGANDA

11.39
THE GOVERNEMNT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Thank you,  Madam Speaker. I stand here to move a motion seeking this august House to approve the proposal by His Excellency the President to vary the number of –(Interruption)

MR NGANDA SSEMUJJU: Madam Speaker, it is not a ceremony to prepare an Order Paper and it is sent to Members of Parliament. On the Order Paper today, we were supposed to have His Excellency, the Vice-president, Edward Kiwanuka Ssekandi, moving this very important Government motion. I can see now that hon. Edward Kiwanuka Ssekandi has excused himself – he was around and who moves in; it is the MP for Kiboga.

Madam Speaker, this Parliament approved the Vice-President to begin running the Government, at least in Parliament, in the absence of the ministers. After approving the Vice-President, the process was not completed for him to come and sit here as Vice-President. Wouldn’t it be procedurally right for this Parliament to suspend this sitting to allow the Vice-President to be sworn-in and he comes here to represent Government?

It is not only ceremonial that Parliament sits and approves the Vice-President. These matters are very serious. If the President died today, the Vice-President is supposed to take over; that is what the Constitution provides. The Constitutions provided that the President can die –(Laughter)- I can see the former Obote minister, Prof. Kamuntu, disagreeing; he thinks that a president cannot die. (Laughter) 

This is bigger than moving  this motion; as I speak this country is in a crisis. Supposing we do not have a President in the next one hour, what happens? Therefore, wouldn’t it be procedurally right to suspend this sitting?

Swearing in the Vice-President does not take even an hour; let us allow the Vice-President to be sworn-in and he comes here to assume full responsibility of Government other than picking one of us to be the one representing Government.

MR SSEWUNGU: Madam Speaker, indeed I seconded the Vice-President and Article 109 talks about the absence of the President. Therefore, when hon. Ssemujju, my chief whip, gives that kind of information and procedural matter, we must give it attention.

Madam Speaker, we are through with this process of moving motions but that procedural matter where the President is not swearing in the Vice-President is a problem. 

Madam Speaker, don’t you think it is procedurally okay? I also support what my whip has stated pursuant to Article 109 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda. Anything can happen to the President as it can happen to you or anybody else here. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

MR MAJEGERE: Madam Speaker, before we vary the list of ministers, this Parliament needs to realign the current Cabinet list to suit the national frame. Cabinet is a national political cake whereby each region should have an equal share –(Interjection)- Madam Speaker, I need your protection.

For the country to develop economically on equal footing, we need to have an equal share of this political cake. Therefore, before we vary the number of ministers, let us first try as Parliament to realign the current cabinet list to ensure that very region has an equal share -

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, that motion is not before this House.

MR MAJEGERE: As I conclude, Madam Speaker-

THE SPEAKER: No, the motion you are debating is not before this House. There is no motion for realignment.

MR SSEKITOLEKO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I need your guidance. My honourable colleague, hon. Ssemujju, is arguing that hon. Nankabirwa cannot move a motion –(Interjection)- I am holding the Floor-

THE SPEAKER: Order. He is on the Floor.

MR SSEKITOLEKO: Madam Speaker, motions are moved by Members of Parliament not by the Vice-President. There is nowhere in the Rules of Procedure of Parliament where it says, “The motion to expand Cabinet shall be moved by the Vice-President”. Therefore, hon. Nankabirwa has a right as a Member of Parliament, in the absence of the Member of Parliament for Bukoto County Central –(Interruption)

MR BALYEKU: Madam Speaker, in our Rules of Procedure, any Member of Parliament can move a motion. The Vice-President is a Member of Parliament, who has taken oath and has a right to move any motion. At the same time, the Government Chief Whip, hon. Nankabirwa, is a Member of Parliament. Hon. Ssekandi can delegate that task to hon. Nankabirwa. 

Therefore, Madam Speaker, we should not waste much time. The country wants us to perform; NRM was voted overwhelmingly by over 60 per cent and it is us in Government. If our President is requesting to bring a motion to Parliament, it does not matter who brings it. The motion is before Parliament, let us debate the motion; we cannot wait any longer.

MR OKUMU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. It is not about excitement. It is about procedures – how Government does its work. You know very well that Parliament at this stage is still moving towards establishing committees to do its work. You cannot just assign the Clerk to Parliament or any other person to act on behalf of a committee of Parliament; the same thing applies to Government. The Executive is only being established. The President is the chief executive who has been elected and sworn-in.

He has appointed a vice-president who has been approved. For all this work that is done on behalf of the Executive in Parliament, the Executive in Parliament represents the President. You do not necessarily need the President to come here. 

What Members are saying is that since the Executive is now being expanded to represent the President in Parliament and that by good luck the Vice-President has been approved and he is a Member of Parliament, who sits here – we have just approved the Prime Minister - wouldn’t it be procedurally right to wait for the Executive to come and represent the President on the Floor of this Parliament?

This is because the people of Uganda gave the President the mandate to be the chief executive of this country. This matter we are going to handle involves financial implications to the taxpayers in this country. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I want you to read carefully Article 93. It does not say “The motion must be moved by a minister”. It says it must be presented on behalf of the Government. It does not say minister. It is not there. Therefore, a Member can represent the Government under Article 93; proceed hon. Nankabirwa.

Honourable members, on many occasions, Members here have assigned their colleagues to ask questions on their behalf on the Floor of this House. It is in the Hansard - proceed.

MS NANKABIRWA: Much Obliged, Madam Speaker.  I am standing here to move a motion seeking this august House to approve the proposal by His Excellency, the President, to vary the number of cabinet ministers and other ministers in accordance with Articles 113(2) and 114(3) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda. The motion reads:

“WHEREAS one of the principles of National Objectives and Directive Principles of State Policy III, which is about national unity and stability, provides that ‘All organs of state and people of Uganda shall work towards the promotion of national unity, peace and stability’;

AND WHEREAS under National Objectives and Directive Principles of State Policy II provides that, ‘All the people of Uganda shall have access to leadership positions at all levels, subject to the Constitution’;

AWARE THAT the Cabinet is a central and active engine of the state to which aspirations of the national unity must be reflected;

AND AWARE THAT the Cabinet is the main body that supports collective Government policy and helps to ensure the effective development, coordination and implementation of those policies;

FURTHER AWARE THAT the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda in Articles 113(2) and Article 114(3) puts a limit on the number of Cabinet ministers and other ministers who can be appointed by the President;

COGNIZANT OF THE FACT THAT there is need to satisfy the aspirations of the people of Uganda to promote national unity, peace and stability, the composition of Cabinet must ensure that all major  national interests are represented and the whole country is effectively supervised  politically;

AND COGNIZANT OF THE FACT THAT the President has considered it prudent that the number of Cabinet ministers and other ministers be varied to enhance effective and efficient political supervision to accommodate the various national interests and to promote the transformation of Uganda;

NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved by Parliament that:
The total number of cabinet ministers be varied as provided for in Article 113(2) from 21 to 31;
The total number of other ministers be varied as provided for in Article 114(3) from 21 to 49”. I beg to present.

THE SPEAKER: It is seconded. Justify

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The motion to vary the number of cabinet ministers and other ministers is enfolded by a number of factors.

Madam Speaker, as you may all be aware, we have just come out of the presidential and the general elections, where our candidate, Yoweri Kaguta Museveni, was elected as the President upon presenting his manifesto to the people of Uganda.

I would like to thank the people of Uganda who supported him. I would also like to appreciate those who did not support him because that is democracy. However, he was elected by the majority of the people of Uganda. 

In his manifesto, there are lots of commitments. As he moved around the country, he was faced with challenges and needs. For example, I represent Kiboga District, where we have been grappling with the problem of settling veterans; veterans cover the whole country. Year-in-year out, there are people making claims as veterans and I think this issue must end. The President thought of appointing a political leader who is going to do political oversight so that we end this problem once and for all - he was responding to that problem.

There are also other challenges. It was a committee of this Parliament which proposed that a ministry in charge of science and technology be established. The President heeded to that. As we move ahead, honourable members, we are faced with enormous global challenges. When the NRA came out of the bush, they came with the Ten Point Programme, only to reach here and find other issues which included issues of gender, environment, ICT and so forth, because the world is on the move.

I can testify that the framers of the 1995 Constitution put provisions of Articles 113(2) and 114(3) for a reason. They had reasons to state that changing can only be done by approval of Parliament. 

Madam Speaker, in 1995, the population of Uganda was 20 million.  The number of districts was 39. Municipalities, counties and sub counties were very few. What is the population of Uganda now? It has continued to swell – even pressure has continued to rise with the population; and such a motion can be tabled in Parliament. 

I was here in the Sixth Parliament, immediately after the promulgation of the 1995 Constitution. The Sixth Parliament moved a similar motion that I am moving seeking to vary Cabinet.

What happened in the Seventh Parliament? A similar motion was tabled here seeking to vary Cabinet so that we can accommodate other challenges and increase on efficiency through political mobilisation.

Again in the Eighth Parliament, the same motion was tabled, and finally in the Ninth Parliament, a similar motion was tabled. Why do we do this? It is because every time we come out of elections, a new Government comes in place and that Government begins with establishments or formation of Government. In the formation of Government, you have to establish the third arm of Government which is the Executive.

Therefore, colleagues, we are aware that we could be having other challenges. However, this will come at a cost. If you do not invest in efficiency, then forget about achieving efficiency.  

I am, therefore, standing here to sincerely request you, colleagues, to support the establishment of a bigger Cabinet; bigger than the Ninth Parliament’s Cabinet by eight. That is not asking too much. I beg for your support and I would like to thank you very much for your kind attention. I beg to submit.

12.00
MR SIMEO NSUBUGA (NRM, Kassanda County South, Mubende): Thank you, Madam Speaker. First of all, I would like to take this opportunity to congratulate you upon your election as the Speaker of the Tenth Parliament.

Madam Speaker, I am standing here to support the motion moved by the Woman Representative for Kiboga District, Ms Ruth Nankabirwa seeking a resolution of Parliament to vary the number of Cabinet ministers and other ministers.

Madam Speaker, last week, His Excellency the President submitted a list of ministries and ministers and among them, we have the Ministry of Defence and Veteran Affairs. I, Simeo Nsubuga, representing the people of Kassanda South, have a number of veterans in my constituency and I am sure that my fellow Members who are seated here also have them in their respective constituencies.

Madam Speaker, we have been getting a number of complaints regarding their compensation and other benefits. This time around, His Excellency the President went an extra mile and appointed a veteran to be in charge of this ministry by the names of Lt Col (Rtd) Bright Rwamirama. 

I am convinced that this time around, the issues concerning veterans in this country will be handled effectively because the person who has been appointed in that office is the right person to be there.

Madam Speaker, I would like to make a humble appeal to my honourable colleagues, especially those from the Opposition, that this time around, the list of Cabinet ministers, which the President has submitted to Parliament for approval, also has some senior Members from the Opposition. We have hon. Betty Kamya who is a founding member of FDC, hon. Nakiwala Kiyingi from DP and hon. Betty Amongi from UPC.

I, therefore, I appeal to honourable colleagues, especially those from the Opposition, to kindly support this motion because this time around, you are also represented in Cabinet. Madam Speaker, I beg to second the motion. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, that is his maiden speech and the rules of this House do not allow points of order to a Member’s maiden speech. 

12.03
MR PETER OGWANG (NRM, Usuk County, Katakwi): Madam Speaker, I stand here to second the motion moved by hon. Ruth Nankabirwa, the Woman Representative for Kiboga District. 

Madam Speaker, if you recall, in the Ninth Parliament, the Committee on Presidential Affairs and Committee on Science and Technology, in their parliamentary resolutions, asked the President to have two ministries put in place. This august House approved those parliamentary reports and resolutions. 

In that light, it would be very unfair for us, honourable colleagues, not to accept an increase in the number of ministries and also to approve our colleagues who have been nominated to take up these mantles -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: It is his maiden speech.

MR OGWANG: Madam Speaker, I am a senior Member in this House, irrespective of the procedural issue he is raising.

Secondly, there are some ministries, which have been created - Let us talk about the special regions. I am happy that the Luweero and Rwenzori dockets have been around. However, let us talk about Karamoja, Teso and Bunyoro. 

Madam Speaker, why is the President bringing all these people  on board, including my own Teso Affairs? The history of our country is what makes some of these positions what they are. The situation could be worse. For instance, my brother, hon. Felix Okot Ogong said that despite having a Minister for Northern Uganda then, some money, which was meant to benefit the people of northern Uganda, did not reach them.

Imagine if we did not have a person directly overseeing the activities of northern Uganda. What would have happened? Therefore, honourable members, I would like to ask you to support the motion moved by hon. Ruth Nankabirwa for the President to vary the number of his nominees. I thank you so much.

12.06
MR PAULSON LUTTAMAGUZI (DP, Nakaseke County South, Nakaseke): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Let me also take this opportunity to congratulate you for having successfully won the Kamuli Woman MP seat and the speakership of this Parliament.

Madam Speaker, we have had a number of ministers in this country who are not efficient in their work. We would not mind even if we had two ministers per ministry, provided they did their work. However, today we have a very big number of ministers who are not performing. Actually, they are just there to waste taxpayers’ money. I wish that these ministers we are approving today perform their work. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

12.08
MS FRANCA AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Agago): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I appreciate the importance of the eight positions as proposed by the mover of the motion. However, I am aware that whatever the NRM wants will always sail through. I am also aware that this motion will go through, but let it go through when the representatives of the people of Uganda who think things should be done the right way have represented their people fully.

Madam Speaker, you are aware that India, with over 1.2 billion people, has only 44 ministers. China, with over 1.3 billion people, has 45 ministers. Russia has less than 40 ministers, Japan has only 19 ministers, USA has 30 ministers, Kenya has 22 ministers, Rwanda has 30 ministers and Tanzania has 40 ministers. 

Madam Speaker, I am here to state that it is not the number of ministers that will translate into service delivery in this country. This is my 11th year in this Parliament. By the way, I have been on the Committee on Budget and Committee on Finance and we have been appropriating money to these ministries –(Interruption)

MR BARYAYANGA: Thank you, honourable colleague, for giving way. The information I would like to give is to the effect that I do not see any necessity as to why we should add on more ministers. Instead, we should have more technocrats. Envisage a scenario where every minister is going to drive a land cruiser worth Shs 450 million. You have a driver to pay, the car has to be fuelled and it has to be repaired in a garage. All that is from Government money. When will you build hospitals when you are adding to the number of ministers? 

Time and again when Parliament wants to supplement its emoluments or salaries, there is an outcry in the public. What is happening now? This is taxpayers’ money that you are going to use. Therefore, I do not see any reason for adding on more ministers. Let us add more technocrats to do the work. Thank you.

MS FRANCA AKELLO: Thank you for that information. Madam Speaker, what I was trying to say is that it is not the number of ministers and the administrative costs that come alongside the ministries that will translate into service delivery – (Member timed out.)

12.12
MR FRANCIS MUKULA (Independent, Agule County, Pallisa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Honourable members, I am conscious of the President’s plan to retire. If increasing the number of ministers can deliver Uganda, as he says, to a middle income economy, I have no problem. In fact, I will support and I urge Members to support this motion. When we get into Government, we shall reverse it. 

Therefore, I would like Mzee to retire after five years happily and bragging that he delivered Uganda into a middle income economy. Thank you very much.

12.13
MS OKETAYOT LOWILA (NRM, Woman Representative, Pader): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you for this opportunity. I rise to support the motion to vary the number of positions for Cabinet ministers and other ministers.

I find this to be logical and very necessary. As we strive to develop this country, areas of focus change. The needs and the desires of the people change. The number of people in this country is increasing on a daily basis and our situation as Uganda cannot be compared to the situation in India, China and other countries. We are not here to amend the Constitution but only vary it for now. If we attain middle income status, say by 2020 or when this country develops, there might be no need. 

However, much as I support the motion, I would like to put two things on record: One, some of us will not be happy to see glaring gaps in service delivery and in the implementation of Government programmes with this increased number of political supervisors. We appeal to the appointing authority to keep an open eye on these political supervisors. We also ask him to plan for reshuffles, even if he does it twice annually, so that we keep these political supervisors on their toes.

Secondly, Madam Speaker, with this increased number of political supervisors, we would like to see a fair balance. This motion has been well constructed, giving references to national objectives and state principles. However, we would like to see this reflected in where these people are coming from. We cannot have complete balance –(Member timed out.) 

THE SPEAKER: You have half a minute to conclude.

MS LOWILA: We need a fair balance at regional and sub-regional levels. Madam Speaker, what reasons would one have to justify, for instance, a case where four nominees are coming from a sub-region with eight districts and three out of four come from one district leaving seven to cater for one? We would expect to see at least some fair balance –(Member timed out.)

12.17
MS DOROTHY AZAIRWE (NRM, Woman Representative, Kamwenge): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand to support the motion presented by the honourable member from Kiboga to increase the number of Cabinet ministers from 21 to 31 and state ministers from 21 to 49.

I am saying so because the population of this country has been increasing and it is the mandate of this Parliament, even the last –(Interjection)– yes. Hon. Nsereko, leave me to present my views to this august House. 

Why am I saying so? It has not been the political leaders and supervisors that have been failing to deliver services to the people of this country. It is the technocrats that have been challenging us because most service delivery is being done at the district level.

You will find that the political leaders at the district level do not know what is taking place within some of the district departments. Therefore, increasing the number of ministers means that they will be able to go out to the districts and follow up the money that we appropriate in this august House and send to the districts.

I would like to emphasise that the appointing authority, who is His Excellency the President of this country – (Interjection) - Honourable members, give  me a chance to express my views and you will give me the information at a later stage. I thank you.

Honourable members, I am requesting the appointing authority to make –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Half a minute. Honourable members, you have two minutes so say the important things that you want to say.

MS AZAIRWE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to conclude by saying that as we increase the number of Cabinet and state ministers, we request the appointing authority to make sure that he opens his eyes because some of these appointees have a longer arm, which should be shortened for the betterment of service delivery in this country. I thank you.

12.20
MR TOM ALERO (NRM, West Moyo County, Moyo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am in support of varying the number of Cabinet ministers and other ministers for the following reasons.

First of all, we have very many tribes in Uganda, many religions and different traditions and cultures and all these different categories of aspects of our lives must be catered for. In addition, we now have very many districts, municipalities and counties and the population has increased. All these must be accommodated.

Apart from that, we also have the Opposition Members of Parliament who should also be accommodated in this new Government and that is why I support the motion to increase the number of Cabinet ministers. Thank you very much.

12.22
MR ROBERT MUSOKE (NRM, Budiope West County, Buyende): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise to support the motion that was moved by hon. Ruth Nankabirwa. Following the speech made by His Excellency the President of the Republic of Uganda that the Ninth Parliament was almost delivering Uganda to a middle income state; I would like to think that there was a problem with political monitoring. 

Given that we love Uganda, if the increment in the number of ministers can help us to deliver Uganda into a middle income state, I beg that this House accepts the motion that was moved by hon. Ruth Nankabirwa, MP for Kiboga.

I would like to give an example. I come from Buyende District where a ferry was promised 15 years back. It was a shame when the President came to Buyende in December last year and in his speech he congratulated the people of Buyende on getting a ferry. When the masses informed him that they had never gotten the ferry, he said that he thought it had been delivered.

I want to think that there was a problem with political monitoring in that the minister who was responsible for reporting that the ferry is not yet there never reached Buyende to ascertain whether the ferry was delivered or not – (Member timed out.)

12.25
MS REHEMA WATONGOLA (NRM, Kamuli Municipality, Kamuli): Thank you, Madam Speaker and congratulations. 

Madam Speaker, I am here to support the motion because constituencies were increased by this same Parliament and this was good. I would not have been here, because mine is a new constituency. 

Secondly, as Members of Parliament, we are talking about service delivery. However, we shall not get to where we want to go when we have few people monitoring. Hence, I would like to advise that if we want service delivery, we must increase the number of ministers.

Lastly, about regional balance and monitoring, Members will agree with me that even if you were the one given the portfolio of agriculture, without the support of your deputies you cannot do good work.

With that submission, I would like to state to you that for better service delivery, we should accept and increase the number of Cabinet and state ministers. 

12.26
MR MATHIAS MPUUGA (DP, Masaka Municipality, Masaka): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for your indulgence. I had wished to move on a procedural matter earlier on to try and appreciate the motivation of the President in enlarging the Cabinet because we are speaking from a vacuum. We are not aware of the evolving structure of Cabinet to attach it to service delivery and here we are, discussing numbers without relating them to what these numbers are going to lead to.

Madam Speaker, the mover of the motion ably took us through the transfiguration of Cabinet over the last three parliaments; it has been growing and growing. We have been in Parliament listening to Members asking for the recall of districts because of failed service delivery. We have reports in committees of districts that can hardly buy bicycles for their leaders.

Here we are, discussing in a vacuum as to where we are going. I listened to the President during the State of the Nation Address. I hardly dozed and he mentioned challenges. The size of Cabinet was never one of the reasons for failed service delivery, which is why I am interested in the intended structure so that I can fit it into the ambitions, dreams and wishes of Government. 

I fear for the kind of ethnic melting pot that we are, as a country, to try and constitute a Government on ethnic considerations. Progressively as leaders, we shall disfigure this country.

Madam Speaker, I would like to comfort all the Members here that each of them is capable of being a minister. I agree with the mover that indeed, national interests are perhaps the basis of this proposal. 

As MPs, we are the custodians of national interests but national interests come with public interest. Are our people asking for ministers? Our people are asking for services. If we sacrifice public interest for political expediency, I do not see any proposal that is going to deliver us into a middle income country –(Member timed out.)

12.30
MR ALEX RUHUNDA (NRM, Fort Portal Municipality, Kabarole): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am a person who is always moved by scientific facts and the issue of the vacuum works across the board. We cannot be sure that a small Cabinet or a big one can deliver because there are no scientific studies that we can base on to compare. That is the challenge of the matter and maybe, it is also a challenge for us, as Parliament in future, to institute a committee that can study this matter and advise the Government.

Madam Speaker, since you are the Chairperson of the Appointments Committee, I wish that we could  also have,  in future, a committee constituted such that Parliament can equip itself with facts that we can use when we are talking about the number of ministers to manage this country.

Madam Speaker, I am particularly attracted by the Ministry of Science and Technology. This is a very important ministry as the world today is moved by science and technology. It is a sector that has been neglected for a very long time and I see a great opportunity here. 

As Parliament, we should move resources and this is where I would like to make it very clear that we can create these ministries. However, if they are not equipped with the necessary resources to enable them to be effective, it will be a waste of time. That is why I feel –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Please conclude.

MR RUHUNDA: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for your indulgence. I was a Member of the Committee on Budget for the Ninth Parliament and I know the challenges of getting these ministries to be effective. That is why it is my prayer that as we approve the expansion of the Cabinet, we must equally be assertive in ensuring equitable appropriation of resources within –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, concerning the issue of science and technology, I would like to remind the House that this House, in the Second Session of the Ninth Parliament, resolved that the Government create a Ministry of Science and Technology. 

12.33
MR MUHAMMAD NSEREKO (Independent, Kampala Division Central, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. As I rise up to support this motion and second it, I know it has been the norm of this august House not to deny the Executive the mandate to perform its duties and the creation of Cabinet is one example of performance of its duties. 

I am aware that the numbers are huge and yield a burden on taxpayers, but I also know that the most important thing here is for Parliament not to be looked at as bipartisan. These are simply points of caution. The welfare of Ugandans is paramount and if we are having an expansion of ministers to cater for only political moves and not the welfare of Ugandans then it will be detrimental.

Secondly, the welfare of workers within these ministries is appalling. Many people in different ministries have not been paid up to now, including this august House where salaries of Members of Parliament have not been paid to date. I heard that in UBC and other institutions, salaries have not been paid up to now and the same applies to some teachers.

This yields a burden on the cost of public administration. Whereas we are not saying that we deny you the chance to increase your capacity to perform, we are also saying, move with precaution knowing that the taxpayer –(Interruption)

MS ANYWAR: Thank you very much, honourable colleague, for giving way. Madam Speaker, personally I would not have much problem with approving what the Executive is requesting for because it is the mandate of the President. However, it would be prudent if the mover of the motion could bring to this House the ministries that demand this extension of ministers so that we see value-for-money. 

From there we can say, yes – As we rightly said, the Minister of Science and Technology had earlier on proposed a ministry of climate change. We should know whether it is deserving.

MR NSEREKO: Secondly, having ministers who are being run by technical officers is also another problem. Hon. Ssemujju talked about ministers who are in ministries with no authority –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Half a minute for Kampala Central.

MR NSEREKO: Thank you. Madam Speaker, we have a huge problem. Recently, in the Ninth Parliament, we had a problem where you would issue directives to ministers who would never yield answers when they return because of lack of cooperation between them and the technical officers.

These technical officers in ministries are becoming a big problem to these ministers and they fight every now and then. As we approve them, let them go with the mandate of this Parliament knowing that they should deliver to the people and be answerable to this Parliament instead of being run by technical officers. Thank you very much.

12.37
MR NELSON LUFAFA (NRM, Butembe County, Jinja): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I vehemently support the motion that has been presented today to increase the number of ministers. However, I stand here to move a motion to suspend rule 153(2). 

Rule 153(2) of our Rules of Procedure says that the Appointments Committee should be closed to the public and the media. I believe that is wrong and that is why I rise to move a motion that this House moves under rule 15(1) to suspend rule 153(2) so that the vetting of the new ministers is open to the media and the public.

Madam Speaker, the justification for my motion –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Okay, speak as it is your maiden speech.

MR LUFAFA: Madam Speaker, locking out the public and the media is first and foremost a gross abuse of one’s constitutional right to access to information. 

It is surprising that the Ninth Parliament deemed it fit to trash and curtail press freedom in this country by locking out the media from such an important committee of this House yet we all know that the media are the bridge and eye of the people we represent.

Madam Speaker, today we have a chance to put things right and respect the fact that the presidential nominees or appointees are supposed to occupy public offices funded by taxpayers. Therefore, people should be respected by giving them an opportunity to know whatever takes place in that committee. 

Madam Speaker, can you believe that even Members of Parliament do not know what takes place in that committee? We have to wait for the names of those approved and we cannot even debate the report. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the point raised is important but we shall require a separate motion to debate that issue exhaustively; it is not part of this one.

12.41
MS ROSE MUTONYI (NRM, Bubulo County West, Manafwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand to support the motion to increase the number of ministers and ministers of state. I am very happy because I am one of those who were on the Committee on Science and Technology who recommended to Government that a Ministry of Science and Technology should be created. Therefore, I am very happy to support this motion.

Madam Speaker, it is we and the wanainchi who put demands on the President. We request for ministries. Let me give you an example. We in Manafwa District have been complaining that since 1998, we have never had a minister. This time, the President has listened to our cry and given us a slot. Why should we reject it? We are very happy.

Secondly, the President was smarter. He first proposed the nominations and then sent the request of varying the number of ministers. Maybe he foresaw that if he had not done that, we would have rejected it. Colleagues, how can we refuse to honour what the President has done and stop our colleagues who have been appointed from entering office? They have been nominated and are eagerly waiting to enter their offices. 

At this time, we should be kind enough to let them enter their offices and taste those seats. If we refuse, we will be locking them out and dishonouring what our President has done.

Honourable members, I request that we support the motion and –(Member timed out.)

12.44
MR GILBERT OLANYA (FDC, Kilak County South, Amuru): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I do not support this motion because Uganda’s priority now is not a higher number of ministers. If you look at health services, we have functional health centres only within the towns and city areas. If you move to the villages and look at the health centres II and III at sub-county level, you will shed tears. 

Look at our education sector and the quality of education in Uganda. Look at UPE performance in the villages. Therefore, Madam Speaker, increasing the number of ministers will simply increase the burden to this country.

Instead of revising the number upward, we need to reduce it. I feel that we can reduce it from 21 Cabinet ministers to 20 –(Interruption) 

MR SSEWUNGU: Thank you, honourable member, for giving way. Madam Speaker, the information I would like to give hon. Olanya is that the Minister of State in charge of the vice presidency one time stated categorically that he was doing nothing because he had nothing to do. If a minister can say that, why do we need them?

MR OLANYA: Thank you, my colleague –(Interruption) 

MR MBOGO: Thank you, my colleague, for giving way. My colleague has talked about the appalling situation in UPE and in health services. I think that is justification enough that we need these ministers so that they can supervise properly. Thank you. (Laughter)

MR OLANYA: Thank you, my colleague. Madam Speaker, if you look critically, right now we have a minister in charge of primary education and another in charge of higher education. In fact in the education sector, we have three to four ministers but look at the quality of education.

Therefore, Madam Speaker –(Member timed out.)

12.47
MR PETER SEMATIMBA (NRM, Busiro County South, Wakiso): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand to support the motion of increasing the number of Cabinet ministers from 21 to 31 and the other ministers from 21 to 49 because we have this great challenge of turning Uganda into a middle-income country by the year 2020. The amount of time between now and 2020 is very small and yet Government has committed itself to achieving that goal; if we look at the Budget, by allocating a lot of money – 

THE SPEAKER: Order, Members. Please proceed.

MR SEMATIMBA: I hope I am not losing those minutes.

THE SPEAKER: Order, Members. Allow hon. Sematimba to make his contribution because that is his maiden speech. 

MR SEMATIMBA: Government has committed itself deeply to making sure that we become a middle-income nation by the year 2020. If you analyse the Budget, the Government has committed a lot of resources and money to get us there. What is missing is an equal or relevant increment in supervision to make sure that those resources are utilised to get Uganda to that level.

In conclusion, I would like to ask this august House to support the motion because the resources are there, the goal is there and the determination is there. All we need is equal and relevant supervision levels to get there. I beg to submit. (Applause)

12.48
MR JOHN BAPTIST NAMBESHE (NRM, Manjiya County, Bududa): Madam Speaker, I rise to add my voice to support the motion moved by the Woman Member of Parliament for Kiboga, hon. Ruth Nankabirwa, but with an amendment. The appointing authority has put in place a number of ministries, which have accorded affirmative action to a number of regions. For instance, Luweero with the justification that it was war-torn, northern Uganda because of insurgency and because they went through a form of terrorism and Bunyoro and Karamoja because they were lagging behind in growth and development.

However, Madam Speaker, I come from Bugisu sub-region; the Elgon Zone, which from time immemorial has been grappling with the challenge of catastrophic natural calamities. They are quite many and even the Ministry of Disaster Preparedness has not measured up to our expectations. Actually, some of the holders of the ministry are a form of disaster to the region. (Laughter) With the ministerial slot bonanza, Madam Speaker, I would request that this list that I am supporting should be approved. It should include a minister in charge of this sub region or rather the Elgon zone so that with concerted effort with the ministers in charge of Relief and Disaster Preparedness, at least, we shall see our people given attention. 

At the moment, there is a challenge of emergency re-location. I am soon writing to you to request to have a special time to bring up a matter of national importance because we had a landslide two weeks ago. However, none of the holders of the office have gone there to conduct a needs assessment. That is deplorable and it is as pathetic as digging one hole to fill another. Therefore, Madam Speaker, I request that they include on the additional eight another one for Elgon sub region.  I beg to move. 

12.52
MR ANTHONY SSEMULI (NRM, Mubende Municipality, Mubende): Thank you, Madam Speaker. As you are aware, I was chairing the Committee on Science and Technology in the Ninth Parliament. As an individual, I am so delighted that at last H.E. the President has decided to establish the Ministry of Science and Technology. 

However, this is what I would like to request this House. Honourable members, we should not evaluate the need of these new ministries or ministers at individual level. I think it is better to analyse the performance at the institutional level. 

For a long time, we have been demanding for an independent Ministry on Science and Technology and it was upon the wisdom of the Ninth Parliament to notice the importance of this ministry that this ministry was formulated.

As far as we are concerned, in 2020, we would like to achieve the middle income status. The world is changing and new dynamics are coming in. If at all we are to prosper in this country, we have to look for adequacy. However, we should fight so hard to eliminate the vice of corruption. I am in support of the motion being tabled by hon. Ruth Nankabirwa. Therefore, I urge Members to support the motion. 

12.54
MR JULIUS OCHEN (Independent, Kapelebyong County, Amuria): Madam Speaker, the matter on the Table is a very pertinent issue for this country. I wish, we the Members of Parliament who are here had seriously shared with our people the issues that they go through and are not able to achieve under the current situation. 

Madam Speaker, what I see to be a problem in our country is where this nation has not taken serious steps to build state institutions that should take charge of delivering service to the people. This is much better than raising the number of Cabinet and state ministers. 

If we are talking about changing this country into a middle income country, like the President is stating and at the same time we are bringing a huge contradiction that taxes resources from the poor citizens, it, therefore, means we are going against our own citizens. 

Madam Speaker, the people of Kapelebyong Constituency through my presence in this Parliament, wish to convey the message to the President of the Republic of Uganda that during this election, he happened to appear in my constituency and their proposal is that -(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Just conclude because you have made your point.

MR OCHEN: Madam Speaker, the people of my constituency are in dire need of services not ministers. I would like to suggest here, even to Members of Parliament that are here, that it is important that we do not only stop to look at the Cabinet size, we must go down the road at an appropriate time and look at reducing the number of districts and the number of Members of Parliament. This is so that the resources are directed to the Ugandan community for the sake of achieving the middle income status by 2020. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

12.58
MR LYANDRO KOMAKECH (DP, Gulu Municipality, Gulu): Madam Speaker, I rise for the first time in this House to submit issues that are very important. The public expenditure in this country is one of the largest in the world. (Interjections) It is very clear that increasing the numbers shows that the institutions that were mandated under the 1995 Constitution are failing. If we are true nationalists and patriotic, we should be aiming at reducing the Cabinet. 

Secondly, it was very clear from the mover of this motion that the Cabinet has been swelling. In medical terms, anything that swells is sickness. We have a problem and we need to solve it. The only way to do it is to reduce it. I thank you, Madam Speaker. 

1.00
MR GAFFA MBWATEKAMWA (NRM, Kasambya County, Mubende): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand here to oppose the motion to increase the number of ministers. I would have wished to see hon. Ruth Nankabirwa tell us the financial implications of increasing the number of these ministers. 

My people in Kasambya are more interested in service delivery than having these ministers. Can we get an audit of the ministries that have had three ministers? Have they performed better than those that have had two slots? What should we do?

Mubende Regional Referral Hospital, for the last two quarters has no ARVs, no Coartem not even gloves. However, we are here talking about ministers. Don’t we have ministers in the country? 

Some honourable members have said that now that the population has increased, we need to increase the number of ministers. Let me ask, Members of Parliament have increased in this House, should we bring an amendment that we have even the second Deputy Speaker in this House, because we are many? (Laughter)

Madam Speaker is managing, much as we are many. It would be treason in my constituency to support increment of ministers. I thank you.

1.02
MS FLORENCE NAMAYANJA (DP, Bukoto County East, Masaka): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand to oppose the motion of varying the ministers and the ministries. There is no clear justification for this. 

The mover of the motion has indicated that since the Sixth Parliament, this has always been done. However, there is no justification that is being given. Every year, this Parliament looks at the Auditor-General’s report. What we see – because we all come from local governments, we see that these reports have always been cutting across issues of inadequate staffing.

The explanation for inadequate staffing has been no funds. I would, therefore, request this Parliament to instead look at public service, in order to have all the vacant positions in local government and in Government ministries filled, so that we get efficient service delivery in our constituencies.

There is no value-for-money by increasing the number of ministers. You cannot talk about increasing the ministers and Government institutions and ministries without expanding the expenditure. We are going to see in a few days after the approval, if at all it happens, luxurious cars being bought and expenses going up.

Yesterday, we were informed that 59 mothers delivering go through the hands of unskilled nurses and the rest do not get even this attention. (Member timed out.)

1.05
MS DOREEN AMULE (NRM, Woman Representative, Amolatar): Thank you, Madam Speaker. When you look at Article 111 of the Constitution, I beg to read it. It says that, “There shall be a Cabinet which shall consist of the President, Vice-President, Prime Minister and such number of ministers as may appear to the President to be reasonably necessary for the efficient running of the state.” 

I am here to plead that our President looks into the activities of the country as the head of state before coming up with such a number of Cabinet ministers and state ministers, to be sufficiently necessary to run this state. For us to stand here and begin refuting – I do not know whether we would like also to build our own small head of section in our own capacities. 

Secondly, my only appeal to the President is, when we are looking at the appointment, he should also look at the expertise that the ministers he appoints will bring to the ministry. It would be a disservice to our country to find that a Member is appointed as a minister when he completely lacks knowledge of the department for which he or she is going to be appointed.

This is the reason why our local governments and our institutions are not functioning well. This is as a result of political appointees. They are given positions as ministers yet they lack the prerequisite of even elementary knowledge to analyse the situation for the departments they are appointed to.

Added to that, it is a disappointment to our country that our ministers sit in offices, the President keeps them even for five years, even when they have not performed. Otherwise, I completely support the motion. Thank you.

1.08
MR HENRY KIBALYA (NRM, Bugabula County South, Kamuli): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am an economist and in economics, there are some clauses that drive what we say and do. I know that whatever discussion that we are having here, it centres on the resources that Uganda has. We have distribution and re-distribution or equality and inequality.

On several occasions, colleagues stand up to say that Kenya has such a number of ministers and this is what Rwanda has, South Africa has this number and Uganda has this number. In whatever we do, we must have a formula.

If they are distributing resources in Kenya, given the 20 ministers they have, which formula do they use? In Uganda, what is the formula that we use? Even in football, the formula that Manchester uses is not the same that Arsenal will use. If the other is using 2, 2, 4 the other will use 4, 4, 2.

In Uganda, we have set a precedent. We have made a formula that it is only MPs, ministers and other related people that will help to take services down to the ground. I saw my colleague hon. Ibrahim Semujju here and other colleagues who were supporting the Prime Minister, after being elected as the Prime Minister - they only said that “You are very good but be assertive.” The other statement they added was “our own”, for us the only people we have as our own are the ministers that we share with -(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Half a minute to conclude.

MR KIBALYA: These are the people that we have as our own that will help us to have the resources delivered. Maybe the only thing we can debate or say now is let the ministers that we are putting be assertive and ensure effective service delivery to the people, so that instead of complaining about the number, we complain about performance. I beg to submit.

1.11
MS CONNIE NAKAYENZE (NRM, Woman Representative, Mbale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I support the motion. Today, Uganda is facing many challenges because of human resources. Increasing on the political mobilisation is part of the human resources.

There are people who are not working just because they want to see somebody supervise them. If you increase the number of people supervising them, we are going to have very positive results. If you have more teachers in a school, you will produce better results than a school with few teachers. I am giving this example because I am a professional teacher.

Madam Speaker, there are some technical officers out there who know their work but they are not working because there is nobody to supervise them. Therefore, Government is losing most of its resources just because these people are not being supervised. 

However, if we increase on political supervision of these different sectors, we shall have positive results. Those who are appointed should, however, increase their vigilance in supervising the technical officers; we are going to have very positive results. Thank you.

1.12
MR PAUL AMORU (NRM, Dokolo County North, Dokolo): I stand to support the motion. I would like to draw the attention of Members to the premise that should form part of our debate. I think this is being taken out of context.

When you look at the political trend in Uganda today, starting with the Parliament where we are sitting, the number has grown and compare that with other countries across the world that have also registered increment in the numbers. That is automatically followed by growth in Cabinet. 

I really think that the discussion should be more on the substance and not the form. This Parliament should promote higher political supervision but go further to ensure that the ministers are effective but also supported by the necessary budgetary allocation with the technical people available. I think that is when we are going to be more effective and more relevant.

This is so because you could even have 15 ministers, if they are not effective and are not supported then they will still have difficulty in implementing Government programmes.

My view is that we support this motion but we go further to ensure that a lot is done within these ministries to give them powers to supervise, and also take decisions that would reduce on the bureaucracies that we have been seeing in the ministries that make Government services to delay.

I, therefore, want to state that it is timely that this increment has come. It will not only reflect the numbers that we already have in Parliament, but will also help us to ensure national unity and regional balance in the country.

1.16
MR VINCENT WOBOYA (NRM, Budadiri County East, Sironko): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am one of those seconding the motion to increase the number of ministers. However, I have about two issues. One, as we approve these ministers, I would like to suggest that we pay special attention to the number of pledges that have been made in the several constituencies. For example, where I come from in Sironko, for the past 15 years, there are very many outstanding pledges. I do not want to name them here; for example, the road.

I am sure honourable members you have several pledges in your constituencies. I would wish to appeal to the ministers to pay attention to these pledges so that the communities can benefit from them.

I have observed that some ministers have a tendency of concentrating services in particular areas where they have interests or where they come from. I would like to suggest that let the ministers be national in nature. Some of our areas are hard-to-reach. I would like the ministers to pay attention to some of these areas. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

1.18
MS SYLVIA RWABWOGO (NRM, Woman Representative, Kabarole): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand here to support the motion because we need to achieve effectiveness and efficiency within the ministries, especially those with one minister, and they are not as efficient as we want them to be.

Madam Speaker, when you want to achieve efficiency and effectiveness, you have to commit resources. I have a background in the local government because I have been a local government speaker. These local governments are dying out. I support this motion, but I am also saying that we need to commit resources; both financial and human.

If we are to use the resources at the level of the ministries, we need to look at the ceiling that has been snubbed on the recruitment of health staff. Madam Speaker, the dragging spirit is going on because we do not have enough people and resources. A sub county gets only Shs 3 million for roads, and Shs 1.8 million for a health centre II in the local government. A health centre II taking the whole parish. We need to commit more resources to these services as we increase resources at the top level. We also need to increase monitoring and other resources in the local governments.  Thank you, Madam Speaker.

1.20
MR ISAAC MUSUMBA (NRM, Buzaaya County, Kamuli): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I seek the indulgence of the House. A motion has been moved and debated substantially and it is well past 1.00 p.m. I would like to move that the question be put. I beg to move. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Since I had given hon. Milly Mugeni, let her close and then I will put the question.

1.21
MS MILLY MUGENI (NRM, Woman Representative, Butaleja): Thank you, Madam Speaker. It would be very unfortunate if my opportunity was just washed away like that and yet, the people of Butaleja are watching live parliamentary proceedings. (Laughter)

I would like to thank the Members of Parliament, especially those who have supported the motion and I also stand to support the motion that let us maintain the number of ministers that the President has suggested. These are some of the justifications I am giving:

First and foremost, as Members of Parliament, we have been crying for service delivery. There is no way we can leave this big job for the President alone to perform and the few ministers that he has been appointing. 

I am wondering why we are saying that the ministers are very many when we do not have a minister for Butaleja affairs. At least if we had one, maybe, I would say that the number is big. (Laughter)

Secondly, I would like us to agree as Members of Parliament that the individuals that have been nominated are very competent; they are senior citizens of this country. They have the resilience to take us to Vision 2040. I beg that we support these Members of Parliament they are our own, why should we fail them?
 
Those who are talking about the technocrats at the districts, for those of you who have been in the Ninth Parliament you know very well that the technocrats have failed you at the district level. We should not say that we leave all the work for the technical team at the districts. We must be the ones to monitor that work. 

Before I leave, I would like to say that if we want to achieve economic performance, let us support the motion. I beg to submit.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that the question be now put.

(Question put and agreed to.)

1.23
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Ms Winfred Kiiza): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I find myself in a situation that is a little uncomforting. One, because the motion, which has been passed came when our honourable colleagues had already been nominated as ministers. In future, the practice should be that if the President wants to increase numbers whether to 200 or 300 the motion should come first so that as Members are debating, they are not looking at the nominees.  

As Members were debating, I realised that those who had been proposed by the President and were looking at their ministries as new were looking at Members with some sad faces. (Laughter) The colleagues who were submitting would look at the faces of the Member and fear that a Member will take them in bad faith. In future, let us see what comes first - is it the chicken or the egg?

Secondly, as Members were debating, I saw issues of regional balance, age and gender coming in but already, the ministers have been named. So, what are we telling the President? Are we doing a post-mortem? 

I am not seeing him drop the people he has already brought forward. They are already beginning to appear before us this afternoon for vetting. Should we send some out because they do not come from particular regions? This should have happened before so that as you look at people to put in places, you are mindful of a,b,c,d; but now it is unfortunate.

To my colleagues, I would like to say this, I was there on the 31 May when the President was lamenting that even his Cabinet ministers go begging to foreigners, to be helped for their children to go to school. It is unfortunate that he is increasing the number of beggars and putting our country in disrepute. (Laughter)

It becomes a little bit okay when you have three babies going hungry than getting 100 hungry babies. As the President also thinks of increasing the numbers, he should be mindful of the fact that the Cabinet is not equally serviced and that is the reason they also go out to beg.

Madam Speaker, I would like to make it clear to my colleagues. Those who are coming into these ministries do not think you are going to make miracles. You should be aware that we had ministries. We had the one of Rwenzori affairs; I can say there is not much we have got from it. We had one of Teso affairs I am not so sure whether my colleagues from Teso got a lot from this. We had one of Karamoja region; I am not so sure whether my colleagues got –(Interjections)– and by the way, majority of people are clamouring for ministerial positions. 

I just want to put you on notice that it is not by having ministers that these services will be delivered to your areas. Otherwise, if service delivery was as a result of having ministries, then some ministers would not be failing to make it back to Parliament.

You can see that a majority of the Members of Parliament who failed to make it back were ministers. It indicates that Government is not delivering the real services to the people and the punishment is passed over to the ministers. 

As you go into those ministries, be aware of what Ugandans need. Beware of what people want. It may not necessarily be the ministries but service delivery. 

I was looking back at the Cabinet of Dr Milton Obote; they were less than 20 but the 20 ministers changed this country. They were efficient and effective. We had hospitals, good roads, the best paid teachers, well paid doctors.

If you look carefully, majority of Ugandans who were polished are out of the Obote regime and we are proud of these gallant sons and daughters. If you reached a village and you saw a well-constructed house, it was of a grade III or grade II teacher. 

I am a proud daughter of a primary school teacher; my father was a teacher in the Obote regime but our house was an iron sheet roofed house at the time when people were still in grass thatched houses. But the teachers of today –(Interruption)

MS CECILIA OGWAL: Thank you, Rt Hon. Leader of the Opposition for allowing me to give you information. Madam Speaker, as I listened to the debate, some Members were quoting Articles in the Constitution but were not quoting them in full and this can pervert the minds of the people.

Article 111 should be read jointly with Articles 113 and 114. Much as we have given authority to the Executive to increase the number of ministers in order to improve the service delivery we are talking about, we should also be mindful of the documents we already have in our hands which advise the Government. 

One of the documents I am recommending to Members of Parliament is that which was authored in 1989/1990 when that particular commission critically looked at the bloated Cabinet. It said a bloated Cabinet, which at that time was about 42 was inefficient, superfluous and was making service delivery more difficult. That is a report of the Government.

The Government responded by reducing the Cabinet. Madam Speaker, the information I would like to give the Leader of the Opposition is that we should be focusing on the creation of the Ministry of Science and Technology, which was the proposal of the Ninth Parliament because we want to move forward but not the increase in Members of the Cabinet. 

Madam Speaker, you know very well that there are many times we have debated very serious matters and there are no members of the Cabinet in the House to respond to the concerns of the people. I think we should be focused in what we are talking about. We are talking about the creation of this new Ministry of Science and Technology, which I strongly support. However, to have a bloated Cabinet - I would give you figures if I had the time of how much we are losing by having this increased Cabinet but I do not have the time -(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion has been spoken for and also against. Thirty Members have contributed. I have noted those who wanted to speak but have not been able to. I have got your list here. At the next sitting, I will give you the first opportunity.

Now, we need to conclude this matter. Therefore, I put the question that the motion be approved.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I would like to ask the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to say something because the other day, he caused me to make a pronouncement – inform us about the “weather conditions”. (Laughter)

1.32
MR DAVID BAHATI (NRM, Ndorwa County West, Kabale): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am speaking about the issue of “rains” –(Interjections)- I have been corrected to say the “weather conditions”. 

First, we would like to apologise to our colleagues for the delay. The reason for this “drought” has been because of the decisions that we made earlier on during the financial year that created a gap. The good news is that the gap has now been filled. We have now sent the “clouds” to the Commission. They are working around the clock to make sure that by this Friday the “rains” will have reached your end. I am very confident about that one. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Members, House adjourned sine die.

(The House rose at 1.33 p.m. and adjourned sine die.)
