
THE REPUBLIC OF UGANDA

IN THE PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA

Official Report of The Proceedings of Parliament

FIFTH SESSION - 8TH SITTING - FIRST MEETING

________________________

Wednesday, 22 June 2005

Parliament met at 2.30 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Members, I welcome you to today’s proceedings. In the Gallery this afternoon we have students of Happy Hours Secondary School, which is located in Kawempe Division, Bwaise Parish, Kazo Zone II. You are most welcome to Parliament. (Applause)

MR TIBARIMBASA: Thank you, hon. Speaker. Sometime back, about two months ago, there was a case, which was reported on the Floor of the House concerning an employee of the Ministry of Education and a former employee of Makerere University. The report was saying that the officer was being wrongly forced out of office from the Ministry of Education; and after reading the report on the Floor of the House, the Speaker then directed the Ministry of Education to consult the Ministry of Public Service and come up with a report to the House. I am raising this issue because the affected officer happens to be my constituent and has brought that case to my notice. 

So far, I don’t know what has been done to resolve this problem. This officer was supposed to have started work by 1st June and now we are coming to the end of the month of June. This officer by the name of Akankwasa has already resigned his job at Makerere University. So, he is literally on the street. May I know how far this matter has gone? I have some documents which I can lay on the Table for reference by the Minister of Education and Public Service if need arises. Thank you.

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS (Mrs Hope Mwesigye): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The Minister of Education is aware of that case and she is handling it. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Can we be told when the report is coming out? When are we likely to get the report on this issue?

MRS MWESIGYE: In one week’s time, Mr Speaker a report on the issue will be ready.

THE SPEAKER: Okay. Now we continue with the debate on the Bill –(Interruption)

THE CONSTITUTION 
(AMENDMENT NO.3 ) BILL, 2005

CAPT. BYARUHANGA: Mr Speaker, the Bill we are discussing is of the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs. Incidentally I don’t see any minister from there, I don’t know who will be taking notes on behalf of the minister.

MRS MWESIGYE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have been asked by the Minister of Constitutional Affairs to step in for him. Thank you.

MS SARAH KIYINGI NAMUSOKE (Woman Representative, Rakai): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I wish to thank the Committee for their extensive input on Bill No. 3. I have read through the main report as well as the two-minority reports. I thank the Committee for the wise recommendation that certain amendments be left to the next Parliament in order to save time, which we seem to be running short of.

Mr Speaker, I wish to make remarks on four areas. The committee on page 11 recommends that the term of Uganda Human Rights Commission be limited to just one term and a term of six years. I think this will undermine the efficiency of the Commission. 

The Uganda Human Rights Commission deals with a lot of technical issues; legal issues, it does its work in collaboration with other departments and organizations; it handles its work in relation to the grassroots people. The Commission can’t in itself determine how long a case it is handling will take because of the input from other departments. But also that their cases take long and when somebody goes into the Uganda Human Rights Commission, it will take time for that person to familiarise with what goes on before they are able to settle down and do the work that needs to be done. 

Moreover when I looked in the Constitution, I found out that other commissions have extensions. Even the commission, which has the longest term - the Electoral Commission with seven years -can be extended for one term. The Education Commission has five years, which can be renewed; and there is no term limit, but the Human Rights Commission has six years with no term limit and that is what the Committee here is trying to cure. I am proposing, Mr Speaker, that there be standardisation in the sense that all the commissions be allowed to have at least two terms so that there is one renewal and then the people can find new members to the commission other than saying that one serves for just one term and yet others have no term limit.

Mr Speaker, regarding the Bill itself, I wish to start by saying that for all the errors, omissions and commissions that the UPC did to this Government, I think it needs to be credited for training its cadres so well in dirty tricks and these cadres are now the leaders in the Uganda Government and they have perfected these dirty tricks so well that they are scattered all over this Bill.

MR AWORI:  Mr Speaker, I happen to be a veteran member of the said party, UPC.  I do acknowledge the kind remarks initially, that indeed we are a great party and we trained many able people especially, currently on the Front Bench, including the head of State.  He is somebody we trained very well.  But is she in order to imply that since they have gone astray, it is because of our good training?  (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER:  It isn’t a point of order really as I see, it is a question of personal assessment of a situation.  So, I can’t say she is right or you are right.  (Laughter)

MS NAMUSOKE:  Thank you, Mr Speaker, for your wise ruling.  I was saying that the UPC government then, trained its cadres so well in the dirty tricks, that now, they are perfecting them in the current Government and you can see them in this Bill.  Mr Speaker, -(Interruption) 

MR WAGONDA MUGULI:  I thank my colleague for giving way, and the information I want to give is that, yes, it is true there were such cadres, but they have all since left and joined the Movement and those who have remained in UPC are the good ones.  (Laughter)

DR KIYONGA:  Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a point of order.  Hon. Kiyingi has repeatedly said that in this Bill, there is perfection of dirty tricks. As we all know, this Bill has come a long way from the population, through different consultations. Is she in order to say; a Bill that has walked such a transparent road has dirty tricks?  

THE SPEAKER:  Well, would you like to substantiate on what you have said?

MS NAMUSOKE:  Mr Speaker, I was just going to give examples to clarify on what I mean.  Honourable members, take for example, the amendment, which seeks to administer Kampala through the Central Government.  I have sought counsel what that means and I am reliably informed just as what I believed; that Government will appoint people to run the city instead of the elected members that we have today.  Now, we are told of course, that the Central Government’s intention is to develop the city; therefore, it should take it over.  I am wondering; how – let us look at the –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER:  You see, the problem here is, somebody stood on point of order and said that you are saying dirty tricks, that is an improper motive, whoever drafted this.  Can you substantiate this?  Is it wrong judgment that you are attacking as improper motive; what is it?  First of all, because I have to rule whether you are out of order or not and therefore, I asked you to substantiate your claim.

MS NAMUSOKE:  Mr Speaker, I really do not know what you want me to do, because, when I said “dirty tricks”, I meant to clarify in my presentation what those dirty tricks are; really very ill intentions, if you seek definition. 

THE SPEAKER:  You see, the thing is – (Interruption) 

MS NAMUSOKE:  Their ill intention.

THE SPEAKER:  The problem is this, when you say “dirty tricks”, well, the Bill was presented here by the Minister and that would be imputing that he had improper motive. I think that is why hon. Kiyonga stood up to say that you are out of order; and I said, before I rule maybe you had a case.  I wanted you to substantiate this and then we proceed. You see, when there is a point of order, it must be disposed of first.  So, maybe you have a point.  So, I want you to assist me to say, “oh, she has substantiated; there was improper motive.”  Otherwise, you withdraw that insinuation of improper motive, and then you proceed with your submissions.
 
MS NAMUSOKE:  Mr Speaker, are you asking me to withdraw the word or to substitute it?

THE SPEAKER:  What I am telling you is that, if you are still insisting on improper motive, then you have to substantiate; but if you meant a different thing, you can say, “well, I withdraw that, but what I meant is this and the other.”

MS NAMUSOKE:  Mr Speaker, for the good of not wasting time, as I look for a new word, I am going to withdraw this one for the time being as I look for a proper –(Laughter) 

THE SPEAKER:  Proceed.

MS NAMUSOKE:  But I will proceed to give the point I am trying to make. The Government says that it wants to administer Kampala for the purpose of development; how can Central Government administer Kampala, when in fact, it has failed even to administer its own area of responsibility properly?  

First of all, you have ghost workers in the Army and all over the place; you have ghost pensioners in that Pension office.  They can create a person, this person will work for 50 years and be retired in one day; Pension office; they failed to curb that, they failed to – you have crumbling buildings in embassies all over the place.  How can they fail to administer this properly and then they tell us that they will administer Kampala?

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PUBLIC SERVICE (PENSIONS) (Mrs Benigna Mukiibi):  Is hon. Sarah Kiyingi in order to continuously raise this issue of ghost pensioners?   It is not the first time she has raised it. I have challenged her to substantiate, she has never substantiated at any one point. Is she in order to repeatedly argue that we have got ghost pensioners, when we have taken a lot of effort to clean our payroll and it is actually very clean and we would benefit from her information if she has any ghost pensioner to give us the information.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Mrs Mukiibi, is in that pension office; so she is saying, can you substantiate your allegation that they have ghosts and since when?

MS NAMUSOKE: Mr Speaker, I am raising an example of inefficiency within the Central Government itself. And the hon. Minister - I was a member of the Committee on Local Government, when she appeared, she was begging that we help to sort out all these problems. If the situation has changed since then, thank God but I know that –(Interruption)

MR KIKUNGWE: Mr Speaker, the hon. minister in charge of pensions on the Floor of this House categorically put it to us that she was failing to secure Shs.17billion to pay her pensioners and it is a fact that Government is involved in unnecessary spending. Honourable Sarah Kiyingi is talking about inefficiency in Government- (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: No, no, hon. Kikungwe, I think there is a difference between inability to pay a debt and creating fictitious claims, because when you create ghost pensioners you are trying to create fictitious claims so that pensions are paid to non-existent people. That is fraud, so the question was, can you substantiate why you say there is fraud in a sense that ghost pensioners are being created in hon. Benigna Mukiibi’s office?  If you can, maybe, it can be that in the past it used to be there, I don’t know. Otherwise, you withdraw and then we proceed.

MS NAMUSOKE: Mr Speaker, can I be allowed to continue?

THE SPEAKER: Yes, but then the situation of fraud, you withdraw and then we proceed.

MS NAMUSOKE: Okay, I withdraw and proceed. Mr Speaker, the point I was making still remains that there is inefficiency in the Central Government itself; but why it thinks that it can handle in addition to its own responsibility to handle the administration of Kampala beats my understanding. That is why I believe that Government having failed to win substantially elective – (Interruption)- Mr Speaker, may I be allowed to continue?

THE SPEAKER: It is you to allow information.

MS NAMUSOKE: Mr Speaker, the fact that the Central Government has failed to win elective positions in the city makes it resort to some manoeuvres, which will give it responsibility in the City Council without necessarily having to have the people elected into office. I think this is sending the legal people back to the drawing board because Government might be taken to court for discrimination against the people within Kampala by not allowing them to elect their leaders yet everywhere people would be electing their leaders.  Mr Speaker –(Interruption)

MR SEBULIBA:  Thank you, hon. Colleague, for giving way. The information I want to give hon. Kiyingi, Mr Speaker, is that Government is already fighting over land with Kampala City Council. That land is situated in Nakawa. Maybe to enrich your information, that could be one of the factors leading to that.

MS NAMUSOKE: Thank you for that enriching information. Mr Speaker, I want to move on to page 17 of the Bill, which talks about replacement of Article 63 of the Constitution. When you look at Clause 4, it says that the Electoral Commission shall from time to time review the demarcation of constituencies.  Now, Mr Speaker, this is what used to happen in the Uganda Peoples Congress’ days.  I am not a historian but I seem to recall that when the Government at that time wanted to make sure that some people did not go into Government or into Parliament, they would re-demarcate until they made sure that only the UPC people had an advantage. Although at that time, they had messed up so much that in some areas even after doing that they lost. The point is –(Mr Awori rose_)- Mr Speaker, may I be protected from hon. Aggrey Awori? 

 The amendment that Government is trying to replace in the Constitution is I think Clause 5 which says that the Commission shall review the division of Uganda into constituencies within 12 months after the publication of results of the census and may as a result re-demarcate constituencies. That means that there is stability, but this reviewing from time to time, I smell the tactics that are going to ensure that some people are basically denied participation in the constituencies simply because they are not supporters.

Finally, Mr Speaker, on Monday afternoon, you looked around the House for those who wanted to catch your eye to speak and there seemed to have been reluctance from the Floor and one member commented that what difference does it make; a decision has been taken and people have been told how to vote. They may as well come back and vote. 

This was the background comment which, I am bringing forward. Personally, it reminded me of the times in the Bible of Jeremiah the Prophet. Jeremiah was sent and told, “Go and tell the people that there is a calamity which is going to befall but if they repent, they will be forgiven. But God also told him that those people wouldn’t repent; they would go on and tell him to leave them alone since they had decided to move in their wicked ways and weren’t going to change their plans.  But he all the same told him to go.

So, for those of us – [An. Hon Member: “Which chapter?”] – it is chapter 18, verse 11 and 12 of Jeremiah.  Mr Speaker, I chose to comment on the issue of third term even when I know that the decision has been made.  Maybe, somewhere God will help us that people will change.  I want to identify myself wholly with the minority report, which is signed by hon. Issa Kikungwe and the reasons that were given in that minority report. 

But I am also wondering, maybe the political analyst should do research and help us to understand, “When does a liberation struggle move from merely being a well-intentioned liberation struggle to a personal investment?”  We need to understand so that we know; we can put in perspective all the things we are seeing compared to what we saw at the beginning of this liberation.  

Because the language that was used at that time was more reconciliatory, the frugality with which Government spent money as compared to the gluttonous use of money today; the way people were being assisted in understanding what is going on, as compared to the way people are told, “you are going to do this or not to do that and that is the decision.” A decision has been taken.  

Mr Speaker, I want these people to help us understand, to put this whole issue into perspective, when a government decides to get taxpayer’s money to pay freebies to support an ill fated project that is a personal investment, personal investment of Government money in order to pursue a personal interest.  

Look at the list of people who are considered to be in all these scandals of wanton robbing of this country: the Congo thing, the corruption in URA, in the Army, all over the place; this is something that is unacceptable and the people of this nation need to be very afraid.  

I am not a prophet, neither am I a prophet’s daughter, but I am telling you this is an ill-fated project – (Interjection) – Mr Speaker, I am winding up and I am not accepting any clarification. I think the people of this country need to be told because even in this House, you know that there are people who are saying, “well, we shall support the kisanja again on personal investment basis because I want to come back here; because I know if I do not support this kisanja they are going to unleash the terror of Government on me in my constituency and I want to come back here” - that is a personal investment.  So, when does one – (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Member, it is time, please. I don’t want to cut you short, but you have overrun your time. Please wind up.

MS NAMUSOKE: Mr Speaker, I am winding up.  When does one cross from liberation struggle to personal investment so that we are all aware and we choose to either invest in this business or not? People of this nation need to be very afraid and may God bless you as we go through this.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Members, originally it was five minutes; we extended it to seven but now people are taking almost 12 to 15 minutes.  Please, let us stick to time and do not unnecessarily interrupt the contributions simply because you do not agree with the points raised.  Do not interfere with a point of order simply because you are sensitive on the matter; let us give our colleagues time to make their contribution within seven minutes.  

MR KASSIANO WADRI (Terego county, Aura): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  As I stand up to make my contribution on this contentious issue before this House, I know for a fact that there is nothing new that is going to be generated in this House. When we debated on the Government White Paper, a lot was said.  I want to make the record correct and at the same time make history because the manner in which we are assembled here, is the manner in which in 1884 the Berlin Conference was held. The day when they decided to come out and partition Africa, was exactly the same manner in which we are seated here.  

Why do I do say so? Today we are talking about the ills of colonialism and it will be in the same manner in which the future generation will talk about us when we are long gone. Good enough, some few of us may still be alive to give oral testimony when Ugandans get to know where they will be and those responsible for their destiny.

Mr Speaker, I seek your indulgence to allow me talk on five key issues. I will want to start by talking about the eye of the boil, that is Article 105(2).  Mr Speaker, yesterday, hon. Francis Babu and my brother hon. Prof. Mondo Kagonyera talked at length on this Article.  In their submission they tried in vain to convince us to debate this Article not pegging it to the incumbent.  

I say I am going to peg this discussion on the incumbent because last weekend when the Movement had its NEC meeting in Munyonyo, a motion was moved by LCV Chairman of Wakiso District, Mr Ian Kyeyune. The President smiled very broadly –(Laughter)– meaning that he was in agreement and supported that motion and therefore, there is no way I am going to discuss this motion without pegging it onto him; because that is not the only time. On a number of occasions, he has even adorned himself in the kisanja attire - the dry banana leaf. If he did not believe in ekisanja, I do not think he would have gone ahead to adorn himself in those attires.  So, the fact that he has on these two examples sided with the whole motion to amend Article 105, I strongly feel that he is at the center of this move, and therefore I am not going to spare him. 

There is an English saying, which says, “familiarity breeds contempt.”  All dictators world over are not bred overnight, when they start, they start in a very good way and everybody says, “yes, this is our saviour, this is our liberator.”  Look around the globe; whether you are talking about the late Mobutu, whether you are talking about Marcos of Philippines, they are all over. Even Mussolini started in a small way in Italy but at the end of the day every human being on the globe felt his pinch. 

In a similar way, we do appreciate that President Museveni has sacrificed and done a lot for this country; and good management only deserves that if you are a good manager you must also be able to groom people to whom to hand over.  I do not think that he can be a good judge to be a good leader and a good manager for that matter if in the last 20 years with all these competent men and women on the front bench, he has failed to identify any of them, including even my brother here, hon. Prof. Kagonyera.  If he has failed to identify a professor to whom to hand over, what kind of manager is he?  

So, that is already a big weakness on the side of His Excellency President Museveni. If he has failed to identify a successor, that itself is a clear sign that it is not only Kisanja that he wants but is actually clamouring for life presidency.  Personality can never be separated from this amendment.  Therefore -(Interruption)

MR ERESU:  Information.

MR WADRI:  Please, I am well informed on what I am talking, hon. John. Can you take your seat as I have limited time?  The longer the person stays in office, the issue of checks and balances fail to hold water.  If we are going to allow one Ugandan out of 26 million people and we are saying it is only person who has got a vision, and that the many professors in his Government don’t have a vision, then what is the meaning of this word “vision”?  Is it the English vocabulary that I know, or this is only a word coined for those in NRMO to judge best?

The second issue is of appointment of Chief Administrative Officers.  For the last 20 years, with decentralisation on the scene and with the onset of UPE, we have regionalised and tribalised our education system and even our appointment into the general service.  Decentralisation much as it has its good side, has created tribalism and therefore killed the spirit of nationalism.  The days when I was in secondary school in 1970s; those of us from the north prided in coming to study down-country, and those from down-country areas also prided going to the north. That is why today when you find people moving along the streets of Kampala, a person from the north bumps into somebody from the west and refers to him as OB, either in Buddo, Nyakasura, Ntare, Nabumali, Jinja college, Mbarara or in Arua; but today, this spirit has been killed.  Therefore, unless the local councils become accommodative and take people on their own merit, we shall be leaving the Chief Administrative Officers and other cadres of civil servants recruited in one district; not transferable, without an opportunity for carrier advancement and judging them for doom.  

For example, today you look at the higher administrative positions in Government.  If you have to be an under secretary or a permanent secretary, you are subjected to both oral and written examinations.  If you have been a chief administrative officer recruited by Kotido district, and you have stayed in Kotido for 20 or 30 years, and you are brought to Kampala for an interview for the post of a permanent secretary, I don’t think that you will be in position to write a paper because you have never been exposed to it.  So, I am of the opinion that we need to protect our civil servants, accord them the opportunity to advance in their carrier; and that can only be if they can be returned to the center, so that they can be able to effectively compete with other people as recommended in the Sempebwa report.

I have had experiences in German and in Denmark, where I went to study, what decentralisation in those countries is like. The only good side of those countries is that, their local governments are a little more developed than many of our district administrations.  You find a local councillor who has never had any office, therefore who is a chief administrative officer in jeopardy.

Mr Speaker, the third issue on which I would want to put myself on record, is the position of Resident District Commissioners.  The Constitution stipulates that the Resident District Commissioners are civil servants, but for the last 19 years, I don’t know whether in the District Administrators, Special District Administrators and now Resident District Commissioners there is any change in them.  They have never at any one time conducted themselves as civil servants who are supposed to be apolitical.  

They have tended to be promoters and campaign agents of the Government of the day. I think there is need for us to look further in their qualifications; the Constitution stipulates that one needs to be a senior civil servant. At what time does that condition come into being? Is it after appointment or the person should have attained a position of a senior civil servant; and that ties down with the qualifications of these resident district commissioners, which is their minimum.  What should a person who is to be considered for employment as resident district commissioner have, and can their appointment and employment also be transparent so that if everybody who has got an interest can be able to make a contribution?

Last but not least, Mr Speaker, is on the issue of equal opportunity.  For the last 10 years, the constitutional provision for creation of equal opportunities has been collecting dust on the law volumes. Before we consider any amendment, I think it will be prudent that the Government comes up with a clear explanation as to why for the last 10 years the equal opportunity commission has not been operational.  Otherwise it will be useless for us to amend an article, which has never been tested.  Mr Speaker, thank you very much for your indulgence.

DR FRANCIS EPETAIT (Ngora County, Kumi):  Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  I am just going to dwell on one point and I call it the main clause, that is article 105(2) because in my own opinion, the rest of the proposed amendments are salads in the dish; they are bigenderako. 

My observation is that it is treasonable to undermine or attempt to sabotage a manifesto of a head of state.  We are aware that during the 2001 elections, in President Museveni’s manifesto, he repeated it about four times that he was going to serve his last term. I am also aware that since these debates - on what others prefer to call third term whereas actually it is not third term, but unlimited terms started, the President has chosen to put an “ultra-super glue” on his lips. He has chosen not to touch it, however much members of the Front Bench try to ask him, “Sir, what is your opinion?”  “Ultra-super glue.” Even members of the international community have tried to tickle the President to at least say something about it, but “ultra super glue.”  One wonders where the proponents of lifting term limits get their mandate!  

I would like to state here assertively that should the President come up publically to reverse his opinion and say, “I am sorry I am not running for the 2006 Presidential elections.”, I bet hon. Kiyonga and group will all take a reverse gear.  So that is why we still can’t be disentangling President Museveni from this whole thing.  

I would like to mention one example, of where the President’s actions are looking at that target and yet he is tightlipped.  You remember, hon. members, the Private Members Bill, seeking to scrap graduated tax and to amend the Local Governments Act, moved by hon. Okulo Epak and seconded by 64 others? 

The President made a comment on the 29th April 2003, at 9.45 p.m. in the Conference Centre while addressing a Movement Caucus Meeting.  I was there, I was very keen to know what our President was going to tell the caucus, and he said, “Honourable Members, you are aware those other MPs (meaning the MPs in the opposition) have come with the bill seeking to scrap graduated tax and I entirely agree with all the reasons they have advanced to justify the Bill.  They are very strong, but remember there are 5.5 million graduated tax payers in Uganda and if we allow those MPs to proceed and amend the Local Governments Act, then we shall lose the support.” –(Interruption)- No wonder most of those who attended are here saying “ah.” 

The President further said, “The trick that we are going to use is to first of all block them from proceeding to amend that Local Governments Act and then in 2005/2006 financial year, we shall tactfully, temporarily suspend graduated tax in the budget so that by 2006, we shall hit three birds with one stone.” So, all his actions are aimed at getting something and yet when asked to unequivocally state his position on whether he intends to run or not, it is, “ultra super glue.”  

So, Mr Speaker, I want to say that during the Constitution making process, those who –(Interruption)

MR NASASIRA: Thank you, Mr Speaker.  Is it in order for the hon. Member on the Floor to continue making serious allegations about the President of a caucus he doesn’t belong to without any substantiation and evidence? Is it in order for a member to make such serious allegations against the President without any evidence being brought here? Because I know what he is saying is not true.

THE SPEAKER: Well, first of all I don’t know who belongs to this caucus or the other.  But I think his position was that then he was a member of the caucus; he has shifted to another camp.  I think this is what he is saying.

DR EPETAIT: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for your ruling and to allay the fears of the Chairman of the NRMO Caucus, that time we were in the Movement Caucus. I even got an invitation letter officially in my Pigeon hole to attend that meeting.  So, please, keep relaxed.

Mr Speaker, during the Constitution making process in 1994/1995, many members - (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: It is time; they have rung the bell, and you only have two minutes.

DR EPETAIT: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for the time reminder.  The very proponents of term limits, those who advocated for presidential term limits had very justifiable reasons and indeed carried the day and all of us were happy that at last, Uganda was about to get a Constitution that would stand the test of time.  Before that particular article is given a chance to be tested and also give Ugandans a chance to visit their former President in his home of residence within the country and get guidance, from him.  The very proponents of the article in 1995 are now the ones shattering it.  They are the chief surgeons of the same.

MR ERESU: Can you take my information please?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Member, he has run out of time, so the question of allowing does not arise.

DR EPETAIT: So, to wind up, I would want to urge my dear brothers and sisters, hon. colleagues, that really since this is an article, which cannot be disentangled from the incumbent President. I think it is only fair for us to accept that our debates are not looking far, which is very dangerous for the country.  If all projects could be as successful as this recent one, where cash was given to facilitate members to explain the White Paper, then I want to call it a successful project because the manner in which debates are proceeding in this House, it is majorly the beneficiaries of that project who have decided (they say the decision has already been made) not to look at the pros and cons of amending that particular article.  I beg you, let us look far and not look just near our nostrils.  Thank you.

MR ERESU: Mr Speaker, I come here to Parliament, apart from representing my people also the people of Uganda, to share views and contribute to the welfare and the well being of this country.  I would expect that as we debate matters pertaining to our nation, our people, our country, we should be open to one another to the extent that although the rules give the member on the Floor privilege to accept or refuse information and so on, for purposes of a good debate and understanding of the subject, I beg that in the process, Mr Speaker, we are given the freedom to inform each other and seek clarification so that we enrich our debate.  Can I seek guidance as to whether discretion cannot be given to this? –(Interruptions)

THE SPEAKER: The guidance you seek is in our rules. As far as information and clarification are concerned, the person holding the Floor is at liberty to allow you or not. From what I perceive, you are suggesting that we revisit the rules and change them some time. We can do that.
 
The other observation I have made is that interruptions of “point of order”, “point of information” are all prompted by someone trying to show that he disagrees with the point being made. It is therefore not information, but an opportunity to show that he disagrees. That should not be the purpose of information or clarification. Many of you have taken a stand one way or the other, so if another person says something against your stand, you interrupt.  Please let us maximise the time we have for this general debate by not unnecessarily interrupting our colleagues.

3.28
MR WAGONDA MUGULI (Buikwe County North, Mukono): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I wish to belatedly add my voice to those that have thanked the committee for the excellent report presented to this House. I would also like to persuade my colleagues to endorse the recommendations made, particularly on expunging certain clauses of the proposed amendments, so that we concentrate on those which will make a difference towards the transition.

I have listened to the debate on the Floor very carefully and attentively, Mr Speaker. A past leader of this country once said, “Entebbe ewoma” meaning, “The presidential seat is very sweet.”  I have been listening to arguments that we should try to exclude the incumbent from the argument for or against term limits. I am not persuaded that President Museveni is a disinterested person in the matter of opening up term limits. It is inconceivable that he could even be disinterested.  

THE SPEAKER: But, honourable member, assuming he is interested but the amendment is not made, can he do anything?  So the issue is, if you are opposed to lifting of term limits, bring the demerits of amending this clause, and those who are for amending, bring the merits rather than tying it down to an individual.

MR WAGONDA MUGULI: I thank you, Mr Speaker, and I appreciate your guidance. This was only reference to attempts by some people to paint a picture that it is possible to discuss one without discussing the other.  Unfortunately, they failed miserably because they ended up justifying why the incumbent should be pushed out. I have not been persuaded, Mr Speaker, that there is a training college anywhere on this earth where they train presidents.  

President Mandela walked out of prison and became a very successful President. When he left, South Africa did not collapse. If anything, it has become a shining example. We have had people like President Chiluba who was a trade unionist and became president. The country continued with business as usual, even after he left. Why do we think that Uganda will cease to exist when there are term limits?

There have been arguments, Mr Speaker, that the people have the right to choose. What has the trend been in the African Continent? The people indeed have the right to choose, but have they been choosing freely and independently?  What was the case in Zimbabwe? The whole municipality of Bulawayo was disenfranchised and no electoral materials were delivered because the president feared that he would lose in Bulawayo.  

In the election of 2001, hon. Awori Aggrey was a contender for the race. Together with his colleagues, each was given Ug Shs 16 million. Meanwhile, the president complained that his campaign machinery had cost more than 13 billion shillings.  Is that level playing ground?  The truth of the matter is that in Africa, as long as the incumbent regime can raid the treasury –(Interruption)

MR AWORI: Not only did they give me Ug Shs 15 million only, but they even took away the little I had - the helicopter.  (Laughter)

MR WAGONDA MUGULI: So, Mr Speaker, you can see that the ground can never be even.  As long as the incumbent regime can raid the treasury and finance its operations, it is like a Karimojong coming to raid your cows and the next day he comes to pay bride price for your daughter and then you pride yourself for having a very good son-in-law.  

Mr Speaker, history will judge us very harshly. Time now should be used judiciously, to make sure that the reasons the term limits were imposed in the first place remain valid, and the term limits maintained. There has been a saying that, there are no bad armies but bad commanders.  In this particular case, I want to give President Museveni the benefit of doubt. It is those persons who hang around President Museveni, who think their survival is dependent on him, that are pushing the president to do the impossible. 

Those people think that without the president, they will have problems of survival and having a political identity of their own. They want us to believe that removing term limits is a very innocent act. It is not, and I urge my colleagues to reject the removal of the term limits with all the contempt that it deserves.

Mr Speaker, I would like to address the issue of the presidential and parliamentary elections being held on the same day. The problem is that politics in Uganda has been so commercialized that even the voters would rather have these elections on separate days because they think that is the way for them to maximize returns from all the candidates, including the presidential candidates. As a leader, I think it is a good idea to have elections on the same day. However, I do not agree that it is necessary to cut short the term of office for Members of Parliament. The elections can be held and MPs serve their full term until July 2nd. 

Mr Speaker, on the issue of the special status of Kampala, I think it is a good idea that Kampala, as the capital of Uganda, be given special status so that it can be availed resources to develop to a level that befits a capital of a distinguished republic like Uganda. However, as we do this, I agree with the committee that in creating Mengo Municipality, we do not do it under the constitution, but we follow relevant laws that govern urban and local governments.  

Mr Speaker, I want to appeal to my colleagues to reason with themselves and examine their conscience. I appeal to them that when it comes to voting, they not only consider our daily bread but also the future of their children and their children’s children. I thank you. 

3.37
MR JOHN KEN LUKYAMUZI (Lubaga Division South, Kampala): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: I have got a list of the people who recorded their names yesterday and I am trying to follow that list. I will cover you; do not worry.

MR LUKYAMUZI: Mr Speaker, being one of the members of the quasi opposition in this House, I beg to begin this crusade by responding to some of the issues raised by the proponents of the Kisanja phenomenon. Both hon. Kubeketerya and hon. Amama Mbabazi, yesterday contended that as long as there are frequent elections, there should be no fear of lifting the presidential term. Those people forgot the following and I have data to prove them wrong. 

As we speak, Uganda’s history is characterized by a bad record of elections. For two years now, we have been sitting on a report related to election violence which cannot be presented on the Floor of the House because Government has interests in hiding that report. Otherwise this is a very important report –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: I think we have to correct the record. The report was presented and debated upon. However, one member, I think it was hon. Sabiiti, had certain amendments or resolutions concerning this, which did not come up. It is not true that the report was not debated. You can check with the Hansard.

MR LUKYAMUZI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. What I was alluding to was that the contents of that report, are very important in redefining issues related to the bad record of elections. Further more, I would like to quote an alternative authority namely, the Supreme Court Judgment Petition No.1 of 2001 where the judges in the case of Dr. Besigye versus President Museveni and Electoral Commission in 2001. The ruling of the court observed and stated that, Uganda’s elections at that time were characterized by vote rigging, vote buying, intimidation and militarism. 

These are some of the incidents, Mr Speaker, which we should refer to when we argue that when you lift presidential term limits, you should not worry because elections can play the alternative role. People are saying that President Museveni has assistants to speak for him as far as the Kisanja is concerned. Most of those campaigning for the lifting of presidential term limits argue that the president is not the one forcing himself through but that it is the people who want him.  

Mr Speaker, this president has been president for 19 years now. He is the only person who has been holding political addresses everywhere. The likes of Ken Lukyamuzi cannot reach every part of Uganda much as I may be presidential material. Therefore, the argument that the people are the ones who are pressing him to come back is not tenable because, if the people told you to steal, would you steal because you have been urged to do so? You should not do everything that people tell you to. Rather, you have to examine what you are going to do. 

Mr Speaker, I want to quote an alternative source to justify my view, that even our good president Museveni is interested in the Kisanja. I am quoting an authority as regards what was published in the Observer of the 16th of June, volume 2, Issue number 013. A senior minister, hon. Sam Kutesa, openly stated that the President of Uganda, His Excellency Yoweri Kaguta Museveni is interested in the Kisanja and nobody contested that statement, not even the president himself. It therefore goes without saying that the President of Uganda is interested in the Kisanja.  (Interjection) I am not interested in the information. (Interruption)

MR WAMBUZI: Mr Speaker, I know hon. Ken Lukyamuzi, is a serious member of Parliament as far as partisan politics is concerned. In fact, he has been on this Floor as a champion for partisan politics. Hon. Ken Lukyamuzi knows that partisan politics means that a group will actually put up its agenda and fight to lead the country.  Is he in order to insinuate that it is wrong, when some people who have decided to join partisan politics start organizing themselves, yet this is the way where he wants to go? Is he in order?

THE SPEAKER: Well, as you have said, we are moving in that direction. I think it may be necessary to organize seminars to handle the subject of how multipartism operates.

MR LUKYAMUZI: Thank you very much for your wise ruling, Mr Speaker. I did not expect anything beyond what hon. Gagawala said –(Laughter) The point I wanted to make regarding the statements I quoted is that one of the reasons why the President of Uganda, Yoweri Kaguta Museveni, went to the bush was the bad election record.  

Suppose we manipulate the amendment of the Constitution so that others can also go to the bush, will they not claim legitimacy once they formulate another government? We should avoid any situation of doubt, which may create possibilities for people to go to the bush.

Mr Speaker, the report admits that the Constitution is a declaration of principles. If this is so, we should accept that the 1995 Constitution is such a declaration. How then can we say we trust the Constitution if we cannot give it time to operate?

Mr Speaker, is the committee aware that if the Constitutional principle is to retain the respect it deserves, it must be subjected to some level of longevity? If it can be short lived circumstantially, how can you prove that we can have confidence in such a document? Because when you talk about principle, you are talking about longevity. When you talk about longevity, you are talking about sustenance. When you talk about sustenance, you are talking about life and these are the issues –(Laughter) 

Mr Speaker, the committee told us that they are deleting 60 constitutional provisions and retaining 30. What was the magic wand behind such an assessment? Is it speculation? The reasons are neither standing nor sustainable.

Mr Speaker, I was not in the Constituent Assembly but I regularly sat in the gallery to listen to you and others. The main reason for bringing in Article 105(2) was the need to limit the presidential term because of Uganda’s peculiar history. The Constituent Assembly was dominated by the Movement much as the present parliament is. Why do you not trust yourself? If you trusted yourself in the CA, why do you not trust yourself now? Give yourself trust so that you can get more followers to trust what you have built.

Mr Speaker, in East Africa, it is only Uganda which has had nine presidents so far. It is only Uganda which is amending over 30 provisions of the Constitution in less than ten years. In Kenya, they have amended about 28 of their constitution provisions whereas in Tanzania there are only 14 –(Interjection)- I have no time for clarification. We have a very big challenge. While most us got our Independence at almost the same time, Kenya in 1963, Uganda 1962 and Tanzania in 1961, one wonders why so many hinges are haphazardly coming up in Uganda’s society. We must learn a lesson from our history. 

As I end my submission, Mr Speaker, why did we put that provision of term limit? The main reason was to avoid several occurrences. What did we want to avoid? We wanted to avoid the propensity towards violent political changes that have characterized our history, to avoid domination on the basis of ethnic subjudication, and to avoid “the winner takes it all” politics. We also wanted to promote national unity. Uganda is a nation of many nations. Whenever you hear that in phase one you have a Mutoro as President, in phase two you have a Mucholi, you gain confidence in yourself. This is one of the reasons why we brought in the term limits.

THE SPEAKER: It is time, please.

MR LUKYAMUZI: In conclusion, we wanted to promote confidence in taking up challenges especially those related to public litigation. How much assurance can you give me that you can handle corruption related to ghost soldiers, depletion of natural resources in the Congo and junk helicopters? Most, especially when President Museveni is still in power and the scenario of junk helicopters and depletion of resources implicate some of his relatives? How much litigation can you pursue? He must go so that you can pursue a substantial litigation. That is why we are urging you all to support us so that we retain that provision. Forget the kisanja so that Uganda lives on. Thank you very much. (Laughter)

3.52
DR BYATIKE MATOVU (Entebbe Municipality, Entebbe): Thank you very much Rt honourable Speaker and my colleagues. Honourable members, whoever coined the very unfortunate term, “third term” to mean the lifting of the term limits was not fair to the principle we are trying to correct. It is a dreadful term, which we should drop immediately. 

Honourable Speaker -(Interjections)- I thought I was on the Floor but I have a couple of people here who are – Honourable Members of Parliament, my contribution is going to be on one issue which I think is important as far as I am concerned today and that is clause 37 or Article 105(2) in the Constitution. There have been cases of people who became dictators within their first term. They did not wait for the second or third term to become dictators. 

Similarly, there are have been people who resigned after one term. Therefore, the number of terms that one has in office has no bearing on whether he is going to be a dictator or not. He can resign after one term when he is very good or he can also be removed after one term when he is bad. So, I think there is no reason why we should change this. 

Mr Speaker there are known cases of leaders who have served much longer than one term. We have seen such cases in Britain and here in Uganda and during that period, people have enjoyed a lot of freedom. So, I think it does not have to be one or two terms during which somebody can turn a dictator. I think I do not have to elaborate on that. We better go ahead. 

Honourable members, I think that the people have got powers and are capable of removing a bad leader however long and painfully it may take. If you have a bad leader, yes, people have got powers; they can change him or remove him.

Honourable members, I had opportunity to talk to the Tanzanian soldiers who were returning to Tanzania after the 1979 war, and what they said was that if it had not been for the people inside Uganda, it would have been almost impossible to defeat Amin. What I am trying to show here is that people have powers and they can defeat a dictator. 

Similarly, like Amin who was life president at that time, in Malawi, Kamuzu and another life president were also removed by the people. We have another example of the people in the Luweero Triangle. They also had the courage to remove somebody who was really bad. I am sure Ugandans today are capable of removing somebody whom they feel has overstayed his usefulness. So, we should not be worried because we can work that out.  

Therefore, Mr Speaker, I feel that Ugandans are able of sending a male dictator into exile wearing a gomesi. They can do that just as they can support a popular leader riding on a boda boda to go for his nominations. If he is popular, they will keep him there and I am sure that it has been the people who have kept the Movement in power. So, I really think, they should be given a chance.

In conclusion, Mr Speaker and honourable members, I say that since the people have the right and powers to remove a non-performer after one term, they should also have powers and rights to prolong the tenure of somebody who has done extremely well. I am convinced that we should lift the term limits on the presidential office. Thank you very much.

3.59
MS BETTY AMONGI (Woman Representative, Apac):  Thank you Mr Speaker.  I will restrict myself on the issue of the term limit and I want to thank the committee for the work. I have heard many arguments on this Floor concerning why we should lift the term limit. When we talk about term limits, we should be able to understand the term limit, its origin, and the reasons why it applies to the presidential system. 

The arguments I have heard from the Rt. Hon. Prime Minister and hon. Zziwa on the issue of why the Constituent Assembly thought it wise to apply this limit as regards the system we were in then does not apply. The presidential system is different from the Westminster system. The presidential system gives too much power to a president who heads the executive. The president, for example, has the power to get money from the Consolidated Fund and has power to control the Army. That is why, in the presidential system, the origin of the limitation of terms came about. 

America decided to try and limit that power by putting the presidential term limit. In Africa, by 1981 almost half of countries were either being governed by military dictatorships or the government then was in power through military armed coup. Of course, the research after 1981, also shows, that many African leaders came to power by military coup, for example Uganda. Once in power, why did many African countries after the 1980’s decide to put term limits? 

Many people are arguing and thinking that the term limit is only in Uganda. In Africa just to give you a few examples, there are term limits in Nigeria, Ghana, Namibia, Malawi, Zambia, Ethiopia, Tanzania, and the list continues. So if you talk about term limits in Uganda, please do not confine yourself here. Move beyond Uganda, because we are talking about regional integration and the East African Community. 

Mr Speaker, I have heard arguments from many people saying that in a multi-party system, you give the people the power to choose their president through the internal structures. May I inform you that all the African countries I mentioned, are in the multi-party system and the origin of the multi-party system is America? When people come and start debating about this being applied because now we are going to multi-party system, there is a total lack of research and knowledge. I think this should not be acceptable in this parliament and especially from somebody who should debate from an informed position.

Mr Speaker let me go on to give my reason as to why in Africa we have term limits. If you look critically in all African governments, you will find that –(Interruption)

MR MULENGANI: Mr Speaker, I was very reluctant to stand up on a point of order to my colleague, hon. Amongi, but the fact that she has mentioned that we rise up and talk in this House without researching and from an unknown point of view, is she really in order?  For a member to rise up and insinuate that members in the House talk without researching and being well – (Interjection) – Mr Speaker, protect me –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, in raising these points of order we should maximize our sensitivity on some of these things. Try to ignore some of the statements made by your colleagues. According to her assessment, she has more knowledge about what she is saying than the others. Let her continue.

MS AMONGI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to move on to state why in Africa there is need for term limits. In most governments in Africa, when leaders come to power after supposedly fighting dictatorship, they want to cling to power and even become worse than the dictatorship they supposedly fought against. They start using military dictatorship like the army to entrenching themselves. Because the president has the power for resource allocation, they amass wealth which wealth they use to buy people. 

Therefore, Mr Speaker, in instances where many elections have taken place, free and fair elections are very difficult to achieve, especially in Africa.  So, for people to argue that free and fair elections can enable people to make a choice and drop an entrenched incumbent is not true. That is why it is important to put term limits so that those who come into power to entrench themselves and take charge of the military, resources and infrastructure are checked, and the most important check can only be term limits.  

That is why, Mr Speaker, I support the limited term –(Interjection)– I can see many people clapping, I was thinking that I am talking of opening up political space.  So, much as I support opening up the political space, I support the retention of the term limit in the constitution because in Uganda it is not a popular movement. It came from the cabinet and it has been entrenched within this system. It is the Members of Parliament fighting for it, not the people. I thank you.

4.09
PROF. MORRIS OGENGA LATIGO (Agago County, Pader): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for the opportunity to contribute to this debate. In Agago County, where I come from, before the war and cattle raids destroyed our animal wealth, when you wanted to marry, you brought your in-laws and showed them the cattle in the kraal, which would be used to pay for the lady.  

They would always show you a cow and say, “This cow here produces milk, you do not have to milk it. Simply put something under it and the animal will produce the milk.  You see the neck of the other bull, it can plough from morning to sunset”. The fact of the matter would be that those were actually the worst animals in the kraal and you would have the challenge of taking these animals to your in-laws. So what we would do is to release the whole kraal, go with it and then you push the stubborn animals that you are giving for somebody’s daughter into the other kraal and return the rest of the animals.

Mr speaker, what we see in amending our constitution is exactly like taking stubborn cows to another kraal. The rest of the cows are not the problem, and similarly, the so many amendments that are being proposed are not the problem, the problem is just one stubborn cow, Article 105(2) and because it is the only cow in all this, I am not going to bother with the other ones; I will make my contribution on that one.

Mr Speaker, if anybody doubted that this is a difficult thing for those who want to support it, all you needed to do was watch our honourable colleagues, very learned and ordinarily very articulate people, struggle to talk and justify. Yesterday, for example, my learned brother Prof. Mondo Kagonyera made his contribution merely to say that it is right to amend the constitution under the constitution.  As to whether Article 105(2) should be removed, he did not say. He only said it is right. You see many other people saying they do not see any problem with amending and worst of all, my political elder in this House and a professional, the Rt. Hon. Prime Minister, also struggled to link what we are doing here with the British system.  

Now, these are burdens that we would not have incurred if we had recognized that the provisions that were put there were validly put. The consequence of this struggle is, as we say in Acholi, the same as licking your vomit. My brother Amama Mbabazi and hon. Hope Mwesigye yesterday told us to research on what was said. I went to the library and read what they said when they were supporting term limits.  It could not take them ten years, with their level of intelligence to recognize that the term limit is the problem. So, one must wonder why the toad is jumping in broad daylight.  My greatest problem is that we commit ourselves and then we jump out of it.

Those who read the Monitor of yesterday, page 27, entitled “SALEH PLEADED FOR MUSEVENI”. They quoted, “President addresses Gulu January 27th 2001”, and this is what is quoted. “ I will not accept a third term and will not seek it, I will not be part of this culture of amending the constitution. It is being orchestrated by opportunists. They simply misrepresent me. They are doing it deliberately to discredit me”. This is the President’s word as published.  

Mr Speaker Sir, if this is what the President said, then our greater challenge is why we should participate in a process where many of our people are saying, they are doing it because President Museveni has done so well, he is still young and he can handle these things. Yesterday, hon. Muzoora tried to talk about the history of the amendment and the imposition of term limit under the American constitution. Unfortunately, he talked as if he was not informed and yet I know he did arts and social sciences at Makerere so he actually knows the history. It was just convenient for him to misrepresent it. 

I will cite a book by Milton Isenore, “The President is calling”. In that book he said,” My reason for favouring term limits for the president is based on the conviction that we should expect the president to foster all those programmes and policies which he is convinced are in the interest of the nation as a whole. That he should have no incentive to propose and fight for measures mainly to enhance his chances of re-election or merely to confound a political position”.

When we heard about changing the Constitution for example bring back parties, it was not that by conviction it is a valid thing, it was merely to say,” Let them go”. In other words you will then have a circle of people who in practice now, are going out and saying if you do not have a yellow card of the Movement, you will not get a job, in the camps that you will not get food and if under these circumstances we are having these statements -(Interjections)- yes, that is what they are saying now - and if under these circumstances we are doing this, then by removing this term limit, we are heading for doom.

Finally, Mr Speaker, I quote the title of chapter 13 in that book, and it says, “To a politician, there is no greater temptation than the intimation of electoral immortality and this is the big problem. Convinced that he will always be elected, he must now remove the term limits”. If any of us wants to look for any reason why the term limits must remain, it is exactly this debate and the quest for “Kisanja” because that is what was anticipated in providing for the term limit, that this electoral immortality is going to sink into many heads and they will try to remain forever.

Finally, Mr Speaker, we Ugandans can do better and our honourable parliament can do better. We cannot be ready to remove term limits yesterday or tomorrow. In Zambia, when this issue came, vice presidents and ministers resigned. In Malawi, countries that are less educated, and that have gone through less turbulence than us, resisted when the attempt to remove term limits came. In our case, we think that there is going to be some miracle. 

Let me assure those who will remove the term limits that, when you have removed the term limits and the President has infinite opportunity, the immediate thing will be, like what the lions do, to eat those cubs that threaten to succeed them. The first victims are those who are likely to influence others to remove him from power; it will not be the opposition. It will be from within that the first victims will begin. I can assure you I am speaking because I have been told, “here we have the numbers, you wait.” On Tuesday, we will wait. But we will also wait for history because history is on our side and you will be the first victims. I thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

MR MWANDHA:  Mr Speaker, the hon. Prof. Ogeng Latigo made a very serious comment that in fact people in the camps are being refused food if they do not have the yellow card, that is if they are not members of NRM.  The other day, a similar statement was made by another colleague, and I wonder whether the Rt hon. Prime Minister undertook to check on this matter and inform the House. I think this is a very serious matter and any serious parliament cannot overlook it.

THE SPEAKER: I am going to allow the minister or the Prime Minister to comment on this but I think, even yesterday, somebody said that people were marketing cards and saying this is going to be national identity card. What you must know is that people use many means of recruiting people including claiming this is the policy when it is not. But some of these things are just for purposes of marketing what they want to sell. (Interjections)- but you see honourable members, you should differentiate between a party functionary and a government policy but the Prime Minister is here, let him answer.

4.20
PROF. NSIBAMBI: Thank you, Mr Speaker Sir. I thank you hon. Mwandha for raising this matter. Yesterday, when hon. Ben Wacha made the same allegation, I asked him to give me hard evidence and he has written to me. I am expecting more evidence. This matter is going to be investigated and we shall not hesitate to punish, harshly, anybody who is guilty because this is a very serious matter. (Applause) 

Under the IDP policy, we are required not only to protect those people, but to also feed them. It is outrageous that anybody should say that those people who do not have cards will not be fed. It is not Government policy and it cannot be. These are not Government cards. 

THE SPEAKER: What you need for all parties - it could now be party X, next time it will be party B - you need a code that governs the conduct of these people regarding what they should and should not say. There are people who you as a government cannot control and they use this to deceive people. So the best way is to have a code for parties. It will be the only solution. 

4.04
MR ROGERS MAATE (Ntoroko County, Bundibugyo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the committee and government for bringing this important issue to the Floor of this House. We are now able to take part in discussing the amendments to be made to our Constitution.

I will restrict my contribution to four points but all of them revolve around the issues of governance, term limits, local government and the office of the IGG. 

The constituency of Ntoroko is in support of removal of term limits. We came to this decision after discussing the merits and demerits of term limits. We are now in an era where competition is the most important aspect in decision-making. Almost every Ugandan is saying there should be competition in the political arena where all individuals compete for participation in the political affairs. Removal of term limits will enable interested parties to have unlimited competition. For instance, in Economics when we talk about economic growth we refer to an environment where there is unlimited competition and even donors encourage us to create environments in which stakeholders can compete.

Mr Speaker, the competition I am talking about here is where there are no term limits and where individuals will freely stand for president. One only has to work hard to be an attractive candidate to the electorate. If I am a presidential candidate, I must work hard to make sure that Ugandans like the way I perform, which will determine my being re-elected.  

We also know that Uganda has a history of resistance and freedom fighting. We have fought dictators in the past and we still have the capacity to fight them, should they arise. Mr Speaker, why am I saying we have this kind of history? We have been able to fight for freedom and this should be a signal to whoever will want to come to power through dictatorial means; Ugandans will work hard to make sure that such a leader will be removed because we still have that capacity.

Regarding development, the problem is not the term limits but misuse of power at various levels. It also concerns the distribution of that power between local and central governments.  For instance, this power can also be seen in terms of the allocation of resources between centre and local governments. 

Given the fact that we are moving towards further decentralization - which means we shall also have the development budget decentralized - there will be more money at the level of local government. What matters is how this money is being used at local government level. How are we addressing issues of the misuse of these resources? It is not the term limits of the leaders who are involved in making decisions on the use of these resources that matters but the outcome of the use of these resources. That is why we support the removal of term limits.

Indeed there are demerits, but I will not go into the demerits because we realized that it is important to open up, and the merits for lifting term limits were more.

Mr Speaker, let me also talk about the issue of accepting dual citizenship. We look at dual citizenship as a way of increasing free movement of labour. Given the fact that we are in the period of globalisation, Ugandans are affected by what happens elsewhere. We should make sure that there is freedom of labour movement between Uganda and other parts of the world such that we are able to have our goods and services exported across the borders. This will help us to address the balance of payment problems. The remittances from the dual citizens will help us address the balance of payment problems of the country.  

I would also like to talk about the issue of governance at district level. My constituency discussed the role of the central government in as far as the office of the CAO is concerned. We recommend that that office be administered by the central government because the officers misuse it. The relationship between the local council and the executive at the district is not impressive. More so, this helps the central government to monitor the programmes at district level, since it will have a bigger say in the direction of policies. These officers know that the central government recruits and fires. This will help to keep them in check. 

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Speaker, I seek your guidance. I have been listening carefully. Three Members of Parliament have made statements, which imply that if any dictator came and sat in office we would fight him. Hon. Avitus Tibarimbasa made the same statement yesterday, “We shall fight you.”  Hon. Dr Matovu Byatike made a similar statement, he said, “We have mechanisms of dealing with those who choose to become dictators.” I have also just heard hon. Rogers Maate make the same statement, and they have quoted extensively how they dealt with Amin. 

Mr Speaker, could you have the statements we make in this House controlled? If Members of Parliament are preaching war already then I do not know what implication this is having on the society, which is either watching or listening now. Could you please, be in charge and ensure that our statements do not imply that Members of Parliament are talking about war.  

THE SPEAKER: When you talk about fighting here, you must be talking about fighting using the Ugandan Constitution, not axes.  

Honourable members, permit me to take those who registered yesterday; it would be unfair for me not to give them chance. I see new people coming up, but I am recording your names. I had hon. Kabwegyere Tarsis yesterday. I will definitely cover all of you but let me first deal with this list, which was prepared yesterday.

4.34
PROF. TARSIS KABWEGYERE (Igara County West, Bushenyi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. We are here building our democracy but in building this democracy there are certain principles we must respect and go by. The first one is to respect ourselves. When honourable members claim a monopoly of historical wisdom, they ought to recognise that there are others who can claim the same thing. We should respect one another. Let us give each other a hearing; history is the one to judge us. We may judge ourselves in helping history to judge us, but I think it is better that we do it tangentially and leave history to be the judge other than we doing it ourselves.

Democracy, particularly liberal democracy, which is one we are aspiring to build here, recognises an opposition. In fact in many countries where liberal democracy exists there is a shadow government and a shadow cabinet. These are actually paid over and above what is paid to real Members of Parliament. They are a government in waiting and because of that they are working on an alternative government with alternative policies. They recognise that they can take over a country whole rather than dismember it with whatever criticism they make. Therefore, positive opposition is what guides liberal democracy.

I do not understand when I sometimes hear honourable colleagues who are prophets of doom say, “a, b, c is going to happen”. I do not know whether that is an alternative government or policy, which they are presenting to the population of Uganda so that when they come into power they are better. If there is doom, what do you as the opposition have for people in order to persuade them to follow you? Therefore, if we are going to build our democracy, there are things we must hold dear. One of those is the country that must exist whether we are in power or not. This should be emphasised and respected.

Secondly, you hear people say, “With these people’s education and level of understanding, how can they do this, how can they think that?” Wisdom is not judged as simply as you think. If there were an examination that must be done and passed at the gates of Parliament on how to predict Uganda’s future, am sure many people would fail to state where we are going. Having said that, a question has risen on the Floor of this House, “Is there a school where leaders are taught?” and I want to state it here that it is society.  Society is the school; it is the industry where the individual becomes a product to lead. Unfortunately, this applies to both bad and good leaders.  

Uganda produced both Amin and Museveni. The conditions that produce bad leaders are the conditions we must fight so that we can enhance conditions that produce good leaders. You cannot have one person becoming a dictator; there must be conditions in that society that produce dictatorship. Dictatorship is not a quality of an individual –(Interjection)- I am sorry, the time is limited and that clarification - that dictatorship – [Mr. Odonga Otto: “A professor keeps time”] - yes, when a professor is giving a lecture he does not allow interruptions. 

Sir, dictators are produced by this society. This should show you that Amin was the dictator he was because of the many failures that had accumulated in Uganda. In the same way President Museveni is here because of what happened in Uganda during his time. Each one of us here is a product of conditions is our constituencies. We may not necessarily be the best that the constituency has, but we happened at this particular point in time to be who we are and to represent our people. That is why, election after election, the members who come here have been changing. 

The majority of us here were not in the Sixth Parliament and it is probable that the Eighth Parliament will also be representative of a new breed. This is what society does by rejuvenating and recreating itself. When you introduce democracy, which we have been trying to do here, you minimise and weaken the conditions that produce dictatorship. 

Those of us who have seen Museveni the man independent of the society, which has produced him, Museveni the man who is not sitting here in this Parliament, and yet we make independent decisions; Museveni the man who cannot be consulted every time any of us speaks; it shows you that we really have to understand where we are in our society. 

This brings me to the amendment of Article 105(2). I was one of those who were in the Constituent Assembly and we were very vehement. I had never seen a president who could lead Uganda the way our President has. I want to be very honest with you, take it or leave it. There has been a difference between the eight presidents we have had and the one we have today. (Applause) Whether or not you are in opposition, this must be established and society is yearning for a leadership that can advance their cause and recognise their rights. 

We are saying, therefore, that the allegation that we are opening for Museveni is not true. Just like we were against dual citizenship that time, not knowing that Ugandans abroad could be as important as they are now, similarly at that time we did not think we could produce a leader that could qualify for more than two terms. Museveni as a human being has a limit, which he cannot naturally go beyond. 

If the population perceives it differently, no constitution should hinder them from exercising their right to vote a leader of their choice. This is separating the man from the history of Uganda, but also recognising that a man at a given point in time can be of such a magnitude as the famous ones: Markus, De Gaulle, Gandhi and Mandela. Mandela is directing South Africa from outside. People think that he went out but his image is still that of the leader of South Africa. 

There is a difference between Mandela and Museveni. There is a difference between hon. Latigo and Kabwegyere. In history I may want to be somebody, that is why when hon. Lukyamuzi said he is presidential material, I wrote him a very casual note asking him if he is in order to exaggerate his capacity for being a president -(Laughter)- because we are in a free society to exchange. That allows for communication. 

When we talk about CAOs we are saying, the centre should appoint them. This is because we have looked at the conditions of decentralisation and think that we may move a little backward in order to go forward. Let us understand the amendment of the Constitution in terms of responding to the changes that have occurred in our country. 

Lastly, Mr Speaker, I am amazed that there can be people, some of them Members of this Parliament, who are saying, “We are bottlenecked, we cannot breathe, we want political parties.” Now that time has come, you are going to court to say, “Please, do not allow this to happen.” What a contradiction! It is not surprising because this society is full of contradictions. Therefore, let us identify those who pay lip service to democracy but do not believe in it.

Those who do not believe in democracy only want to be heard speaking but they do not want to face the people. Democracy is about governments in which people participate and in which they choose their leaders. Those who say we cannot have fair elections, I notice that in this House there are only a few of us who are not elected, and I have said this before: if we were unfairly elected, please, let us go and confess our sins.

I thought all of us here had been fairly and freely voted through a system, however imperfect the system might have been. This system can be improved, which is the reason we are here. I believe Uganda is better than what it was yesterday. I want to be one of the prophets of hope. I want many people to be prophets of hope, to build on what has been achieved rather than come here with anger to talk about this man as if he is the only one Uganda has. It is as if all these heads here have no contribution to make!  Surely, let us respect our conscience; let us respect ourselves. (Applause)  

4.48
MRS SYDA BBUMBA (Nakaseke County, Luweero): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to add my voice to the honourable colleagues’ who have spoken before in complementing the committee for a hard job well done. I am going to address myself to four issues; dual citizenship, appointment of CAOs, powers of the IGG and of course the lifting of the term limits.

Today we are living in a global village where there is free flow of labour and services. Here the rate of job creation does not match the demand on the market. Therefore, many of our people are going abroad to look for greener pastures. 

On the other hand, we have many brilliant brains in this country who get jobs outside this country. When they are there, in order for them to get access the services there, they are compelled to take on foreign citizenship. However, at the same time they want to maintain their home citizenship. The people who work abroad greatly benefit this country. They bring in expertise and money. In many countries especially in the Far East, foreign employment is one of the major sources of foreign exchange. Even in this country it is among the top three foreign exchange earners. 

Our people working abroad are being constrained from investing here because when they acquire foreign citizenship they fear that they may not be able to get visas to come back home. Dual citizenship would help our people by encouraging them to go and work abroad. It will also be a good encouragement for our people working abroad to come and invest here.

The appointment of the chief administrative officers should be done by the Public Service Commission. We need uniform standards for recruiting the CAOs. They will be insulated against compromise by the local council. Those of us who have been in districts where there are conflicts between the local council and the CAOs sympathise with the unpleasant situation. Development is constrained, funds are mismanaged, but at the same time the district council cannot sack the CAO because of fear of financial loss. But if the CAO is appointed by the centre, he will be accountable to the Public Service Commission. 

The CAO is also the chief accounting officer of the district. The Secretary to the Treasury supervises all chief accounting officers. To enable the Secretary to the Treasury to have people of almost the same standards to supervise and to give regulations to, it would be good for all of them to be subjected to the same recruiting procedures and to be recruited from the centre. 

I also support that we give the IGG powers to arrest and prosecute. Many people, especially those who are opposed to the Movement Government, are using corruption as an excuse to stifle investment and the flow of aid to this country. Government has done a lot to fight corruption but it is the IGG who will expose these corrupt officials of government. It is important that the office of the IGG is made independent, with full powers to make decisions. 

I represent Nakaseke in this Parliament - the district in the making. Nakaseke hosts eight mass graves in which there are more than 30,000 skulls. That is the price the people of Nakaseke paid when a particular group of people was fighting to make this country democratic. When I consulted on the issue of the lifting of term limits, the people of my constituency told me that when they sacrificed their people’s lives to get democracy, they never agreed on getting only half a doze of it. They want to be given full capacity to decide on the leaders through free and fair elections or referendum. (Applause)  

The people of Nakaseke suggest that democracy be exercised from the highest to the lowest office. They want to see equity in treatment of leaders. People are saying LC I is important because it is in direct contact with the people. There is no term limit for LC I, LC V, or even for hon. Members of Parliament here. 

There are many honourable members who have been in this House for a long time but I have not heard any of them suggest term limits on the office of the Members of Parliament. Surely, if the problem is that of being an incumbent, even those of us in this House have problems of incumbency when we are competing with new candidates in our constituencies. The people of Nakaseke want Article 105(2) on the limitation on the term limits amended.

According to the people of Nakaseke, dictatorship does not arise out of the length of the term of the head of state. Obote became a dictator in the first three years of his office. His term of office became a death term, a sad term, a bad term, all this only after three years. That is when he attacked the Lubiri, carried out the Nakulabye massacre, the killing of Kisubi boys; all these in just three years of his term. (Applause)

Mr Speaker, Idi Amin Dada (RIP) became a dictator on the very first day of his assumption of office. It did not take him three years to become a dictator. Therefore, the argument that the longer somebody stays in office the more that person becomes a dictator is not true. It is only a good leader who stays in office for a long time because his people will continuously vote him, one term after another. 

People have raised the issue of incumbency. We have seen incumbent presidents being voted out. Today our bullet is the vote. As long as the people do not like him, they will not vote for him. The important thing is to ensure that there are regular, free and fair elections. 

There is already a limitation on life presidency, which some honourable colleagues are alleging. The minimum age is 35 years and the maximum is 75 years. We have seen people who live up to 100. If you think, people will be life President beyond the age of 75 –(Interjection)

THE SPEAKER:  Time.

MRS BBUMBA: Another important whip is the performance. If a President is not performing, he will not be voted back into office. The regular elections are the sieve. There is no reason the people should worry. There is a sieve after five years and for us in Parliament there is another way of removing a non-performing President. Hon. Lukyamuzi has tried it before - the impeachment of a President - though he has not succeeded. The one he attempted to impeach is performing. Surely, there are checks and balances in place.

I would like to urge the House to give the people the full dose of democracy. You cannot give somebody only dessert and soup and you say, “I have given you a full meal”. Give them a full dish. Let us have no term limit for elective offices.  

5.00
MR LATIF SEBAGGALA (Kawempe Division North, Kampala): Thank you for giving me this opportunity. In the interest of time I will focus on three or four issues. Mr Speaker with your permission I went to the United States and the United Kingdom and while there I met Ugandans in over ten states and I must say what they told me to say. 

They asked me to support dual citizenship so that they can be assured of their investments at home. I would like to appeal to colleagues here that Ugandans in the UK and USA are in great need of dual citizenship. If they are given dual citizenship, their investments in this country will even multiply by three. My electorate in Kawempe North support dual citizenship.  

Much has been said about Article 105(2) and I just want to have it on record so that history will judge us. What we are doing right now is for some of us to be exonerated by history. This is because I am not convinced by any of the arguments I have heard. When we talk about opening up, more than eight million Ugandans are eligible. It is only one person who does not qualify because he has been in power for the last 20 or 19 years. He has had his share. There is no reason we should open up to let that one person who has already had his share. In fact he has taken the lion’s share in as far as leadership in the highest office is concerned.   

My colleague, hon. Syda Bbumba, has talked about Members of Parliament, district leaders, councillors, and LC I leadership having no term limit. If having term limits for Members of Parliament will be useful in as far as saving our country is concerned, let it be. Let us have term limits for Members of Parliament, councillors and the President.

Hon. Members of Parliament, if we are sincere, if we are stopping - if this argument they are giving that because other leaders can be in office as long as their people are voting them is valid, let us have two term limits for Members of Parliament and I suggest that it should be retrogressive. If you have been in the CA, count the terms and then – I believe that will save our country. That is the strongest argument others are giving, those who are agitating for lifting term limits. Let us have term limits at all levels so that we could have our country at peace.  

I strongly oppose lifting the term limit and let it be on record, because we young leaders should have by now taken a leaf from our seniors who are here. Unfortunately, we have not been guided by their age and experience. Let us take courage and guide our seniors, including professors, so that we protect our country. I agree with Kawempe North constituency, which I represent. Term limits should not be lifted if our country is to prosper. 

Mr Speaker, it is my wish that Kampala city is given a special status for as long as it does not encroach on our powers to vote for the Mayor or for the Governor of Councillors. As long as the people of Kampala have the privilege to vote for their leaders right from the Mayor or Governor to the councillors, we do not have a problem with the special status. We know that Kampala doubles as a district and a capital city. Therefore, justice demands that the central government intervenes in order to improve the conditions of Kampala as a city.

I am not convinced about why we should change the status quo of the accounting officers and the powers attached to their offices. You say that the chief administrative officers are corruption but corruption is everywhere. So, our mechanism -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: I should correct you. They are not accounting officers; they are chief administrative officers.

MR SEBAGGALA: I believe chief administrative officers are as corrupt as other officers are. Let us find ways of improving instead of changing the whole system. We have often said that decentralisation has done well. If we take away powers from the district administrators to the extent that they are appointed by the central government, I believe we shall be doing a disservice to decentralisation.

5.11
MR OMODI OKOT (Kole County, Apac): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to begin by thanking the committee whose work has stimulated this kind of debate. I also want to thank Radio Uganda for improving its reception to the Northern part of Uganda. I am sure my people are now with us.

Looking at the terms and references of the Constitutional Review Commission and relating the recommendations and the findings they have come up with, I am sure the most important reason for which the Constitutional Review Commission was established was Article 105(2). The establishment of the Constitutional Review Commission did not have its own Act. 

The Commission of Inquiry’s Legal Notice was used to establish the Constitutional Review Commission. The question is, why was this signed? Why were we hurrying for this? The Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs and the Commission of Inquiry Act Caption 166 issued the Notice of Appointment. The terms and references under which the Commission was appointed targeted Article 105(2). One of the outstanding terms of reference reads as follows:

“To examine the consistence and the compatibility of the constitutional provision relating to the sovereignty of the people, political system, democracy and good governance and to make recommendations as to how best to ensure that the country is governed in accordance with the will of the people at all times”.

There is nothing to doubt in this statement as regards targeting Article 105(2). It was the consistency of 105(2) and the compatibility of the same, which was being sought. The purpose was to use Article 105(1) to argue out that Article 105(2) was not consistent, not compatible and, therefore, there must be a demand to remove it. This makes me wonder who is an interested party in the removal of Article 105(2).

We have the institution of the Presidency in this country. All the turmoil we have had in this country is because of the institution of the Presidency, which has been a problem to this country. It is not the Legislature or the Judiciary. There were times when the institution of the Presidency turned around to demoralise the Legislature for instance, when a President threw away Parliament and took the responsibility of making laws himself. 

There was a time when the President killed the Chief Justice of this country. This House has the responsibility to use the opportunity available to them today to avoid a situation of more bloodshed in this country. We should forget our individual interests and aim at making a Uganda, which will be enjoyed by those who will come in hundreds of years to come.  

It is very unfortunate that in Uganda today when you criticize the NRM/O Party Leader indirectly you are criticizing the President, and the leader of the Army. This makes it very difficult for people like – I do not know whether he is called General – Tumukunde. For this reason the poor man is behind bars because when you criticize one man, is everybody and it becomes very difficult for you to escape. I see that this country has got a problem of sharing. We still do not have interest in sharing. When I get the opportunity today I would like to stick around and make sure nobody comes in after me. The issue of term limit is an opportunity for Ugandans to share in the leadership of this country.

We had a workshop some years ago, which was addressed by the former Tanzanian Prime Minister, Walyoba. He said very clearly that two terms of five years each for ten years is enough to make one give their national contribution to nation building. It is just enough, even when the people have to tolerate a bad leader. Who knows, Ugandans may be tolerating today and we want to extend the period of tolerance? So many people will be locked in for nothing. 

So, in Uganda we have one unfortunate situation. We have made the President the total of everything. When there is something wrong with the boda bodas, they come to the President, when there is something wrong with the traditional birth attendants, they run to the President. This makes the position of the President very nasty and he himself, His Excellency the President, continues accepting that kind of thing! This is bad. We should learn the art and responsibility of sharing opportunities.  

I want to observe that we have already had a false start. We discussed the election violence report in this House and we agreed on certain things but the most unfortunate thing, which was behind that report, was the violence that was committed, the killing and destruction of property. Mr Speaker, are we once again preparing to go into this kind of practice? 

Just last week I was in my constituency when a military jeep was escorting people taking registration cards for NRM/O members. It was a military jeep with personnel armed to the teeth. This is a bad start; this is not a military party. It is a civilian, political party, the services of which should be made available to the civilians.  I do not see the need of putting the military in the whole thing.

Our leaders must know that Uganda needs unity more than anything else. When the President came out of the bush, he was so active. Then he was so helpful to this country and he did a lot of good things. But with the trend of things happening today, corruption is going high and higher, nepotism is being seen here and there, I think the President has started to lose teeth. He no longer bites hard enough.

If he were barking well during the time he came out of the bush and he is failing to bark today, we cannot place the responsibility of barking on him; we cannot. We need to put some people in place to take over the barking. There are so many of them. What I am saying is that NRM/O has become a political party with leaders. Hon. Kiyonga is a suitable leader; he can be a President of this country. I do not see the reason of concentrating ourselves to a dog, which is not able to bark and bite. I, therefore, stand –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Please, wind up.

MR OMODI OKOT: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to conclude by requesting in all honesty that we should look at the Uganda we want to have tomorrow even when we are all gone.  

Two, it is important that we become responsible for whatever we do. Thank you.

5.25
DR JOHN ESELE (Bukedea County, Kumi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I wish to start by thanking government for having put in place a constitutional review process. Government recognised that society is dynamic and therefore there is need to change even the system of leadership through the Constitution.  If we had this type of thing right from independence, I am sure we would not have gone through the problems that we had in the past.

The Bill provides for elections on the same day and I would like to support this provision for a number of reasons.

One is that it reduces the time of electioneering.  We spent a lot of time in the past, three or four months, electing a President. Then we went back to campaign, then elected the Members of Parliament. After that we went for the election of the chairmen and this takes a lot of time so we had little time to work. With all these leaders elected on the same day, we are going to reduce on the election process. We shall reduce on the costs involved with the elections and also the tension among the electorate. There is so much tension, which is created during the election process because election takes six months, during which period there is much tension among the people.

For this reason I would also like to support the reduction of the time of the Members of Parliament. The term of office of Members of Parliament should be brought forward to coincide with that of the President. I have heard others arguing that the President’s term should be extended to July. I think it is wrong. There is provision that there will be a package; I think this package will be useful if you want to come back. Also, if you want to go away forever, this package will be useful to you too. So if the process is brought forward, it will be more useful to all of us either way.  

There is also a provision for amendment of Article 105(2). For a long time I have listened very carefully and all those who have spoken against this amendment seem to think that the amendment is targeting an individual. But Constitutions are not made for individuals. Constitutions are made for the nation. I heard one member saying that the individual, who is being targeted, according to him, is using super glue and he is saying nothing about it.  

He would also say on the other hand that this is even the more reason we should take it as a principle. We are setting up a principle for whoever is coming to office to stay in office for as long as we require him to. It is not because we are targeting a specific individual; he is not saying anything about it.

I want there to be a constitutional provision to this matter. Let somebody stay as long as he is required other than having it done the other way; either through military means or through oppression in a non-constitutional way. It is better to provided for it in the Constitution.

The Bill also provides for the amendment of Article 188, which is on the appointment of the chief administrative officers. One of the cardinal responsibilities of chief administrative officers is being accounting officers. The centre sends money to the districts and the chief administrative officers are responsible for the utilization of this money. But the system as it is now is not fair because I give you money and you spend it without my supervision. Somebody else supervises you, and monitors your activities but me who sends the money, I do not have that opportunity. It is better for the chief administrative officers to be appointed by the centre, which sends the money, so that they account to the persons who send the money to them.

I have also seen that the chief administrative officers have become kind of haunted by the district councils so they do not have as much freedom to exercise their responsibilities. There are even some districts that have had so many problems among councillors and the district service commissions that they have actually failed to appoint chief administrative officers. So, let the provision for the chief administrative officers go back to the centre.  

Finally, the Bill provides for dual citizenship either way. If you are a Ugandan you can acquire citizenship of another country and if you are a citizen of another country you can also acquire Ugandan citizenship. This is very good for investment purposes. If you are a foreigner you can invest in Uganda as a Ugandan and, therefore, you have the confidence when you are investing. We have heard of the amount of revenue that the country is generating through the Ugandans working abroad on kyeyo. Again, when you are a foreign citizen you have the confidence in sending money back home for doing whatever you want done.

I consulted with my constituency in Bukedea on all these matters and they are in agreement with all that I have said and I would like to urge my colleagues in Parliament to support the provisions in this Bill. Thank you very much. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER:  Thank you very much.

5.32
DR CRISPUS KIYONGA (Bukonjo County West, Kasese): Thank you, Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues. As hon. Kabwegyere said, there is no doubt that Uganda has made remarkable progress but of course we still have a big gap to cover. It is not that we are home and dry. In fact one of the things we regret is that one part of our country still has people living in camps. This is regrettable indeed. If we had avoided that, our progress would be even more significant.  

This debate on the Constitution amendment has been very deep and wide. In my view all sectors of our society have got involved. The peasants that we represent here have had a role, the academia, the judges and the press have been very fair to us and have opened up this debate to all our people.  

On the part of the Government, it has listened very intensely since this debate started to the extent that we have abandoned many positions in view of the arguments that we see, and we continue to listen. In my view, therefore, what is left is that we who are democrats continue to push our positions as eloquently as possible until the time we vote. If you win, excellent; if you lose, it’s excellent too because that is what democracy is all about. You either win or lose provided the process has been fair and open to all of us.

What I find a bit disadvantageous in this debate is that some of our colleagues, both in the House and outside, are over concentrating on one or two issues. This constitutional amendment is about social change, economic development and governance. Therefore, in arguing our cases we should appear to be balanced because that is the only way we can move our country forward.  

Another issue we should be concerned about is how we are going to sustain stability and change for the better. It is within our means to make a construct that will give us a chance of sustaining stability. I am glad that in these proposed amendments there are prepositions that are going to help in that respect. For example in clause 25 we have agreed for the first time in our Constitution that should we go multi-party; the position of leaders of the opposition should be in the Constitution. This is excellent. It means that we want everybody to get involved from whatever divide you are. We are proposing in the Constitution amendments that the status of that person should also be defined although he or she will be in the opposition.  

We had proposed in the omnibus Bill that we should have a political consultative forum in the Constitution. I have just consulted with my colleague hon. Adolf Mwesige and we appear to have lost this when we created the two Bills. This is another mechanism for us to build for stability in the future. Because the consultative forum means that significant political leaders in our society will play a role. Even if they are not in the House they will come forward in the forum and give advice on how we should conduct our country.  

So we have to look at the issue of stability and I am glad that these amendments go all the way to show what we need to do in that direction. I was of course disappointed a bit when my brother hon. Jacob Oulanyah rejected the issue of corporate governance. The Executive also conceded knowing that the committee had done some good work.  

We are now talking about peer review at the level of presidency from different countries. Why do we not apply it here so that the Speaker, Chief Justice and the President sit together and review each other and know how they are doing in the legislature? This is so because it is a summation of what happens in these three Arms of Government. That will give us a forward, or a backward move. The point here is that we should focus on elements within these amendments that are going to give our country further stability.  

The second point we should focus on is the issue of development. Are we strengthening mechanisms that are going to enhance the development of our country? Ultimately that is the centre of things. Our economy should grow and our people should get better. I am, therefore, very happy that in section 62 we have now constitutionalised or we intend to constitutionalise the position of the head of public service. We have defined the functions of this person: he or she must ensure that the permanent secretaries are doing their work, and that he or she must ensure that the decisions of Cabinet are fully implemented. 

Many times we the political leaders have our thoughts and ideas, we pass decisions only to find difficulty when it comes to implementing them. It is, therefore, very good that we are looking for a construct in these amendments that can bring the technical arm of government to the centre of things. And we have not stopped there. Knowing that we have decentralised power, we are saying that the Permanent Secretary in the Ministry of Local Government must be one of the deputies of the head of public service. That way we may know what is happening out there in the districts. This will enable us to take timely and appropriate actions. I do hope that colleagues will support these amendments.

Last Friday the National Executive Committee of the Movement Political System sat and there were some happy messages for Parliament. The National Executive Committee commended the excellent work so far done in the Constitution amendment. (Applause) The committee was particularly happy that almost by consensus Parliament had passed a resolution to hold a referendum on the change of political systems. The committee members unanimously committed themselves to return to the districts to work for the “yes” in the forthcoming referendum.  They ended by urging Parliament not to spoil the good work we have done so far but to proceed and pass the other recommendation that the National Executive Conference had passed in 2003.  

That we open term limits and amend Article 105(2), at this stage let me argue my case. First is the issue of principle and second is the person of President Museveni. Definitely there is a principle here because as hon. Kabwegyere argued, President Museveni is mortal. We should not say that we are opening term limits and that we are talking alone. He will have to go at some stage. We even got to the extent of putting it in the Constitution. It is a principle because even after President Museveni it will still apply unless we remove it and live in the real world where some countries have term limits and others do not have term limits.  

The argument, which I have heard this afternoon, is that in Africa term limits are a fashion. It needs to be put forward with some humility because ultimately the taste of the pudding is in the eating. Yes, some people have two term limits, but finally what will judge those countries is how they have gone on to transform their own people. That is the final test, and not because they have two or no term limits. So, this is the principle and in my view if we go for no term limits there is no harm. 

Coming to the question of President Museveni, surely the work we have to do to keep our country stable, to move forward, is no simple job. And in my view it would be disadvantageous to say that other people do not qualify when we are in the middle of this difficult task. I agree with those who have said that there are many people who could become presidents. I agree with them totally. We want the best among them and if the population judges that Museveni is the best now, why should we reject that movement? Why should we disadvantage our country and ourselves by taking another line?

Let me end by appealing to our colleagues in the House that the way forward is to argue our points and wait for the vote. If you lose, that is part of democracy. If you win, that is also part of democracy. People who have started passing threats outside this House that if this happens there will trouble; it is the duty of this Parliament to call such people to order. Where we see trouble we should curb it so that our country continues to move forward. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

5.44
MR CHARLES KOLUO (Serere County, Soroti): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Let me commence by thanking the Committee of Legal and Parliamentary Affairs for the work well done, and I would like to begin my submission with my views on the term limits.  

I see that as promotion of human rights in that there will be freedom of persons to offer themselves to stand unhindered. At the same time you will have the electorate having the opportunity to choose among many. I have observed it as being very unfair for us to hinder anybody who is standing or intending to stand for President. So in my opinion, that would be tantamount to abuse of rights.

Secondly, this would lead to a phenomenon where we would reward good leaders and it would act as an impetus for excelling. Once in power, a leader would have to compete, excel and win favour. For that matter I undeservedly go in for term limits lifting. Besides, the phenomenon of term limits stops leaders from being hard workers and instead makes them target workers because he is aware that after two terms, however hard he works, he will not have another opportunity. That will in itself create a situation where we shall have corrupt leaders because he is trying to safeguard his pocket for when the time comes for leaving.  

Thirdly, the lifting of term limits will enable the people of this country to tap the rich values, which are often rare, of good leaders so much so that they can afford to have good leaders once they have an opportunity and get rid of bad leaders when they do not subscribe to their governance. I appeal to the House to come to a consensus and lift the term limits when the time comes.

On the terms of the chief administrative officers, the current situation where CAOs are appointed by the District Service Commissions has promoted sectarianism and has hindered appointment of good people qualified enough to be CAOs. In my opinion if they are appointed at the centre, the nation will be able to take advantage of the abundant wealth of professionals. Therefore, good people will be appointed to the right positions and not necessarily sons of the soil only. I see it as an opportunity whereby one would obtain a situation where hard workers would be seen to prosper because once a CAO is appointed on merit then there will be a challenge for that CAO to work very hard for vertical growth. This in itself also will reduce corruption.  

I have seen district councils compromising positions and disabling CAOs from performing their roles. At the same time I do recognize the need for districts to have some element of control. So you would have district councils observing the performance of CAOs and recommending to the central authority for their transfer or discipline. You would have them making their recommendation to either the Inspector General of Government (IGG) or to the central government for the discipline of the CAOs.  

On dual citizenship, my constituents in Serere and I, do strongly support the idea of dual citizenship for the reason that for example in Teso it is agreed that once one is to emigrate from a homestead, he is not advised to uproot the pumpkin. So, once a son of the soil has gone to another country and he becomes a citizen of another country, that should not hinder him from being a national of this country to the extent that we shall not be able to benefit from the wealth our children will acquire once out there. 

Similarly, we would be able to benefit from the wealth of external persons coming and admiring our country. Therefore, I am of the opinion that we take up the idea of dual citizenship and amend our Constitution accordingly.

I support the idea of amending the Constitution to give the IGG full powers of investigating and prosecuting whoever commits an offence because once we do that we shall be able to empower the IGG’s office. That way we will go a long way in reducing corruption in this country.  

On the national language, I am for Kiswahili because it will enable us to be linked. We shall be able to forge unity and it is a good medium for communication. It eases the communication between the people of East Africa, Rwanda, and Burundi. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, hon. Koluo.

5.55
MR SAMUEL ANYOLO (Soroti County, Soroti): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am here to contribute to this important constitutional amendment process. I have three areas to talk about but before I do that I want to talk briefly about the appointment of CAOs. 

I agree that the appointment of CAOs should be decentralised basically for their career development and also to promote nationalism. 

On parliamentary and presidential elections, I suggest that this should be held on the same day for one reason: resources. Even time will be saved. However, I do not support the idea of cutting the term of Parliament or compensating Members of Parliament. I would rather we extend the term of the President to coincide with the term of Parliament. 

About the IGG, currently the function of the IGG is to investigate and prosecute all cases related to corruption. The IGG also supervises the enforcement of the Leadership Code but as you may realise, our IGG here has very limited powers. For example they do not have powers to recover the loot whereas in some other countries for example Egypt you have an equivalent, the Government Administrative Control Authority of Egypt, who even has powers to sell your assets. Our IGG here could walk to Muyega, sell your house and put the money back to the Treasury. That is what I would love to see in Uganda. (Applause)

If we have to fight corruption, I am one of those who say that we can do without foreign aid if we could fight corruption. If we fought corruption in Uganda the money we have is enough to propel us, but if we do not fight corruption then that is a big lie and we may not manage. In Tanzania the Permanent Commission of Inquiry of Tanzania, the equivalence of IGG here, is more powerful than ours. In China they can even recommend for your hanging. If you dip your hand into the national coffers, you are hanged. So, I want to see us making a very concrete law to give the IGG more powers to fight corruption and we attain our goals for this country. 

This Bill also supports that Kampala should be given special status. Mr Speaker, I am in agreement with this. As you may recall when we were discussing or negotiating the regional tier, it was a very sensitive issue. If our colleagues from the centre had not given it up we would be battling up to now I presume. But I have something to challenge our planners about: why do we still mess up our capital with industries? Why do we not separate them? If we cannot transfer the city, why can we not get a commercial centre separate from our administrative unit? Smaller countries have gone far in this. 

In Tanzania they have transferred their capital, Malawi has done so yet Uganda is four times bigger than Malawi but we cannot even rejuvenate Jinja for example. Mbarara is coming up, Lira, Soroti, Aura, Gulu, those are all potential centres and it will augur well with what His Excellency the President is trying to promote, the idea of zoning. So, our planners should look towards that direction. Meanwhile I support the proposal that Kampala be given special status. 

On term limits, I consulted on this issue and I had a very heated debate with my constituents. The supporters of lifting the term limit would say, “Why do you always bother with elections if they are useless? Why do we not, after giving somebody the first term after his first five years, let him proceed? Why do you come and disturb us that we should go for elections”? That is what they were challenging me about. 

They were also saying, especially among the women that, “If I am told in the house that next week I am going to be divorced and I still live in that house, can I not cause chaos before I leave rather than be taken by surprise”? Those were some of the raw arguments down there, whereas on the other hand those against were saying, “But hon. Member of Parliament, we have UPE. It is doing well. Where are you going to put all these children if one person is going to remain in that job for all that period”? That was another view but to me as a Member of Parliament and somebody very interested in the future of this country, I know that it starts from this House. The people you see seated here are capable of putting this country into fire. You have seen bullets in this building; they were not fired by children but by adults. 

So, I want us to be ourselves. The Movement Government has been there for this time. We are going for a transition. They are on the steering wheel. They are giving you their preposition that to propel us forward we need an experienced driver. 

In Northern Uganda the chairman of the committee is popular with the saying that, “Dako nywari nyeke” it means that a woman will always help her co-wife during delivery. However much you have been in disagreement with this government, this is the time. For the sake of the 26 million people, we should lend a hand. Lend a hand to your co-wife because she is in a very critical situation and the child she is about to deliver is very innocent. So, I beg you my brothers let us lift the term limits such that we harmonize these positions. Let the people decide. Let the power rest with the people. There is nothing to fear. 

In my language we say the earth is not about to burst, “Mama kwape gwagha”. It means this is not the end of the world. So lend a hand to your co-wife and we go in for the opening up of term limits. I thank you and I want to thank my constituents for giving me this opportunity to contribute to this important event in this country.  Thank you so much.

6.03
MR MICHAEL WERIKHE (Bunghoko County South, Mbale): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would also like to take this opportunity to thank the committee for a job well done. I will premise my debate on two or three issues. 

I will begin with Kampala having special status. If we are to actually have Kampala administered by the central government, I believe there are several advantages that will come out of it and propel the well-organized development of our capital city. This will enable Kampala to draw from the Consolidated Fund. It is because Kampala has had a problem with funding that some of the programmes are not implemented, be they planning programmes or of course social-economic development programmes. 

So I believe that if Kampala has a special status as a capital city, we will be able to have special funding for it –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: I do not want to interrupt you but what I have sensed on this issue is that perhaps everybody agrees on this special status. However, it appears from the contributions given that we will not practice democracy in administering this capital. Would you like to – should everybody address this issue?

MR WERIKHE: As enshrined in the proposed amendment Bill, Parliament will come up with appropriate laws on how the relationship between the administration from the centre and the local leadership of Kampala will be. There should be some kind of harmonious arrangement in having Kampala administered because if we say that it is just going to be administered without spelling out how the local leadership is going to be involved, it could create problems. But I think that will be sorted out in the Act when Parliament comes to pass the appropriate laws.

And of course this is going to impinge on some of the Acts already in place when it comes to having the central government administering Kampala. For example, the Town and Country Planning Act will of necessity be revised. The Local Government Act should also be looked at in order to cater for this special status. I believe, taking all these into account, Kampala will certainly be able to overcome some of the problems of for example the land tenure system, which is one of the obstacles to proper planning and implementation of programmes in the city. So, perhaps this special status will come out with proposals as to how we can solve some of these problems.

MRS ZZIWA: Thank you very much, honourable minister. I appreciate hon. Werikhe is a very senior planner and I would like to seek this information to assist me understand. After granting Kampala a special status, I heard you mentioning that it will still be designated within the Local Government Act. If I understood that to mean operating within the Local Government Act, would it not be better for Kampala to get a separate law for instance for management and easier administration? 

Currently Kampala City is equated to a district and that in itself hinders it both in terms of allocation and financing. So, I think we would be better off if we had it elevated with a separate law to cater for its city status. I just want to either understand you and complement that we need to agitate for a separate law apart from the Local Government Act.

MR WERIKHE: Mr Speaker, I think your proposal is in tandem with what is actually provided for in the Bill. Parliament will certainly come up with the appropriate laws as to how Kampala is going to be administered in terms of development and administration. So that one is taken care of by the Bill. And as I was saying, Kampala’s perennial problems especially with regard to implementing her development –(Interruption) 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, when you are addressing this issue, which has a provision that says that there will be a law to deal with the administration of Kampala, you have to take into account the fact that under part II of the National Objectives and Directive Principles of State, there is a democratic principle, which enjoins you to follow democratic principles in all the set-ups. That will also be taken into account. I just want to alert you that there exists such a law.  

MR LUKYAMUZI: Mr Minister, I happen to be one of the Members of Parliament representing Kampala so I am seeking further clarification. What geographically constitutes Kampala now and in the years to come may not necessarily be tied to what is envisaged because places like Lubaga South and Lubaga North will be in Wakiso. So, what is the minister telling us about that? (Laughter)

MR WERIKHE: Thank you. I would like to thank hon. Lukyamuzi. If you carefully look at the proposal in the Amendment Bill, it is clear that an Act of Parliament shall delineate the territorial boundary of Kampala. So, this is going to be studied and we are going to have this determined scientifically depending on the parameters that we will agree upon. I do not see why you are talking of Wakiso and so on. Certainly, there will be a boundary for Kampala, which is going to enjoy the special status.

I also believe that with a special status Kampala will be able to attract appropriate skilled personnel in running many programmes, which has been a problem. Because of the inadequate funding Kampala has not been able to attract skills that could help implement certain programmes, which are specialized. So, we will then have adequate or skilled engineers who will be able to carry out engineering designs, appropriate designs, urban designs and with these Kampala will certainly shine as a special capital city for this country. So I strongly support the proposal of Kampala enjoying a special status.

I will look at the next proposal in the Bill. This is to do with Article 105(2). Without appearing to be tautological, I believe we have actually looked at this proposal especially right from the time when we went to our respective constituencies to discuss the White Paper with our people. And I want this to be on record. 

Having had interactions with the people of Bunghoko South, we arrived at a resolution to strongly support the lifting of the term limits for the Presidency so that Article 105(2) is repealed to take care of this. Of course reasons are that power belongs to the people and this is concomitant with the aspirations of the people of Bunghoko South. They believe that we can help them to choose Ugandans who should lead them, rather than having legal intricacies that will determine the leadership of this country.  

So the people of Bungokho South join the majority of Ugandans to support the lifting of the term limits so that they are able to decide who should actually lead this country, their children and their grandchildren. We are not doing this for an individual as alluded to by some of the honourable colleagues. As a principle let us have the term limits lifted as we transit to a new political dispensation, which is moving from the Movement political system to the Multi-party system. This will enable us as organisations and parties determine who should be a leader within the organisation and of this country. 

The other issue is about dual citizenship. Dual citizenship is something, which I think most of us have supported or would support for many reasons, which have already been advanced. It won’t do any harm for me to repeat some of them. We have many of our people who are out there and would in future like to go for employment opportunities outside their country. The opportunity of being citizens in that country and also retain their citizenship here would empower or motivate them to invest in this country. There will be a sense of security and belonging to the two countries. So I also support the idea of dual citizenship. 

I also support having the CAOs being appointed by the centre for many reasons already advanced. I thank you, Mr Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, I thank you for the contributions you have made today. We did not sit in the morning because the Cabinet was sitting. We started on time at 2.30 p.m., and we have received 18 contributions. Tomorrow we shall sit in the morning starting at 10.00 a.m. Therefore, those of you who are listed and have not been able to contribute are listed for tomorrow. If you come in time we shall start with you so that we can cover as many members as possible and see how we advance towards the weekend. Next week we may have to vote on this particular Bill so that we proceed with other procedures required. 

Again thank you and have a good evening. The House is adjourned to tomorrow at 10.00 a.m.

(The House rose at 6.23 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 23 June 2005 at 10.00 a.m.)

