
Thursday, 25 June 2015

Parliament met at 3.04 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this afternoon’s sitting. Please join me in welcoming students and teachers of St Andrew Kaggwa, Kasaala represented by hon. Byandala and hon. Nabukenya. All the way from Luweero, they have come to view the proceedings.

Secondly, honourable members, despite my appeal to you to register for electronic voting, there is not much progress. Next week, we shall start voting electronically. Any party, which will be short, will lose those votes as you will be deemed not to have those numbers. So long as a Member is not registered, he or she will not be allowed to vote. It is up to you.

If you really want to be a part of this House, the Whips should do their work and make sure that your Members are all registered. Those who will not be registered by Tuesday, there will be no votes for you. They are still in analogue. (Laughter) We have migrated to digital so let us leave the analogue so that we can move very expeditiously.

Honourable members, there were Members who were still not allocated; I do not know where hon. Otada is. Is anyone coming in from the Independents to make the proposals? Are they not ready?

Honourable members, I will start with the Members who do not belong anywhere; hon. Ssekikubo will go to the Defence and Internal Affairs Committee, hon. Tinkasiimire to the Committee on ICT, hon. Niwagaba and hon. Nsereko to Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Committee.

As for the Independent members of Parliament, Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development: hon. Anywarach. Committee on Public Service and Local Government: hon. Matte and hon. Kiyingi Bbosa. Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry: hon. Namara Grace, hon. Lubogo Kenneth and hon. Lubega Godfrey. Committee on Infrastructure: hon. Kafeero Ssekitoleko and hon. Olanya Gilbert. Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs: hon. Akello Rose Lilly, hon. Amodoi Cyrus, hon. Kezekiah Mbogo and hon. Bahinduka Martin. Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development: hon. Bagoole. Committee on Foreign Affairs: hon. Okuonzi Sam Agatre, hon. Allen Andrew and hon. Achile Manoah. Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs: hon. Fox Odoi, hon. Otada Sam, hon. Mujungu, hon. Karuhanga Gerald. Education and Sports Committee: hon. Mary Nalubega Tuunde, hon. Maganda Julius, hon. Kasibante Moses. Committee on Health: hon. Ninsiima Rita.  Committee on Natural Resources: hon. Nyakikongoro, hon. Oboth Jacob, hon. Cadet Benjamin, hon. Baryayanga, hon. Haruna Kyeyune. Committee on Presidential Affairs: hon. Ababiku Jesca, hon. Nsanja Patrick. Committee on East African Community Affairs: hon. Nalubega Mariam.

3.10
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I have heard a number of colleagues being designated to join the Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Committee. However, earlier on, we had raised the issue of over subscription on that committee. According to our rules, there are supposed to be 30 members and the rules are also very clear that representation must match the numerical strength in Parliament.

Therefore, if we go ahead and vote on the names as you have read them, it will mean that we have to sit with our colleagues again to see which members can leave the committee. This is because obviously we are more than 30 members. The rules guide us very well on what the proportions must be for the different categories of people in this House.

THE SPEAKER: We do not have to take a vote today. We will ask the Clerk to collate the numbers for all the committees then before we take the final vote, we shall know who is where and how many.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE EVICTION OF TENANTS AND DEMOLITION OF A GOVERNMENT BUILDING ON PLOT 60–62 ALLIDINA ROAD, JINJA MUNICIPALITY

3.12
THE MINISTER OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Gen. Aronda Nyakairima): Madam Speaker and colleagues, this is a statement to Parliament on the controversy that surrounded the eviction of tenants and demolition of a government building on Plot 60–62 Allidina Road, Jinja Municipality.

On 3 March 2015, hon. Paul Mwiru, a Member of Parliament representing Jinja Municipality East Constituency presented to Parliament a statement on the illegal demolition of a government owned commercial building on Plot 60–62 Allidina Road, Jinja Municipality.


Madam Speaker, you referred the matter to the Ministry of Internal Affairs to investigate and thereafter, report to Parliament.

Honourable members, immediately upon receipt of this directive, I appointed a team of senior officers to investigate the matter. I instructed the team to investigate, among others: 
    (i) Ownership of the property; 
    (ii) Legality of and the manner of eviction of tenants and demolition of property; 
    (iii) The role of the involved government officials. 

The team carried out the investigations and reported. Their findings indicated that Mr Birungi Simpson had no legal right over the property he attempted to grab. He had fraudulently acquired a five-year lease for the land in June 2011 on which Government also had a 99-year lease expiring in 2062.

After a thorough investigation, the IGG caused a cancellation of the fraudulently acquired lease on the first day of December, 2014 and confirmed that the rightful owner was the Government of Uganda.

The evicted tenants were actually bona fide occupants under the Land Act. They rented the ten shops from Government in 1967 in a post-independence initiative by Government to help Ugandans come up in trade and commerce, which was hitherto dominated by foreigners. That was the government policy during that time. The shop building was one of the African Trade Development Fund (ATDF) properties spread across the country that have been at the centre of conflict in many parts of the country.

There was no eviction order to legally back Mr Simpson Birungi’s actions. There was neither a court bailiff appointed by court to implement the order as required by law and there was no warrant issued by a court bailiff to guide the eviction process. Without any legal claim, Birungi’s company had continued to occupy the land. They had employed private security guards to guard the premises and this was contrary to the IGG’s instruction that all activities on the land by the company had to be halted and Government takes over its property.

Some government officials, directly or indirectly, aided the illegal eviction, demolition and later the attempted grabbing of the government’s property. The general perception among sections of the public is that Government is not properly looking after public land. They cite cases of public land without titles or abandoned without clear boundaries.

Madam Speaker, in view of these findings and given the seriousness of the matter, Government decided as follows:
    i) Government took immediate possession of the property comprised of Plot 60-62 Allidina road, Jinja Municipality from Mr Simpson Birungi who had continued trespassing on the government’s property.
    ii) The Attorney-General was advised to sue Mr Simpson Birungi for all his fraudulent actions, including malicious damage to land and trespass on the government property comprised in Plot 60-62 Allidina road, Jinja Municipality and impersonation.
    iii) Government officials whose omissions and commissions directly or indirectly aided the fraudulent acquisition of lease by Mr Simpson Birungi, eviction of bona fide tenants on the plot in Jinja Municipality and the demolition of the building thereon are to be investigated and if found culpable, be punished.
    iv) Government will verify and recognise the bona fide tenants on its property on Plot 60-62 Allidina road, Jinja Municipality and provide legal aid to those bona fide tenants to pursue compensation from Mr Simpson Birungi for the losses they suffered during the eviction and demolition of the property and the lost income they suffered from the date of eviction and demolition.

The involvement of Uganda Police on clearing court orders and decrees arising out of civil suits as well as its provision or protection services during eviction will be streamlined. The Land Protection Unit of Uganda Police will be restructured and its capacity improved at the national, regional and district levels to effectively handle the increasing land disputes.

A cabinet committee was set up to:
    a) Examine the practice and manifestations of the various cases of land grabbing.
    b) Propose measures that should be taken by Government to put a stop to the practice of fraudulent land grabbing.
    c) Examine the extent to which the rural population was being subjected to the same vice.
    d) The head of Public Service/Secretary to Cabinet will conduct further investigations into the role played by officials who were involved and appropriate action will be taken.

Madam Speaker and Members, this is how Government is moving on this matter to ensure that such activities do not reoccur. I submit, Madam Speaker. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Of course it is coming long after the event but let us have a few comments.

3.19
MR MILTON MUWUMA, (NRM, Kigulu County South, Iganga): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I wish to thank the minister for finally coming up with a concrete report that has managed to highlight the facts that surrounded this particular facility in Jinja. 

The other day when we were discussing and raising this particular matter, at some point we were seen to be liars or to be concocting facts that had unfolded during that incident particularly when they were implementing this eviction. However, I am happy that the minister got the facts and the truth that the bona fide occupants who have been on that land were maliciously treated and handled with the support of our police force. 

I would have wished to hear mention of those particular officers who participated in this operation because it was against the law. What has been done to them? Is there any punishment or reprimand meted to them? 

Mention has been made that the bona fide occupants are going to be facilitated in respect to legal aid. In case they are interested in continuing with their contracts, which contracts run up to 2016, what is their fate? Will they enjoy their full rights as they did before the demolition in case they wish to carry out any activities on those premises? I thank you. 

3.21
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Serere): Thank you so much. I would like to thank the honourable minister for the report and what he has so far done so. I would also like to thank hon. Paul Mwiru and his colleagues who brought this matter to this House because at the time when he brought it, some people thought he was just politicking but now we can see what the minister has brought. We would like to thank him and his colleagues from Jinja Municipality for that.  

Madam Speaker, it is not the first time we are seeing Ugandans forging land titles. However, they do not do this alone. I am on the Committee on Physical Infrastructure and we have found out that this is done in conjunction with the people in the Land Commission. All these fraudulent actions, manipulation and forging of land titles - I fell victim sometime back to this type of work but we are not seeing any action being taken to deal with these officers in the Ministry of Lands and in the Land Commission office. When shall we see serious action taken against these officers?

Secondly, the minister has said that some government officials were involved. Can you give us the names of these people? We must learn to name and shame. Maybe that will be one way in which we shall be able to deter these officers from doing this type of action.
 
You are the investigating arm and in charge of enforcing the law. However, I have heard you say that you are asking the head of the Public Service to take further investigations. I thought you are charged with all this and you would only recommend to the head of the Public Service to take action either to reprimand, dismiss or penalise. Thank you.

3.23
MS CHRISTINE BAKO (FDC, Woman Representative, Arua): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The honourable minister is talking about further investigations but I would like him to tell me what he was doing before he came to Parliament to submit this report. He is in charge of all the units that investigate so I find it very disturbing when he tells us that investigations will continue. What are you doing?
Secondly, the Land Commission is the custodian of all Government land and by the time someone acquires a lease fraudulently, what is this custodian doing? I suspect that there must be an arm of the investigators in this land fraud particularly Government property. It is very unfortunate that the senior colleague here still continues to dilly-dally in a government he has served for around 30 years.

Finally, what is this mess with all Government land? For your information, most land that is tampered with so much belongs to institutions like universities. You heard the issue with Makerere University but to this day, I do not know whether you have concluded it. Institutions like NARO and in Mukono, the Coffee Research Institution is being tempered with and the investigating arm is still investigating. When do you put a full stop to investigation? Is it therefore right to suggest that if you cannot investigate to finality, you are part of the fraud? I thank you.

3.25
MR SANJAY TANNA (Independent, Tororo Municipality, Tororo): I thank you, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity. Please allow me, colleagues, to thank the minister for bringing a statement that is clear, accurate and honest. They have not, like in certain instances in the past, delayed indefinitely and failed to bring a report. I would like to thank the minister very much for that statement.

I would also like to thank our colleague, hon. Paul Mwiru. Like hon. Christine Bako has just said, there is a scourge of businessmen who are pseudo investors and this is not the first time that they are grabbing government land while being aided by government officials. I would like to urge the government to properly survey and title its land so that we avoid similar instances. In this case, it was easy because the land was already titled. What if it was not? We would have lost that property.

Honourable colleagues, my experience in Tororo Municipality is that past leaders had taken over the taxi park, bus park and children’s park. They even built a hotel on the children’s park and this is because the council had not titled its property. We currently have school land being taken because there are no titles. 

I would therefore like to thank the honourable minister and beg that action be taken on those people who have been identified as a deterrent to those that are cropping up. With increased value of land in Uganda because of population growth, the incentive for fraud is still very high. 

Therefore, as a Parliament, can we resolve that we give Government a certain timeline so that all Government land is titled, whether at council or national level? I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, you are the last one.

3.28
MR GILBERT OLANYA (Independent, Kilak County, Amuru): I thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for the report although I have a few concerns.
 
One is the way our security forces normally come in to help the so-called land grabbers. These days if an individual manages to acquire land, in the process of the eviction, he will liaise with the police and you find our security forces helping that particular land grabber.

I would therefore like to appeal to the minister that before we send our forces next time to aid any eviction, let us carry out an investigation. Let the forces verify whether the person they are going to help is a bona fide occupant of that particular area because right now, we are denying land rights to so many people who are vulnerable and you know that many of our people are traumatised. The moment they see the police and guns, anything may happen.

Therefore, security personnel should try and investigate before they swing into action. Look at the case in Jinja. It beats my understanding as to how that man acquired a lease offer of five years and yet the government had a lease offer for 99 years. How come? This means that something went wrong somewhere. We need to do deeper investigations right from the lands office where something wrong must be going on. I would like to thank the minister for the report. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, this is the very last one, please.

3.30
MR REAGAN OKUMU (FDC, Aswa County, Gulu): I thank you, Madam Speaker. I am very grateful and I am tending to admire Gen. Aronda Nyakairima because this is his second report on land and I have seen some analysis, which I think shows that he is beginning to be very honest. (Laughter) I would like to take this opportunity to encourage him to save Uganda.

Madam Speaker, I have only two concerns. Issues related to the land board on criminality. The criminal element comes on board and when it does, it is the Ministry of Internal Affairs to come up. Would it be possible for the Minister of Internal Affairs - because land issues have become a big problem in this country whether it is Government, private or whatever - to comprehensively come up with a land analysis of conflict for the whole country whether it is Government or private land. This is because I saw some analysis that they brought regarding land conflict in Northern Uganda and it was a good analysis. 

Would it be proper for the minister to come up with a comprehensive statement so that Parliament, for once, can address the issue of land conflicts holistically instead of focusing on land conflicts as the cases come in one by one? If we do not do this, land conflicts are going to be what I would term as the birth pangs of conflicts in Uganda, which can degenerate into a crisis and insecurity, which would undermine our economic growth, democracy and many other things. 

Therefore, it is very important that the minister focuses on this to address future conflicts and problems. I thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have many items on the agenda.

3.32
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Hon. Reagan Okumu has raised a very important point but he addressed it to Gen. Aronda Nyakairima to come up with an analysis of the land evictions throughout the country. My thinking is that this is very wide as it is multi-sectoral and involves other ministries. Therefore, I thought that I should come out and guide that it has to be a concerted effort involving more than just the Ministry of Internal Affairs.

I would like to take it upon myself to inform the Prime Minister, who is listening, so that he whips the other ministers to sit down and come up with a good report otherwise, Gen. Aronda Nyakairima alone cannot come up with the information that Ndugu Reagan Okumu is asking for. This is the information I had for Parliament.

THE SPEAKER: I thank you. I know that the Prime Minister has heard and that he will take the necessary action.

As we wind up, Rt hon. Prime Minister, I do not know whether the government is really aware of the level of land grabbing. I think that all the municipalities are at risk. When you go to Mbale, Jinja or wherever, that is what you hear. Kampala here is just a mess. 

Today, Kampala has no more green areas, no places for children to play and school play grounds are being sold. I grew up in Naguru and we used to play in Lugogo but it is now all buildings and nobody is caring. Where are our people going to have places for relaxation? Where will the poor people who cannot afford Serena go? Nobody is interested. 

Mr Prime Minister, I do know whether you are aware of that phenomenon because I am sure that even Kabale Municipality must be in danger. (Laughter)

3.34
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Madam Speaker, you are raising a very important point and that is why Government has readily accepted the proposal of hon. Reagan Okumu because this is a national issue, especially in the municipalities.

As I have had occasion to inform this august House, cabinet has set up a committee specifically on these land grabbing crooks. It is some kind of syndicate of some people in the private sector dealing with some people in Government to defraud land belonging to the people of Uganda - (Interruption)

MR EKANYA: Madam Speaker, I would like to seek clarification from the Prime Minister as to whether he is aware that what he calling “crooks” is being done officially. The Constitution of Uganda does not allow foreigners to acquire leases and own land. Recently however, the Ministry of Lands came up with a policy to allow leases not exceeding five years until it is developed but what is happening is that foreigners come here, register companies and acquire leases for 99 years. After the land has been transferred into the name of the company, the land is turned into freehold tenure.

Therefore, are you aware that your officials that you pay salaries together with the foreign investors are doing that? Are you going to make that part of the report?

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, the information from my young brother, hon. Ekanya, is known and that is why Government had already taken these measures. That is also why we think that the report responding to hon. Reagan Okumu’s recommendation will, in addition, cover problems of this nature so that this august House can know the facts and take appropriate decisions both to prevent reoccurrence and to correct the wrongs.

THE SPEAKER: Mr Minister, would you like to say anything in conclusion?

GEN. NYAKAIRIMA: There is a question of name and shame. I do not have the names but there are officers from the Ministry of Lands who were mentioned and action will be taken against them according to the report.
Regarding the police officers, we wrote to the IGP to take action accordingly. There are a number of activities taking place to ensure that this scourge is seriously dealt with. Thank you.

3.38
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Phillip Wafula Oguttu): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The cases we keep debating here, including this one of land grabbing, show that there is a malfunctioning of the state and Government. Every agency is broken down and nothing is working – (Interruption)

MR MUWUMA: Madam Speaker, I rise on a point of order. A few minutes ago, a colleague, hon. Reagan Okumu, applauded the minister for coming out with a good and credible statement. Hon. Sanjay Tanna applauded him for the same. Is the Leader of the Opposition in order to begin contesting the capacity of these institutions, including the Ministry of Internal Affairs?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, I think you have made a sweeping statement. This Parliament is functioning and it is part of the state so unless you are also indicting this House and the security people who take care of you and everything that is happening - focus on the area of concern.

MR WAFULA OGUTTU: Madam Speaker, I should not talk about Parliament but we should be honest with ourselves concerning our country that there is brokenness in our institutions and that things do not work. Whether we like it or not, you can only treat a disease if you have diagnosed it and if you have accepted that there is a disease - (Interruption)

MS NANKABIRWA: Madam Speaker, is the Rt. hon. leader of the minority in order to insist on insinuating that there is no system, which is working without substantiating his assertion?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, I asked you to focus on the areas of deficiency but if you generalise, it is catching everything.

MR WAFULA OGUTTU: Madam Speaker, I can give very many examples in every department where our systems have broken down. My suggestion to Government is that maybe you need to set up an agency to ensure that your systems work.

In the departments of health and education, systems are not working. I hear that in the roads sector, there is something being done in UNRA. Things are not working. I appreciate what the Minister of Internal Affairs has done but there are many things within that ministry, which have broken down like the Police itself where the system has broken down. Therefore, unless – (Interruption)

MR SSEMUJJU: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and the Leader of the Opposition for giving way. The information I want to give to the Leader of the Opposition in this House is that the Attorney-General issued a statement that the former Prime Minister, hon. Amama Mbabazi, can actually go and consult. As soon as he issued it, the police said, “No, it does not work that way.” You can see how the state is malfunctioning.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Leader of the Opposition, if you could wind up because we have now left Allidina street and we are getting into something else. Please close as we have to move to other items.

MR WAFULA OGUTTU: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I choose to make a small observation and make a firm recommendation to Government that we need to ensure that government agencies and ministries are working. It is a serious problem. We may be here pretending that things are okay but you know that they are not okay. Thank you very much.

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, the Leader of the Opposition has given an impression that Government is not functioning. The reverse is the case. The whole essence of Government is to be vigilant to ensure that when there are gaps, they are filled straight away. Therefore, when we have crooks like the ones I am talking about, Government takes necessary measures. Parliament, which is one of the institutions, takes necessary measures. So let me assure my colleagues in this august House and the country at large that the Government of Uganda and all institutions of Government are functioning, are effective and the country is on the right course.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE RECRUITMENT OF IMMIGRATION OFFICERS

3.44
THE MINISTER OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Gen. Aronda Nyakairima): Madam Speaker, this is a statement on the on-going exercise to recruit 300 young people into the Immigration Service of Uganda.

Madam Speaker, Government took a decision to recruit and train 150 immigration officers and 150 immigration assistants. The decision was taken in view of the urgent need to secure our borders, fight transnational crime, terrorism, human trafficking, money laundering, illicit arms trade, illegal entry and stay in the country and exit of persons from Uganda.

There is urgent need to build capacity both in numbers and skill of these forces. Lessons learnt from benchmarking elsewhere, which we undertook to understand this job, include that training is necessary if officers are to be equipped with the knowledge and skills necessary to do this job. The idea of specialised training was discussed with Public Service Commission and this was agreed upon. Thereafter, they undertook to advertise the recruitment.

Madam Speaker, the on-going recruitment exercise is being done by Public Service Commission as per standing regulations. Our information is that they called for applications - (Interruption)

MR MUGUME: Madam Speaker, this statement is important but I have checked on my iPad and there is no report. I think we need to get this report.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I do not know whether you sent the soft copy to the Clerk because I also have not seen it and I do not have the hard copy.

GEN. NYAKAIRIMA: When I was somewhere in a meeting, I instructed my office to communicate this and I believed that they had communicated. I could check as we continue with other business.

THE SPEAKER: Let us defer it until we get copies.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO AUTHORISE GOVERNMENT TO BORROW $84.2 MILLION FROM THE AFRICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK FOR FINANCING PHASE 2 OF THE MARKETS AND AGRICULTURAL TRADE IMPROVEMENT PROGRAMME PROJECT

THE SPEAKER: Chairperson of the committee. I think the motion was moved and the same was sent to the Committee on National Economy.

3.48
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY (Ms Evelyn Kaabule): Madam Speaker and Members, I am here to present a report of the Committee on National Economy on the proposal by Government to borrow $84.2 million from the African Development Bank for financing phase 2 of the Markets and Agricultural Trade Improvement Programme Project (MATIP 2).

Before I report, Madam Speaker, I would like to lay on the Table the following documents:
    i) The original report.
    ii) A brief and resolution from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development.
    iii) The Aide Memoire.
    iv) The loan agreement.
    v) Appraisal documents.
    vi) The snag list for Mbale and Jinja markets.
    vii) The minutes of the meetings that we conducted as we were discussing this proposal. 

I beg to lay.

Madam Speaker and honourable members, in accordance with rule 166 (2)(b) of the Rules of Procedure (2012), the Committee on National Economy considered the request by Government to borrow $84.2 million from the African Development Bank for financing phase 2 of the Markets and Agricultural Trade Improvement Programme Project 2 (MATIP 2). 

The request was presented to this House by the honourable Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development in February 2015 and accordingly referred to the committee for consideration and now I beg to report.

As you can see in the methodology, we had meetings, documentary reviews and conducted field visits.

The background to this proposal

Government secured a loan of units of accounts 38 million, which is an equivalent of $58.5 million from the African Development Bank. It also borrowed $10 million from the African Bank for Economic Development in Africa (BADEA) with Government’s contribution amounting to $6 million and the total comes to $74.5 million to implement the first phase of MATIP 1.

This phase had been programmed to construct 26 markets across the country. However, due to variations at the design review stage, the cost of constructing these markets increased and therefore, the borrowed amount that is $68.5 million was insufficient to construct all the markets.

Madam Speaker and colleagues, construction of the seven markets under the African Development Bank loan was completed and these include Lira, Jinja, Mbale, Wandegeya, Hoima, Gulu and Mpanga while the two markets of Busega and Nyendo, under the BADEA loan, are still under construction with 16 per cent and 20 per cent of the works undertaken respectively, yet implementation of MATIP 1 is scheduled to end in December, 2015.

Madam Speaker, since resources were not adequate to construct all the 26 markets at ago, Government opted to implement the project as a programme by conducting it in phases, based on availability of funds. It is against this background that MATIP 2 is planned to construct 11 of the remaining 17 markets.

Government is seeking to borrow $84 million from the African Development Bank to finance 89.8 per cent of the second phase of the Markets and Agricultural Trade Improvement Project (MATIP 2) that will be implemented over a period of five years. 

The overall cost of the project is estimated at $93.7 million of which Government will contribute $9.53 million (10.2 per cent).

Maintenance of key infrastructure will be financed by the local governments at the beginning but will be ceded to the beneficiaries over time. 

The project will be implemented in nine municipalities in all the four regions of Uganda namely: Entebbe (Kitooro Market), Masaka, Mbarara, Arua, Moroto (Lopedur Market), Soroti, Tororo, Kasese, Busia and two town councils of Kitgum and Lugazi.

The project will comprise of three components namely; market infrastructure development, value addition and trade facilitation and project management and coordination. The project will foster public-private partnerships through modernised management of the markets between   local governments, vendor associations and   market management committees.

Project linkage to country and regional strategies

We are all aware that this project is in line with Vision 2040, NDP II (NDP 2015/2016 to 2019/2020), the National Trade Policy of 2008, the Local Government Sector Support Plan 2013/2023 and it is consistent with pillar 2 of the New Partnership for Africa’s Development Agricultural Development Programme.

The project development objective is to contribute to poverty reduction and economic growth through enhanced commercialisation of agricultural produce and other merchandise.

The specific objective is to improve market place economics and social infrastructure thus -

THE SPEAKER: Honourable chairperson, since you have already uploaded it on the iPads, you can go – is it not there? Okay, let us hold on to that and go to the next one. Clerk, check where the copies are. Check whether they have been uploaded. Just hold on a bit. Have you found it? It is not there?

MR BAGOOLE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The report is there but it is not opening. However, the issue of markets is very important. Much as the report is not opening, let her continue reading.

THE SPEAKER: I think she has said most of the things. Just wind up and make recommendations.

MS KAABULE: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for your wise ruling. I will now move to the observations and recommendations. I will first talk about the performance of the first phase of MATIP 1 in order for you to appreciate it. 

The committee observed that the performance of MATIP 1 has been hampered by the slow implementation of the component funded by the Arab Bank for Economic Development (BADEA) to construct Busega and Nyendo-Masaka markets, which are 15 per cent and 20 per cent complete respectively despite the scheduled close of phase 1 by end of December. 

The committee recommends that Government should evaluate loans sourced from BADEA since disbursements do not adhere to the project disbursement schedules.

Cost Variation

There were variations as you will note in the annex but these variations were the provision of basement parking for Wandegeya, Mbale and Jinja markets and there was change of screed floor technology to a more durable concrete floor in some of the markets.

The committee established that Jinja Market has no basement parking and used screed floor technology. Mbale Market had a screed floor, which has peeled off before the defect liability period elapses. 

Therefore, the committee recommends that the Ministry of Local Government and other Government ministries and departments should always carry out extensive feasibility studies involving all stakeholders so as to prepare designs, which are commensurate with the needs of the stakeholders to avoid significant alterations during project implementation.

About market design, the committee recommends that Government should establish a standard design for all markets under MATIP 2 taking Lira market as the minimum standard in terms of civil works. The markets should have additional facilities like security systems, day-care centres and provision for financial services infrastructure in order to cater for the needs of the various users.

Quality of work

The committee recommends that the Public Procurement and Disposal of Public Assets Authority should undertake a procurement audit for contractors for Jinja and Mbale markets. All defects identified above and those identified in the snag list of various markets that comprise quality of the infrastructure, safety and health of the vendors and other stakeholders should be corrected by the respective contractors during the defect liability period provided and before close of the project in December 2015.

It further recommends that the Auditor-General should undertake a value-for-money audit for MATIP 1 before implementation of MATIP 2 starts in view of ascertaining the amount of money lost as a result of poor quality work and design.

Market governance

The committee recommends that all local governments that have not conducted elections for market leadership to handle the day-to-day administration should do so before the end of September 2015 to ensure transparency in management of these markets. The local government administrations, in collaboration with the market leadership, should ensure proper management of the market infrastructure and also ensure that service provision is to the satisfaction of all stakeholders.

Sustainability of the project

The committee recommends that a maintenance plan should be developed by the market leaders and local authorities before they are handed over to the users.

About the distribution mechanism of key equipment, the committee recommends that Government should establish an elaborate mechanism for distribution of this equipment and clearly spell out roles of Government and the private sector with an objective of ensuring sustainability of the project.

Linkage with the previous projects

The committee recommends that Government should design projects, taking a comprehensive approach to provide sectoral linkages consistent with the National Planning Framework to avoid instances of destroying work of previous projects.

Counterpart funding

We observed the lack of adequate timely provision of counterpart funds for taxation purposes, which constrained cash flows of contractors under MATIP 1 who incurred this cost on behalf of Government. Therefore, Government will have to refund contractors to cater for this expense. 

We recommend that adequate VAT provisions for the project under MATIP 2 should be included in the National Budget each year to allow smooth implementation of the project as well as avoid extra cost to the contractors.

Physical contingency

We observed that although Government has made a provision of 10 per cent of its contribution towards physical contingency amounting to $0.83 million, the government’s expenses are recurrent in nature and do not attract physical contingency. In addition, physical contingencies under the African Development Bank funding constitute 14 per cent of the total base costs, which deviates from the usual 10 per cent applied to civil works.

The committee, therefore, recommends that the physical contingency ratio associated with the ADB financing should be reduced to 10 per cent and the balance of four per cent – an equivalent of $2.65 million – be re-allocated to construct Kabale market or any other market in south-western Uganda.

Collaboration with local authorities

The committee recommends that local leaders should be involved in each and every stage of implementation of these projects. 

For coordination among Government ministries and departments, the committee recommends that for MATIP 2, where such land exists, the Ministry of Local Government should coordinate with the relevant ministries with a view of utilising such land for market space purposes.

Madam Speaker, in conclusion, given the importance of agricultural trade and value addition to the growth of the economy, financing infrastructure to improve agricultural trade and value addition in particular is critical. Lessons should be drawn from the implementation of MATIP 1 so as to improve implementation modalities under MATIP 2.

Therefore, the committee recommends that the request by Government to borrow $84.2 million from the African Development Bank for financing of the second phase of the Market and Agricultural Trade Improvement Project (MATIP 2) be approved, subject to the recommendations made. Madam Speaker and colleagues, I beg to report.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Chairperson of the National Economy Committee and the members for that job. Honourable members, the report is signed by 17 of the 28 members. Therefore, it is eligible for debate. Any comments? 

4.04
DR MEDARD BITEKYEREZO (NRM, Mbarara Municipality, Mbarara): Madam Speaker, I stand to honestly support this motion. I am supporting it because we need wonderful markets that are well planned in all parts of this country. This loan is not going to save people of Mbarara only, but it is going to save people in some other parts of this country, including Tororo.

Madam Speaker, I have met the people of Mbarara on several occasions and they are asking, “When is Mbarara getting a market?” Now is the time.

Honestly, I would urge all Members of Parliament to support this motion for this country and for Government to borrow money to make sure that we put up modern markets in the country so that –(Interjections)- hon. Oguttu, honestly speaking, we need markets.

When you are travelling in Wandegeya, Madam Speaker, and you see that wonderful market there, you will start wishing that it was in your constituency. That is what we want. 

Madam Speaker, when you consider the spaces we have in Mbarara Central Market, you will find small kiosks. I would therefore urge everybody here not to sabotage this motion. I support this motion entirely and urge my colleagues to support us. I thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Let us have three more people and we will take a decision.

4.06
MS JANEPHER EGUNYU (NRM, Woman Representative, Buvuma): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I also want to support the motion of establishing markets in different areas albeit jealously. 

Honourable members, in the Constitution that was made in 1995 - our colleagues put it clearly that there should be regional balance in development. Why do I say that I am supporting it but jealously? We have now spent four years here in Parliament and this is our fifth year. We have been passing so many loans, some of them going to the same places for the same activities. For instance, Jinja Market is built to the extent that we do not know now - we would like to get a forensic audit on the market to get to know how far the market has gone so that we add on other monies. 

However, before we do that, we already want to allocate more money to Jinja market. This gives an opportunity to the corrupt to eat more money because they know that we shall automatically give more money to that place.

Madam Speaker, I am wondering whether, for these years that we have spent here, we can know the projects that we have been allocating money to through getting loans. All our children and grandchildren will pay these loans all over the country. Here in Uganda we have districts that are not heard of and no loan has gone to them. Can we know where those monies have been going so that those other districts, which have been left out, can also benefit from other loans yet to come? I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, the last one. Is there any objection to this loan? Let us listen to hon. Kabakumba and then we take the motion.

4.08
MS MASIKO KABAKUMBA (NRM, Bujenje County, Masindi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. We are discussing a loan to borrow money to support MATIP 2. Madam Speaker, good things have been talked about MATIP 1 as well as some challenges and I would like to confirm that whoever goes to Hoima now will find a landmark there, as somebody refers to it. Before you clap, Hoima market is already developing cracks. Fortunately, it is within the period when the contractor should be correcting these faults and I hope they will be corrected.

Madam Speaker, Masindi Municipality market was supposed to be in this phase. I was listening very attentively and carefully but Masindi Municipality is not in and yet initially, the municipalities were supposed to be dealt with first. However, now we also have town councils, much as some municipalities are not there especially Masindi. Masindi was in this lot and it had been communicated to the people. The honourable minister and the President know this very well but along the way, it was dropped.

I hope that there will be another phase because I am reluctant to say that we add it here since the committee has already given its report and our plea to the committee did not yield much. However, I would like to know from the minister when Masindi Municipality Central Market will be developed. I need an affirmative answer as I go back to report to the people. This is the question, among others, that they are asking us. 

I also want to agree with the previous speaker that when there is distribution of these programmes, there should be equity in the distribution. Otherwise, some of us are beginning to think that we are deliberately being left out –(Interjections)– Madam Speaker, I thank you. I have finished -(Interruption)

MR ODONGA OTTO: Madam Speaker, I rise on a point of order. Gulu is one of the towns that benefitted from MATIP I. They have put a state of the art market in Gulu town that is even making us, the Opposition, find it very difficult to tell people that –(Laughter)– therefore, is the honourable member in order to say that there is no affirmative action even when Gulu, that has been in war, has been put in the first phase of the programme? (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: No, there are other parts of the country, which have not benefitted. Hon. Obua, present the motion.

4.12
MR DENIS OBUA (NRM, Ajuri County, Alebtong): Madam Speaker, I am rising to present a motion - [MR EKANYA: “Procedure, Madam Speaker. Procedure takes precedence.”]

THE SPEAKER: There is a motion. Let him move the motion and I will come back to you.

MR DENIS OBUA: Madam Speaker, having listened attentively to the report of the committee, highlighting the key successes of MATIP 1 and arising from the limited debate we have had, and reading the mood of the House in support of the establishment of the various markets, arising from the fact that we have hope that from MATIP 1, we are now progressing to MATIP and we shall proceed to 3, 4, 5 and eventually cover other parts of the country, I therefore beg to move a motion that a question be put on the report of the Committee on National Economy on the proposal by Government to borrow $84.2 million from the African Development Bank for financing phase two of the Market and Agricultural Trade Improvement Programme Project (MATIP 2) with that limited debate. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, there is a general support but I would like to hear an assurance from the government on when the parts of the country that do not have markets will get them. It must be on the Hansard. Therefore, as you are organising, let me give hon. Ekanya a chance. I want that assurance and the timeline clear.

4.14
MR GEOFREY EKANYA (FDC, Tororo County, Tororo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I was seeking for your indulgence partly to say what he has already said. 

Day in and out, I have requested that the way we manage our economy should be based on Vision 2040 and our National Development Plan. This is in order for us to stop these situations or programmes that put Members of Parliament in a very difficult position and they cannot even raise questions. It is linked to a populist aspect; if the market was in my constituency and I stood here to query it, the voters would misunderstand me. 

The Government needs to come out clearly and tell us the entire plan for modern markets for the entire country. This will stop us from asking questions like “When is mine coming?” or from having some Members saying they support and others saying they do not support. 

This will also give us capacity and moral high ground to question the contractors. Unless we start indigenising the loans we approve in this country - In the case of MATIP I and II, 90 per cent of the contractors are non-citizens. There is capital flight. So, you will have a beautiful market but the contractors are foreigners. They will take the profit and the capital out. There is nothing that will remain apart from the structures, and like my colleagues have said, these structures do not last the duration for which they are designed. 

Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, it is the same issue with the roads, for example those made by UNRA. You inject Shs 2 trillion but 90 per cent of the contractors are foreign and they externalise the resources. 

I want us to have a system where from the loan we approve here, which will be paid by our children and ourselves because our debt is already becoming unsustainable, we make sure that the contractors are indigenous people. That should be one of the requirements. 

Two, it should be in line with the Public Finance Act. This is because the Public Finance Act says that the budget should be in line with the National Development Plan and this is part of our budget. When a loan request is brought before the Committee of National Economy, the committee should ensure that it is in line with the National Development Plan and the contractors who have built the others are ploughing the money back into the economy. These are serious issues. 

On the question of land issues, Tororo would have got a market long time ago even at a lower cost, but the ministry dilly-dallied on resolving the land conflict. It is the same thing which is going to happen with this loan. You will find that loan requests which we are approving here to build about 10 markets will end up building about five of them. They will then bring another request for us to borrow and we cannot question it. This is a serious issue that this House should be able to discuss; we should not just look at beautiful markets but look at how our people are benefitting. I beg to support the programme. 

4.18
MR REAGAN OKUMU (FDC, Aswa County, Gulu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I just have three comments to make. I also want the House to know that debate always enriches any matter that comes to the Floor, irrespective of whether it is supported or not. Members should not be stifled when there is an opportunity to contribute or enrich whatever subject matter is on the Floor. 

The Minister of Local Government knows what happened in Gulu. I say this in support of the audit query raised by the committee. Gulu had a big problem. The chairman of the district did a lot of work to crosscheck, find out and eventually alter the entire plan and yet the contractor had already started work. The original design was going to cost almost half of what the money was meant for. Although at the end of the day when they were opening the market - the Minister of Local Government knows - the chairman of the district was not even recognised, to share the benefits of his contribution. 

Secondly, I think there is need for standardisation. When we go for some of these projects, we should standardise them. When I drive around, I see Kiboga Hospital, Kiryandongo Hospital and Anaka Hospital; these were similar projects that emerged in the 60s and they were standardised. That way it is easy to monitor and find out whether there are faults and whether the structures are substandard. I think some of these markets should be standardised so that the costs and everything else are sealed. 

Lastly, it is important that these markets focus on the common people - the poor people. These poor people are basically peasants. When we look at the whole process of production, we should not look at its end game, which is the market; we should look at the production - how are these peasants able to produce? We should look at the storage aspect - how are they able to store after production? Are they able to process what they have produced before they finally go to the market? 

Therefore, I would like to urge Government that in the long run the focus should not just be on the markets, which is the tail end of things. It must cover the entire chain from production to storage to processing to the market. I thank you.  

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I want the assurance for parts of the country that do not have these markets? When will you deliver to Iganga, Buvuma, Namayingo, Rukungiri, Kamuli, to mention just a few? We would like to hear from you.

4.21
THE MINISTER OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Mr Adolf Mwesige): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the honourable members and the committee for their good report. 

As usual, the NRM Government is always mindful of the need to balance our regions, to balance our diversity and the need to accommodate all Ugandans irrespective of where they are located. The question of regional balance in the design selection and construction of these markets was definitely taken in to account. That is why you saw that even during the first phase, seven markets were regionally distributed; two markets in the north, two in the east, two in the west and one big market in central Uganda. 

If you look at the selection of the 11 markets that we plan to construct, we have also taken deliberate steps to make sure that all regions of Uganda are as much as possible catered for –(Interjection)- Kitgum is in the next phase; I thought you read the report. 

About the need to spread out to other parts of Uganda, we are determined to do this, Madam Speaker. You can see that the first phase has taken us from 2010 up to now, a period of about three to four years. We hope to learn from the experience of the first phase. The first phase was our first experience with these mega markets and mega shopping malls in municipalities. We hope that the second experience will even be better, more efficient and faster.  

When this loan request is approved, we are immediately going to embark on looking at the third phase. This is because the project must be continuous. Transformation must continue. It will not stop with these few markets we have done. Transformation of Uganda must be countrywide. Therefore, all the towns, especially the big town councils and the medium size town councils which have not featured in MATIP I and II, will be captured in MATIP III, which we are going to embark on immediately with the bank. 

When I talk of MATIP III, I am thinking about areas like Kamuli, Madam Speaker - (Laughter) - and areas like Bugiri. We are on course and we have no doubt in our minds that wherever there is a market that merits construction and modernisation, it is our determination as Government to make these services reach our people wherever they are and as soon as possible. 

So, as soon as construction of MATIP II markets begins, we will also start designing MATIP III and we will come to this House because you are the representatives of the people. It is this House which appropriates the money and approves the plans for the ministry. So we have no hesitation in coming to this House even before MATIP III commences.

The committee talked about the audit; I would like to inform the House that the Auditor-General has already carried out the value-for-money audit. His report was produced on 31 March 2014 and this report, I am informed, is before the Public Accounts Committee of Parliament for its scrutiny.

Yes, the committee pointed out some defects in some markets but I would like to inform the House that as a ministry, we have also observed some defects and we are addressing them together with the contractors. There is some money which the ministry has retained which will be used to correct all these anomalies so that our markets can stand the test of time. 

Overall, the construction of these markets is really a fundamental change for Uganda. I would like to invite all colleagues to support this project because it causes transformation in urban areas. If it can continue and be replicated in all urban settings, I think it will make a tremendous contribution to the transformation vision of the National Resistance Movement. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that this House do authorise Government to borrow the sum of $84.2 million from the African Development Bank to finance phase II of the Market and Agricultural Trade Improvement Project.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: The “nay” was feeble. (Laughter)

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO ESTABLISH KABALE UNIVERSITY, LIRA UNIVERSITY AND SOROTI UNIVERSITY AS PUBLIC UNIVERSITIES UNDER SECTIONS 22 (1), 24 (1) AND 25 OF THE UNIVERSITIES AND OTHER TERTIARY INSTITUTIONS ACT, 2001

THE MINISTER OF EDUCATION, SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND SPORTS (Maj. (Rtd) Jessica Alupo): Madam Speaker and honourable members, this is a motion for a resolution of Parliament on the establishment of Kabale University, Lira University and Soroti University as public universities under sections 22(1), 24 (1) and 25 of the Universities and Other Tertiary Institutions Act 2001, as amended. I am moving this, Madam Speaker, under rules 47, 48, 50 and 51 of our Rules of Procedure. 

“WHEREAS section 22(1) of the Universities and Other Tertiary Institutions Act, 2001 empowers the minister responsible for education, on the recommendation of the National Council for Higher Education, by statutory instrument and by a resolution of Parliament to establish a public university;
 
AND WHEREAS section 24(1) and 25 require the minister to include in the statutory instrument the objects, functions and location of the university respectively;
 
AND WHEREAS the National Council for Higher Education has recommended that Kabale University (Kabale District), Lira University (Lira District) and Soroti University (Soroti District) be established as public universities; 

AND WHEREAS the minister responsible for education proposes to make Kabale University, Lira University and Soroti University public universities under the Universities and Other Tertiary Institutions Act (Establishment of Kabale University) Instrument 2015, the Universities and Other Tertiary Institutions Act (Establishment of Lira University) Instrument 2015 and the Universities and Other Tertiary Institutions Act (Establishment of Soroti University) Instrument 2015 respectively; 

AWARE THAT the National Objectives and Directive Principles of State Policy have obligated the Government of Uganda, particularly 18(2) of the Constitution which provides that the state shall take appropriate measures to afford every Ugandan citizen equal opportunity to attain the highest educational standard possible; 

COGNISANT that Article 30 makes provision for the right to education for all Ugandans;
 
NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved by Parliament that: 
1. 	Kabale University be established with the object, functions and locations as set out in the University and Other Tertiary Institutions Act (Establishment of Kabale University) Instrument 2015. 

2. 	Lira University be established with the object, functions and locations as set out in the University and Other Tertiary Institutions Act (Establishment of Lira University) Instrument 2015. 

3. 	Soroti University be established with the object, functions and locations as set out in the University and Other Tertiary Institutions Act (Establishment of Soroti University) Instrument 2015.”

Madam Speaker, I would like to lay the statutory instruments before Parliament. This is the Universities and Other Tertiary Institutions Act (Establishment of Soroti University) Instrument 2015. I beg to lay. Universities and Other Tertiary Institutions Act (Establishment of Kabale University) Instrument 2015; I beg to lay. Universities and Other Tertiary Institutions Act (Establishment of Lira University) Instrument 2015; I beg to lay. Madam Speaker, I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Is it seconded? It is seconded by both sides of the House - the Independents, the Opposition and NRM. Justify.

MAJ. (RTD) ALUPO: Madam Speaker and honourable members, let me make a few points to justify the motion. 

Government notified the National Council for Higher Education (NCHE) about the intention to establish Kabale University, Lira University and Soroti University as public universities. Programmes were submitted to be run at these universities, which the National Council for Higher Education found to be in line with the national priorities in Vision 2040. Government is moving to establish Kabale University, Lira University and Soroti University as public universities in order to equitably expand higher education to undergraduate and postgraduate levels, and to develop human resources appropriate for the transformation and development of Uganda. 

The functions of the universities will be to provide teaching and learning to all students admitted to the universities; to undertake basic and applied research critical to national development; to stimulate skills development in Uganda; to organise and conduct courses with particular emphasis on development goals; to conduct outreach activities, examinations and award degrees, diplomas and certificates; and to undertake publications in line with community needs and national development plans of Uganda. 

Madam Speaker, these universities will disseminate knowledge and give equal opportunity of acquiring higher education to all persons, including persons with disability and pregnant women, regardless of race, political opinion or gender through the provision of quality education, generation of knowledge, promotion of innovation and community empowerment for transformation. It is anticipated that these universities will play a key role in developing our communities and transforming our societies towards achieving our Vision 2040.

In establishing these universities, government has additionally received substantial support from development partners. They have pledged support in ensuring that these universities are established as government public institutions, and physical infrastructure is already in place. 

The NRM government will continue to ensure that all Ugandans have access to education at all levels and are able to attain the quality higher education standard available through the establishment of these universities and secondary health care, agriculture, medicine and engineering. These universities will commence in teaching and research of programmes in ICT, public health, medicine, engineering, science teacher education and agriculture, among others, with a view to bridge the much needed skills gap in the science and technology area.

Allow me to lay on the Table reports which show that a lot of work was done in verifying these universities:
1. 	Verification report on Kabale University for a public university status. 
2. 	Verification report for Lira University College to Lira University. 

3. 	The institutional verification report on Soroti University project to an independent public University. I beg to lay.

May I also lay on the Table the certificate of title for Soroti University. The certificate of financial implication is herein attached. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, do we have any objection? There are seconders; I hope they do not take too much time. Let the seconders finish and later I will go to the opposers.

4.37
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION (HIGHER EDUCATION) (Prof. Tickodri-Togboa): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I have just a few points to make. 

Madam Speaker, in my maiden statement before you –(Applause)– I would like to indeed support this motion. In 2001, I was here in the corridors of this august House; I was in a committee room pleading for the establishment of Gulu University at that time. Now, I am on the Floor. (Laughter)  At that time, I was pleading for the expansion of access to higher education, and the establishment of Gulu University, Busitema and others achieved that. However, there was liberalization at that time and that opened more space. In the process, we have had very many graduates who are, unfortunately, unfocused in many areas. 

The point of establishing these three universities is that it will enable us to focus on those areas where we should be producing the human skills and the capacity to transform this country. As the minister in that area, I do not have the critical mass of scientists of all these engineers and so forth to transform this country. The establishment of these three universities will enable me to focus and create the necessary critical mass to move forward. 

With that, I would, therefore, invite the august House to support the motion to enable me to start the process of creating that critical mass for this country’s transformation.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Professor. 

4.39
THE MINISTER OF STATE, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (NORTHERN UGANDA) (Ms Rebecca Amuge): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for this motion. 

You are aware that at independence, Uganda had a population of less than 10 million but as we speak, we are over 35 million and the biggest percentage of this population are the young people. Therefore, this calls for planning not only at the lower level, which has already been done with Universal Primary Education (UPE) and Universal Secondary Education (USE); we now need to churn out these same young people to the universities. Putting these universities in different regions will enable them to access university education and it will even make it affordable.

I have been to all these universities that the minister has brought before the Parliament and I have seen the work which has been done so far. I have been with the minister to Kabale, Soroti and Lira, not leaving out Muni University which is in the PRDP region. I would like to say that Kabale, which is in Kigezi Region, is highly populated and is at the border. We can still use this same university as part of our East African integration, in that we can bring students from across the border. This will enable us to generate foreign earnings in Uganda.

The statutory instruments brought by the minister will make universities like Gulu University Constituent College, which is lira, now to begin operating independently. It has been a constituent university college for about nine years. We will now be able to allow the minister name councils, senates and also start the process of appointing vice chancellors and creating independent vote functions for these different universities and eventually admissions in the next academic year.

Lira and Soroti universities fall in the right direction of rehabilitating Northern Uganda. For the last two decades, most of our students were left behind because of the war but now they will be able to access education at that level. However, during my interaction with the minister, we agreed that this must not be used to bundle children from the same region in their regional universities. We would like to use this as a point of integration so that children may have to move across Uganda. This is because we want a Uganda where children are integrated and work as citizens not as tribes.

Lira and Soroti universities have titled land, which is over 600 hectares per university. I believe that this will enable them to be self-sustaining. I would like to conclude by thanking the NRM Government on behalf of the people of the greater north for creating this university for us under the leadership of President Yoweri Museveni. I thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Let us finish with the seconders who were brought by the minister officially and then I will get a few more people.

4.43
MR TAYEBWA ODO (FDC, Ishaka Municipality, Bushenyi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I second the motion to establish the three universities as public universities. 

It is very important that the more educated people we have especially at graduate level, the more development we shall have, the more discipline and good governance we shall have. This is because if we have more graduate workers in most of the institutions like the police, military and even taxi drivers, we shall have a better life and a better country. 

We should know that in the past we have been having low population increases but this time we have a high population increase. In 1983 to 1986 when I was at Makerere University, we had only one university and that was Makerere. Kyambogo was only teaching Grade V graduate teachers. Nakawa was for diplomas in commerce. Students would travel long distances to access university education. Now that we have spread the universities in all corners of the country, I think we shall have more accessible university education in different areas.

We should not say that it is for the NRM government. These universities are for the Government of Uganda. I am here as a member of the Opposition supporting this motion as a Ugandan, not as an NRM member. At times when we are here debating, you start distorting some of us when we have some proper and better ideas to put on the Floor. This is a national issue; it is not an NRM issue. 

It is good that we are going to have more universities but then we should now focus on what we are teaching in these universities. It should match with the necessities and the development of this nation like agriculture. If you say Kabale University specialises in agriculture to cover that mountainous area with terracing and so on, it would be very wonderful for this country. 

Madam Speaker, I second the motion that we have these universities established as public universities and more should be established. Thank you.

4.47
MS PAULA TURYAHIKAYO (NRM, Rubabo County, Rukungiri): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the Minister of Education for this motion before the House.


Madam Speaker, I do second the motion for mainly two reasons. One of them is that it is going to bring services nearer to the people, more especially in Kigezi where they are going to have a public university for the first time. 

I do support the function of research and innovation. These institutions will, therefore, go a long way to promote the knowledge and skills required for spearheading research and innovation, which in the long run is likely to provide employment for our young people.

The establishment of these universities is going to provide market for our produce, especially the agricultural products, wherever they are going to be established. The good thing is that there has been regional distribution of these institutions. The north, Kigezi Region and the eastern region have been catered for. Therefore, I applaud the NRM Government for this foresight in having an equitable distribution of these university institutions.

I do support this motion because it promotes sciences and especially ICT, which is quite a volatile industry. If we are to provide employment to the young people and also improve on revenue generation in this country, we need to support ICT especially in areas of research and innovation. Therefore, the establishment of these universities in the different regions is going to go a long way to enable this country realise Vision 2040. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

4.49
MR SSEMUJJU NGANDA (FDC, Kyadondo County East, Wakiso): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I listened to the minister justifying the establishment of these universities. Can the minister give us a more robust justification? All these institutions must be demand driven. Look at the issue of the completion rate in our education sector. Primary school has a 25 to 30 per cent completion rate, you have only about 100,000 students who sit for Senior 6 and 30 per cent of them fail completely.

These universities are not established to buy tomatoes and menvu from our communities. Who is going to fill these universities? Where is the demand? Can the minister give us statistics on the completion rate in secondary schools? I can see the obsession; I could also start a university in Kireka, but this is not how governments operate. So, can you give us the justification? 

The minister also spoke about the human resource gap. Can the minister tell us what the gaps are and in which areas. You will find even those people who graduated from our universities are in shopping malls in town selling second hand clothes. You cannot justify that this country has a human resource gap without giving us the figures. 

Training is not a ceremony, so that you just send people to school even if they have no jobs. Before you speak very strongly about scattering universities in every part of the country, tell us what happens to those that you have already trained. You cannot simply train; it does not happen anywhere. 

Look at the so called Asian Tigers - Malaysia, Singapore and others. They identified critical areas for training; they did not need to start universities within their own countries. They were sending students to universities in Europe. That is why they were able to transform. You do not transform by throwing a university at every region; you analyse your human resource and the needs and then you begin training. You do not start at the end; you start with training.

Madam Speaker, establishing a new university is a very costly venture. Why don’t we think of Makerere University opening constituent colleges in these areas? Must we have a university in every district, in every region? Is that what is most cost effective? Is that how you maximise and use the capacity and experience that you already have? (Member timed out_)

4.53
MS SANTA ALUM (UPC, Woman Representative, Oyam): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I rise to support the motion. 

I would like to start by saying that if we as a country are supposed to benefit from our population dividend, then we need to train the young ones up to the university level and this is what the minster has brought before us. With the many children completing advanced level education, we need as many universities as possible to accommodate these students.

My only issue is that we have to align some of these courses to the needs of the private sector, so that at least when they come out, they can get employment and they can fit into a sector like the agricultural sector, which has a lot of potential. We also have potential in our natural resources, in oil, in tourism. So, I strongly support the establishment of these universities because it is in the right direction. If you look at our gap in science oriented disciplines, this will go a long way to improve on that. 

These universities will also help a lot to address the issue of unemployment among the local people. Men and women will at least get involved in small businesses around these universities. Personally, I feel this will enable us to improve on the income of the people and communities around these universities. This is something that as a House we have to support. We have to make sure that our people develop as we move towards attaining a lower middle income status as a country.

Finally, Madam Speaker, there is the issue of the cost of accommodation. If you look at some of the students out there, they cannot even afford transport to come to universities far away from their homes. This will help the disadvantaged parents who cannot raise transport for students to move all the way to Kampala or Mbarara. These disadvantaged communities that have been having wars will also benefit because they will have institutions of learning near their residences. 

Madam Speaker, with these remarks I would like to thank the minister so much. I pray that the motion is supported by as many Members as possible. I thank you.

4.56
MR GEOFREY EKANYA (FDC, Tororo County, Tororo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The wave in the country is to have a university in every region. However, I would like to put the Minister of Education and Government on notice - I would like the Rt Hon. Prime Minister to listen – that the wave now is for a university in every sub-region. 

The Rt Hon. Prime Minister and Government are aware that for a country like Uganda to move from a low developed country to a middle income and to a first world country, we will need technical colleges, which are capital intensive, to produce technicians to power industries and agriculture so that we move forward. It is not through universities.

However, since this is the wave, let us be fair, colleagues. We have a region called Busoga - look at Jinja, Kamuli, Iganga and Mayuge – and there is nothing. There is a man who came here called Father Grimes and he started a university before any of these universities came up; it is called Namasagali University. Up to now, Government has abandoned that university and it is almost collapsing to zero. 

Therefore, Madam Speaker, with pain, I would like to move an amendment to this motion that we add Namasagali University in Kamuli District as part of the universities and we direct the minister to issue a statutory instrument to establish Namasagali University in Kamuli as a public university. I beg to move the motion before I continue –(Interjections)– Thank you very much. 

Madam Speaker, let us be fair. If you look at the national development programme for this country, we have PRDP for northern Uganda, we have a programme for Rwenzori; it is in Busoga where we say they have jiggers and they do not have anything. For once, let us put something for the people of Busoga –(Applause)– so that we transform that region as well. Thank you very much.

4.59
MS MASIKO KABAKUMBA (NRM, Bujenje County, Masindi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise to support the motion moved by hon. Ekanya that we amend this motion to include Namasagali University in Kamuli. I will also amend hon. Ekanya’s motion to include Bunyoro University in Kigumba and it is seconded – (Interruption)

BRIG. GEN. KATIRIMA: Madam Speaker, I listened to my sister, hon. Kabakumba from Masindi, moving to further debate an amendment to a motion which had been moved by hon. Ekanya, which motion in my understanding violates the provisions of the Constitution. 

Madam Speaker, Article 93 of the Constitution bars Parliament from moving on a motion whose effect is to increase a charge on the Consolidated Fund unless it has been moved by Government. At the commencement of this debate, a certificate of financial implication was tabled before the House regarding the universities which are going are to be established. Is it in order to proceed to debate a motion which is in contravention of the provisions of the Constitution?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we all took oath to abide by the Constitution and one of the areas in that Constitution is the need for equity in development for the whole country. (Applause) I do not think we should use our Rules of Procedure to stifle the views of those who are complaining. Let us listen and the minister will advise us whether she will take it on or not.

MS KABAKUMBA: Thank very much, Madam Speaker, for your wise ruling. I move that Bunyoro University be added because I am mindful of the background of how these universities are being proposed. The President did commit himself to create a public university in Bunyoro way back in 2001.

Madam Speaker, every time there is a creation of a university, we are given excuses. Last time, it was the Uganda Petroleum Institute. I am careful and I know it is not a university, and he did mention that at an appropriate time it will be upgraded to a university. I think this is the right time to upgrade this institution.

Madam Speaker, looking through all the justifications, Bunyoro and Busoga as regions more than qualify to be part of this motion, more than even those that have been proposed. As we create these three, let us add Kamuli, that is, Namasagali University, and Bunyoro Public University which has been on your desk honourable Minister of Education. You know that it has been on your desk for a long time.

Madam Speaker, I know when it comes to Busoga and Bunyoro they are going to raise the issue of resources. However, this is the Parliament that appropriates and Government should find resources for only these two other universities. I know and believe that it is possible –(Interruption) 

MR ODONGA OTTO: I rise on a point of order basing on the sectarian remarks being made by the former Minister for Presidency, hon. Kabakumba Masiko.

For most of these projects, whether markets or universities, their gestation period is about five to seven years. So, they started while she was in Cabinet but now she is out and she is crying loudest because she is out. (Laughter) Is she in order to express her personal sentiments and yet she was in Cabinet and she did not do anything about the issues she is raising? 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, she said that she supported the creation of Gulu University because it was going to move with Bunyoro University. While she has seen Gulu University move, Bunyoro University has not started. That is her compliant.

MS KABAKUMBA: I thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for your wise ruling. It is not only Gulu University that I supported but also Busitema University, Muni University and all the others. 

I was in this Parliament and if you were listening carefully, at every point there is a different excuse that is given. I am saying that we are running out of excuses and there is no genuine excuse that can be raised now to leave out Bunyoro and Namasagali universities. I thank you and really beg that these two be included in this motion. (Applause)

5.06
MS JOY ONGOM (Independent, Woman Representative, Lira): I thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the education minister for bringing this motion on the Floor of Parliament. 

The creation of these three universities in Lira, Kabale and Soroti has brought relief to this country. I would like to bring the assurance of this House that the three universities should and shall be of national character. Much as many people are complaining that it seems that almost every district will want to have a university, if you went to some of these universities you will find that the students come from all over the country. Lira University, for example, already has nurses and they are from all over the country. I wish to say that the universities will be of national character.

The development of these universities will bring a lot of transformation to this country. Take the case of Lira District; when the teachers finish their evening lessons they go to malwa joints because they do not have anywhere else to go. However, they will be able to attend lectures at these universities in the evening and in the process upgrade their education level. I thank the minister for that.

The development of these universities has helped our people, especially with the cost of transport and accommodation. Most of our students could not go to Kampala or Gulu because it was expensive for them. I think Soroti and Lira universities are going to be saviours and they will even be nearer to the Karamoja region. I stand to support this.

I would like to assure the House that Lira University, as the honourable said earlier, has vast land that is titled with no issues of land wrangles that could arise out of that. I stand to second the motion that the creation of these universities be supported. I thank you.

5.09
MR MARTIN BAHINDUKA (Independent, Ntoroko County, Ntoroko): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to commend the minister and the NRM government for moving this motion. Although I am an Independent, in my culture we give credit where it is due and I do not think that I am doing anything bad.

I would like to go back to the issue and deviate a little bit from hon. Ekanya’s motion. As I speak, the whole of Rwenzori region has no university. We definitely want one. We are intelligent people who can go to school and qualify and do what is best for our communities and it also applies equally to the people from Karamoja sub region.

I believe that unlike hon. Ekanya’s direction and from the statements that other Members have alluded to in the House, the NRM Government is a government that practices regional balance. I know that since you brought this statement in good faith, the Rwenzori region is already considered but in future all we need to know is when. 

I do not think that you are deliberately considering only a few and leaving us out. Since you have said that NRM is a government that believes in regional balance, tell us when you are considering the Rwenzori and Karamoja regions so that this debate does not go down to a district, constituency or village level. Let us debate at a wider scope and see how we resolve all these issues – (Interruption)

MR BAGOOLE: I thank my brother from Ntoroko District. The information that I want to give you is that the Busoga sub region has no university. However, the Church of Uganda helped Busoga and created a private university, although for some time that university has been denied a charter by the education ministry. 

The ministry always gives conditions that the university lacks buildings and when it puts up buildings, they say the academic staff are not sufficient. When the university recruits qualified academic staff, they change the conditions. This is the information that I want to give you.

MR BAHINDUKA: I thank the honourable member for that information. As I conclude, I would like to say that it will be very bad for us to get out of this House when Busoga has been considered and Rwenzori has not because I will go and protest with my people. So if we are going to do it, let us amend this motion to the last bit, if that is how we are going to move. Thank you.

5.13
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman Representative, Serere): I thank you very much. I would like to thank the minister for this motion. I would like to thank Government for listening to the plight and demands of the people. This has been a consistent demand from the people of Teso for a public university. 

I would like to, in expressing my support for this motion, highlight two very important things. One, I have looked at the certificate of financial implication and certainly, the money is little. To operationalise these universities, we would like to see an additional commitment in future to ensure that these universities execute the real mandate of universities – the teaching and research functions. It is not enough to just have a place and call it a university if it is not executing its mandate. We hope that in the future, more money can be found to help the universities achieve that mandate.

Two, if you look at these areas where these universities would have a local catchment, there is something very common with all of them - the poor performance at A’level. I would like the education ministry to ensure that these universities also derive the students that they will have locally. 

If you go to most of the secondary schools around Teso, Kabale or Lango, basic equipment for science teaching and learning is not there. This includes laboratories and appliances such Bunsen burners. To help the minister in charge of this segment in the Ministry of Education to realise his dream, we need that backward linkage to help create, generate students that can be recruited for these specialised courses in these universities.

Madam Speaker, I have highlighted that the performance in this region has been lacking and it is up to the ministry to demonstrate their commitment to – (Interruption)

MR BARYAYANGA: Thank you for giving way. Of course, I support the creation of universities but what would happen if these universities that are coming up could also move with NTCs and UCCs. Do NTCs and UCCs have to always be diploma-awarding institutions? Can’t NTC Kabale be a school of education and give degrees and UCC Kabale a school of business studies and award both degrees and diplomas? 

Can’t these colleges also be partly attached to these universities? Can’t we have Kachwekano turned into a school of agriculture and be attached to these universities? It is a school of agriculture now but it is just giving diplomas and certificates. I do not know whether we can have them move in tandem with these universities so that they also grow to become bigger. Why should they only give certificates and diplomas? Can’t they also give degrees? 

MS ALASO: I think that is an extremely important bit of information. 

I just want to share my final thought. I do not think that at this particular point we will major on the approach to education in this country. This approach to decentralise public universities and put them in every region is the approach of the NRM and while they are in power, we will support it because we do not want our people to be left out. We certainly support these proposals –(Interruption)

MS NYAKIKONGORO: Thank you, my sister. The information I want to give is that when we have a wider spread out of these universities, it empowers the communities and the human resource within those areas increases, rather than having a particular human resource that dominates.

I want to give you an example of our Ankole Western University, which is a private university, the one that you have been reading about in the papers. It has empowered the people of Sheema to the extent that even the teachers and those people who have been working in the sub counties and at the district are now degree holders. So, it empowers the human resource. That is why they say that in Uganda we have the best human resource because of the institutionalisation of these universities.

I want to support the establishment of these new universities. However, Government should think of these other areas like Rwenzori, Kamuli and Bunyoro. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: You gave all your time to informers. Just conclude because you have donated all your time. You are very generous.

MS ALASO: I would like to emphasise that even as we take on this approach as a country, the quality of the products of those universities should be a marketable quality in a global world. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

5.19
MS BEATRICE ANYWAR (FDC, Woman representatives Kitgum):  Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I support the motion as amended. However, I want to make some observations and probably also give caution- (Interjection) - Can I be protected from the minister?

THE SPEAKER: You are protected.

MS ANYWAR: I support the motion as amended. It would not be a problem because education is building human resource. I also want to let this House know that because we support the building of capacity at university level, as a family we have given 100 hectares of land free of charge to Gulu University to establish education in northern Uganda and the country at large. 

That brings me to the issue that if we are establishing such institutions for the common good, it has a lot of cost implications. However, I would want the minister to ensure that these established institutions of Government are on secure land. They should not be curtailed by land struggles. If this happens then our efforts would go to waste.

I also hope that the agitation we are putting across is not going to be for political window-dressing as it is for districts. Government should have come here earlier with a plan for the regional universities. That is now what is being agitated for here. Before this is operationalised, I would want Government to come to this House and give assurances about quality in these universities. Quality in these universities is what will propel them. Now we are only looking at the –(Interruption)

MR TANNA: I thank the honourable colleague for giving way to take this information. 

Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, she has raised a pertinent issue that has been burning me here from the time the honourable minister read the motion. She is talking about the quality of the output. Today all these private universities and government universities set different examinations for the same course while all secondary schools have papers set by UNEB for O’ level, A’ Level and P.7.  

The law exams at KIU, at UCU and at Makerere University are different. The advantage in the law sector is that you must go to LDC. However, in this case we have doctors, engineers; it very important that we look at the aspect of standardising the quality of the output from all these universities. I thank you, honourable colleague.

MS ANYWAR: Thank you for the information. We are emphasising the quality because we are preparing these universities to take over students who have already gone through UPE and USE whose quality is still lacking. We want the minister to come to this House and give us assurance on the quality of our students from these universities and how they can be marketed not only in Uganda but all over the globe.

There is the issue supervision of our universities.  We have Makerere University and Kyambogo University here and you hear about cases of students graduating with retakes and students buying examinations. We want that assurance before operationalising these other universities; otherwise we are going to create this for window dressing and it will not serve the purpose.

Two, we would want the courses, which are going to be assigned to these universities to reflect what we need in this country because we are looking at the job market. Are we just going to produce unemployable or we are going to produce employable? 
We have left out the technical aspect of our education and we are now going higher - (Member timed out.)

5.25
MR JOSEPH SSEWUNGU (DP, Kalungu County West, Kalungu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. As an educationist, I would be unfair to myself if I do not support education institutions and because of that I stand to support the motion. 

Secondly, I want to give assurance to this House that Kalungu as a district is not demanding for a university but students from Kalungu will go to any university that is established in Uganda. 

In support of hon. Geoffrey Ekanya’s motion, I want to assure you that even the Catholic Church wants to establish a university in Busoga; a national major seminary because there is a gap there in our faith.

Madam Speaker, I want to emphasise and thank the minister but my major area of interest - I do not know how we are going to put it into this motion - is how the Committee on Education is going to be involved in the establishment of these universities. Why, because normally, these universities start and for us we go in to solve problems. At least the time I have spent in Parliament and even when I come back - I know I will be a member of the Committee on Education - but we visited a number of universities but found a lot of gaps. 

It is the Committee on Education, which looks into the budget and if we are looking into the budget we must know how these universities must be established. Already I want to assure you, the moment people hear that you want to start a university at Soroti as they have been named - people are already lining up and a lot of stories will come out. The question however, is: How are we putting the safeguard? When you look at the loan scheme, because of the strong involvement of the Committee on Education, at least they just went away from the Act but its establishment and the way it moved was okay. We are not about benchmarking but about establishing universities with no problems that will come later on -(Interruption) 

MS BAKO: Thank you very much, honourable for giving way. The information I want to give you and this House is that proximity does not mean access- when you talk about Uganda’s university education- Madam Speaker, Muni University had an intake of 72 students, but of the 72 only four came from Arua district; those on Government scholarship.  

Now what does that tell you? It means that even if an institution is established in your district, it does not necessarily mean that it is your own people that are going to have access to the Government scholarships. And therefore what hon. Alaso is saying is so vital that unless you begin from the very beginning then these universities will just be occupationally on your land but access will not be for your people.

Secondly, I think therefore, hon. Minister, the information that I want to give to my colleague is that I think it is higher time we started thinking about these institutions based on population. We are not going to continue saying let there be one in Arua - 

THE SPEAKER: But are you really giving information or you are submitting?

MS CHRISTINE ABIA: I am giving him information. (Laughter)

MR SSEWUNGU: The information has not come to me; it has gone somewhere else. Hope it has reached. Anyway, Madam Speaker, as I face the minister – hon. Minister, kindly look at me because someone is distracting you – I want to inform you that establishment of universities must be for the betterment of Ugandans and in terms of remuneration.

Madam Speaker, as we talk the Ministry of Education has sent out circulars to all head teachers in Uganda who do not have degrees that they be given three years - they will be struck of the posts of head teachers, if they don’t acquire them by that time. Some of them who had only diplomas went back for degree. But after qualifying as degree holders, they still earn the same salary as a Grade 3 teacher. 

Now as we establish these universities, let us also match with the remuneration of our workers as they qualify. Do not just think about qualifying – Joseph Ssewungu has got a degree, he goes back to teach in a primary school as a head teacher but earns only Shs 300,000 yet he holds a Bachelor of Education. That will not contribute to the development of our country - (Member timed out.)

5.30
MR SULAIMAN BALYEJJUSA (NRM, Budiope County East, Buyende): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I rise in support of the motion that Government goes ahead to establish the three universities in the areas that have been highlighted in the report.

I also want to associate myself with the very illuminating submissions of colleagues that have happened before relating to this debate.

I especially find it very heartening when I read justification No.8 that these universities will focus more on technical and scientific fields, which are critically needed in Uganda’s job market.

However, I want to register one concern. Drawing from the words of the Minister of Local Government, when he was giving concluding remarks on the debate about markets, he said that Government must balance our diversities and regions in order to cause equitable development in the country. But where is Busoga connection? That is why I want to add my voice on the submission of hon. Kabakumba Matsiko that we make an amendment to include Busoga University as one of those universities that must be provided for and Bunyoro - there is Bunyoro, Busoga and Namasagali particularly from Busoga - (Interjection) - yes I can take the information.

MR KENNETH LUBOGO: Thank you very much hon. Kirunda for the space you have given to me. I want to give you some information, which I think will enrich our understanding of this whole situation. 

In the Bible there is a book called Lamentations and in that book somebody called Jeremiah was lamenting, considering how Israel had forgotten their God. In this particular case there is lamentation as to how Busoga has been forgotten.

To me there is an apparent crime that Busoga committed that we have not yet known. Maybe you will seek from the Prime Minister in your submission to tell us what that crime is because he studied in Busoga; he was there for a long time –(Laughter)– but when it comes to the issue of special development programs, Busoga is left out. When it comes to the issue of the elderly getting benefits - the SAGE Scheme - Busoga is completely left out. When it comes to the issue of universities that we are debating right now, Busoga is left out. 

So, probably in you submission, seek from the Prime Minister to know, the crime that we committed so that we may probably repent and be considered too? Thank you very much. 

THE SPEAKER: The Prime Minister wants to say something? Okay, after him? 

MR WAIRA MAJEGERE: The information I am giving is that since it is becoming imminently clear that Busoga University, that is Namasagali and Bunyoro University should be approved tonight, I am suggesting or giving information to the minister that she goes back and get a Certificate of Financial Implications, which includes Namasagali and Bunyoro universities before we go for further debate. Thank you.

MR BALYEJJUSA: Madam Speaker, as I conclude my submission, I want to tell this august House that Members from some corners are already whispering that –(Member timed out)

5.34
MR FELEX OKOT-OGONG (NRM, Dokola County, Dokolo): Madam Speaker, I stand here to support a Resolution of Parliament on the establishment of Kabale University, Lira University and Soroti University as public universities.

Madam Speaker, I support this resolution for basically three critical issues. First, as a country, we have our National Development Plan whose vision is to transform this country. In transforming this country, it is known in many studies that there can never be meaningful development without a trained, skilled and empowered human resource, in terms of education. 

This motion fills the gap of empowering our human resource in training and skilling Ugandans. Therefore, I am in total support of this motion, Madam Speaker.

Secondly, I support this motion because Uganda, as you know, has become the centre of education and excellence. I have read many reports – and I invite Members to read – about rating of universities in Africa and outside Africa, where Uganda stands highly in terms of standards of education. Makerere University in the East and Southern Africa is leading. It is only universities in South Africa and Nigeria that beat Makerere University. You can read about it. Makerere University is the best university in this region.

Therefore, I support this motion and I would like to invite all Members of Parliament, of good standing, to support this motion for establishment of Kabala University, Lira University and Soroti University.

Madam Speaker, I also would like to support this motion because today is the first day that I am seeing Uganda being passed as a nation. I am seeing a university being established in Kabale in Western Uganda; I am seeing a university being established in Lira, in the North; and I am seeing Soroti University being established in the East. I believe, as Members urge for more universities, I would like to appeal to the minister that next time you appear here try to cover all parts of the country, especially Busoga and Bunyoro.

I know the difficulty you may have here, especially as per our Constitution. We are all in support but we want it to be presented in a manner that –(Member timed out.)

5.38
MR EDDIE KWIZERA (NRM, Bufumbira County East, Kisoro): Madam Speaker, thank you very much. I stand to support the motion, as amended, to provide for the areas that had been left out. The minister is also aware that the President directed that there should be a university in Kisoro – (Laughter) - called John Carey Institute of Science and Technology. 

It is provided for and land has been secured. This is why later we shall say that this motion should be withdrawn and be taken to the Committee on Education so that more harmonisation is done on it.

Universities are centres of knowledge manufacturing. Therefore, the more universities we shall have – if Government has capacity to maintain them – the better for us. We should not see any region - if Government can afford – like Busoga without a university. There must be a reason for that to happen. That is why Government should have a policy or criteria that guide it in allocating and establishing some of these higher institutions of learning.

I have seen a number of universities that do not have capacity and the level of employability of our graduates is the lowest in East Africa. This is basically because there are some universities that offer second degrees, but do not have professors and so have no capacity to supervise people who are doing second degrees.

So, in establishment of these universities, what capacity do we have to add to what we have now? We should not do more of politics than science because education is science. We should limit ourselves as to whether we are doing politics or science or economics. Otherwise the output – (Interruption)

MR AYOO: Thank you, Madam Speaker and hon. Eddie Kwizera, for giving way. The information I would like to give is that unless we establish these universities and lobby for support so that the real meaning of having universities of science and technology is realised, we will not be doing much. For that matter, I would think the minister moves in to lobby support from partners for these universities to get the capacity to compete in science and technology within the East African Region and beyond. 

But also we need to look at the quality of the management of the universities – the councils – the minister must ensure they put people who are going to perform, but not to reward political failures. This is the information I want to give.

Otherwise, I support the motion - I think we start with this one and let the minister bring the other and we support -

THE SPEAKER: You have taken over hon. Eddie Kwizera’s time. 

5.41
MS JUDITH AMOIT (NRM, Woman Representative, Pallisa): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I also would like to join the other Members to thank the minister for the motion and the government for finally accepting the people’s demand. 

These universities, Madam Speaker, are demand-driven. I have been in Pallisa for consultations and this has been one of the key issues that people have been asking. I am happy that today I am in the House and it has been brought on board; I support this motion 100 per cent. 

First, our region – the Teso Region – has been lagging behind for a very long time. When you look at the statistics of poverty levels, we are actually much marginalised. My thinking is that the establishment of these universities is going to create a big economic and social transformation set up for our people. Since education is the core tool of empowerment, we are very happy; the establishment of these universities will build capacities for people to engage in economic activities.

As you are aware, too, we are soon to establish a fruit factory in Soroti. Our people do not have the technical knowledge even to plant the citrus that we need. When I look at Soroti University, the function is that it is going to build skills for the people. This should be able to create a lot of impact for the people to fight poverty in our region.

However, Madam Speaker, like my sister, the hon. Alice  Alaso said, if the ministry does not engage in revamping the academic performance in the lower schools, we shall not have the students to feed these universities. 

I would like to thank the hon. Dr J C Muyingo; he recently visited Pallisa. When he randomly sampled the schools, he found a lot of challenges. The teachers were not in schools. The headmasters were in schools, but the staff were not there. This type of monitoring is really needed as well. Also, performance appraisal for our teachers, Madam Speaker, is still wanting.

The ministry should think of a mechanism of revamping and helping the lower levels to teach these children the knowledge that will help them excel and join these universities. Otherwise, we shall - (Member timed out)

THE SPEAKER: Yes, hon. Stella Namoe-Let us hear from Karamoja first. (Laughter)

5.44
MS STELLA NAMOE (NRM, Woman Representative, Napak): Madam Speaker, I stand to support the motion for the establishment of the three universities and thank Government for the establishment of those universities.

Madam Speaker, I really have a concern that Government should consider other regions that do not have even tertiary institutions, for example, the Karamoja sub region, does not have even a college or a tertiary institution. Given the increased enrolment in UPE and USE schools, we have so many students who cannot manage to come to these other tertiary institutions in other districts.

So, I really appeal to Government to consider the establishment of such institutions in regions like Karamoja for us to build the skills and transform Karamoja as a region given the fact that skills are a survival for everybody. Therefore - (Interruption)

MR AYEPA: Thank you, honourable member for giving me way. The information I want to give to my honourable colleague is that when you look, for example, at the level of poverty in Uganda, you realise that 74 per cent of Karimojongs still live below the poverty line. So, it is only education that can make Karamoja transform. 

And for the people in Teso and other regions, unless Karamoja is developed that is when you can remain peaceful. (Laughter). If Karamoja is not developed, the rest of the places in Uganda will not be peaceful. (Laughter). Therefore, if we do not educate the people of Karamoja, we are risking. Thank you.

MS NAMOE: Madam Speaker, I thank my honourable colleague for that information. That is the fact. Madam Speaker, I beg to end here and I stand in support of this motion. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I know you want to vote on that motion, but let us listen to other people as well. 

5.47
MS ANNE AURU (NRM, Woman Representative, Moyo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand to support the minister on the motion for the establishment of the said three public universities. I feel it is really in line with the decentralisation policy in Uganda. It is also community driven. 

However, the big question is, will the communities benefit fully from the universities? There is need for the Ministry of Education and Sports to put more emphasis and support on education at primary and secondary levels so that the people in these districts also benefit from these universities.

Madam Speaker, Northern Region has got the highest level of school dropouts. I am happy that these universities are going to award certificates, diplomas and degrees. That means, the people of this region will have the opportunity to eventually attain these awards.

Uganda is at the forefront of championing regional integration. It is doing very well in the field of education; many foreign students are coming to Uganda. With Lira and Soroti public universities coming on board and since South Sudan also wants to become part of the East African Region -when they join and come to benefit from our education, eventually there will be peace. The constant fights between Uganda and Sudan will subside somehow. Otherwise, it is an opportunity for the region because it will bring development. With the people going there, there will be market for the products.

Madam Speaker, I would like to support the motion moved by the hon. Kabakumba Matsiko. It is important for all the regions to have public universities though we need to be advised by the technical persons whether it will be able to work by the next financial year. It is because the three universities, the financial implications have already been tabled, but for the other two, it is not yet there; we need advice. Thank you very much.

5.50
MR STEPHEN TASHOBYA (NRM, Kajara County, Ntungamo): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I would like to join those who are seconding and supporting the establishment of the three public universities. I also would like to support the amendments to have similar public universities in Busoga and Bunyoro. (Applause)

However, Madam Speaker, after supporting this motion, it is time now really to have a moratorium on setting up of new public universities. We should re-assess the courses offered in the current public universities and see whether they are relevant to the development of our country. 

After assessing and analysing what we are giving out and what we are providing to our children in these universities, it may be possible that even the universities we have, if properly utilised to offer the right courses, they may be sufficient for the manpower needs of our country. So, it is important that we re-examine what we are teaching and offering in some of these universities. 

In that regard, Madam Speaker, I would like to have an assurance - after supporting the creation of these three public universities - that Government will utilise these universities to provide programmes in ICT, public health, medicine, engineering and other science teaching. 

I am saying this because, for example, the Mbarara University of Science and Technologies was basically set up to provide education in science and medicine. However, when you go there now, those courses are now only about 20 per cent of what is being offered in that university. So, we would like an assurance that after approving the creation of these universities, they will provide courses that are being put before the House.

Lastly, Madam Speaker, we should re-examine the education being offered by the present public universities because if you go to some of these countries that are developed, like South Eastern Asia, they are not developed because of the universities they have, but because of the nature of the institutions they have put to provide relevant education for their people, right from primary education. They have more technical institutions to provide skills for the children right from primary. One does not have to go to the university to get the skills and have the capacity to employ themselves and others. Therefore, I think the minister - (Member timed out.)

5.53
MR JULIUS BIGIRIWA (NRM, Buhaguzi County, Hoima): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to support the motion as amended, to include additional public universities for Busoga and Bunyoro sub regions.

Madam Speaker, there is no doubt that everywhere a university has been established, the communities have not remained the same. If I could put it in the normal experience we have gone through, you realise that when a university is in your region or in a place nearby, even if you look at the business aspect of it, there is always a boom. People will have to construct hostels. There will be sale of all foodstuffs; social transformation will have to come in certainly. So, there is no doubt that for a region to have a university there has to be a change in whatever form, but mainly social transformation. This is because we needed education and still need it. 

I would like to request colleagues to support the motion, as amended. We need all regions developing together in tandem with access to education. We don’t want have some regions blaming others simply because they have received and others had not. 


The other issue I want to talk about is the emphasis on science education. We have got a very big challenge; we have been mainly emphasising science education but at the expense of other courses, for example, in the arts field. We are quite aware that at some point we will have more scientists than the administrators yet at the end of the day, we also need them. 

We should not be thinking of developing scientists at the expense of other courses in administration, managers and social workers.  Otherwise, we will find ourselves in a situation where the country will have more scientists at the expense of the others. 

5.56
MR DENIS OBUA (NRM, Ajuri County, Alebtong): Madam Speaker, I rise to support the basic principles for the establishment of the three proposed public universities. That notwithstanding, may I seek clarification from the minister just for the record? 

While laying on our Table some documents, the minister laid the certificate of Title for only one university. The other two were not laid. May I be guided whether the minister is in the knowledge that the other two remaining proposed public universities also have certificates of title? This is important in order for us to be sure these proposed universities are legally having land? 

Secondly, I have perused through the second attachment to the motion, which is the Certificate of Financial Implications. When you look at the last part signed by the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, a total of Shs 7.5 billion has been earmarked for the three proposed public universities in Soroti, Lira and Kabale. 

However, when it comes to the distribution of Shs 7.5 billion, one proposed university is taking Shs 6 billion. The other one is taking Shs 1.5 billion and the third university does not have any amount attached. Just for the principle and the notion of equity and fairness - because all these proposed public universities require resources for development. May I know whether probably in subsequent years we shall see enhancements, in terms of these subventions going to the various universities? 

Those are the two points of clarification. We are happy. Whereas, the President had already highlighted, the Lira University would be effective in this financial year, I see in the Certificate of Financial Implications, it is for the next academic year. I do not have any problem with that. We shall be patiently waiting. 
Otherwise, on issues of resources, I think there should be equity such that even when we approve other proposed universities, we are moving with equitable distribution of resources. Thank you. 

5.59
MR TOM AZA (NRM, West Moyo County, Moyo): Thank you, Madam Speaker and my honourable colleagues. I would like to concur with my colleagues to support of the motion for the establishment of Lira, Kabale and Soroti public universities. 

However, I would like to draw the attention of the ministers present to the following issues: one is that they should work hard in order to avoid mistakes that are being made by the existing public universities especially Kyambogo, Gulu and Makerere, where strikes are rampant. You find today Kyambogo University has gone on strike, the following month Gulu and after two to three months, other universities also strike. 

The second issue is that you should please ensure that we have techno-science subjects in these universities. The world is becoming globalised. We now use the internet to access information, learning and so many other things. We should therefore enforce the issue of techno-science in our universities. 

The third issue is the payment of lecturers and professors - these are the ones who normally instigate our students into strikes. You find lecturers quarrelling amongst themselves and the administrators doing the same too. 

Therefore, harmonise their work and please try to have proper administrative set-ups in these universities with roles –(Interruption)

MR GILBERT OLANYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the honourable colleague for giving way. The information I would like to give to the House is that in Gulu University, Kitgum Branch, this semester students did not do exams because lecturers were not paid salaries. Therefore, wherever we are opening a new university, the issues of lecturers’ salaries should be considered properly.
 
MR AZA: Thank you very much my colleague. Otherwise, I would like to end by saying that places like Karamoja, Busoga, Kamuli and Bunyoro should also be considered for public universities establishment. 

6.02
MR TERENCE ACHIA: (NRM, Bokora County, Napak): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Whereas, the University and Tertiary Institutions Act empowers the minister responsible for education - and on recommendation of the National Council for Higher Education  - to establish public universities, I believe the same Act empowers the minister to also strategically plan for the establishment of such public universities in other regions. 

My main interest here is: much as the three have come out now, we would love to hear from the minister on what plans she has about similar universities being established wholesomely to include other places like Karamoja, Bunyoro, Busoga and the Rwenzori regions. 

We would like to hear from her on what plans are in place because we do not want to leave this unheard. It will help us to remember that at least there was a plan; it will be very good for us. 
A public university is good. It has more advantages. It is good for Karamoja for instance with that population of about one million people; we would love to hear that. 

6.04
MS MARGARET BABA DIRI (NRM, Woman Representative, Koboko): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to support the motion to the establishment of the said three public universities. We so far have six public universities in Uganda and when we establish these three, we shall have nine universities. 

In future, we are going to add the three - one for Busoga; one for the Ankole Region and the other for the Karamoja Region. That will be considered in future, not now. Everything must be planned, you cannot just say that let us have a university today and you have it like that; it cannot happen. However, we pray that they will be established in the future.

Madam Speaker, the more public universities we have, the better for Ugandans because in other developed countries, there are very many public universities that are accessible - anybody who wishes to get a degree can just go right ahead and get it because the universities are available.  We need these public universities because we would like to de-congest Makerere University. The students are over 33,000 and Kyambogo University too, is congested. When we get more public universities established, the other students will go there; the congestion challenge will be solved. That is very important because if they are too many, they cannot receive quality education.

Having a public university in a nearby area is very important. The people in that area benefit. I was really sorry and perturbed when I learnt that this year, Muni University admitted only four students from the whole of West Nile. What does that mean? It means that our students cannot qualify to go to that nearby university.

First we need to emphasise the issue of improving the quality of secondary education so that more students can qualify to join these public universities. As we improve, we need affirmative action - the place in which the university is situated - the students from that area should be admitted as long as they have two principle passes and have passed General Paper.

For the students with disabilities, since 2001, they have been taking only 64 throughout and yet the number of students with disabilities going to the university is increasing. Now that we have more Universities, we need the number of students with disabilities to also increase to at least 100 or even more.In Muni University –(Member timed out.)

6.04
MS MARGRET MAKHOHA (NRM, Woman Representative, Namayingo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would also like to thank the minister for the motion to establish the three more public universities. 

I rise in support of the motion because I know that it is very important for us to have public universities in different regions. I would also wish to appreciate private university owners who have been supplementing because they also play a very big role in ensuring that many Ugandans access higher education services.

However, I equally would like to note that most of these private universities are business minded. As a result, in most cases they are after making profits which makes majorly students from upcountry at times find difficulties in paying tuition. So, when Government comes up with the program of establishing more public universities across different regions, it is a very good idea; I welcome it.

In most cases, many people prefer joining public universities because at times when they go for interviews, the employers prefer recruiting people who have been in Government institutions. So it is very important that Government establishes more public universities in all regions of Uganda.

As my colleagues have said, Busoga as a region has been left out for long. I know that today it may not be easy since the budget is already drawn. But if it is possible, then the minister should quickly implement and in case it is not easy for it to be done today, in the coming financial year, it should be made a priority.

I would like to ask the Minister for Education and Sports to consider Namayingo District for a vocational institution. Yes we are talking about establishment of public universities but in Namayingo District, we do not have even a mere vocational Government institution.

So as we go for public universities, may you please equip even these other regions and districts with vocational institutions for those who are in positions to go for higher studies to do so? We are advocating for universities, how about those who drop out of schools?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I know you want to move a motion but before we take a vote. I would like to hear – because we are going to vote whether we have amended the motion or we revert to the original one; I would like to hear from the Government, before we vote.

6.10
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Thank you, Madam Speaker. This obviously has been a very dynamic debate on the establishment of the Universities and on the motion by the Minster of Education and the amendment by hon. Kabakumba.

Let me – initially yes, the suggestion came from the hon. Geoffrey Ekanya, and then my sister, the hon. Kabakumba Matsiko tabled a motion. Anyway, let me go straight to the substance of my contribution.

The subject of my contribution is that the Government of Uganda supports access to education - primary, secondary and tertiary level and would like it to be done in a planned and effective way.

Secondly, Government supports the establishment of a public university in Busoga and Bunyoro and other deserving areas of Uganda. They are many and that is why the point made is that we should do this in a planned and systematic manner. This is a very important point.

The establishment of a public university as you know has a number of stages and these stages among other things – the Minister of Education is reminding us that it takes at least four important stages. The minister’s motion has taken into account all these stages.  

Therefore, I would like to propose a win-win situation. The win-win situation I would like to propose, on behalf of Government, is that these three public universities are actually going to become fully functional in the financial year 2016/2017.

This is because of the financial constraints and other considerations - the win-win proposal I have is that, a public university in Busoga and Bunyoro should then be established in the financial year 2017/2018.

I am making this point because it will be necessary for the Ministry of Education and Sports, the National Council for Higher Education to go through the necessary requirements in order to establish a viable public university in Busoga and in Bunyoro for – (Interruption)

MR BAHINDUKA: I rise on a point of order. With all due respect to the Rt hon. Prime Minister, who has been sitting in this House this whole afternoon, not only listening to the pleas of the people from the Busoga and Bunyoro regions but equally Rwenzori and Karamoja regions. 

Madam Speaker, and I say this emotionally, is the Rt. hon. Prime Minister in order to only have opened his ears to two regions and look at the rest as if they are not regions of this country and therefore do not deserve to be considered? Is he therefore, in order to continuously refer to only two regions as if we the other Members of Parliament in this House who made statements to that effect just wasted our time?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, he has just started the submission. I don’t know whether he was not going to talk about Karamoja and Rwenzori. (Laughter) But having said that, Prime minister, I think it is important to give a message of hope about equity in this country. Surely can’t you make a commitment also for Rwenzori and Moroto in the other financial years?

MR EKANYA: Madam Speaker, I would like to seek clarification from the Prime Minister. When I moved a motion for the establishment of Namasagali University in Kamuli, I was aware of the four stages. When we passed a resolution –(Interjections)- Kindly let me finish. When I moved a motion, I was aware of the four stages. When we passed a resolution here to establish Busitema University, a decision was taken that Busitema University would have campuses in Nagongera, Soroti and Namasagali. However, to my surprise - for Members of Parliament who have not gone there - by the time we were created Busitema University, Namasagali University had already been started by Father Grime –(Interjections) – yes! A lot of resource had been put there. 

But it is so painful, Madam Speaker, that to this date, Busitema University has not been getting support to extend subvention to Namasagali University yet it has been extending support to its campuses at Nagongera and Soroti. Today we are creating Teso University in Soroti - it is proper that Namasagli University is given a charter because it has been there. It was started and has fulfilled the entire requirements but since Government abandoned it, it is now a bush. Are we fair?

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, I thank you for your ruling and let me also say that I agree with you, Madam Speaker that definitely we must have a message of hope that is perfectly in order. I earlier on in fact stated that both Busoga and Bunyoro, yes but I also said that this will give Government an opportunity to examine other areas of Uganda that may be found to be very deserving at this material time.

So, Madam Speaker, to really cut the long story short, establishment of public universities is a major issue. It requires the necessary planning and the Ministry of Finance to be doubly sure, through the issuance of certificates of financial implications that resources are available.

We heard from my good friend the hon. Gilbert Olanya that the Gulu-Kitgum Campus had big problems in sitting exam recently because of resources. Therefore, we must be sure that resources have been provided for and ensure that these institutions are going to be established and they are going to be viable. In regard to Namasagali University in Kamuli - I better get this clarification.

MR MAJEGERE: Thank you, Rt hon. Prime Minister. The clarification that I would like to seek is that you have not told us the criteria you used to select the three universities for those regions while leaving other big regions like Busoga that has 10 districts. Could you first tell us the criteria used to select those three regions?

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, as colleagues know very well, the Minister of Education and Sports dwelt on the criteria and reasons taken in to account when she was moving the motion. 

Concerning Namasagli University, all of us in this House know that Namasagali University or as used to be Busoga college, Namasagli has done great work, including producing our won Speaker of this august House and many other distinguished ladies and gentlemen. We would want to see this university given more support. By the way at the moment Government of Uganda pays money to Namasagali University. Of course it is true that gradually, if it becomes a public university then the subvention will move to proper location by Government but let us not stampede into creation of public universities. Let us have a systematic and well planned programme so that our public universities get to exist with viable and proper funding. 

As I said, I my view, a win-win situation is to have this motion passed and in addition agree that in financial year 2017/2018, two public universities – they could even be three, depending on studies by the National Council for Higher Education. This will be done in a well-planned manner.

In conclusion, I appeal to hon. Geoffrey Ekanya and my sister, the hon. Kabakumba Matsiko to support the motion moved by the Minister of Education and Sports with a clear understanding by Government that in the financial year 2017/2018 there will be a public university in Busoga and in Bunyoro and that the National Council for Higher Education will look at all these issues and at an appropriate time advise Government – can I have clarification from the Shadow Minister of Health?

DR BAYIGGA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I also thank you very much, Rt hon. Prime Minister; you are a gentleman. I would like to appreciate the planning for these universities and I wish to support it. However, do we have a human resource plan in terms of lecturers for these and other universities that we are planning to establish in the future?

By now, we should be able to tell some statistical numbers of the availability of academic staff, who would be ready to undertake duties in the near future and progressively, in the medium term, in terms of those numbers.

Secondly, there should be the availability of financial resources to support them so that we do not see hobnobbing lecturers; those who teach one institution to another. I mean those who can concentrate and bring up students at the university level, the way it used to be, other than what is happening now. I beg to seek that clarification. Thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: I appreciate the hon. Shadow Minister of Health for his inquiry. If I may make a comment with the permission of the Speaker on this - Uganda has done very well in training her human resources to master and take charge of higher education. 

As I speak, the information we have about, for example, PhD holders in Uganda - we have 973 Ugandans with PhDs and the training of more Ugandans in this direction continues - research continues.

The challenge is to ensure that we plan; we ensure there is quality and also help reskilling our people so that Vision 2040 and its requirements, in terms of skills are indeed met. That is the appeal I am making colleagues. 

Please support the ministers’ motion to establish the three public universities with a clear understanding and a balanced position from Government that a public university in Busoga and Bunyoro will begin in the year 2017/2018. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, it means that the Prime Minister has accepted the amendments; the mechanics can be done but he has agreed to the motion.Honourable members, I put the question that this House do adopt the motion for the amendment of that motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

6.28
THE MINISTER OF EDUCATION, SCIENCE TECHNOLOGY AND SPORTS (Maj. (Rtd) Jessica Alupo): Madam Speaker, for the record, I want to just articulate, point by point, the four strategic stages, which we as legislators, as part of Government, are required by the Universities and other Tertiary Institutions Act, which we passed to follow before we reached the stage we are now.

One, Government identifies the need to establish a public university in a given area for a specific purpose.

Second, Government through the respective sector, that is ministry of Education and Sports, writes to National Council for Higher Education notifying it about the need.


Third, National Council for Higher Education does sufficient verification and returns to the respective sector, with a response in terms of those very big volumes of reports, which I laid here.

Fourth, the minister comes to Parliament to lay those statutory instruments through a motion; that is what we have just done.

Madam Speaker, this should be reflected to what we are thinking about in line with amending the motion now because my thinking is that we are now moving from the fourth stage back to the first one.

However, the Rt hon. Prime Minister has made a fundamental point that Bunyoro, Busoga, Karamoja and Rwenzori regions have been asking Government, not only from here, but also through different fora – to the sector ministry and the visitor of the universities, according to the Act, who is the highest point of authority on issues of establishing universities - I would like to agree with the Rt hon. Prime Minister that we follow the stages and have these areas that we have all identified that have a need to have these universities, but according to the prescribed criteria under the law, which was passed by this very Parliament. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, thank you. Actually, we are all in agreement. What this House is saying is that you need commence those four steps in respect to Busoga, Bunyoro, Rwenzori and Karamoja regions. That is what we are saying.Honourable members, I put the question that this House do adopt the motion as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Motion adopted.

BILLS 
SECOND READING

THE PARLIAMENTARY PENSIONS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2014

6.31
MS ROSE AKOL (NRM, Woman Representative, Bukedea): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The Parliamentary Pensions Act Amendment Bill, 2014, was laid on the Table and appropriately referred to the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs.

Madam Speaker, I would like to request the chairperson of this committee to present the report; it is ready.

MR MUWUMA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a point of procedure. The minister of Internal Affairs was supposed to present a statement to this Floor regarding the immigration trainee officers but by that time the report had not been uploaded on the system.

Madam Speaker, on Monday, these recruits are supposed to move on to the next phase. I am surprised that if we are not able to consider their plight and concerns now, what would happen to those who are affected by the decision?

THE SPEAKER: Is it now available on your iPads?

MR OKUPA: Given the gravity of the matter - because we know there were ladies who were pregnant and were denied the opportunity. I think this is the time we need to sort this matter if Monday is the final day for them to move to the next stage. Whether it is uploaded or not, the hon. minister already has a statement; we can listen to it. We can accept to wave procedure and go digital to receive this information so that we are able to conclude this matter. Otherwise, we cannot afford to see these ladies left out just because some men have made them the way they are, no. And it is again men who are doing all these things to make them fail to get the positions.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I am just torn between allowing our Muslim fraternity to go and break the fast; that is my other worry. I do not know what you think about that.

MS AMONGI: Madam Speaker, in the circumstance, if the issue cannot be handled now, then we should  have a commitment from the honourable minister to differ the Monday interview until this matter is discussed on this Floor.

MR OBOTH: Madam Speaker, I have access to the statement. It is one of the shortest statements I have ever seen. This is very important. There are so many people waiting to hear this. The statement is less than two pages and the minister is known for being very brief and he will give us facts.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, of course we have been demanding for this since Tuesday when we got information that people with disabilities were disqualified from the marathon and, therefore, they could not proceed to the next stage. The ladies who were pregnant were also not allowed to continue and this is a violation of the rights of Ugandans. We would like to know what you are saying about this. We need answers so that we can tell our people what to do.

6.35
THE MINISTER OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Gen. Aronda Nyakairima): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Just like this matter on education that we have just finished, you also have to have the time to know the background of this. It was an advertisement of recruiting 300 people and 44,000 submitted their applications and were invited for interviews. We are in the fifth month of interviews and at every level, people have been eliminated. 

However, what has been done –(Interjections)– I will come to it but there are some facts which you need to know; that whereas in other areas the phases could not have caused controversy, this was purely according to the advert which was given out by the Ministry of Public Service. By the way, again the procedure is that if the Ministry of Internal Affairs wants people, they have to be recruited and interviewed by Public Service; that is the arrangement.

This was a physical fitness and medical test for joining and that is where matters took place and this is what I wrote, for record’s sake. Madam Speaker, as I had already said, Government took a decision to recruit and train 150 immigration officers and 150 immigration assistants - there were two categories. The decision was taken in view of the urgent need to secure borders because we have a challenge of people flocking into our country through non-gazetted points; to fight transnational crime, terrorism, human trafficking, money laundering, stealth arms trade, illegal entry and stay in the country –

THE SPEAKER: No, do not interrupt; he is making a statement. 

GEN. NYAKAIRIMA: There is urgent need to build capacity both in numbers and skills to do this.

Lessons learnt from the benchmarking exercises we undertook indicate that specialised training is necessary if the officers are to be equipped with knowledge and skills necessary to do the job. The idea of specialised training was sold to the Public Service Commission, who in their advert put out made it clear that those recruited will have to go through the exercise.

Madam Speaker, the on-going recruitment exercise is being done by the Public Service Commission, as per the standing regulations. Our information is that they called for applications and received more than 40,000 applications. These were checked and those found to have been over age or having insufficient qualifications were disqualified at some stages. This reduced the number to 12,000 and they were invited for aptitude tests. The results of the aptitude tests were considered and 950 were then scheduled to undergo medical examinations and are to be subjected to oral interviews.
Honourable members, the oral interviews are scheduled to be conducted starting 29 June 2015. The results of the oral interviews will yield the 150 immigration officers and the 150 immigration assistant trainees who will be brought on board. The specialised training of this is scheduled to begin on 01 August 2015.

Madam Speaker, there is information circulating to the effect that some people were unfairly disqualified from the exercise; expecting mothers and the disabled have been mentioned. There is information suggesting that some of these who successfully went through the physical tests were also unfairly disqualified. All this information will be investigated and appropriate action will be taken thereafter.

What is true, however, is that those expecting were advised to consult doctors who were on the exercise site. They were also advised to take the doctor’s advice seriously. There was no attempt whatsoever to disqualify them on the grounds of being pregnant and this was when an undertaking was to be made on a physical test of a marathon run of 10 kilometres.

As for the disabled, Madam Speaker, our view is that they also have the right to be employed in the Government of Uganda. This is why affirmative action is always taken so as to address this matter. As I stated above, if it established that anyone was disqualified on grounds of disability or pregnancy, appropriate action will be taken. It is not Government’s policy to deny anyone a job on those grounds.

In conclusion, I would like to call upon honourable members that I will undertake to review this because it is being undertaken by the Ministry of Public Service and the Directorate of Immigration to see exactly what happened and whether it is true that such a disqualification happened.  If so, they will be justified on the basis of the requirements that are needed for this training or recruitment and subsequent training to take place.

The training will take place for nine months and those who will qualify – and for the first time, Madam Speaker, we want, like other countries who have managed illegal immigration, to create an immigration service that has a component of border control that includes patrols. Madam Speaker, I beg to submit. Thank you.

6.42
MS HELLEN ASAMO (NRM, PWD Representative, Eastern): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank the minister for attempting to bring a report but I would like to say that for people with disabilities - I even have the contacts for these particular people and of some women. When they came to the level of taking photos and they were given numbers - I am aware of the process - this one was told to first stay put. He said a young man was very positive but they told him to first sit as they consult. 

There is a lady who is the Deputy Secretary to Public Service by the name Prossy - I will give the details - she barked at them and said, “You, the pregnant ones and the disabled, we will not attend to you.” They were very rude; I took an interview. This young lady told me that when she went for the interview - first of all on the Public Service forms, we have advocated that you indicate whether you are a disabled person and she said that in the advert, it was written that you will undertake training and the training was not specific.

They were three persons with disabilities and when they filled the forms, they indicated that they were disabled. Maybe at that point, if this training was not favourable, they would have been removed. One of these young girls went with her sister, who had been disqualified at first stage. She qualified for the aptitude test and at the level of taking the interviewees’ photographs, she was denied a number. 

She said, “I cannot run but I can do the training.” Honourable minister, is running part of that? If you begin subjecting running 10 kilometres to people who have not done exercise and have not practised, honestly even the 950 are going to disqualify themselves from the programme.

Some women pleaded that they were to deliver in the next month but they were told “no”. They even said they would leave their babies behind for the sake of the job but this person in public service did not accept. It is unfortunate that the Minister for Public Service is not here to give some of these answers.

Madam Speaker, this was a rights discrimination issue and I would like to agree with the minister that we need affirmative action. By the way, People with disabilities are very good spies because they can sit in a place and have a lot of psychology in the mind. Therefore, people should not look at only running as a qualification for an immigration officer.

I really beg that if we can take consideration of these people - in fact, she just said, “Let me be used as an example so that people will learn from denying us jobs.” This girl is qualified in economics and I think that this was very terrible. The pregnant women who were due to deliver in the following month were denied and they had to go away - (Member timed out.)

6.45
MS SUSAN AMERO (NRM, Woman Representative, Amuria): I thank you, Madam Speaker. The minister has just told us that in this recruitment, they were looking at specialised training. I had the opportunity to serve at Entebbe International Airport for about 11 years, and I know that we have a lot of specialised personnel at the airport and border entry points who are responsible for these issues that the minister has enumerated here like terrorism, and anti-money laundering. 

We have JATT, ESO and ISO at the border points – what is this specialised training that we need for immigration officers? I think that it is a way of keeping away those Ugandans who should be occupying these other offices and bringing those who are already employed in the police, the UPDF and Prisons to do this same job. 

I would like to say that the action that was taken is not good for us. We have unemployment and yet we want to reemploy those that are already employed. Where are we going? 

Madam Speaker, the Ministry of Internal Affairs is becoming a problem. Recently, police officers were recruited, trained, sworn in at the training school after which, they were sent away. The new people who went to the police training school are the ones who have taken the jobs, forgetting that we have a lot of problems in this country especially with people who have learnt to handle firearms. 

There are several criminal cases in this country because people go for training and in the long run, they are not employed. Where are we going, as a country? I thank you.

6.48
MS BETTY AMONGI (UPC, Oyam County South, Oyam): I thank you, Madam Speaker. This is a constitutional matter and we cannot accept to sweep it under the carpet because once we do it, we would have failed in our constitutional duty of upholding the Constitution of Uganda.

I would like to read Article 21 on equality and freedom from discrimination:
“(2) Without prejudice to clause (1) of this article, a person shall not be discriminated against on the grounds of sex, race, colour, ethnic origin, tribe, birth, creed or religion, social or economic standing, political opinion or disability.” That is very clear and it is constitutional.

The Constitution further defines discrimination in Article 21 (3) “For the purpose of this article, ‘discrimination’ means to give different treatment to different persons attributable only or mainly to their respective descriptions by sex, race, colour, ethnic origin, tribe, birth, creed or religion, social or economic standing, political opinion or disability.” 

Madam Speaker, I would like to go the specific article on women, which is Article 33. Article 33 (2) states, “The state shall provide the facilities and opportunities necessary to enhance the welfare of women to enable them to realise their full potential and advancement.”

Article 33 (3) says, “The state shall protect women and their rights, taking into account their unique status and natural maternal function in society.” I would like to repeat, “…and natural maternal function in society.” (Applause)

I would like to conclude with Article 2 of this Constitution, which does not give Public Service any hand in proceeding with this recruitment considering the article that I have read. Article 2 of the Constitution talks about the supremacy of the Constitution. 
Article 2 (1) says, “This Constitution is the supreme law of Uganda and shall have binding force on all authorities and persons throughout Uganda.” Article 2 (2) says, “If any other law or custom is inconsistent with any of the provisions of this Constitution, the Constitution shall prevail and that other law or custom shall, to the extent of the inconsistency, be void.”

Is there anything else that I need to add, honourable minister? Is there anything else I need to add, Rt Hon. Prime Minister?      

HON. MEMBERS: No. 

6.51
MS ROSEMARY NYAKIKONGORO (Independent, Woman Representative, Sheema): I thank you, Madam Speaker. In his presentation, the honourable minister mentions that pregnant women were advised to go and consult their doctors. I wonder because the doctor would definitely tell them not to participate in the 10 kilometre marathon race. I would like to also find out, honourable minister, if you have ever impregnated a woman – (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Order.

MS NYAKIKONGORO: Sincerely speaking, can you subject your wife to a 10-kilometre marathon race? If that woman wanted to achieve something, would you expect her to say, “Yes?”

Our minister and the Prime Minister are aware that you do not doubt the capacity and performance of women in this country and just to give you a few examples, we have the URA where women have been performing very well and they have not been subjected to their reproductive status. A woman was recently posted to UNRA. In KCCA, the woman there is performing and of course without forgetting our Parliament here where the Speaker sits here for long hours, performing -

THE SPEAKER: Without a marathon.

MS NYAKIKONGORO: I think this is total discrimination. You cannot expect me to go and have my baby by caesarean birth because I want to come and attend the marathon race – (Interruption)

MS IBI EKWAU: I thank you very much, hon. Nyakikongoro. Without shame, not long ago, the police withdrew the police officers serving in Parliament on account of being pregnant and nursing babies. That is the information that I am giving.

MS NYAKIKONGORO: I thank you so much. Does that mean that the women of this country are going to stop getting employment opportunities because of procreation and adding value to this country?

MS AMOIT: Thank you, Madam Speaker and my sister, for giving way. We are representatives of the people. I visited these offices to lobby and they told me that they have a national character in the selection of the candidates. 

We are here and they are telling us that many of our daughters who have been taken for training have been thrown out because of health problems and disabilities. My worry is about the people who are going to replace these people and where they are coming from. 

MS NYAKIKONGORO: I would like to conclude and ask the minister that if these women performed well in the first two or three interviews, are you going to keep their positions such that after consultations and after delivering their babies they will come back and attend the marathon race. What do you expect them to do? What do you want them to do? We are all struggling to survive in this country; the women are also struggling to survive and get employment.

6.56
MR SAMUEL ODONGA OTTO (FDC, Aruu County, Pader): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity and I would like to thank my good friend, the Minister for Internal Affairs, for bringing the two reports. I would like to speak as someone who has experience and has also impregnated other people and not only one –(Laughter).

I know the minister is in a very difficult situation because we have 44,000 people fighting for 300 positions that even if we were to recruit all the women, there would still be complaints because it is 44,000 people looking for 300 jobs. However, I wonder whether the minister is aware that this Parliament is up in arms against homosexuality because the immediate alternative to avoiding pregnancy is probably to engage in those unnatural practices. You may find that those men whom you think are well off are in very bad situations. 

There has to be fairness in every arrangement. The minister said, if I may quote him; “We advised them to go and consult the doctor and take the advice seriously.” That presupposes that you were already privy to the information from the doctor to the extent that you were just counselling these people to take the advice of the doctor seriously. You knew the advice of the doctor.

What remedy do I give? What I would suggest, Madam Speaker, and I do not know whether the minister has control over the events; at least 50 per cent of the 300 required should be women. If you have discontinued those who are pregnant, which could be in their own interest because drills are drills, border patrol is border patrol it is not stamping passports in passport offices. You can do some affirmative action and revisit your records such that of the 300, 150 should be women and I would like Parliament to pronounce itself over that particular aspect. However, to go ahead and say we stop the exercise of Monday would be stepping beyond our boundary. 

The Prime Minister is here and he is very kind to women. If we could pronounce ourselves on that, that 50 per cent of all –(Interruption) 

MR LUBOGO: Thank you very much, hon. Odonga Otto, for the proposal you have put forward but I seek clarification from you. You are bringing an interesting proposal but it is not sufficient to address the issue we have right now.

Even if we were to take 50 per cent as women and it is possible we can have them, don’t you think we will still leave out these ones who were pregnant or disabled? I think the issue of these people having passed the interviews at the other stages and they are only medically and naturally unable to do the other part should not prejudice them from accessing employment.

MR ODONGA OTTO: From the way things are, let the minister carry his own cross. I rest my case. (Laughter)

7.01
MR STEPHEN TASHOBYA (NRM, Kajara County, Ntungamo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for the statement and I would like to express my admiration for the hon. Betty Amongi’s good constitutional grasp and submission on the subject matter. 

However, I would like to take the minister on his own word and ask him to clarify a few things.  What is that investigatory mechanism that you have put in place to address this matter? Who is doing this job so that we do not have people who did these mistakes investigating themselves? Secondly, what is the time frame, when do you expect this work to be concluded? Would you assure Ugandans that after the exercise and the investigations have been conducted the people who have been unduly prejudiced will get redress and be recruited?

7.02
MR MILTON MUWUMA (NRM, Kigulu South, Iganga): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. This morning as we complained about the two aspects of pregnant women and the PWDs, I was approached by a parent of one of the applicants who went through this exercise. She is a girl but again they had brought in the aspect of weight. This girl weighed 45 kilogrammes and after coming number 34 in the marathon, they told her that because she was less than 50 kilogrammes, they were not taking her up. 

Honourable minister, I advise that you withdraw from this because the Ministry of Public Service that you delegated to handle, I think is letting you down. The minister is speaking on behalf of a docket that he delegated Public Service to handle. I think they are misinforming him in one way or another. The process is not transparent; there is a boy who came fourth in the marathon but he was thrown away and he did not do the interviews. The process is not clean. 

I would have wished to see the Minister for Public Service who is handling the process to come and explain what is happening. I think the General is receiving issues from some other person but he does not have hands-on experience. The process is so bad and as we talk about the other women who were pregnant, what about this innocent girl because in the recent times, university students especially girls have adopted the issue of being slender models. How do you begin denying her because she is tiny yet she is brainy and she can work? These are the serious issues that we need to reflect upon. I thank you. 

MS ALASO: Information – 

THE SPEAKER: Information? But he has finished.

MS ANYWAR: Thank you, hon. Muwuma, for giving way. The information I would like to give to this House is that the problem is not only as outlined. We have another angle. We have information that most of applicants were asked to give Shs 500,000 and I have three of them who were asked to give this money; one gave Shs 300,000 and another gave Shs 200,000 but the other did not have the Shs 500,000 and at the last stage, they said they had not fulfilled the Shs 500,000 and they were dropped out. There was a lot of bribery, which should be included in the investigation. We are willing to bring those people to testify. Thank you.

MS ALASO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and hon. Milton Muwuma. The additional information I would like the House to benefit from is actually in two pieces. The first bit is that there are even those women who managed to make it among the 400 and the information we got is that some of them are hospitalised and for some of them, there are case of miscarriages. Therefore, they will not even appear for the Monday interviews because if you got a miscarriage after the 10-kilometre marathon – so, you have lost your baby and also lost the opportunity to appear on next level. 

Secondly, now that I have opportunity, I would like this Parliament to examine critically the attitude that is emerging against women in this country, particularly in the forces. Last year, the Commander, Kampala Metropolitan Area, Mr Andrew Flex Kawesi said, and it was in the media, that the policewomen should not get pregnant –(Interjection)– and those who want to go for police training should also not conceive. 

Madam Speaker, let us take this matter very serious. It keeps popping up; it pops up in the Police now it has popped in immigration, it will pop up another day and nothing is done. If you want to victimise women for being pregnant, what is being done to victimise those who impregnate them because that should be the measure. If it is criminal to be pregnant, let it become criminal to also impregnate - (Laughter)– other than punishing us for doing a natural obligation to this country.

Lastly, personally, I do not even think that it is beyond the ability of the minister to call off this exercise until it is rectified. He has the power. Honourable minister, you can call it off if you really mean well to address the anomalies. Call off the exercise and then investigate, report back to this Parliament and then we know we are at par when we are talking about opportunities for the men and women of this country. I thank you.

MS KABASHARIRA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to add to what hon. Alaso has just said. Yesterday, I was in a certain church very early in the morning and a certain lady came to give testimony, thanking God that in the company where she works - the company belongs to Europeans - they do not allow anybody to get pregnant. When you do, you are supposed to stop work. The testimony she gave is that I think in the company, there were four pregnant women; the three were stopped except her, for one reason or the other and she believed that maybe it was because of God that she was accepted. It is a policy in that company that when you are pregnant, you stop working. Therefore, it should not only be – actually, the situation should be taken further because even other companies, especially private companies, have a bias on women who get pregnant.

MR MUWUMA: Thank you so much. Honourable members, all that was enriching information and, Madam Speaker, I would like to propose that the Ministers of Internal Affairs and Public Service do suspend this exercise for at least two weeks until the anomalies are addressed accordingly. I beg to move.

7.10
MS GRACE KWIYUCWINY (NRM, Woman Representative, Zombo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to start from where hon. Muwuma has stopped because I was going to say that what I have heard just now about the constitutional discrimination, and the lack of transparency in advertisement, would tantamount to cancelling the whole process. 

Discrimination has already been clearly and elaborately explained by hon. Betty Amongi. In the advertisement, if the pregnant women and the persons with disability knew that this type of job was going to require the type of exercise which the minister is talking about, I do not think they would have even applied. I think that something was hidden and it was disguised and they thought that immigration work does not require intensive exercise, like it is being explained and that is why they applied. 

They have gone this far with all the steps they have taken up to the aptitude tests. Somebody has really given her time, effort and resources to reach this far. Therefore, it is very unfortunate that at this time, they should be told to check with their doctors so that the doctors will tell them that they do not qualify.

If it were possible, let us postpone this process for a while, do the investigations and if it is found true that some of these, like hon. Alaso said, girls have now even gone purposely to abort so that they can be taken on - because after you have been dismissed because you are pregnant and you feel you do not have where to go, the only thing that can come to your mind is abortion so that you can go back and be accepted in this process.

I really think - (Interruption)

Mr AYOO: Thank you, Madam Speaker and hon. Kwiyucwiny, for giving way. Given the fact that so many issues are coming up including money changing hands, you can clearly confirm that we cannot accept and support impunity where people who are managing the process of interviewing these people have connived and put in issues for them to get money and also to bring in people of their own interest. They would be putting all this to eliminate people they do not want and bring their own. 

Therefore, if this Parliament sits here and say proceed, we would be promoting impunity. Let the minister postpone the programme for about a week or two, investigation is conducted so that Ugandans who are going there will know that they have come on merit and those who have lost will know that they lost because they were not able to take it. However, when we leave it like this, then we will have promoted very serious impunity right in this Parliament and this Parliament should not promote this.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, please conclude.

MS KWIYUCWINY: In conclusion, if the process is postponed for a week or so and the investigation is done, I would like to recommend that if there was any good person with disability or if there is that good person who was pregnant, let these two categories of people be given other assignments and the persons who are able be taken for that extensive training so that these other people can get an opportunity for employment.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I think the border work is really a lot of brain work. I think they will be relying more on their brains than chasing people. Yes, computers, IDs.

7.15
MS MARGARET KOMUHANGI (NRM, Woman Representative, Nakasongola): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Discrimination is not only applied during the process of recruitment but it is also happening at work. A case in point is where I represented you at the art exhibition in Makerere. A lady called Ritah Magezi became blind when she was working as the Executive Director at the Makerere Art Gallery. When this lady became blind, she was dismissed from her job. She is 45 years. She went home and sat for six years. A Good Samaritan gave her a garage where to operate from and she is the one who organised that art exhibition; it was an international exhibition. She brought in artists in the region and internationally. She is doing very well even though she is blind yet this is a person who was dismissed from Makerere University – the higher level of learning in this country!

Madam Speaker, we have got an opportunity to day to deal with this discrimination once and for all - (Applause). Really, the country should know that these issues are constitutional. Affirmative action should be applied fundamentally. They are not issues to decide on your own as you wish. We need to take action right now.

DR BAYIGGA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. We must condemn all forms of discrimination. However, can we be guided on this selection criterion so that we can debate it? It could be that in their wisdom, this is what they had seen as a selection criterion which they hid from the applicants and that selection criterion is what we should debate for change. However, before they give us that information about the selection criteria, it becomes very difficult for us to continue to talk to each other.

Madam Speaker, I request, procedurally that the selection criterion should be put on the Table so that we debate it. It can be changed to accommodate others. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: I would not want to believe that the advert said, disabled people or pregnant women need not apply. If that was there, I would agree with you. If that is what they said, I would understand.

7.18
MS KABAKUMBA MASIKO (NRM, Bujenje County, Masindi): Madam Speaker, I do not think we should encourage the minister to continue with a process that is unconstitutional. This hiding of criterion is because they want it to appear as if it is constitutional. Now they have discovered that it is not actually constitutional.

The Constitution really protects women because of their natural role. You are enjoined, honourable minister and Government, to protect the women. It was clearly read; because of their natural role that they play.

Honourable minister, if this happened during your time, maybe your mother would not have given birth to you –(Laughter). There could have been a miscarriage or an abortion and we would miss the General that is in you. Look at it from a wider perspective; that is why those who framed our Constitution put it the way they did. This pregnancy is not a permanent situation. I am a mother of six children and my pregnancies were never at any moment a hindrance to my duties, including what you said.

You have also heard that disability is not inability. Do not victimise these people. Are we training an immigration force or immigration officers? There is a huge difference, hon. Prime Minister and minister. If it were a force - that time it was explained for the police that the women and the disabled cannot apply, etcetera. However, these are immigration officers not immigration force.

Therefore, I would like to agree that we do move that this process – because we have discovered it is not constitutional – be suspended and we look into the selection criterion and consider all these complaints. It is only two or three weeks. After all you have said it has been going on for five months. What will two or three weeks cost you, honourable minister? We can then come back and report to this House and you continue with the process. Let us not continue with a process, which is unconstitutional.

7.21
MS FRANCA AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Agago): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Subjecting women and people with disabilities to physical exercise as criterion for the selection of people to get a job is in itself a criminal act, to begin with. In that regard, the Public Service has already committed a crime for not following the Constitution of this country and for this matter, I would like to support all the members who have suggested that this process be suspended until the issues here are clarified and investigated. 

Enough time must be given – not one or two weeks but until all these matters are settled; we are not going to accept any form of discrimination against women and people with disabilities. This country belongs to all of us. Some of us in this Parliament have given birth to children. We have been able to work 24 hours with you –(Applause). 

I would like to give the example of myself. Madam Speaker, in the Eighth Parliament, you are very much aware I had three children in this Parliament –(Laughter)– and I was one of the best performers in the Eighth Parliament. It was not because of my pregnancy and all those other related issues.

Public Service and my very good friend, the Minister of Internal Affairs, must know that even Ugandans out there who do not know what is in the Constitution of this country because they cannot interpret it, are also aware that it is their right. 

When I was campaigning in 2006, I was seven months pregnant with my second born. My voters voted for me when I was very heavy –(Applause). That means they are very much aware that it is the right of a woman to give birth to a new life in this country. Therefore, who are you to come here and start saying kwara kwara!

7.24
MS JOY ATIM (Independent, Woman Representative, Lira): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the honourable members for their submissions. Sincerely, the minister should realise that there was a lot of discrimination in this matter.

As hon. Alaso has just told you, there are others who were not well but because they saw that they were throwing out others, they risked so that they could be admitted. Those who had caesarean birth cases risked to run the 10-kilometre marathon and they are not okay. You have to take note of that.

There were those who qualified after running the 10- kilometre marathon but they had babies who are one month or two or three months old. They are going to be subjected to another training beginning 1st August. I would like the minister to clarify this issue. How will they cater for the children? It is because the rights of the children should be taken care of. Are you going to go with them? These women have the brains; they can work in offices because they have the capacities and they can even run the 10 kilometres but they have children. How are you going to take care of those children? Are they going for that training with their children or are they going to leave them behind? Thank you so much.

7.25
MS FLORENCE IBI EKWAU (FDC, Woman Representative, Kaberamaido): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I support the motion moved by members to have this exercise delayed. The credibility of Public Service in this country should be a concern to all of us, particularly these rude officers who decided to undermine the disabled persons. This issue should really be a concern and the officers should be brought to book. They should be seriously investigated.

In fact, it gives the reputation of Public Service - even the little credibility that is left goes looking at what is happening in the pension sector, now you add onto this. It is a common outcry to the entire country. Therefore, the Ministry of Public Service definitely at the end of the day carries all the blame. These officers should be investigated.

Secondly, Madam Speaker, a question was put that at least the exercise should be stayed for two weeks. I suggest that we give it time so that the ministry is able to sort out all this mess until we are satisfied that we are now on course.

Thirdly, I am talking to the person responsible for recruiting the police officers of Parliament. If this can happen outside there and you bring it right to Parliament and deny officers who are pregnant or nursing babies opportunities to provide food on the table; at the end of the day, this is a national shame. I hope the officers outside there are listening to all of us. It could happen to your daughter or to you, tomorrow.

Let women be allowed to give the country a chance to get more lives after us. If this can happen in Parliament here, what about outside there? Why should we complain about Public Service outside there when even in Parliament it happened? I am very concerned; it was a very bad incident. Even when they reconsidered, some were not returned even as we talk!

Therefore, Minister of Internal Affairs, your docket is being crowded with a lot of dirt, non-clarity and problems. These should be sorted out. Women should not be punished because of their morphologies or what God directed that they do. It is a very big - it reaches out to all because as a mother, you should be concerned about the welfare and the lives of Ugandans.

Madam speaker, this is a concern and I pray that this House - I am very grateful to all of us because we have really given this matter all the attention it deserves. I thank you.

7.29
MR JACOB OBOTH (Independent, West Budama County South, Tororo): Madam Speaker, thank you for the opportunity to add a voice. I am aware of a young girl from Tororo who applied and she is five months pregnant. I do not know why she did not go through.

However, I have picked interest and I have shared with the minister about the qualifications and I picked where they needed physical fitness and medical test: “The applicants for the post of immigration officers shall be required to pass the described physical fitness and health test in accordance with the laws of Uganda.” It is not prescribed or described. This is where the whole problem comes from. If you did not want pregnant mothers or people with disabilities, you were at liberty to say so. 

This is the Ministry of Public Service. The Minister of Internal Affairs, you are only receiving. We know that you are not the one who sent out the advert. We know you wanted the workers but your job is not that. You do not have any constitutional mandate to recruit. Therefore, we are not blaming you per se but this is a matter that brought shame.  If you needed people who –(Interruption) 

MS KABAKUMBA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and hon. Oboth for giving way. The information I would like to give you is that it is not actually the Public Service that is screening these people out. The guidelines are by the Ministry of Internal Affairs and it is the one insisting that, “No pregnant mothers, persons with disabilities” and etcetera. They know very well it is unconstitutional. It is the Ministry of Internal Affairs and not the Public Service.

MR OBOTH: I thank you for the information but I would like to conclude by drawing our minds to the qualifications required: “Pass the described…” even the words “described physical” - it should have been described above. However, if it was prescribed, it would mean that you do not have access to it. That is my little knowledge from Muwafu Primary School in Tororo.

If you say, “Pass the described physical fitness test” it means you have to give the person the descriptions but if you are saying “prescribed”, it means the author has it and it is not known to you. Sometimes, hon. Prime Minister, you need the services of your legal officers. People are becoming constitutionally aware and very small things like this mean a lot. People are desperate for jobs and if you are going to fail anybody, fail them in the right way. 

Therefore, I do not think pregnancy was what you were describing - (Member timed out.)

7.34
MS EVELYNE KAABULE (NRM, Woman Representative, Luuka): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I am also perturbed by the fact that the user department or ministry must have been the one to come out with the person’s stakes for this particular job. Why do you then come up with different stakes that have not been described in the adverts?

Secondly, I agree with members who are suggesting that we halt this exercise and investigations are carried out. However, one thing that I do not agree with is that the Public Service Commission should do the investigation. Let us get an independent body or a select committee to be the one to do the investigations because definitely, the hunters cannot be the hunted.  I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister and Prime Minister, I think you will agree that this matter would appear to reveal an infringement of Articles 33, 35 of the Constitution and Article 40 on economic rights. 
I have been reminding members that it is only this House that has the ability to legislate for the country; no one else has the capacity. Now that this matter has been brought to our attention, Minister, what more do you want us to do? This is the only place where this complaint can be brought and it has been brought and it is an infringement on the Constitution.

7.34
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Madam Speaker, the Minister of Internal Affairs is going to come in but I just wanted to state the following: The observations made by colleagues about the constitutionality of the exercise are important. The issues raised about people with disabilities and also women being penalised because they are pregnant is also very important. They are not only pregnant because they are going to have their children; they are pregnant on behalf of the whole nation.

It appears to me that in order to ensure that we go an extra mile to correct some of the obvious mistakes that may have been made and also to ensure that what we are doing is as constitutional as indeed it must be, a period of perhaps two or three weeks should be given to the Minister of Internal Affairs. This will enable him examine these issues with other critical stakeholders in Government. This is in order to make sure that if there are mistakes made, they will be corrected. It will also ensure that there is gender parity on the recruitment of immigration officers. I think it would be a very reasonable position for the House to take. 

Of course, there may be issues - logistical and others - but it is crucial that the exercise is above board, constitutional and that there is no obvious discrimination against our compatriots. In principle, the idea of reviewing the exercise is to ensure that it is in line with what we are committed to as a nation, as a government and as the Parliament of Uganda, is correct. 

I would be interested to see my brother, Gen. Aronda, conclude the matter along the general principles of ensuring that the exercise is above board and is as constitutional and as non-discriminatory as possible. I thank you. 

MR DOMBO: Madam Speaker, I have listened attentively to the Rt Hon. Prime Minister. I do not know whether he was just being diplomatic or he deliberately avoided talking about the on-going process. Does it mean it will stay as the review goes on or does it mean the exercise continues? That needs to be clarified. 

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, I said the Minister of Internal Affairs will require time to look at the exercise and make sure that if gross errors have been made, they are sorted out. He will also need time to consult with other critical stakeholders to ensure that the exercise is above board, respected and is in line with national values under constitutional stipulation. I think giving him two weeks sounds reasonable. 

7.39
THE MINISTER OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Gen. Aronda Nyakairima): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I wish to thank the members for the concerns. As it was said by Julius Caesar that, “I came, I saw, I conquered”. I have been seated here, I have listened and I have followed the concerns, especially the constitutional matters like the lack of transparency. What we mind most in creating professional institutions is that they are created transparently. In case there is a cloud of non-transparency in this, we will investigate it, as guided by my Prime Minister. 

However, I also call upon the Members to understand that there are challenges, not only to Uganda but globally. Europe is almost overrun by illegal immigration. We have a protocol of free movement of persons in the East African Community. In all those protocols, there is illegal immigration here. There are illegal immigrants taking away our jobs. There is need to create order and harmony in this service. 

Therefore, in two weeks, we will get the Attorney-General, the Ministry of Public Service and other specialised people to understand what happened and then come back here with the correct picture. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, our worry is that the process commences on Monday. There is an exercise supposed to take place on Monday, 29th June. If it proceeds, it means there is no point in the investigation. We shall have endorsed it infinity. 

GEN. NYAKAIRIMA: Madam Speaker, we take guidance that we will freeze it until we get to the bottom of all these allegations. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister. You know you have our support to ensure that the country is safe and that you have all those you need for doing you work. 

Honourable members, I would like to thank you very much for your participation. The House is adjourned to Tuesday, next week at 2.00 p.m. 

(The House rose at 7.43 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 30 June 2015 at 2.00 p.m.) 
