Tuesday, 25 June 2013

Parliament met at 3.20 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

ADMINISTRATION OF OATHS

The oaths were administered to:

    1. Patrick Mutono Lodoi

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Mutono, on behalf of Parliament, I welcome you very warmly to this Assembly. I understand you are a Member of the National Resistance Movement; so you will sit on this side of the House. But in order to assist you to do your work, I want to hand over to you a copy of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, which should guide you in understanding your work; the Rules of Procedure which you should study and understand very well so that you can go about your work, including debate in this House. I trust that the Whip of the National Resistance Movement will allocate you to one standing committee and one sessional committee. But we are happy to see you here. Congratulations! (Applause)

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I will invite the Leader of Government Business and the Leader of the Opposition to welcome the new Member.

3.13
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on behalf of the government and the ruling party and I know I am speaking on behalf of my colleague, the Leader of the Opposition and his side, to welcome the new Member of Parliament, hon. Dr Mutono. 

I would like to congratulate him; I know that it was a contest well fought. It conformed to all rules of democracy –(Laughter)– I had the pleasure and the honour to witness the campaign myself. I was really very happy that on the day when I went, I found the NRM rally was not far from the DP rally. They were very close in proximity with each other. There was absolute peace. Everyone exercised his or her right to say his or her mind. I would like to congratulate the people of Butebo for carrying out a peaceful by-election –(Applause)– and to congratulate Dr Mutono once again on his victory. 

My advice to Dr Mutono is that although he is here on a party ticket, in Parliament we serve Uganda as a whole through the prisms of our political affiliations. But we are courteous to each other except a few - and my advice and request to you is that you should follow this practice in this House so that you observe the dignity of the House and the dignity of the Member of Parliament. But, of course, you observe discipline of Parliament and of the party that sponsored you. You are most welcome.

3.16
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Nathan Nandala-Mafabi): I thank you very much, Madam Speaker. In the same vein, I want to welcome hon. Dr Mutono to this House. First and foremost, you are now a Member of Parliament and an MP’s first role is to represent the people of Uganda, not my brother hon. Amama Mbabazi’s issues. You should also know that the election you went through was a contest and you know very well how you have come here. There are some areas which never voted. I am told about two sub-counties never voted at all; that demonstrates discontent. It is incumbent upon you to make sure that you serve all the people in spite of what took place. At the back of your mind you must know that there is a problem where you came from - (Laughter) - and how you came. We are aware people were beaten during the election –

THE SPEAKER: No, hon. Nandala-Mafabi, I want to beg you to only welcome, hon. Mutono. Do not make him feel guilty about anything. Please just welcome him. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, thank you very much. I am happy the Prime Minister, my brother, hon. Amama Mbabazi, said that it was a democratic process and I was telling him, yes even though there were problems. We do not want to sweep things under the carpet because this country belongs to all of us and we cannot hide. I will call on my brother hon. Amama Mbabazi that democracy must be democracy and not double standards. And we look forward to this country going the democratic way and not where some people go against the rule of the law. You are most welcome. 

As for me, I know you; look after our interests from the eastern region because we are the marginalised group. I look forward to serving with you. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you back from the short recess and I hope you have been able to rest and you are now ready for work. You may recall that during my communication during the State of the Nation Address, I stated that there are a number of tasks pending before this House. I did acknowledge that we had done some good work in the second session, and that I was hoping for a better session now that Members are more acclimatised to their work. 

I want to urge Members to work in unison to fulfil the promise of posting a better performance in the third session. This is the defining session of our tenure because after this session, active party politics will come in and take the attention of some of the Members. So, this is the time to complete the work which is outstanding. 

So, I want to appeal for increased commitment and attendance both in the committees and in the plenary. I want to remind you that if you are not able to attend Parliament, you should let the Office of the Speaker know. I want to inform you  that I now have an analysis of the attendance of both plenary and committees for the last session and depending on how one conducts oneself, we shall either use the information or not.

I am also appealing for teamwork in the committees. The committees are the engine of our activities and I am hoping that you can continue to work together and that Members should be as well informed as both the Chair and Vice-Chair about the issues of their committees. I invite the whips to renew their commitment to their roles in organising for the attendance of the House and also the attendance of the committee. You will have my cooperation. 

I am also appealing for improved communication and consultation across the political divide so that we can generate consensus in some areas. I also want to appeal for enhanced cooperation from the Executive and invite them to bring whatever business is still pending so that it can be brought before our committees. 

I did also inform you during the State of the Nation Address that, a number of colleagues were not present for the State of the Nation Address. I just want to remind you that the following Members are still indisposed or were indisposed from that time: hon. Kahunde Helen of Kiryandongo; hon. Gregory Matovu of Bukanga; hon. Joy Kaliisa of Buhweju; hon. Hussein Kyanjo, Makindye West; hon. Col (Rtd) Fred Mwesigye of Nyabushozi; hon. Freda Kase-Mubanda of Masaka; hon. Paula Turyahikayo of Rubabo; hon. Aboud Kittata – I hope he is back; he has been in hospital- and of course our friend hon. Peter Omolo who is still indisposed. 

Those who requested for leave of absence on medical grounds have been granted leave by me, and I want to say that the Parliamentary Commission will continue to assist Members where it can. I want to thank those who went to visit them in the hospitals and those who have been telephoning them and comforting them.

I also want to announce that when the Ninth Parliament started, we introduced the parliamentary calendar. The calendar for this session is ready for consideration by the Business Committee and the Commission. Once it is approved, it will be printed and distributed to the Members of Parliament and the Executive so that everybody knows what will happen at what stage. 

The Clerk has accordingly given notice to the Members of the Business Committee to sit on 27th June to chart out the programme for the activities of the session. There are some Bills which have been pending and which are very crucial, for instance, the Anti-Money Laundering Bill. Just before I came to the House, I was given a report; it is now ready. So I may have to amend the Order Paper and bring it forward so that we can receive the report today. 

The Anti-counterfeiting Bill is also ready. I will also bring it forward and then we shall follow with the Public Order Management Bill and National Population Council Bill in that order. The rest will be determined on Thursday by the Business Committee. 

I want to thank you very much and wish you a very fruitful third session. Thank you very much. 

3.24
MR HATWIB KATOTO (NRM, Katerera County, Rubirizi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance. We know the people who are partly holding the economy together are the traders - (Interjections) - in Uganda. They are not here in Parliament but they are in Uganda. They have been suffering and going through hell. Whenever they suffer and make an alarm, there is no one to rescue them.

There is an SGS which was abolished by Parliament and it was costly to the Government of Uganda. It is the same thing they are trying to establish. These traders have made an alarm but they have not been attended to or called to any dialogue. In an attempt to make the government listen to their appeal, they have decided to close up shops, which is not only costly to the government but also costly to the people of Uganda.

Madam Speaker, as we talk, the government has made a loss today and if they are not called to dialogue, they are going to find difficulties in getting their issues resolved - (Interruption)

MR KAKOOZA: Thank you, Madam Speaker and thank you, honourable colleague. Regarding the matter raised by hon. Katoto, in 2001, 2002 and 2003, we tried SGS as a company for pre-shipment of goods’ inspection and we found out that it was a cost on traders. What Parliament did was to pronounce itself and this company was banned. It is on record in the Hansard.

Uganda is a signatory to general agreement tariffs but SGS is a tariff barrier to traders. We have contacted some stakeholders but they have not paid heed. What should the traders do? It is incumbent upon this Parliament of the people to pronounce itself because it has ever pronounced itself to help those traders who promote the economy. When you look at the background to the budget, these importers pay 65 percent of the total import of those suffering. This is the information I wanted to give.

MR KATOTO: Thank you for that information. Madam Speaker, can you imagine you go abroad with US$ 20,000; you buy a container of goods, proceed to Mombasa where you pay; you come to the border and pay; at Nakawa you pay a lot of money and now in addition to those costs, every container is supposed to pay US$3,000. It is costly!

The economy is not working well and those people are suffering. Therefore, Madam Speaker, I would like to task the minister responsible to suspend this SGS and call the stakeholders and give them information. We should not sit here when Ugandans are suffering. These traders are suffering; they go through hell. We should task the minister to come and explain to this Parliament –(Interruption)

MR SSIMBWA: Thank you, my colleague, for giving way. Madam Speaker, the information I wanted to give my colleague is that the issue is not about SGS only. The issue is about the re-introduction of PIVOC, the pre inspection shipment verification exercise. The traders in town are not against the exercise per say but the problem is the cost. When you compare the East African countries with other countries that apply PIVOC, the nature of costing is different. In our case, it is very costly and not comparable to other countries where PIVOC is operating.

Therefore, we would request the Minister of Trade to reconsider and suspend this as negotiations go on between the traders, the companies that are involved and other stakeholders so that we can have fair business in Uganda.

MR KATOTO: Thank you for the information. Lastly, a container is not considered as a full container. They enter inside the container and if you have shoes inside, they are charged separately. If there are other items, they are also charged separately, which increases the cost -

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Katoto, it seems we are having a debate by ourselves. Why don’t we task the minister to bring a statement because we are talking to ourselves? I am going to ask the Prime Minister to say something because we are talking to ourselves.

MR KATOTO: I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Ogong has information then the Prime Minister will-

MR OKOT-OGONG: Madam Speaker, the matter being raised on the Floor here is very important. I am talking with knowledge and information because I am a Member of the Committee on Trade and Industry. We have had discussions in our committee about the quality of goods that enter our country. 

Honourable members, you are aware that when you go anywhere, the quality of goods that come to our country is questionable and our people are suffering. As you are aware, there was a tsunami in Japan and those vehicles that had radiation are actually entering our country and endangering the lives of our people. The goods that we consume are also affecting the lives of our people.

We should not talk just because we want to talk. This is a very important matter that we have discussed with the minister and traders and we have agreed that it is important that we protect our people. Therefore, Madam Speaker, I want to inform Members that this is free verification. Before your goods leave their point of manufacture, they have to be verified by a competent -

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we are again talking to ourselves without the minister. I will ask the Prime Minister if he has something to say, but in principle, we should agree to have a debate on this so that we all understand and move on the same page.

3.32
THE PRIME MINISTER/ LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Thank you, Madam Speaker and I thank hon. Katoto for raising that issue. It is an issue that we have talked about in Cabinet and when we adopted this as a policy, we had very good reasons for it because this is the practice not only in Uganda but the world over to have – (Interruption)

MR WADRI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I have risen up to seek guidance, having observed the manner in which the Rt Hon. Prime Minister is giving an explanation. If anyone of us had an opportunity to move down town today, all shops are closed and what we should consider and be addressing our minds to, as a Parliament, is what should be done in the short run.

The guidance I am seeking from you, Madam Speaker, is what is going to be the status quo after this? Can Parliament and the government come out with preliminary suggestions so that the ordinary person does not suffer? We should really try as much as possible to address our minds to that otherwise waiting for the minister or for all these explanations will not help us as a country.

The guidance I am asking from you, Madam Speaker is, what do we do in the short run to avert this situation?

THE SPEAKER: But, honourable members, are we possessed of sufficient information to take a decision today? Are we? I do not think so.

MR MBABAZI: Madam Speaker, I was saying that this is a matter that we considered and we had reasons to introduce the inspection. There are many good reasons - I am not going to go into the details of that now. I just want to say that we have heard the response of the traders; we have heard what hon. Katoto has said and I want to assure this House that in case there may be a problem, for instance, about the cost of inspection or any other thing, we are open to meeting with these traders and those concerned to discuss them and find a solution that is satisfactory to all. 

As far as we are concerned, our effort in this is to try and take care of the standard of goods that come into Uganda. We are looking at the interest of the consumer of the goods that come from outside. So, if it is the cost or any other thing that may make it difficult for our business community to perform, we are ready to sit with them on a table of dialogue and –(Interruption)

MR AMURIAT: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I do not understand whether the Rt Hon. Prime Minister was listening attentively to the concerns raised by the various Members of Parliament. There are people in town who will not have bread on their tables today. There is an economy in this country and we think those traders will contribute 80 percent of our budget and yet their shops are not open today. The solutions that the Prime Minister seems to be advancing do not help in the immediate term. 

So, I think what we should be discussing with Government in the House today is how the shops can be opened tomorrow. A day lost in business is a lot of income lost to the individual people, and the government. So even if we spend the whole afternoon today, so be it. We cannot play the ostrich. This is our economy we are playing with; it is the livelihood of our people we are talking about. 

So, I expect something more practical. I know that there have been - 

THE SPEAKER: Now, what is procedural, you are making a submission? 

MR AMURIAT: The procedure I would like to raise is as to whether the Prime Minister is right to gloss over an important issue like this and yet the country is waiting for practical solutions to the problem of the traders? 

3.39
MR SANJAY TANNA (Independent, Tororo Municipality, Tororo): Madam Speaker, the matter that has been raised is extremely important. While I am trying to understand and appreciate what the Prime Minister has just submitted to this House, I would like to shade further light to what hon. Katoto and hon. Okot Ogongo just told this House. The pre-shipment inspection is not a barrier as such. A pre-shipment inspection means the Government of Uganda is going out there and hiring people to do work on its behalf. Now the scope of work in this case is that as Uganda, we cannot afford to equip our standards bureau to certify the products that enter into Uganda; so in order to apportion some of this work to qualified people, you go out and hire agencies and outsource that particular responsibility; for example, in the field of textiles, shoes, leather and so forth. 

While we appreciate that Government of Uganda has done that to protect the consumers against substandard goods that are flooding out market, I would like to raise the concern of the traders whom I happen to be part of. 

First, Government of Uganda went and negotiated with these companies, one of them being SGS. The monopoly or duopoly has been given to two companies. There are certain countries where SGS – I have forgotten the second one but it starts with a “P”. They have no offices in certain countries. So, if I am importing from a country like Yugoslavia or Indonesia, and those two companies do not exist there, and my goods are shipped and brought here, then I have to pay a penalty of the $3,000 per container that hon. Katoto is talking about. 

The traders have said that they have no problem with that. But they were not involved in the negotiation of appointing these companies because we are directly affected. Secondly, considering the cost of trade, if this cost was going to be imposed upon the consumers – ultimately, as traders, we pass on the cost to the consumers. So as the cost is borne by the consumers of Uganda, what factor is Government of Uganda ready to bear from their potion of taxes?

Further, when you pay SGS, the SGS is added on to your ICF cost, taxes are normally levied on cost of product, insurance, freight and SGS. That means there is an addition percentage added on for us to pay tax. 

So, the manner in which the other countries that have implemented this particular inspection have done it; it has been done beautifully and there are very many good models to choose from. The reason we have failed in Uganda – I think this is the third or fourth time, if my memory serves me right. The last time it was hon. Otafiire who was Minister of Trade. Even then, it collapsed because the idea had not been sold to the traders and consumers. Therefore, there needs to be enough civic education carried out on all sides before such a tax or levy is put in place. 

As we speak, the economy is suffering, the traders are not going to relent – if we remember the last strike that lasted four days, it cost Uganda Shs 7.2 billion in loss of revenue. So, are we as Parliament ready to let this loss to go on? Are we ready to allow the Executive clash with the business community? What role do we have to play? Those are the questions that we have to answer today.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, what hon. Sanjay has said has further complicated the issue, meaning that we really need to understand this matter from all the perspectives. They are   Members speaking for it and others speaking against it.  So, I direct the Minister of Trade to come here tomorrow with a paper and we shall devout two hours to this matter tomorrow so that we can guide each other. 

3.44
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Nathan Nandala-Mafabi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Before I make my statement, what have we decided to do for the traders at least in the mean time? Hon. Sanjay has raised an issue of loss of Shs 7.2 billion per day. If we continue closing the shops, we are losing Shs 7.2 billion. What do we do in the meantime because we do not have drugs?

As the Prime Minister is contemplating for the answer, I have also a matter of national importance to raise. Of late, the Police which belong to the people of Uganda, are continuously arresting the members of the opposition, the Lord Mayor of Kampala, hon. Lukwago, Dr Kiiza Besigye, the former President of FDC, and many others without reason. I will continue to say without reason.

Madam Speaker, you are aware that the Police are using teargas, yellow water, bullets, pepper applying them on the people of Uganda. They sprayed on people in Mengo Hospital; in schools in the process of trying to harass people of Uganda like the Lord Mayor of Kampala, and Dr Kiiza Besigye, among others.

We gave Police about Shs 300 billion in the Budget; last week we gave them Shs 27 billion. They are now asking for supplementary two, Shs 19 billion. They have what we call addendum to supplementary No. 2, Shs 34.1 billion which means in three weeks they are asking for about Shs 81 billion in addition to the Shs 300 billion we gave them. Does this mean that when they come to ask for money, it is meant to harass the people of Uganda? I would want the Minister of Internal Affairs -

MS FLORENCE NAMAYANJA: Thank you, Leader of Opposition, for giving way. The information I want to give is that the Police have not stopped at harassing the Lord Mayor and the former FDC President. Last Friday, despite the fact that my party, the DP, had informed Police that we were going to hold a rally in Mityana to talk to our supporters, Police tear-gassed them and affected school-going children. The whole of Uganda is being tear-gassed.
  
THE SPEAKER: Please conclude.

MR MAFABI: They are tear-gassing innocent people as you have heard. People who pay taxes and yet in Rakai there are continuous murders every day; in Mukono they are murdering people every night and the Police are doing nothing. They have now become a partisan Police using militia to harass innocent people of Uganda.

Can the Minister of Internal Affairs explain these spontaneous arrests, harassments and murders in Rakai and in other places?

I want to find out from the President of Uganda and Gen. Aronda Nyakairima - when he was still the CDF, he warned the people of Uganda that the military can take over the country. Is it now that they are implementing the takeover of Uganda by now dressing the military in police uniforms to harass the people of Uganda?

Can the Minister of Internal Affairs explain if this is a true story that now they have come to takeover Uganda? This is also applying in Amuru land where the Police have been replaced by the Army. If that is the case, advise us as the people of Uganda what we should do?

THE SPEAKER: When can the Minister of Internal Affairs respond to those issues?

3.51
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr James Baba): Madam Speaker, honourable members, there has not been continuous arrests. What has happened was that some individuals have taken it upon themselves to go to particular streets or areas like Kisekka Market and Owino Market without the cooperation of the Police to cause chaos and disorder.

MS OSSEGE: Madam Speaker, I thank you so much and I thank the hon. Minister. When the honourable minister says some people always want to go to particular streets, are there some streets or any places or locations in Uganda that certain citizens must not go to? Madam Speaker, all I am saying is that, Ugandans have every right to demonstrate but peacefully. But so long as you inconvenience others then the Police under the law have the right to intervene.

You all saw the pictures of women’s saucepans in the market that were abandoned and shops that were closed as people ran way. They were not part of the demonstration. The Police have the obligation to protect such people. We are not against peaceful demonstrations, orderly demonstrations, but if you cause chaos under the law we have to come in.

MR KASOLO: I listened to the Leader of Opposition attentively; he put forward a very pertinent question, why do you concentrate on only political and you forget about areas, which have suffered murders and robberies like Rakai? In Kampala, there are so many police officers but I can only see three or four. So the point of order that I wanted to raise is whether the minister is in order to rotate around the Kampala issue and forget these places like Rakai and Mukono? Why are you just rotating around Kampala? Is he in order, Madam Speaker?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I do not know whether you want the minister to bring a statement or to be spontaneous. What do you want us to do, because you are asking many questions on many issues?

MR JAMES BABA: Madam Speaker, the Rt Hon. Prime Minister came here and gave a very comprehensive report on the murders in Uganda – (Interjections) - well, if you were not here, then that is your problem. But you go to the Hansard where a month ago, the Rt Hon. Prime Minister gave a comprehensive statement on the murders. The murders are on issues of land, crime of passion, business rivalry – (Interjections) - this is the nature of the murders.

Now on the supplementary, Madam Speaker, this House did appropriate money for Article 145 – 

THE SPEAKER: No honourable members, let us go to the next item. The supplementary will come later. The next item, item No. 4. Who has not finished? Wait a bit.

LAYING OF PAPERS

3.57
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PRIVATISATION) (Mr Aston Kajara): Madam Speaker, in accordance with Article 156 (2) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, I hereby lay on Table a summary of supplementary funds for recurrent expenditure for the financial Year 2012/2013 and Schedule No.3. I beg to lay. 

THE SPEAKER: Yes, hon. Nandala-Mafabi.

3.58
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Nathan Nandala-Mafabi): Madam Speaker, the minister is bringing Supplementary Schedule No.3. Today is 25 June 2013 and the financial year is ending on 30th - in five days. I have seen on the Order Paper that we have something like Vote-on-Account. 

Madam Speaker, I am lost – (Interjections)- It is a serious matter! Do we need supplementary right now for the remaining five days and yet we are going to pass a Vote-on-Account? How are you going to make these expenditures? Those, which are on the supplementary for 2012/2013 and at the same time we have Vote-on-Account. Are you taking people of Uganda for granted? If it is arrears – (Interjections) - please listen to me. Arrears means that the budget was approved and the money which was available was less and that means that you incur an arrear and an arrear is already approved because you passed a budget and never got enough money. That one can be a first call on the next budget. 

Please, it is not right for us to really take people of Uganda for granted. Five days and you again bring a supplementary! Madam Speaker, for the first time, look after the House. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I do not think that matter is for debate today. It has been laid and we will send it to the committee. You can go and give your views there and the report will be brought here and we debate it – do not worry, the House does not die. I have sent that document to the Committee on Budget – whatever committee it will be, it will consider it and give a report to the House.

DESIGNATION OF MEMBERS TO SECTORAL COMMITTEES IN ACCORDANCE WITH RULE 176 (7) OF THE RULES OF PROCEDURES OF PARLIAMENT

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, as I indicated, when we read the Budget, we agreed that we shall constitute the sessional committees today. Let me start with those which have come to me from the NRM.

The Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development:
Hon. Margaret Komuhangi
Hon. Arinaitwe Rwakajara
Hon. Nokrach William 
Hon. Baba Diri Margaret 
Hon. Nauwat Rosemary
Hon. Ssentongo Nabulya
Hon. Joy Kariisa
Hon. Nshaija Dorothy
Hon. Achia Terrence
Hon. Martin Drito
Hon. Aboud Kitata
Hon. Kipoi Jack Nsubuga

THE SPEAKER: Those are 12 Members.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, you are right to read the names. But we wanted to seek your indulgence that you allow us some time tomorrow so that we are able to put together all the numbers from our side so that they constitute the whole team; we have not yet concluded on it and that is the best way we were requesting.

THE SPEAKER: But, honourable members, the numbers are known. I think that we have proportions for all the NRM, the Opposition, and the independents. What difference is it going to make? We can receive some names today and then complete tomorrow because I think that we all have proportion. Yes, hon. Otada, you wanted to say something?

MR SAM OTADA: I thank you, Madam Speaker. I wanted to say something earlier but I think that since you did not give me the opportunity, I will not raise it because it will take us aback. 

Madam Speaker, when you look at Rule 176 (4): “Independent Members shall apply to the Clerk to join committees of their choice and the Speaker shall accordingly ensure that the Members join the committees of their choice.”

Madam Speaker, it is my understanding that this provision places an independent Member of Parliament directly in a committee of his or her choice. Therefore, I wanted to read the list of independent members who have indicated their interest, and that is a list that I have shared with the Office of the Clerk and I thought I would proceed under that rule. But I seek your guidance, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: You know, I was going to come to the independents after the NRM. So, I had just read the names of the NRM proposal and then I was going to read the ones of the independents. The Opposition said that they were not quite ready until tomorrow.

MR WADRI: Madam Speaker, I want to borrow from past history and the good part of it is the fact that we used to share the joined measures of the Government Chief Whip and the Opposition Chief Whip while agreeing on Members on parliamentary committees. It is a very tedious exercise. There are honest emphasis on trade-offs as people agree. I am really trying to ask for your guidance. This business of bringing the list piecemeal may run us into trouble and may cause some confusion. 

I just beg your indulgence. I would have appreciated a situation where the few chief whips together with the representative of the independents sit the way we used to sit before you, Madam Speaker, so that we are able to come up with a holistic and agreed position; so that there is no collusion. The way I see it, we run a risk of getting into some confusion. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Now, what is the problem? Is there anyone who wants to be on a committee and has not got one?

MR AMURIAT: Madam Speaker, I would like to seek your guidance. I know that the practise of the House is that, we pronounce ourselves on the names that you have read. I do not know whether you want to proceed by having us pronounce ourselves on the names for the NRM, and then pronounce ourselves on the names forwarded by the independents and then tomorrow, we will pronounce ourselves on the names forwarded by the Opposition. Is this how we want to proceed?

THE SPEAKER: What is your problem? I do not see what the problem is. I have just read the names submitted for the gender committee by the NRM. I will have to read the ones submitted by the independents. What is the problem? 

Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development, submissions by the independents: Hon. Arthur Anywarach, and hon. Rosemary Nyakikongoro are to remain on that committee. Those are the two proposals for the independents for that committee. 

Honourable members, I put the question that those who have so far been proposed be approved by this House pending the proposal by the Opposition. 

MR OTADA: Madam Speaker, the practice has always been that when we are designating members to sectoral committees, we get to know the chairperson and the deputy chairperson and in this case, I speak for myself. Madam Speaker, I do not understand who is going to be the chairperson of that committee and who will deputise because the list that you have has a request by hon. Nyakikongoro to chair that committee. It is a request and you have it and this is a matter that I have shared with the Rt Hon. Prime Minister. So, I just want to be guided. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, for now let us deal with the membership then we shall deal with the chairpersons. You know, you people took away my powers to assist in identifying the chairpersons in the rules. So, that is the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development. Tomorrow, we shall receive the names from the Leader of the Opposition. 

Committee on Natural Resources 	
    1. Hon. Werikhe Kafabusa
    2. Hon. Kwizera Wagahungu
    3. Hon. Anne Marie Nankabirwa  
    4. Hon. Wangolo Jacob
    5. Hon. Alex Ruhunda
    6. Hon. Wamakuyu Mudimi
    7. Hon. Bangirana Kawooya
    8. Hon. Byarugaba Grace
    9. Hon. Muhwezi Jim Katugugu
    10. Hon. Kiwanda Geoffrey
    11. Hon. Julius Bigirwa 
    12. Hon. Bakaluba Mukasa
    13. Hon. Namirembe Bbumba Syda 
    14. Hon. Simon Lokeris
    15. Hon. Yorokamu Katwiremu

Those are the proposals from the NRM. I now get to the proposals for the independents: 
1. 	Hon. Jacob Oboth
2. 	Hon. Benjamin Cadet
3. 	Hon. Phyllis Chemtai
4. 	Hon. Andrew Baryayanga.
Those are the proposals, pending the submissions from the Leader of the Opposition. 

Committee on Public Service and Local Government
    1. Hon. Grace Freedom Kwiyucwiny
    2. Hon. Mable Bakeine
    3. Hon. Florence Kintu
    4. Hon. Raphael Magyezi
    5. Hon. Besisira Ignatius 
    6. Hon. Mutyabule Florence
    7. Hon. Kiiza Rwebembera 
    8. Hon. Nanyondo Birungi
    9. Hon. Muhumuza David
    10. Hon. Mubiito John Bosco 
    11. Hon. Kafuda Boaz
    12. Hon. Wilberforce Yaguma
Those are the NRM nominations for the Committee on Public Service and Local Government.

The proposals for the independents are hon. Joseph Matte and hon. Bbosa Kiyingi Kenneth. We shall receive the others from the Leader of the Opposition tomorrow.

Committee on Trade, Tourism and Industry. For NRM: 
    1. Hon. Flavia Kabahenda 
    2. Hon. James Mbahimba
    3. Hon. Stephen Kasaija
    4. Hon. Evelyn Tete
    5. Hon. Peter Mugema
    6. Hon. Beatrice Mpairwe
    7. Hon. John Ssimbwa 
    8. Hon. Stephen Mayende
    9. Hon. Okot Ogong Felix
    10. Hon. Patrick Nakabaale
    11. Hon. Elizabeth Karungi
    12. Hon. John Mulimba
    13. Hon. Moses Grace Balyeku

So, for the independents, these are the following proposals: Hon. Godfrey Lubega from Kasanda North constituency - I think that is the only nomination for the independents. Again, we shall receive the Opposition proposals tomorrow.

Committee on ICT, for NRM: 
    1. Hon. Turyahikayo
    2. Hon. Bagiire Vincent
    3. Hon. David Bahati
    4. Hon. Kyewalabye Kabajjo
    5. Hon. Anthony Ssemuli
    6. Hon. Gregory Matovu
    7. Hon. Jackie Amongin
    8. Hon. Margaret Kiboijana
    9. Hon. Edward Baliddawa
    10. Hon. Omara Gregory
    11. Hon. Nulu Byamukama
    12. Hon. Micah Lolem

So, the proposal of the independents for the ICT committee is hon. Mariam Nalubega. That is the only nomination I have made for that committee. We shall receive, from the Leader of the Opposition, proposals for the committee on ICT tomorrow.

Committee on Physical Infrastructure, we have for NRM:
    1. Hon. Biraaro of Buhweju
    2. Hon. Peter Aleper
    3. Hon. Balyejjusa Suleiman Kirunda 
    4. Hon. Emmanuel Dombo
    5. Hon. Migadde Robert
    6. Hon. Kyewalabye Majegere
    7. Hon. Nabbanja Robinah
    8. Hon. Amos Mandela
    9. Hon. Samuel Semugaba
    10. Hon. Tophace Kaahwa
    11. Hon. Stephen Mukitale

The proposals from the independents are hon. Ssekitoleko Robert Kafeero. I think that is the only one on the Physical Infrastructure committee. The representatives of the Opposition will come in from the Leader of the Opposition tomorrow. 

Hon. Gilbert Olanya for ICT – okay, hon. Ssekitoleko and hon. Gilbert Olanya. I think my list is not clear.  Hon. Gilbert Olanya for Committee on Physical Infrastructure. 

Then we go to committee on Agriculture: For NRM we have:
    1. Hon. Matia Kasamba
    2. Hon. Huda Oleru
    3. Hon. Lowila Oketayot
    4. Hon. Gilbert Bukenya
    5. Hon. John Amos Okot
    6. Hon. Peace Kusasira
    7. Hon. Jalia Lukumu
    8. Hon. Dorothy Mpiima
    9. Hon. Namoe Stella Nyomera
    10. Hon. Kase-Mubanda
    11. Hon. Fred Badda
    12. Hon. Kasirivu Atwooki. 

So, for the committee on agriculture from the independents, apparently there is no nomination - is it there? Where is it? Okay, hon. Ssempijja Bamulangaki is for the agriculture committee. I think he is the only one. So the representatives of the Opposition will be submitted tomorrow.

Then we go to the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs: 
    1. Hon. Benny Namugwanya
    2. Hon. Peter Eriaku
    3. Hon. Milton Muwuma
    4. Hon. Simon Mulongo
    5. Hon. Patrick Mulindwa
    6. Hon. Fred Mbagadhi
    7. Hon. George Mukula
    8. Hon. Margaret Makokha
    9. Hon. Peter Okeyoh
    10. Hon. Saleh Kamba
    11. Hon. Sarah Nakawunde
    12. Hon. Proscovia Alengot
    13. Hon. Dr Lyomoki, for the NRM.

And for the independents (Defence and Internal Affairs), we have hon. Akello Rose Lilly  to remain in that committee and hon. Cyrus Amodoi to remain in that committee and then hon. Kezekia Mbogo also to remain on that committee. The representatives of the Opposition will be submitted tomorrow.

We have the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development. For NRM we have: 
    1. Hon. Sebunya
    2. Hon. Anthony Okello
    3. Hon. Henry Musasizi
    4. Hon. Xavier Kyooma
    5. Hon. Rose Akol
    6. Hon. Sejjoba Isaac
    7. Hon. Timothy Lwanga
    8. Hon. Adong Lilly
    9. Hon. Katoto hatwib
    10. Hon. Lugolobi
    11. Hon. Emma Boona
    12. Hon. Ayepa Michael
    13. Hon. James Kakooza and
    14. Hon. David Ochwa. 

For the independents, we have hon. John Bagoole - I think that is the only submission from the independents for the finance committee. The Opposition’s submissions will be brought tomorrow. 

For the Presidential Affairs Committee, we have for NRM: 
    1. Hon. Fred Mwesigye
    2. Hon. Peter Ogwang
    3. Hon. Tom Aza
    4. Hon. Agnes Nabirye
    5. Hon. Amoit Judy Mary
    6. Hon. Florence Nebanda
    7. Hon. George Ekuma
    8. Hon. Harriet Ntabazi
    9. Hon. Naome Kaabule
    10. Hon. Gertrude Nakabira
    11. Hon. Hellen Kahunde
    12. Hon. Michael Mawanda. 

From the independents, we have hon. Mathias Mpuuga, hon. Patrick Nsanja, hon. Jesca Ababiku. Those are the three for the Presidential Affairs Committee. The Opposition’s submissions will come in tomorrow.

Committee on Foreign Affairs, we have for NRM:
    1. Hon. Abraham Lokii
    2. Hon. Juliana Auma
    3. Hon. Fadhil Chemaswet
    4. Hon. Sempala Mbuga
    5. Hon. Onyango Kakoba
    6. Hon. Ongalo Obote
    7. Hon. Stanley Omwonya
    8. Hon. Hellen Asamo
    9. Hon. Ahmed Awongo
    10. Hon. William Kwemara
    11. Hon. Asupasa Isiko
    12. Hon. Monica Amoding.

For the independents, we have hon. Andrew Allen - I think that is the only submission for now. So, the submissions of the Opposition will come tomorrow.

For the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs, we have for NRM:
    1. Hon. Stephen Tashobya
    2. Hon. Stephen Baka
    3. Hon. Remigion Achia
    4. Hon. Dennis Obua Hamson
    5. Hon. Linda Timbigamba
    6. Hon. Yona Musinguzi
    7. Hon. Jovah Kamateeka
    8. Hon. Kabakumba Masiko
    9. Hon. Sarah Mateke
    10. Hon. Nyakecho Okwenye
    11. Hon. Nakayenze Connie
    12. Hon. Alex Byarugaba.  

The independents on the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs we have:
    1. Hon. Fox Odoi
    2. Hon. Gerald Karuhanga
    3. Hon. Sam Otada Amooti 
Hon. Grace Namara also belongs to this committee. Submissions of the Opposition will come in tomorrow.

The Committee on Education and Sports has, for NRM: 
    1. Hon. Ssinabulya Namabidde
    2. Hon. Jacob Opolot
    3. Hon. Yahya Gudoi
    4. Hon. Lydia Chekwel
    5. Hon. Alex Ndeezi
    6. Hon. Betty Mbabazi
    7. Hon. Victoria Businge
    8. Hon. Khiddu Makubuya
    9. Hon. Margaret Aleper
    10. Hon. Christine Acayo
    11. Hon. John Nizeyimana
    12. Hon. Susan Amero
    13. Hon. Sarah Lanyero.

For the independents on this committee, they have the following submissions: 
    1. Hon. Moses Kasibante
    2. Hon. Mary Tunde
    3. Hon. Julius Maganda. 

The members of the Opposition will be submitted tomorrow.

Committee on Health has, for NRM:
    1. Hon. Omona
    2. Hon. Margaret Iriama
    3. Hon. Ruth Lematia
    4. Hon. Evelyn Anite
    5. Hon. Naome Kabasharira
    6. Hon. Medard Bitekyerezo
    7. Hon. Dr Twa-Twa
    8. Hon. Dr J.B. Lokii
    9. Hon. Justine Kayinza
    10. Hon. Dr Chris Baryomunsi
    11. Hon. Barumba Rusaniya
    12. Hon. Egunyu Nantume
    13. Hon. Patrick Mutono. 

For the independents, we – Clerk, I do not see anybody for the health committee. Okay, we have hon. Ronah Ninsiima and hon. Sam Okuonzi who will remain on that committee. Representatives of the Opposition will come in tomorrow.

For the Committee on East African Community Affairs, we have for NRM:
    1. Hon. Sarah Mwebaza
    2. Hon. Veronica Kadogo
    3. Hon. Nelson Sabila
    4. Hon. Sarah Kayagi
    5. Hon. Nakato Kyabangi
    6. Hon. Safia Nalule
    7. Hon. Olivia Kwagala
    8. Hon. Rosemary Seninde
    9. Hon. Anne Auru
    10. Hon. Tonny Ayoo
    11. Hon. Baker Ssali
    12. Hon. Martin Mugabi. 

For the independents, hon. Haruna Kyeyune - 
I think that is the only submission for the Independents. The rest from the Opposition will be submitted tomorrow.

So, Members, tomorrow we shall complete the process after we have received all the names. Is there anyone who has not been allocated a committee? 

4.25
MR SAM AMOOTI OTADA (Independent, Kibanda County, Kiryadongo): Madam Speaker, I want to thank you for this opportunity. I wanted us to harmonise this so that we can move forward without any controversy. The list that I have that I shared with the Office of the Clerk says something else about a few Independent Members of Parliament and I wanted the record to be altered as such.

The hon. Mujungu Jennifer was a member of the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs in the last session, and she wishes to retain her membership on that committee. I thought that should be corrected. 

The hon. Haruna Kyeyune requested to go to the Committee on Natural Resources and not the Committee on East African Community Affairs as I just heard - 

THE SPEAKER: No, hon. Otada, you gave two choices. I have here EAC or Natural Resources. This is your document. You placed two choices for hon. Kyeyune. 

MR AMOOTI OTADA: He had a first and a second choice. You are right, Madam Speaker, but his first choice was Natural Resources and that is the first option that he wanted this House to adopt.

The third one is the hon. Lubega Godfrey, Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry; the fourth is hon. Kenneth Lubogo, Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry and the last is the hon. Achile Manoah for the Committee on Natural Resources. These are only five Members and I thought we would agree on this, Madam Speaker. It is not a very big deal. I beg your indulgence.

THE SPEAKER: So, you want all those to go to the Committee on Natural Resources?

MR AMOOTI OTADA: Yes, I want hon. Achile Manoah and hon. Kyeyune to go to the Committee on Natural Resources. They are actually two. Then hon. Mujungu is retaining her membership on the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs; hon. Lubega Godfrey and Kenneth Lubogo to the Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry. So, there are only two who should be added to the Natural Resources Committee, Madam Speaker. I harmonised this list with the Office of the Clerk. I have it here and it is stamped “Received Copy”. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: But it is also the same list which has gaps. 

MR AMOOTI OTADA: Yeah, there are those who actually did not express and I thought that by conduct they were saying the status quo should prevail.

THE SPEAKER: Hon.  Mujungu remains on the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs where she has been working. Then there are those two proposals to the Committee on Natural Resources. So, there will be nobody for the Committee on East African Community Affairs from the independents.

MR NZOGHU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have listened to the list submitted by the Government side and also the one provisionally submitted by the Independents. The Opposition is going to submit tomorrow. The guidance that I would like to seek is on the status of our four honourable colleagues whose names I have not heard either on the Independents or the NRM side. That is hon. Ssekikubo, hon. Niwagaba, hon. Tinkasiimire and hon. Nsereko. I have not heard their names, Madam Speaker, and I would like to seek your guidance on where they lie.

THE SPEAKER: They will be allocated committees by the Speaker tomorrow. (Laughter) I understand, hon. Iddi Isabirye was omitted. He is to go to the Committee on Physical Infrastructure. Thank you. So, tomorrow we will complete the process. 

The UPDF have brought their list. Their proposal is as follows: 
    1. Hon. Gen. Elly Tumwine, Committee on Public Service and Local Governments;
    2. Hon. Gen Aronda Nyakairima, Committee on Natural Resources - he has not yet appeared before my committee. As far as I am concerned, he is still a back bencher. 
    3. Hon. Gen. Katumba Wamala, Committee on Physical Infrastructure;
    4. Hon. Gen. Oweyesigire, Committee on Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries;
    5. Hon. Lt Gen. Charles Angina, Committee on Foreign Affairs;
    6. Hon. Maj. Gen. Julius Oketta, Committee on Presidential Affairs;
    7. Hon. Brig. Katirima, Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs;
    8. Hon. Lt Col Sarah Mpabwa, Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs; 
    9. Hon. Capt. Susan Lakot, Committee on East African Community Affairs.

HONOURABLE MEMBERS: And Sejjusa?

THE SPEAKER: He will be allocated. 

MR SSEMUJJU NGANDA: Madam Speaker, the UPDF has submitted their list. I assume they have a caucus and you are reading from that list that they have submitted. Since we have them - I can see Gen. Elly Tumwine – don’t they owe an explanation to this Parliament as to why they have deleted the name of Gen. Sejjusa?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Tumwine.

GEN. ELLY TUMWINE: Madam Speaker, just a while ago, we were told clearly that people must serve on committees of their choice. So, we are waiting for hon. Gen. Sejjusa –(Laughter)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, Gen. Tumwine wins. About the sitting arrangement in the House, Rule 9(1) of the Rules of Procedure says that the Speaker will have to reserve a seat for every Member. Under our Constitution, Article 208(2) says, “The Uganda Peoples’ Defence Forces shall be nonpartisan, national in character, patriotic, professional, disciplined, productive and subordinate to the civilian authority as established under this Constitution.” 

Madam Speaker, the rules also say that on your right sit the people of the ruling party; and on your left the government in waiting. (Laughter) The UPDF is supposed to be nonpartisan. That side is for the ruling side and this side is for the government in waiting. Now, where are they, given the fact that the UPDF is supposed to be nonpartisan?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, you know we do not have enough seats in this House. When we get our new Chamber we shall allocate everybody where to sit. 

I now read the UPC Members:
    1. Hon. Betty Amongi, Committee on Health;
    2. Hon. Benson Obua, Committee on ICT;
    3. Hon. Jimmy Akena, Committee on Natural Resources;
    4. Hon. Jacinta Ogwal, Committee on Presidential Affairs;
    5. Hon. Chrispus Ayena, Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs; 
    6. Hon. Lucy Ajok, Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry; 
    7. Hon. Akora Maxwell, Committee on Finance, Planning -

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, in this House there are two sides: there is the ruling side and the Opposition and the independents. As far as I know, I am the one who leads the Opposition and we have the Opposition Chief Whips. This is a procedural matter –(Interruption)

MS AMONGI: Madam Speaker, I stand on a point of order under Rule 14 of the Rules of Procedure and I want to read the rule. Rule 14 speaks of whips and sub rule (8) says: “The role and functions of a Party Whip is to ensure due attendance, participation in proceedings and voting in Parliament of Members of the party.” Sub rule (10) states: “Other functions of the Government Chief Whip, Opposition Chief Whip and Party Whip shall include -(c) supplying lists of Members to serve on standing and sectoral committees.” 

It does not say, “Supplying of the list is by the Leader of the Opposition.” It is very clear that it is the Government Chief Whip, Opposition Chief Whip and Party Whip that do so. Is it in order for the person who is not entitled to supply the party list for UPC to stand and block the list of UPC from being read?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I do recall that the Leader of the Opposition dismissed the DP and UPC Members and I have not got information that he has reinstated them. So, I thought that they are doing their own things as parties.

MR WADRI: Madam Speaker, what I have just witnessed is very ugly and for any sane Parliament to work, such things should not repeat themselves. I would prefer and propose that the Leader of the Opposition go back to his side and harmonise these positions. We are not reinventing a wheel. It is good that those of you who were here in the last Parliament when multi-party dispensation started know the processes in this Parliament. I would beg that –(Interruption)

MR SSIMBWA: I thank you, Madam Speaker. The issue, which is on the Floor of this House, is legal and it follows the procedure of Parliament. Rule 176(2) is very clear and I want to read it: “In the selection of members of sectoral committees, the parties or organisations represented in Parliament shall designate through the Whips, membership to committees on the basis of party or organisation representation in the House.”

Madam Speaker, is the Member in order to deviate from the rules set by this House and seek for issues that are outside our rules in conducting parliamentary work? Is he in order?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I just want to clarify that in doing our work here, we acknowledge the existence of several parties in this House. Even if they are all on one side of the House, I do know that we work with the whips of those parties. So hon. Nandala-Mafabi, allow hon. Amongi to-

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, all along I thought we were working together but now I have learnt. The Opposition Chief Whip is not available and that is why I was standing. I know it is the Opposition Chief Whip and we always agree. We thought it was team work but we have learnt. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, let me just complete this process. The list from the UPC MPs:
    1. Hon. Betty Amongi, Committee on Health; 
    2. Hon. Obua Benson, ICT Committee; 
    3. Hon. Jimmy Akena, Committee on Natural Resources; 
    4. Hon. Jacinto Ogwal, Committee on Presidential Affairs; 
    5. Hon. Chrispus Ayena, Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs;
    6. Hon. Lucy Ajok, Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry; 
    7. Hon. Akora Maxwell, Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development; 
    8. Hon. Santa Alum, Committee on Public Service and Local Government; 
    9. Hon. Acheng Joy Ruth, Committee on Physical Infrastructure; 
    10. Hon. Fred Ebil, Committee on Foreign Affairs.

Honourable members, we shall complete the rest tomorrow.

DR BITEKYEREZO: I wanted your guidance, Madam Speaker. The Opposition has said that they did not know that they were not working together anymore. Is he still the Leader of the Opposition or have things fallen apart? I wanted to know.

THE SPEAKER: No, I think they are still working together and that is why they are still sitting together.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, as you are aware, under the Administration of Parliament Act, as amended, parties can appoint whips. As far as I am concerned, the whip for UPC is hon. Fr Jacinto Ogwal. Please, this is a matter, which is official and which you may not be privy to. It does not concern Dr Bitekyerezo from Mbarara; it concerns us.

Madam Speaker, if we are going by that, don’t you think you will need a response from Fr Jacinto who is the official whip of UPC? You have the letter.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, I will check my records and find out but for now these are the submissions from UPC. Next item.

MOTION THAT THE HOUSE RESOLVES ITSELF INTO A COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY TO CONSIDER THE SUPPLEMENTARY SCHEDULE NO. 2 FOR FINANCIAL YEAR 2012/2013

4.44
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Madam Speaker, I beg to move a motion that the House resolves itself into a Committee of Supply to consider the Supplementary Schedule No. 2 for financial year 2012/2013. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Is it supported? It is supported.

MR OMACH: Madam Speaker, following the passing of the Supplementary Schedule No. 1 for financial year 2012/2013 on 23rd May this year, totalling to Shs 55.78 billion, more pressures came from ministries, departments and agencies requiring Supplementary Schedule No. 2 totalling to Shs 46.94 billion which represents 0.41 percent of the previously approved budget for this financial year. 

Madam Speaker, this Shs 46.94 billion is consistent with recurrent expenditure of Shs 36.988 billion, development expenditure of Shs 7.7 billion and statutory revision of Shs 2.2 billion. I beg to submit. 

4.46
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Nathan Nandala-Mafabi): Madam Speaker, first of all, the minister has talked about the pressure to spend. Where is the money coming from? There must be income and expenditure. So before we go further, let the minister tell us where this money is coming from; otherwise, we might give you authority to spend and you go and break into Bank of Uganda. 

MR OMACH: Madam Speaker, we have given this explanation to the committee and the committee will cover it in their report.

4.46
THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE COMMITTEE ON BUDGET (Mr Tim Lwanga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have risen to give a report of the Budget Committee on the Supplementary Schedule No.2 for the financial year 2012/2013. I believe on this occasion, everybody has a copy of the report – (Interjections) – well if you do not have it, then they should be able to give you one. 

Introduction
On 14 June 2013, the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development in accordance with Section 12 of the Budget Act presented to Parliament Supplementary Budget Schedule No.2 for the financial year 2012/2013, which amounted to Shs46,943,597,000. The schedule was referred to the Budget Committee for scrutiny. 

The committee scrutinised the schedule and now wishes to present its report to the House for consideration. 

Methodology

The Budget Committee scrutinised the supplementary request together with other relevant documents and held meetings attended by the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and other relevant sector ministers together with their technical staff. 

Framework for the scrutiny of the supplementary expenditure

The committee used the following framework to scrutinise the supplementary request: 
    1. The Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, Article 156(2); 
    2. The Public Finance and Accountability Act, 2003; and 
    3. The Budget Act 2001.

These were used to establish whether the supplementary expenditure is in conformity with the law, that is, if the supplementary expenditure is within the statutory limit of three percent provided for under the Budget Act and to establish whether the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development indicated the impact of supplementary expenditure on the original financing arrangements and sector work plan as required by Section 16 of the Public Finance and Accountability Act; and the source of funding for supplementary expenditure; that is, additional resources or reallocation within the sectors. 

Total supplementary request

The total supplementary expenditure under this schedule amounts to Shs 46,943,597,000 which represents a 0.4 percent of the approved budget. 

Table No.1 shows the summary of the expenditure schedule No.2 for the year 2012/2013 by category. 

Under recurrent expenditure, there is a total of Shs 36, 988,375,444. Under development expenditure, Shs 7,755,222,000 and in statutory revision, it is Shs 2,200,000 which gives us a total of Shs 46,943,597,444. 

Overview of the supplementary expenditure

The supplementary expenditure request under schedule No.2 of the financial year 2012/2013 is as follows:-

    • Shs 2.38 billion under State House to cater for shortfalls in wage recurrent budget for the fourth quarter for the financial year 2012/2013;

    • Shs 7.755 billion under the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development under project No.117 financial management and accountability programme;

    • Shs 19.5 billion under Uganda Police Force to cater for the following:
    i) Shs 6.13 billion for shortfall in payment of outstanding electricity and water bills;
    ii) Shs 12.87 billion for operational expenses;
    iii) Shs 0.5 billion for classified expenditure;

    • Shs 4.6 billion has been provided to the Ministry of Education and Sports to cater for wage shortfall arising out of delays in transferring the staff of the recently decentralised tertiary institutions on the ministry’s payroll. This expenditure will be effected through a reallocation from the district tertiary budget allocation.

    • Shs 1.3 billion for the Uganda Heart Institute is a supplementary expenditure for procurement of drugs and other medical supplies.

    • Shs 2.2 billion supplementary expenditure has been provided to the Auditor-General’s Office to pay gratuity under the staff voluntary retirement scheme. This scheme is intended to improve efficiency and effectiveness by retiring staff who are not copying with the nature of work and recruiting more suitable and efficient staff. 

    • Shs 0.194 billion under Gulu University is supplementary expenditure required to cater for wage shortfalls arising from the recruitment of critical staff in the faculty of medicine, faculty of science and faculty of agriculture and environment. The recruited staff could not access the payroll due to wage shortfall.

    • Shs 1.6 billion for National Forestry Authority is supplementary expenditure provided to cater for wage shortfall arising from underfunding due to the expiry of donor funding. A big part of the authority’s wage used to be financed by the donors. The supplementary, therefore, is intended to fill the wage gap created by the expiry of donor funding. 

    • Shs 0.902 billion for Butabika Hospital as supplementary expenditure required of which Shs 0.7 billion is to cater for wage shortfall and Shs 0.2 billion is to cater for improvement and maintenance of the hospital private wing. 

    • Shs 50,000,000 for Naguru Hospital required for the enhancement of operation in the private wing. 

    • Shs 3.897 billion for a number of referral hospitals that have experienced wage shortfalls leading to delays in payment of staff salaries. Salary shortfalls under referral hospitals are attributed to under budgeting and deployment of additional health workers in referral hospitals by the Ministry of Health without taking into account the wage bill provision for the financial year 2012/2013. 

    • Shs 0.114 billion is for Uganda High Commission in New Delhi where authority is needed to allow the mission utilise unspent balances for the last financial year amounting to US$4,372 to cater for shortfall in operational budget. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, what was the figure you read?

MR LWANGA: Shs 43,732 - 

    • Shs 2.754 bn for other Missions Abroad, which have experienced wage and non-wage budget shortfalls arising out of underfunding, exchange rate depreciation and unforeseen costs related to transfer of staff in the financial year.  

General observation on the Supplementary Schedule No. 2 of FY 2012/2013

The committee noted that for Government to present a request for supplementary funding two weeks to the end of a financial year, implies that there is a lack of clarity and credibility in the budget process and budget execution. They wanted to know where additional resources come from at the end of the financial year. The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development presented a schedule indicating the sources of funding. It is attached herewith as Annex 1.

There was also concern about the tendency of Government to suppress certain planned activities so as to raise funds for supplementary expenditures thus stifling the activities of certain sectors. 

The committee further observes that the re-location of funds from one vote to another under Section 12 (3) of the Budget Act, 2001 does not require additional resource to the overall budget allocation for a financial year. It, therefore, cannot be referred to as a supplementary expenditure. The appearance of this section in the Budget Act, 2001 under the marginal note ‘supplementary expenditure’ is erroneous and the law should be amended to rectify the anomaly. 

Pursuant to Section 12 (3) of the Budget Act 2001 that requires any reallocation of funds to be made in consultation with all the affected ministries, departments, institutions or organisations, the committee is concerned that some of the suppressions and relocations are done without evidence of consultation with the affected stakeholders.

The committee recommends that there should be committed transparency and discipline in the budget process and further recommends that Government should raise the MTEF ceilings of the sectors that continuously ask for supplementary funding with a view to having a more realistic budget.

Specific Vote Scrutiny  

State House - Vote 002 

The committee was informed by the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development that a total of Shs 2.086 billion is required to cater for salary shortfalls which could not be submitted under schedule 1 because it came after supplementary expenditure schedule No. 1 had been considered.

The committee notes that State House always overshoots its budgetary allocation for a financial year. State House has already benefitted from Supplementary Schedule No. 1 with a total of Shs. 128.596 billion, which now brings its total budget for the FY to Shs 189.228 billion. 

The committee is greatly concerned about the high propensity to spend by State House. It however notes that this FY 2013/2014, the State House budget has been increased. It, therefore, hopes that this will put an end to the recurrent supplementary requests. 

Uganda Police Force - Vote 114	

The committee was informed that Uganda Police Force requested for additional funding of Shs 54.95 billion to settle outstanding obligations. However, due to the budget constraint, Government could only afford Shs 19.5 billion to cater for the following of their needs: 

    • Shs. 6.13 billion to cater for shortfalls in payment of outstanding electricity and water bills; 
    • Shs. 12.87 billion to cater for operational expenses; and 
    • Shs. 0.5 billion to cater for classified expenditures.

The following issues were raised:-
The committee was concerned about the high utility bills incurred by Uganda Police Force and recommended that the Auditor-General should conduct a forensic audit on the utility expenses and domestic arrears of the force. In the meantime, Uganda Police force is advised to adopt and implement efficiency measures aimed at cutting down these bills because they are becoming unsustainable, given the limited resources available. They should consider introducing, for example, utility allowances for all the officers. This will go a long way in cutting down the utility bills.

The committee observes that for Uganda Police Force to be provided with only Shs 19.5 billion out of the Shs 54. 95 billion they requested for to settle their outstanding obligations, they are left with a debt of 35.45 billion. This will be translated into domestic arrears. The committee is greatly disturbed by the rate at which Government is accumulating domestic arrears many of which arise from poor budget management. 

The committee further noted that there is an ESCROW account with Uganda Electricity Distribution Company Limited (UEDCL) where UMEME draws funds to cover for unpaid electricity bills by Government institutions after a given period of non-payment. The committee recommends that all electricity bills that will remain outstanding after the provision of this supplementary fund to Uganda Police Force, should be cleared from the Escrow account. 

The committee recommends that Government in future provides for these necessities in the budget and ring fence the budget of Uganda Police Force.

Regional Referral Hospitals - Votes 162–166, Votes 168 – 174 and Votes 176 

The committee was informed that the above votes experienced wage shortfalls amounting to Shs 3.897 billion arising from recruitments and delayed transfers. In regard to delayed transfers, the committee was informed that staff who are transferred are usually budgeted for in their previous stations and not the ones to which they move. The wages asked for in this supplementary request were, therefore, approved by Parliament under different votes.

Ministry of Education and Sports - Vote 013

The committee was informed that the supplementary funds required by the Ministry of Education and Sports amounting to Shs 4.6 billion are a reallocation from the districts to the centre. This arose from the fact that tertiary institutions were decentralised and their money transferred to the districts but the staff concerned continued to get their salaries from the Ministry of Education. The funds that were transferred to the districts remained idle while those at the centre were getting depleted. 

The committee observes that these supplementary funds may not clear all outstanding wages, and recommends that Government should establish all unpaid wages owed to teachers and ensure that they are paid.

Votes 201 – 221 - Missions Abroad

The Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development informed the committee that one of the reasons for the supplementary request from the Missions Abroad arose from shortfalls incurred due to loss on poundage.

The committee observed that the loss on poundage that is often experienced by foreign missions is something that is expected and should be budgeted for beforehand. It recommends that the ministry should open up a poundage account to cater for these eventualities.

Conclusion
 
The supplementary request sought for under schedule No.2 of financial year 2012/2013, is for the approval of Shs 46,943,597,444 representing 0.41 percent of the approved budget. 

The committee recommends that this House approves the Supplementary Expenditure Schedule No.2 for FY 2012/2013 as follows: 
    • Recurrent Expenditure 36,988,375,444 and
    •  Development Expenditure 7,755,222,000

The committee also recommends that Parliament takes note of Supplementary Statutory Expenditure of Shs 2,200,000,000.  Madam Speaker, I beg to lay the report on Table with the Schedule attached. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: I thank you, Chair, and your committee. Hon. Mulimba, three minutes and then honourable –(Members rose_) Oh sorry, wait, wait. There is a minority report. Hon. Cecilia Ogwal. 

5.06
MRS CECILIA OGWAL (Independent, Woman Representative, Dokolo): I thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me an opportunity to read the minority report which is attached to the main report.

Introduction

On 14 June 2013, Government presented a Supplementary Budget Schedule No. 2 to Parliament amounting to Shs 46.94billion, the total supplementary request under Schedule No. 2,represents a 0.41 percent of the total approved budget of Shs 10,903,22billion.
Under the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, Article 156(2) (a) and (b) and under Section 16 of the Public Finance and Accountability Act, 2003 allows Government to spend and bring to Parliament for retrospective approval. Section 16 also enjoins Government to carry out consultations before any reallocation is made. 

Dissent from the committee position

Under Rule No. 194(1) which states that a Member dissenting from the opinion of a majority of a committee may state in writing the reasons for his or her or their dissent, and the statement of reasons shall be appended to the report of the committee.

Rule No. 194(2) provides that the Member dissenting from the opinion of the majority of the committee shall be given time to present the minority report at the time of the consideration of the committee report.

I am submitting this minority report in good faith, Madam Speaker, because we have observed over the years that the issues of concern raised in this report have continued to be raised on the Floor of Parliament and also in the Budget Committee. We are witnessing complete disregard of the recommendations made by both the Budget Committee and Parliament.
Madam Speaker, I am a member of the Budget Committee and I did attend meetings of the committee but I am not in total agreement with the committee report. In line with Rule 198 of our Rules of Procedure, I have decided to write a minority report. My point of dissent relates to the following:

Legal Requirements not adhered to

In the consideration of supplementary expenditure under Schedule No. 2, two fundamental laws were breached and not at all adhered to as required. These are:

    (i) The Budget Act, 2001 and;
    (ii) The Public Finance and Accountability Act, 2003.

Both pieces of legislation operationalise Article 156(2) of the Constitution of Uganda. Once all the laws governing supplementary expenditure are read together, the following guidelines emerge, contrary to what the Executive has presented in this supplementary request.

Section 16(2) of the Public Finance and Accountability Act, 2003, states that: “A supplementary estimate prepared under section (1) of this Act shall indicate any effect on the financing requirements of Government submitted under paragraph (a) of sub-section (1) of Section 15 and any expected changes
to the statement provided under sub-paragraph (iii) of paragraph (c) of Section 15”.

While the Budget Act, 2001, under Section 12 (3) states that: “Any reallocation of funds shall be made in consultation with all the affected ministries, departments, institutions or organisations,” there was clear evidence in the committee deliberations and interaction with the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, that the referred to consultations never took place. Instead, there were arbitrary  cuts of sector budgets to finance activities that were not of any emergency as required by the law. 

Out of the total Shs 46.94 billion, none of this money is for flood victims, none of this is for hunger-stricken people in Karamoja or any calamity that has befallen any part of the country in the last 12 months. Instead, the bulk is for predictable expenditures, which would have ordinarily been budgeted for. These include wages, police operations, domestic utility arrears and State House operations.

This is a total violation of the law including the Constitution, Article 156(2) of which I was a party, which sanctions supplementary expenditures on unforeseen and unpredictable expenditures. (Applause) 

Budget indiscipline 
In addition to legal parameters of supplementary expenditure as stated above, good financial management requires frugal management of budgetary resources. National budgeting, which culminates into passing the Appropriation Act is an elaborate process where ordinary and statutory expenditures should easily be captured. 

Consequently, a supplementary expenditure should be made for activities and programmes that were not foreseen or arose as a matter of emergency. Is Parliament presented with the right picture at the time of budgeting, Madam Speaker? Is the Executive realistic with the planning and budgeting exercise? All these questions need answers from the minister herself because in the committee, it was the junior minister who appeared and did not provide satisfactory explanations.

Madam Speaker, as if that is not enough, another serious anomaly has occurred where the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development used uncouth methods to sneak through an addendum to the Supplementary Schedule No.2 without following clear laid down procedures. This is undermining, not only your authority as Speaker, but the entire Parliament, as it has happened with this very Supplementary Schedule No. 2.

Madam speaker, I beg your indulgency to condemn this act and demand for an apology from the Executive for by-passing the procedures. I beg to lay the documents, which the ministry attempted to sneak under Schedule No. 2. Can I do it before I finish, Madam Speaker? 

In this addendum, the ministry attempted to sneak the figures amounting to Shs 77 billion but detailed to Shs 59 billion and I beg also to lay on Table the sneaking note of the minister just in case they deny it. (Laughter)

Madam Speaker, we should be mindful of the contents of these documents I have laid on Table so that we are not taken unawares when it could be submitted under supplementary appropriation or under “Addendum 3 or schedule 3.” So, we should be mindful of the documents I have put there. 

I wish to conclude, Madam Speaker and dear colleagues, this Parliament has the power to appropriation and oversight to the implementation of the budget by Government and its agents. I, therefore, wish to recommend as follows:

    1. The Executive, through the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development be condemned for disrespecting Parliament. (Applause)
    2. Parliament rejects this supplementary schedule since Government is not even sure of how much money they require to spend in the next few remaining days to end this financial year. And to supplement that point, the government has failed to adhere to the law. If we were in the courts of law, we would say this schedule is null and void; it has breached the Budget Act.
    3. Government considers providing all the required funds through the mainstream budget and desists from using supplementary expenditures as underhand operations. I thank you, Madam Speaker. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, hon. Ogwal. Hon. John Mulimba, you have three minutes. 

4.18
MR JOHN MULIMBA (NRM, Samia-Bugwe County North, Busia): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the committee for their report presented. I have special interests in this report, particularly in the opening statements. “2.1 Framework for scrutiny of supplementary expenditure.”

I was very delighted when the committee referred to the respective laws, which had to be adhered to in order to inform their recommendations in as far as the supplementary is concerned and I want to just read this part. “The committee views the following framework for scrutinizing the requests, the Constitution, the Public Finance and Accountability Act, the Budget Act…” and their intention was to establish whether the supplementary expenditure was within the statutory requirement limit of 3 percent as provided for under the Budget Act. I listened carefully when the minister submitted what we now term as supplementary schedule No. 3, in any case, which was an addendum. I have also got an addition of supplementary schedule No. 1, 2 and 3. In all opinion and observation, that does not add up to within the limit of 3 percent like the Budget Act provides in section 12(3). The same Budget Act also provides that where the expenditure is beyond that, it should be done in consultation with the votes, which it affects. 

I have scrutinised the whole of this document, Madam Speaker, I have gone to the observations. My dilemma and where I want to get clarification from the committee is that I do not seem to connect or relate the observations with the recommendations. Whereas in the opening statement the committee outlines the respective laws; whereas in the observations the committee observed - and Madam Speaker, I beg to read 4.0 “There was concern about the tendency of Government to suppress certain planned activities so as to raise funds for supplementary expenditure thus stifling activities of certain sectors.” I know and I know most of the honourable members here are aware that the ministry now supplies indicative planning figures to all districts, ministries and departments of Government upon which they do the planning. Today, I will speak about my district of Busia. I am not sure about the others but my guess will be right, that in the whole of the country, no district has received development budgets. 

Madam Speaker, you will realise that we do a number of things when we go to our constituencies. When the road is bad, the leadership at the district is pointing fingers accusing Members of Parliament. They say, “We were given indicative figures but your Members of Parliament have not brought the money.” We have got evidence here attached to ensure that the Ministry of Finance did not at all consult the accounting officers at the districts so as to waive these shortfalls or even savings. I am very sure that in my district of Busia, so many staff who have been on the payroll have not been paid for quite a long time. And now, I hear that in my district, we have a saving from the current expenditure. 

We did approve here money meant for recruitment of health workers, particularly for Mulago Hospital. We asked that the salaries of doctors be increased and recruitment of health workers be done. I am surprised that under Mulago Hospital, we have a saving of over Shs 1 billion. Where did that one come from? All of us here have been pondering and have been lamenting about the state of Mulago Hospital. The roads out there are in banishes, districts have committed these monies; they have signed contracts and I am sure tomorrow or the other day, districts are going to go to court with the contractors. Can I get an explanation from the Minister of Finance and from the committee, having looked at these beautiful observations, where they get the guts to say they now recommend that we approve? In any case, you are very much aware that no figures which were planned after supplying the indicative planning figures to the districts have been stifled. Where do you get the guts? (Mr Ruhunda rose_)

THE SPEAKER: Information from hon. Ruhunda. Are you taking it?

HON. MEMBERS: He is a member of the committee.

THE SPEAKER: He is not contributing; he is giving information.

MR RUHUNDA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I know how delicate this matter is and as a member of the Budget Committee, we labored very much to ask similar questions especially to the head of Budget in Government to give us a sufficient explanation as to where they are getting the extra monies to pay for this supplementary. As you know very well, some of us are part of the society that is suffering. We have been involved in trying to call off industrial action. So, the negotiations between the workers and Government have been ongoing. Now, there are some people who have to take responsibility. We must, at a particular moment, find time to know who to blame for this anomaly but the informationI would like to give is that usually, by the end of the financial year, if districts have not spent the balance of the money on the different activities, then that money is returned to the Consolidated Fund. So, it was established that there is a saving of Shs 86 billion, which accrued from all the unspent balances that the districts submitted, saying they are not in position to absorb. So, I am giving you information and that is how we came to that conclusion.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I think when we are debating this matter, let us also be sincere. As the Parliamentary Commission, we have met almost all the leaders of the local governments in Uganda; all of them are complaining about the shortage of funds. So, how can you say there is a saving when they deliberately sent the money late so that they cannot spend it? No, no.

MR MULIMBA: Madam Speaker, I thank the honourable colleague for the misinformation. I am in receipt of a document from the Ministry of Finance, writing to my accounting officer that for this quarter, “We are not releasing development budgets because the time is too short for you to consume the money.” So, it is not true that this money had been released and therefore, districts had no capacity to utilise them. All of us, hon. colleagues, have been bashed time and time again in this House as failing to coordinate activities at the grassroots. All of you have become victims. I do not know whether you are really part of that. We have been bashed over and over again but whenever you go there, the CAOs will tell you. “We do not have the money –” (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: I think I had given hon. Wadri three minutes and then thereafter, hon. Niwagaba.

5.27
MR KASSIANO WADRI (FDC, Terego County, Arua): Thank you, Madam Speaker. As a matter of courtesy, I would like to thank the committee for the work they have done, albeit not giving us satisfactory points of conviction to approve their request. 

The Executive has time and time again abused provisions of the Public Finance and Accountability Act. Just a while ago, we received yet another request termed as “Addendum” and therefore, Schedule No.3 to this addendum that we are discussing. 

There are two scenarios where Government comes up to seek for supplementary budgeting. The first one is either when they have used the money and they come to Parliament to give retrospective authority taking into mind that Parliament is a rubber stamp – that they have no choice but to approve. In this particular request that has been shot, Government has not even come to tell us whether they are seeking our retrospective approval or they are asking for our approval to procure this money. If it is to procure this money, today is 25th and by 30th, all accounts of Government will have been closed; they would have all closed books of accounts. So, what kind of procurement of goods and services are these people going to ensure that they are able to obtain within the next three to four days, taking into account the weekend?

Secondly, I have seen them here trying to convince us and most of the money is going to salaries. (Interjections) I still want to drive my point home. I know why I am saying this. As I talk, there is an embargo on recruitment by the Civil Service. I ask anybody to rise up and challenge me convincingly that what I am saying is a lie. What is currently happening is the filling of vacant positions to which money has already been attached. Therefore, what kind of money are you asking for, well knowing that the Public Service Commission does not allow any recruitment when there is no money available? (Hon. Kamateeka rose_) Yes, I can take information from my OG. (Laughter)

MS KAMATEEKA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. And thank you my OB and colleague. The information I wish to give is this: You have said that there is a ban on recruitment by the Public Service but this financial year, we as Parliament allowed the Ministry of Health to carry out recruitment and so, some of the money we are supposed to approve in this supplementary budget goes to pay those people who were recruited during the course of the financial year and others – because there are other Government departments that negotiated for the ban to be lifted and they carried recruitment in the course of the financial year.

MR WADRI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to thank my OG for misleading this House. (Laughter) All of us were in this House when we categorically voted huge amounts of money for recruitment of staff to attend to health centres IV; there was money appropriated and released. So, the issue of coming and saying that we require so much – please, you are a very senior former administrator and you know all these things. Please, do not mislead us. (Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, sometimes when people speak, you assume that they are going to put across a real point. Under Schedule No.1, we gave Shs 44 billion.  [Hon. Members: “Is it Shs 44 billion?”] If you round it off, it is Shs 44 billion and she knows it. Now, when you come to lie to the public that the money is now for the recruitment you did, I really shudder.

MR WADRI: Madam Speaker, even to further prove that the committee and the request from Government are wrong, I want to take time and talk about the issue of staff who hitherto were a responsibility of the districts and local governments, especially those under tertiary institutions. It is a simple administrative procedure – many of us have worked in Government and we know that when you are transferred from point A to B, you are transferred with your budget line of salary. So, what are you asking us to do, hon. JachanOmach? Do not take us for a ride; these are issues, which are very clear. If you want money for other things, be clear and frank to us and where we see genuineness in the whole thing, we will be able to assist.

And it is even further erroneous for you to come and say that you are asking for this amount of money because the donors have cut off their aid; donors do not pay recurrent salary expenditure except for project staff who are recruited by them. And when they wind up the project, they do it with the staff. Which officer in Public Service has ever been paid by donors? Nobody. So, what are you asking money for? If you have got money for other things that you intend to do and you do not want us to know, please, if the opportunity was there that the Shs 34 million Ugandans came here and saw how the Executive is trying to defraud them of the little they have, believe me, you will not reach your constituency. (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Please, use just half a minute for winding up.

MR WADRI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. As I conclude, there is only one important thing that I can agree with Government at this point; the issue of low poundage for Foreign Service offices. Five or six months back, members of the Public Accounts Committee went to visit our missions abroad and there was a problem; the issue of poundage is a reality and that should be the only thing, if I had the powers, that I would have approved. Otherwise, the rest of the things, whether State House or Education, should wait for the new financial year, which is just three or four days away from today.

5.35
MR WILFRED NIWAGABA (NRM, Ndorwa County East, Kabale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Mine is a matter of seeking guidance. We are dealing with points of law and the facts do not seem to match with the law. When I read both reports - the minority report and the majority report- it is clear under section 12(3) of the Budget Act that when a reallocation is done, the affected ministries and institutions must be consulted. 

The majority report tends to suggest, but not in clear terms, particularly on page 2 on the methodology, that the committee looked at relevant documents, which are not attached. It also suggests that they held meetings attended by the minister and other relevant sector ministers but there is no such evidence. When you look at the minority report, particularly, pages 3 and 4, it is very clear from that report that only the junior Minister of State for Finance was met. 

In my view, there is a credibility question on this report of the committee on two aspects. One, whether, indeed, they got evidence that the Ministry of Finance consulted the sectors whose monies were not going to be released by suppression; and two, if they were not met - did the committee meet these sectors? Can we have an attendance book of the meetings they held with officials from these sectors and the documents they looked at? If we do not have those, I am afraid it would be a waste of time to proceed with this report because we would be committing an illegality and violating the law we have made ourselves. (Applause)

May I, therefore, suggest, Madam Speaker, that if this report is to be debated, we first get the attendance book of the officials the committee met, the relevant documents they received from those affected ministries and organisations consenting to their monies being reallocated to those otherwise wasteful expenditures. I beg to move.

5.38
MR WILBERFORCE YAGUMA (NRM, Kashari County, Mbarara): Madam Speaker, we have problems with local governments. We want to draw your attention to annex 2 of the report. There is that column C talking of inflated savings. Column C is talking of- (Interruption)

MR SSEMUJJU NGANDA: Madam Speaker, the hon. Niwagaba has raised a matter of law, concerning the credibility of this report. He actually ended by moving that before we proceed, we need to get evidence of the committee, meeting affected institutions and Government departments consenting to the reallocation of their money. And now that he has raised a matter of law and actually moved - I heard him move - the guidance I am seeking is whether we can continue with the debate without having that matter settled first.

THE SPEAKER: No. Let us hear what other Members have to say about his proposal.

MR YAGUMA: Madam Speaker, I was saying that local governments are suffering. This Parliament appropriates money to local governments and either intentionally or not, the Ministry of Finance releases the money late. No sooner is the money released than it is sent back to the centre. This document talks of Shs 86 billion, which has been returned. This money does not come back to Parliament for re-appropriation. 

In other words, the money we appropriate to local governments is returned to the Consolidated Fund and Parliament is kept out. Of this money, there is retention money. These are contracts, which have been signed by local governments. The law requires that about 20 percent be retained for a period. It is unfortunate that at the end of the financial year, this money is also returned. This is the money that goes to the Consolidated Fund for misuse because it does not come back to Parliament for re-appropriation. For our High Commission in India, the minister is seeking permission of Parliament to allow them to use their balance. Why should it be done for the High Commission in India, when it is not done for local governments?

The committee is recommending a forensic audit into the Police as far as Shs 6.13 billion, which the minister is seeking from Parliament to settle utility bills, is concerned. Now, supposing the audit finds otherwise and we have allowed the appropriation and the money is already spent? We have a very nasty experience in this country of how money has been misused. Some ministries and Government departments are settling utility bills of individuals and other companies. 

So, I would suggest that we do not allow the use of Shs 6.13 billion until the audit has been done as recommended by the committee.

And finally, Madam Speaker, I am disappointed with the committee. Those of us who have written compositions know that you get the conclusion from the body. Now, in the body, you recommend and then in the conclusion, you say, we are okay? Are you doing this country a service? I thank you, Madam Speaker.

5.43
MR BENARD ATIKU (FDC, Ayivu County, Arua): Thank you, Madam Speaker. First and foremost, I want to thank you for your guidance in our last sitting when you adjourned this House to allow this matter to go to the budget committee. I think it is from there that more information has been availed to us. Through the committee, they have been able to look at the nitty-gritty that was in this supplementary request.

Madam Speaker, you all agree with me that the committee indeed made the right observations. Where the disappointment comes is in the recommendations. It is like a doctor studying a patient and finding out that the patient is suffering from Malaria and prescribing antiretroviral treatment. This is exactly what has happened. You have correctly cited the laws that have been violated and actually, conditions, which do not warrant for a supplementary request to be brought before this House but then, you are recommending that the august House passes this supplementary. 

Madam Speaker, I want to thank hon. Mama Cecilia Ogwal for the minority report. She has advised – actually, I want to put it as advice to this august House - that if we pass this supplementary request as recommended by the committee, we are going to put the integrity of this august House into question.

Before I came to Parliament -I started hearing about the lamentations about endless requests by Government when I was still a student at university. When I left the university and joined the district council, the same lamentations continued. I finally joined the august House and the same lamentations are happening. So, what has been happening? 

The recommendations that this august House has been passing are not adhered to, so, the Executive seems to be taking us for a ride. I would like to implore this august House to embrace the minority report and advise the Executive to wait for the remaining four days. Actually, we are remaining with three days and in three days, we cannot address these issues, which have been raised. Salaries and foreign missions, as my senior hon. Wadri has said, cannot be addressed within three days. These are critical issues, which we should study further and if necessary, as we will be debating the budget- (Member timed out.)

5.50
MR WILLIAM NZOGHU (FDC, Busongora County North, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Last week, I was in my constituency and I visited the health centres there, especially health centres IV and III for which we appropriated monies, including for health workers, who were recruited. 

The information that I gathered is that the salaries of these health workers who were recruited have never been paid and yet, monies should have been released to that effect. I am shocked when I read XI on page five that states that they are trying to address wage shortfalls at regional referral hospitals. I feel that this is a mockery, since Government has not released these salaries for the workers for whom we passed the budget.

Madam Speaker, when you come to page seven, the committee rightly observes that State House always over-shoots its budget allocation for a financial year and State House has already benefited from Supplementary Schedule No. 1, with a total of Shs 128 billion, which now brings the total budget for the financial year to Shs 189 billion. They go ahead to say that they are greatly concerned about the high propensity to spend by State House. 

The report notes that for financial year 2013/2014, State House budget has been increased and it is hoped that this will put an end to the recurrent supplementary requests.

The point of contention in this statement is that the committee made a critical observation but they never gave a recommendation to that effect. I wonder - when we were still at Makerere, hon. Aggrey Awori came to visit us. By then, he was still subscribing to UPC. He told us that the reason he did not want to associate with our current sitting President was that he knows him as a person who is not disciplined in financial matters. 

He enumerated since 1986 up to that time, and showed us that the President is not disciplined in financial matters and I see that it is coming out and even the committee is bringing it out right here.

So, Madam Speaker, we may end up paying for mysterious workers who are working on his farm in Rwakitura and we think we are giving State House money - (Interruption)

MR TODWONG: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I recognise our concern that we really need to scrutinise the supplementary request by Government. I believe and I know that we all have feelings and definitely, individuals might want to have their own views passed across this supplementary request. But listening to my colleague from the other side, who is trying his level best to drag the President into issues of arrears of salaries and wages, of pertinent issues including the present arrears of teachers, health workers and missions, is it, therefore, in order for my colleague to insinuate that possibly, this budget is going to aid the personal comfort of the President of the Republic of Uganda while we actually know that these requests are to cater for arrears of the individuals that were presented before the committee? Is he, therefore, in order?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, let us not bring extraneous issues but concentrate on what was put in the report. They are talking about State House, not about an individual.

MR NZOGHU: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for your wise ruling. The question of accountability is not a new phenomenon to my colleague on the other side. He knows where the problem lies in this country.

Finally, when you look at page three of the minority report of hon. Cecilia Ogwal, she rightly notes the circumstances under which a supplementary budget could actually arise. On the 1stof May, Kasese District experienced floods. A number of people died and billions of money in property were lost; over Shs 50 billion.

I just want to observe that in my view, this supplementary would only address those areas that are urgent in nature not issues that we do not understand, having given the minister and his team time to explain to the committee and they have not substantially explained to the committee.

I wish to beg this honourable House that this supplementary - (Member timed out.)

5.52
MS NAKATO KYABANGI (NRM, Woman Representative, Gomba): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for this report. My concern is on Vote 114; Uganda Police Force. For Uganda Police Force to be provided with only Shs 19.5 billion out of Shs 54.95 billion that they requested for to settle their outstanding obligations and they are left with a debt of Shs 35 billion, which is translated into arrears, is unfair.

What happens when Police is given less money is that it always caters for priority areas leaving out domestic arrears. That means that domestic arrears keep accumulating and a bigger part of domestic arrears comprises of farmers who supply food stuffs to Police. If you remember last year, suppliers to Police wanted to strike. At some point, Members were wondering what Police is doing when people are being murdered. This is part of the facilitation to Police. 

So, I would like to request Members to support this supplementary.

I would also like to know when Government will give Police enough money for its operations and even domestic arrears because the suppliers are suffering. Thank you very much.

5.53
MR PATRICK NAKABALE (NRM, Youth Representative): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I wish to agree with the report. However, I want to put the following to light. First, I appreciate the activities going on and indeed government has so many good programmes that we cannot dispute now. When you look at the issue of wages, one would appreciate the issue of the supplementary because we proposed to recruit more teachers. But to say that we completely stop the issue of supplementary release this time, I would argue that; if you look at the amount requested for, it is not beyond the three percent. 

However, when you go with budgetary discipline, the projections that we ear-marked – when we are budgeting as government, we are realistic? Do we set targets that are achievable? And in doing so, do we conform to the provisions of the law? 

For example, KCCA came up with a good programme to source for more revenue to fund its activities. For example, it collects Shs 1 billion from commuter taxis. But Government spends Shs 2 billion to pacify strikes. So when it comes to supplementary, I call on the Executive to be mindful of the estimates. Indiscipline comes from such anomalies which cannot be seen in time. 

But on the fact that there are activities which call for immediate attention and release of funds – for example, I was in Lira last weekend and their police barracks is in a bad shape. So in order to correct the situation, let us approve the budget as requested. 

5.57
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman Representative, Serere): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to consider this a great opportunity for me to at least tell myself and the people that I represent that I am not going to support this supplementary. It looks like the committee is reading from the same template of observations and recommendations that we have had in this House for the last ten years. They give the same attitude and they expect that it will change. 

Madam Speaker, we continue to address wages as an emergency. Wage shortfall – who does not know from the beginning of the budget cycle that we will be recruiting more people and that they are expected to earn this much? I know that there is complete lack of sincerity on the part of the Executive. They take the appropriation exercise as a matter for rubber stamping. They are not genuine to this country in terms of revenue - what they collect. They withhold some information and then they come and spend money and expect retrospective approval. 

In terms of the Ministry of Education, what we need right now in the secondary sector is 94,000 teachers. This country has only 27,000. And for the last five years, Government has said that there is no money for our children. Now they come here and the committee wants us to believe, in wishful thinking, that we are going to give State House more money. For all I can say, State House is a bottomless pit; it will never get satisfied. It is so indisciplined and they are not part of the priorities. 

Capital development money for local governments was an issue in this House. The minister promised to come and tell us what had happened. Up to today, he has not come to tell us. I can lay on the Table, tomorrow, letters which I collected from Teso region. Their monies were taken without consulting with them. The district is experiencing a crisis. 

In Serere District, two doctors were recruited and for the last eight months, they have not got their salaries. But this House passed a supplementary; we even passed the initial provision of Shs 6 billion. I hear colleagues say, “You know, we have regional referral hospitals, we have the heart institute, we have foreign affairs”– (Interjections) – but let me tell you, we are being given poison here to eat, but the icing is what the other sections are getting. 

MR MULINDWA: Madam Speaker and honourable members, allow me to inform the Member that at the time of appropriation, there was only Shs 6.5 billion and that money was for recruitment only and not for salaries. You recall at the time when the budget stalled, there was only Shs 6.5 billion for recruitment. 

Secondly, when we are appropriating, we do so by vote. The referral hospitals have different votes. So, if a member of staff is transferred from Jinja to Mubende, he leaves his salary in the vote of Jinja and does not go with that salary to Mubende because Mubende is a different vote. So, we need to make a supplementary for that.

MS ALASO: Madam Speaker, I think my colleague wants the House to believe that we are passing either some allowances or something like that –(Laughter – but I understand that recruitment has to go with a projection of the salaries that those people will be earning. I understand that in the supplementary schedule No.1, we also provided for salary. 

So, we should be told why the health workers have not been paid up to now. Anyway, I do not want to ridicule my colleague, I trust his judgement on this matter. (Laughter)

Finally, which way do we go? Hon. Cecilia has raised the matter of an addendum which I do not know whether it was scrutinised; which of these contains the figures this House is supposed to pronounce itself on; where will this money come from? I am extremely concerned.

And let me pray to this Parliament; we will finish another five years – if we continue having the Executive hoodwink us the way they do – (Member timed out).

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, can you explain to us; if we appropriated money last financial year to cater for these people, then we issued a supplementary of Shs 43 billion – who was paid and who wasn’t?

6.04
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Madam Speaker and honourable members, first of all, under supplementary schedule No.1, this Parliament did pass Shs 43 billion for the payment of workers in health centres IV and III; and all these have been paid – (Interjections) – yes. The people who have not been paid are those in referral hospitals – (Interjections) – so, when there were transfers from the districts to the referral hospitals - the votes under referral hospitals are different from the votes from the districts and from the centre.

As far as virements are concerned, if you are transferring expenditure within one vote, which is called virements, the Minister of Finance is allowed to do that without bringing this to Parliament. However, when you are transferring from one vote to another vote, even when the money is there, like in the case of the Ministry of Education where we have Shs 4.6 billion for salaries, it is appropriated in the districts.

Now, the workers are at the centre. So, to transfer that vote from the district to the centre, the law allows us to bring it to Parliament for Parliament to appropriate but the source of funding remains the same because it has already been appropriated by Parliament but because it is moving from one vote to the other, this is why we have brought it to Parliament. (Interjections) Just allow me to finish, before you can ask for clarification.

The budget is an authority for Government to spend. Government spends and we utilise the budget according to the quarters. Every quarter we release, when these releases are not in consonance with the amount of money we are collecting from the revenues, if there is a shortage, then we have to see exactly how to spend this money within the amount of money that we have collected.
The minority report is asking where we got the authority to move the suppression from one vote and take it to another. When we do this we give all the details of where we are getting the sources of funding for the different votes that go in the supplementary and this is taken to Cabinet where you have all the ministries represented and when Cabinet has looked at this, then it is brought to Parliament indicating that these consultations have been done.

This is the reason that hon. Cecilia Ogwal is saying that there is need for this minority report and also hon. Niwagaba is saying that we have contravened this part of the law.

Madam Speaker and colleagues, the Public Finance Bill, which we have presented is requesting that all supplementaries that will come to this Parliament must be appropriated before we can – (Interruption)

MS OGWAL: I think the statement that the Minister of Finance has made on this Floor will be termed as historic, that we would use a Bill to justify a statement on the Floor of Parliament. You are a minister and you operate under laws and rules, which have been passed by Parliament but you are now making a reference to a Bill, which has not even been considered by Parliament. Is this minister in order - and the rules are very clear? Would you want me to quote for you the rules, Mr Minister? I thought that by the time you are appointed a minister, you are conversant with all these rules. (Laughter)Is the minister in order to quote a Bill-

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, our rules do not allow us to legislate by anticipation. Let us address the present position.

MR OMACH: Madam Speaker, I was bringing this –(Interruption)

MR NANDALA MAFABI: Madam Speaker, the moment you pass the budget and say the budget is Shs 13 trillion, then you say, “We made a mistake, some money was put in the other vote, when it should have been in another.” You do not come and say, “Our total request is Shs 46 billion.” No. You do not ask for that. What you ask for is not what you planned for.

Is it procedurally right for him to come and talk on top of his voice, when he is giving us wrong information, yet we are here and we know that the moment the money was put on the wrong vote, it is a matter of bringing it back and it does not increase the money for supplementary.

THE SPEAKER: The minister was speaking loudly so that you could hear everything he was saying. (Laughter)

MR OMACH: Madam Speaker, why I was referring to the minority report, the import was that we would want some of these laws amended and that is why I was referring to this Public Finance Bill, which is addressing some of these but I stand to be corrected.

The Local Government not being consulted, which was raised by hon. Mulimba, I have already indicated that it is through –(Members rose_)

THE SPEAKER: Arising from the debate, there are some areas he wanted to clarify. That is what he is doing.

MR SSASSAGA: The information I would like to give the minister is that even when you move on page 6 of the committee report, I can read it; Number four says, “Pursuant to section 12(3) of the Budget Act, 2001 that requires any reallocation of funds to be made in consultation with all the affected ministries, departments, institutions or organisations, the committee is concerned that some of the allocations and re-allocations are done without evidence of consultation with the affected stakeholders.”

I was bringing it to the attention of the minister that yes, the minority report is talking about this but also the committee is concerned although it fell short of making a biting recommendation out of that. So, it is the concern of both the committee and the minority report authors.

MR WADRI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Mr Minister, you indicated the possibilities of virement. We know that virement is a matter of re-allocation from within the same vote, with consultations from the accounting officer and the Secretary to the Treasury but you brought this in light of outstanding salary arrears of tertiary institutions. These institutions have been under Ministry of Education for the last five or six financial years. Every financial year, they are budgeted for appropriately, under ministry of education. So, the issue of virement does not arise at all. 

It was already budgeted for. Therefore, you cannot hoodwink Parliament by talking about virement. It does not apply. 

So, you better find a better explanation than trying to mislead us that, “Oh, you see, it is a matter of virement.” What virement? Clarify on that.

MR OMACH: Madam Speaker, if you look at the committee reports on page 6, the committee under item 3 is saying that the committee further observed that the reallocation of funds from one vote to the other under Section 12 (3)of the Budget Act, 2001 does not require additional resource to the overall budget allocation for a financial year. 

Therefore, it cannot be referred to as supplementary expenditure. The appearance of this section in the Budget Act, 2001 under the marginal note supplementary expenditure is erroneous and the law should be amended to rectify this anomaly.

As of now, we are supposed to bring it to Parliament. The virement within the – because this one, which is under the Ministry of Education, is not just a virement.(Interjections) It is from one vote to another vote and not from within. So, we are following the Budget Act.

On the source of funding, Madam Speaker, the source of funding for the Shs 46.95 billion is budget suppression of other votes, which are the non-wage and development expenditure, which amounts to Shs 31.5 billion and then reallocation within the wage bill, which I have already referred to is Shs 13.6 billion. Then, excess Non-Tax Revenue collection of Shs 1.74 billion and then unspent balances of Shs 0.14 billion and this is what is being used to finance the Supplementary Schedule No. 2 compared with other numbers that we are praying for now.  (Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Minister, you are dodging the issue. You just look at Appendix 1 – State House. State House has an estimated saving of Shs 124 million for salaries and on the same note, it is asking for Shs 2.08 billion. Did you consult them? Is the Shs 2.08 billion less this 124 million – now, the reason that I was bringing this means that you are asking for more money when you have not spent what you have saved. That is a clear indicator that –(Interjections)– 

THE SPEAKER: The Budget Committee.

MR LWANGA: I thank you, the hon. Leader of the Opposition. Actually, we noted this on their Schedule and we went back and found that their clerks had made a mistake. They actually had no saving - (Interjections) - [Hon. Member: “We are dealing with a forgery.”

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: So, Madam Speaker, you can see that there are mistakes already. If you can see Shs 124 million, how many are we having down? If you look at the centre, it is only going to lose Shs 17.87 billion and the remaining, which is about Shs 70 billion, is coming from the districts. This appetite at the centre is terrible.

The minister should really help us to understand this table or column very well before we can move and that is why we agree with hon. Cecilia Ogwal that this table you brought was for purposes of thinking that we, Members, shall not read and just pass and yet we need to know everything. So, you better help us to understand. 

HON. MEMBER: Just withdraw.

6.20
MR SAM OTADA (Independent, Kibanda County, Kiryadongo): Madam Speaker, usually, when there are controversial issues in this House, I normally see my colleagues from the other side, by way of body language, really expressing where their heart is and at the end of the day when decision time comes, they take a different decision. (Laughter)
Today, this document is a clear testimony that that conduct has actually been put on paper today, in this report because when you read this report, sincerely, the findings, the observations are  at odds with the recommendations – which is the conduct I was talking about.

For people who have supported that type of politics – at least, I have been here three times and such people always never come back to this House. When you involve yourself in air supply – the kind of things that the hon. Niwagaba’s have been telling you in the NRM Caucus that, “Look here, when we supply, we must supply real stuff and not air supply.” Anyway, the credibility of this report is something that some of us are looking at and frowning – 

MR LWANGA: Madam Speaker, we sat for two weeks and looked at invoices, big heaps for the Police. We looked at schedules, we added figures and we all became accountants for two weeks. We produced a report, very truly, and we did not hide any facts. The facts as we have given them are the facts as they were in the committee. The checking of the figures was done by my committee and I really praise my members because they worked hours and hours to make sure that they look at the figures, compare the figures with the sources of funding, look at the need of the various sectors and we came up with a recommendation that is saying that “Yes, this is a genuine request.” 

Now, Madam Speaker, is the hon. Member in order to disregard all that has been done? Disregard a report that has been genuinely produced and doubt its credibility. Is he in order?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, unless you have evidence, I think that it is not necessary for you to impute ill motives on the Members. They have expressed what they think are the areas, which are not satisfactory but never the less, they have said that there is this problem - but they have showed us the problems. I think that they have been sincere.      

MR OTADA: Madam Speaker, I thank you for your wise ruling. But what I am simply saying is that I enjoin myself to what hon. Niwagaba raised here. He raised issues of credibility and law and I am with him on that. That is the issue that I am raising to the Chair. 

But I also want to invite the Chair to page 9 of his own report. The committee was informed that staff who are transferred are usually budgeted for in their previous stations and not the ones which they move to. The wages asked for in this supplementary request, therefore, were approved by Parliament under different votes. What do you want us – it is self-indictment. Self-indictment and that is what we are telling you.

Anyway, I want to rise in support of hon. Cecilia Ogwal and I would like to join her in asking the simple question she asked on page 4; “Is Parliament presented with the right picture at the time of budgeting?” I think that is a fair question to ask. “Is the Executive realistic with planning and budgeting?” That is another fair question to ask. I believe that that question deserves an answer and an answer from this House because we are responsible for appropriation and all these things.

I would like to repeat what I have always appealed to this House before to do. Every time we come to this House, we want to try and diagnose the political health of Uganda and we have always fallen short of diagnosing the economic health of this country. Every time we come to this House, we have never failed to load attention to the Budget turnaround of this country and therefore, this question, to me, deserves to be answered. The report talks about Shs 13 billion budget and when you look at page 8 of the majority report, again, you find another self-indictment right there, where the committee says on page 3, “The committee is greatly disturbed by the rate at which Government is accumulating domestic arrears, many of which arise from poor budgeting or poor budget management.” Self-indictment - you are living beyond your means. This is what this statement says. You are living beyond your means because you are budgeting for something that is not there. 

I want to conclude by reminding this House, again, that the Committee on National Economy always brings its report here and we shelve it. One day, we shall regret why we did not take time to discuss the economics of this country, which actually, is the life blood that keeps this country running and not only the politics. Madam Speaker, I oppose the supplementary budget. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, just for the record, I do not think we have shelved reports of the Committee on National Economy. That is not true. We have debated them here and concluded them. We have not shelved any. Can you get us out of this quagmire, hon. Chair?

MR LWANGA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am not a lawyer but I happen to have been here when the Budget Act was written. I was one of the three people who actually worked very hard, the others being hon. Kiraso and hon. Musumba to make sure that this Budget Act was done and I want to use my layman’s language, because I am not a lawyer, to try and interpret Article 12(1) of this Act. One says, “The total supplementary expenditure that requires additional resources over and above what is appropriated by Parliament shall not exceed 3 percent of the total approved budget for the financial year without prior approval of Parliament.” What does this mean? As a book keeper, I understand it to mean that extra money – it does not mean reallocation; it does not mean moving money from one board to another board-(Interjections)-may I finish my interpretation, please? So, when talking about the 3 percent in reality, you are talking about the 3 percent being the additional part. 

Two, where funds are expended under subsection one, that extra fund, supplementary estimates showing the sums spent shall be laid before Parliament within four months after the money is spent – that extra money but the one which actually causes a problem, is where some of us think the legalities are done and not done and I think this is where hon. Niwagaba comes from, which says, “Any reallocation of funds shall be made in consultation with all the affected ministries, departments, institutions or organisations.” 

Madam Speaker, I want to ask a question; Who makes sure that this consultation is done? My assumption is that when the Executive sits in Cabinet, they go through all these consultations because by the time the supplementary budget comes to us, much as in the committee we also try to ask the same question, they have done their consultation. So, I would like hon. Niwagaba to throw more light on what illegalities he is talking about here. 

MS AOL: But I also need clarification, Madam Speaker, on this supplementary. When we talk about supplementary over and above, then you look at the education sector and in education, we are trying to get funding from the district to the centre and yet, in the district, the teachers are really suffering. We have many teachers - for example, in Gulu, we even have a head teacher who died without payment for a complete year and we have over 40 teachers whose names are not on the payroll. Now, we are getting monies from the district to the centre and we are putting this money as supplementary – Shs 4.6 billion supplementary - and yet at the same time, you say these funds were from the centre and taken to the district but you want them back to the centre. Are you not confusing us? What is supplementary and what is reallocation? Let us be fair to the people out there. Some other people sneer at Members when Members get up to talk. We are all here to speak for our people and we are all here to represent the people. People should not underrate others. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: But hon. Members, I think there is one issue we have to resolve on what is meant by “supplementary” and I think the committee, in their report, said that we amend it to change the language; that the issue of reallocation was wrongly placed under supplementary expenditure, under the Budget Act. So, we are going to solve that problem. So, it comes under that. That is why it is called a “supplementary” because that is the law. 

MR RUHINDI: Madam Speaker, I would like to supplement the understanding, which has been made by the chairperson of the committee by referring to section 12 of the Budget Act. In addition to that, there are regulations, which are made under the Act, that is the Public Finance and Accountability Regulations, which, of course, are made under the Public Finance and Accountability Act to supplement the provisions of section 16 of that Act and under these regulations, in regulation 6, he refers to voted expenditure and it says, 

“The Appropriation Act incorporating the approved estimates of expenditure constitutes the means by which Parliament exercises control over the expenditure of public monies by the government during the year, to which the expenditure relates.”

And two says, “Upon the approval of the estimates and the enactment of the relevant Appropriation Act, the expenditure for the year is held to be definitely arranged in accordance with the votes and account classifications and such expenditure; 
a) 	is to be limited by the provision in each item shown in estimates of expenditure and 
b) 	can only be increased or varied by Parliament or in accordance with the provisions of the Act or under general specific authority delegated by Parliament”

Regulation three says, “The allocation of funds under a vote is controlled by the minister under the authority of section 4(1)(a) of the Act and any variation in the amount allocated shall have the prior approval of the minister.”

Clearly, this shows that if you are reallocating funds from one vote to another, you need the approval of Parliament but within a vote, the minister has that power or of any delegate and this is also emphasised under regulation 38 of the same regulations because regulation 38 talks about supplementary provisions, which is the subject under discussion and regulation 39 talks about virements or reallocations within a vote. So, clearly, there are distinctions and in regulation 38, it says, 

“(1) Where any further disbursements are required in respect of a service, which - (a) would not have been foreseen, (b) may not be postponed without detriment to the public interest, (c) cannot appropriately be changed as an existing item of the estimates or (d) would cause an excess on estimates, prior approval for authority to incur such expenditure shall be sought. 
(2) Where an expenditure cannot be met by virements within the vote from items with savings, then provisions for supplementary funds shall be sought, in which case an application for supplementary funds may be made to the Secretary to the Treasury.
(3) Applications for supplementary provisions shall be reviewed by the Secretary to the Treasury and submitted to the minister for consideration and after examination and where necessary, consultation with the accounting officer concerned the need for the supplementary provision is agreed, the amounts of such provision shall be included by the minister in supplementary estimates to be submitted to Parliament for approval.”

The expression “approval” was inserted in the amendment of 2005. Before that, it was “for appropriation by Supplementary Appropriation Act”. And this is what they actually referred to as technical supplementary vis-à-vis the other normal supplementaries that we understand. “Technical” in the sense that you are not actually providing for additional funds but you are relocating money from one vote to another and you need the approval of Parliament as against virement within a vote, which is the responsibility of the minister. Thank you.
6.37
MR WILFRED NIWAGABA (NRM, Ndorwa County East, Kabale): Madam Speaker, this particular matter has arisen from the point I had raised and the learned Deputy Attorney-General, with due respect, is trying to mislead the House. We are looking at and considering section 12 of the Budget Act and not anything under the Public Finance and Accountability Act or the regulations.

Secondly, Madam Speaker, lawyers know that when you are interpreting the law, you do not consider the marginal notes. And section 12(3) of the Budget Act has no connection whatsoever to section 12(1) and (2) as it relates to supplementary budget in respect of additional funds. We are talking about reallocation of funds and what is required is consultation – mandatory. Hon. Colleagues, especially my colleague from Samia-Bugwe, informed the House about how districts are complaining that their money has been taken away without consulting them. 

And what we wanted from the committee is this: Yes, if there was consultation, can you give us that evidence? What the committee should have sought – (Gen. Moses Ali rose_)

THE SPEAKER: But hon. Members, I think we should find out what was envisaged in this law; was it envisaged that the Minister of Finance would sit, say in Sheraton Hotel and invite the Town Clerk of Jinja and the CAO of Amuria and say, “Gentlemen, I have invited you to discuss the reallocation of your funds.”? Or does the Town Clerk speak through the minister? I do not know.

GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: Madam Speaker, I really feel very sorry because there are very many different Government branches and Cabinet is one of them. What is discussed in Cabinet – whatever is not passed in Cabinet cannot come here. This one also must have passed through – (Laughter) – yes, because being in Cabinet, I might know. But the truth is these documents pass through the Cabinet and therefore – (Interruption) 

MR SSEMUJJU NGANDA: Madam Speaker, you earlier informed the House that some district chairpersons have complained. In fact, I was in the final stages of helping my district of Wakiso to raise a petition to Parliament because their money and that of other administrative units in the district was reallocated. They were only told that for the fourth quarter, they would not receive some money; some actually simply discovered when the money was not sent to them. Hon. Niwagaba has raised – (Interruption)

GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: Now, what is the point of order? This is simply an explanation. Now, I will also put you on a point of order. (Laughter)

MR SSEMUJJU NGANDA: Madam Speaker, unfortunately, Parliament does not work like the military – that for example, if you occupy a higher office, you stifle those ones occupying lower offices by standing up.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, please, raise your point of order. 

GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: Is it my position, which disturbs him or not? Is he in order to worry about my position? What is his problem?

MR SSEMUJJU NGANDA: Madam Speaker -

THE SPEAKER: Please, raise your point of order.

MR SSEMUJJU NGANDA: Madam Speaker, hon. Niwagaba raised a matter of law that relates to consultation. There is overwhelming evidence that no consultation was done – I think by both reports and by individual submission by Members of Parliament. Is hon. Gen. Moses Ali – former Minister of Parliament under Idi Amin Government –(Laughter)– in order to mislead Parliament that by Cabinet discussing this supplementary, it meant that the other affected institutions of Government had been consulted? Is he in order?

THE SPEAKER: But hon. Members, I had asked you whether you think the law envisaged that individual accounting officers must be consulted on their budgets or they go through their ministers; we have not resolved that issue.

MR NIWAGABA: Madam Speaker – [Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali: “I have not finished.”] (Gen. Moses Ali pushes hon. Niwagaba off the microphone_)(Hon. Members rose_)

MS ALASO: Madam Speaker, I have just witnessed what is scary in this House. I have every respect for Gen. Moses Ali. But I cannot stand the fact that he pushed my colleague because it makes all of us insecure. Is it in order for Gen. Moses Ali, the Deputy Prime Minister of this country, to physically assault a Member of Parliament? Madam Speaker, is it in order and are we safe? 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I believe the General stumbled -(Interjections)- okay, hon. Members, the House is adjourned to 2.00 p.m. tomorrow. 

(The House rose at 6.46 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 26 June 2013 at 2.00 p.m.)
