
THE REPUBLIC OF UGANDA

IN THE PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA

Official Report of The Proceedings of Parliament

FIFTH SESSION - 13TH SITTING - FIRST MEETING

________________________

Wednesday, 29 June 2005

 Parliament met at 2.32 p.m. at Parliament House, Kampala
.
PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, please join me in welcoming a delegation of women leaders from Kasilo County. They are on their way from Bushenyi where they had gone to look at development projects in that area. They are up there in the gallery. You are most welcome. (Applause) As you know, Kasilo County is represented by hon. Okupa. Thank you for making this arrangement for the ladies.

Secondly, on a very sad note I would like to inform you about the death of the Speaker of the Malawi Parliament, Rt hon. Rodwell Munyenyembe, who died in a South African hospital yesterday. He collapsed a few days ago in the Parliament of Malawi during a very heated debate concerning the procedure for the impeachment of the President. After collapsing he was taken to South Africa, where he died. I would like to ask the honourable members in solidarity to stand up for a minute of silence. 

(The Members stood and observed 
a minute of silence.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: May his soul rest in eternal peace.

So honourable members, I would like to appeal to you not to get into heated debates otherwise the Speaker and I will be endangered.

Thirdly, for purposes of correcting the record, during the debate on the Constitution (Amendment No.3) Bill, 2005, when the Second Reading was being taken, hon. Nandala was absent. He was involved in a motor accident. Although he came, he sent a note to the Speaker who did not see it in time and he was unable to vote. However, he has informed me that had he been able to vote, he would have voted against the motion for the Second Reading. Thank you.

2.35
MR NANDALA MAFABI (Budadiri County West, Sironko): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. It is true if I was in the House I would have said no. I want to assure everybody that my conscious is clear and I always feel good whenever I do well. I feel bad whenever I do something bad. I felt bad when I could not vote yesterday. Today I am happy that the record has been corrected. I want to assure the public, whether you believe me or not, even over my dead body, I am a man who believes in institutions. I want to assure you I will always vote “no”, and even my will reads “no to the third term” –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Nandala, you are now debating. We have corrected the record and you have indicated what you wanted. Please, there is no more debate now.

MR NANDALA MAFABI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for that time.

PRESENTATION OF PAPERS

2.37
DR FRANK NABWISO (Kagoma County, Jinja): Madam Speaker, I want to raise a matter of great concern to the whole country. This concerns the rehabilitation of Jinja–Bugiri road. Recently the Minister of Works, Transport and Communications told us that although –(Interruption)

MRS MWESIGYE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The clerk read item 3 on the Order Paper and hon. Nabwiso stood up for a matter of importance. Is it procedurally correct for hon. Nabwiso to take us back when we had already moved to that item? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think the honourable member was slow in getting up, but he had indicated that he had a matter of public importance.  

DR NABWISO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for your wise ruling. The Minister of Works told this House that the main contractor for that road was to be appointed and that in the meantime H. Young Company was going to fill potholes on that road. I have a document here, which I would like with your permission to lay on the Table. The resident engineers who are supposed to supervise the rehabilitation of that road have written this document. It clearly shows that H. Young is doing shoddy work on this road. The company does not have technical competence and adequate machinery for the rehabilitation of that road.

There are four important issues, which we should ask. First, we as Ugandans and Government of Uganda are collectively the clients of H. Young. Why does that company give us a raw deal? Why should we be throwing money to a company, which is not competent? This is a major highway from Mombasa, to go as far as Bujumbura, Kigali and the Democratic Republic of Congo. Trade will be affected if this road is not appropriately repaired. This road is a great inconvenience; we have had so many accidents and it now takes me two hours to drive from Jinja to Iganga.  

Madam Speaker, the Government of Uganda should be interested in repairing this road in order to avoid possible political repercussions. That is why I want to lay this letter on the Table so that the Minister of Works can use it to answer these questions in Parliament.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: May I ask the Office of the Prime Minister to take charge of that document?

2.42
THE MINISTER, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER, GENERAL DUTIES (Prof. Mondo Kagonyera): Thank you, Madam Speaker. We welcome you back into your Chair. I would like to say the following:

Hon. Nabwiso is right to have interest in the quality of the work being done by H. Young. However, he knows the procedures that are normally followed whenever there are queries that need answers. He has talked about a document, which government has not yet seen, written by people who are supervising the job complaining about poor work by H. Young. He ought to know that these are already steps in the right direction –(Interruption)

MR SEBULIBA MUTUMBA:  Madam Speaker, I am rising on a point of order. Hon. Nabwiso has communicated to this House a matter of national importance regarding road repairs, which have been on and off. He has laid the document on the Table of Parliament. We would have expected this matter to be referred to the sector ministry for further reaction to this important matter he has raised. Is it in order for the minister to come up and start opening up a debate? I would have thought that the reaction should have come from the sector minister.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The honourable minister works in the office that co-ordinates all the ministries. Probably he has some information in addition to what the Minister of Works will bring.

PROF. KAGONYERA: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for that very wise ruling. My honourable colleague should know better that this is an executive process that is being undertaken. There is nothing Parliamentary about it. I would have expected the honourable member to tell us that he has gone to the relevant ministry and failed to get appropriate response. His first point of call is Parliament and government has every obligation to respond to all issues raised by a Member of Parliament. In fact, I am doing it on behalf of the Government of Uganda –(Interjection)- I am afraid I am not taking any clarification. 

I am Mondo Kagonyera, Member of Parliament for Rubabo County and Minister for General Duties in the Office of the Prime Minister. Does that satisfy you? I address the Chair and need no distraction by honourable members.  

If members are interested in getting the job done, let them approach the appropriate ministers. Therefore, I thank hon. Nabwiso for raising this issue but I would have expected him to raise the same matter with the Ministry of Works. The way things work is that if a consultant raises a query, it goes to the technical department of the relevant ministry. If the technical department cannot provide a solution to the problem, then the political leaders get involved. That is how we do business.  

I would like to assure hon. Nabwiso that the Government of Uganda is interested in solving the problem of that road. Remedial steps will be taken appropriately, notwithstanding the interjections by hon. Aggrey Awori. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I expect that eventually the Minister of Works will update us because he undertook to keep updating us on that matter. May I ask the Leader of Government Business to pass on that document to the Minister of Works so that he comes up with an answer?

PRESENTATION OF PAPERS

2.45
THE MINISTER OF STATE, INFORMATION (Dr Nsaba Buturo): Madam Speaker, in compliance with section 14 of the Electronic Media Act, I seek your permission to lay on the Table the Annual Report of The Broadcasting Council for the year 2004. The Electronic Media Act provides for the Broadcasting Council as a regulatory authority for the electronic media in Uganda. The Council, among other broad objectives, seeks to ensure that the broadcasting sector supports the national vision of Uganda through the provision of information to help in the eradication of poverty, promotion of health, modernisation of agriculture and good governance.  

Honourable members may note that this is the first ever report of the Broadcasting Council to be presented to this House. This is because it has taken us quite long to operationalise the Electronic Media Act. The existing council effectively commenced work in the year 2004 and has made progress in establishing order in Uganda airwaves. Most of the activities of the Broadcasting Council that were undertaken in the year 2004 are in this report that with your permission I beg to lay on the Table. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The report will be committed to the Committee on Presidential and Foreign Affairs to peruse and report to the Plenary.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

2.49
THE MINISTER OF STATE, DEFENCE (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Last week the Member of Parliament for Aruu County, Pader District, hon. Odonga Otto, read a statement in this House and raised a number of issues concerning human rights violations, the security situation, and the status of Local Defence Units (LDUs).

I beg to respond to these issues, beginning with human rights violations. Hon. Odonga Otto alleged that civilians were beaten up by the UPDF on the orders of 2nd Lt Patrick Abaho on the night of Thursday, 16 June 2005. It is true that civilians were beaten up. The circumstances that led to the beating were that around midnight of that day, civilians in Rwakikoko IDP camp all of a sudden began shouting, yelling and drumming. The 25th battalion being the force charged with the security of the area, the information officer moved in to verify what the noise was all about, thinking the enemy had entered the camp. 

It was found out that people were shouting and making noise in order to chase away devils and other medical ailments. The officer advised the people to stop the noise because the enemy could easily exploit the commotion to attack the camp. Although some of the people ceased making noise, others refused to stop. The officer then ordered for the breaking into the houses of the people that were still making noise to subdue them by beating them, which was a wrong decision to take, and which the Ministry of Defence does not support. In the process, 23 people were beaten up.

On 17 June 2005, which was the following day, a security meeting was convened and the population reported the intelligence officer to the district leaders of Pader. Second Lt P. Abaho apologised and offered to pay the medical bills for the serious causalities. This officer has been arrested because the ministry cannot accept apologies although the civilians had accepted and had forgotten about it. The ministry has gone ahead to arrest him and further investigations are in progress.

The human rights team visited the camp and assessed the damage. They interviewed victims, recorded their voices and took photographs of both the victims and the destroyed doors. On 18 June 2005, the Member of Parliament visited the camp and took note of the incident. 

On the action taken, a team comprising of security personal, local area authorities, IDP sector leaders and local political leaders was set up to investigate the matter further. The following are the findings:

Twenty-three civilians were beaten up and according to medical records at Rwakikoko dispensary, 12 victims were treated, five of whom had serious injuries. Those five are Alice Abworo who lost a tooth, David Ogwang who is suspected to have a compound fracture, Ruth Akwero, Night Abaro and Doreen Akech. Two referrals were made to Kitgum Hospital and some victims are still receiving medication at Rwakikoko Dispensary.

It was discovered that 19 huts were broken into by force, destroying the doors. Some doors have been repaired while others are yet to be repaired. Those whose houses are affected include widow Adonia Adoch, Mary Okwong, James Okello and David Ogwang.

There were no other crimes such as rape and theft committed by the soldiers.

On the security situation in Pader, it is a fact that there has been war. It is in Pader that most LRA commanders have been killed. This has not stopped the flow of civilian road traffic. For example, buses smoothly run and it is very unfortunate that a few days ago eight people were killed in separate incidents by the LRA. However, this was an isolated incident and not typical. The road from Pader to Pajule is reasonably safe and has not been closed; civilians can testify to this. However, more UPDF deployments have been made in the place to provide greater security on the road. 

The welfare of the LDU’s has been a current issue in the House but the genesis to the problem arises from the fact that there has been delay by a Cabinet verification committee, which was assigned with the responsibility of reconciling the actual strength of the forces on the ground. A budget of Shs 47 billion was needed to cater for the salaries, food, uniforms and general welfare for the LDU’s countrywide. However, only half of that figure was reflected in the budget of the Ministry of Internal Affairs, which is the ministry that is responsible for auxiliary forces. This has caused a funding gap. A supplementary expenditure of Shs 6 billion was approved for the management of these auxiliary forces and it is expected that on completion of the work of the Cabinet sub-committee harmonising the strength of these forces, additional funds shall be released to address the problem.

Salaries have been paid up to January 2005 for the auxiliary forces and arrangements are underway to raise the remaining arrears. By the close of the financial year there shall be an outstanding amount for salaries of four months, from March up to June. Approximately Shs 14 billion is required to adequately cover all the requirements of the auxiliary forces for the remaining period of this year. 

It is not true that LDUs have not had new pairs of uniform. In October 2004, the first pair was issued to all soldiers in both auxiliary and regular forces. The ministry is in the process of issuing the second pair of uniforms, which includes the dress, gumboots and socks to the auxiliary forces. The issuing has commenced with 4th and 5th Divisions and it is expected that by the end of July, which is next month, all auxiliary forces shall have received their second pair of uniforms. I want to state that all is done at the expense of the regular forces, which has had its resource cut in order to provide for the auxiliary forces. 

Madam Speaker, and honourable members, it is also not true that LDU’s are surviving on World Food Programme food and that in some cases uprooting people’s food crops in and around the camps. UPDF issues supplies to LDUs at the same scale as the regular force. There has not been any distribution of World Food Programme rations in the barracks of the UPDF. It may, however, be true that the families of the auxiliary forces that live in the IDP camps do partake of the World Food distributions just the same way as any other residents of the camp. 

About the Patong clash, on 13 June 2005 a force of UPDF and LDUs was deployed to protect Lokore IDP camp located north of Patong camp in Pader District. At around 1 0’Clock, Pte Jackson of the 111 battalion mistook a fellow soldier LDU David Ojok of Patong battalion for an on coming enemy and accidentally shot him dead. One of the LDUs who is a brother to the deceased also shot Pte Jackson Tumusasire dead, and fled.

The 74 LDUs fled from Patong back to Lapono fearing that all of them might be arrested for the act of the brother of the deceased. However, they are in detaches in Lapono. The UPDF command and investigative bodies are handling the case. Therefore, it is not true that 300 LDUs fled and joined the LRA as it was alleged by my hon. Odonga Otto. 

Madam Speaker, I thank you very much for this opportunity and I thank my honourable colleagues for listening to me.

3.00
MRS JUSTINE LUMUMBA (Woman Representative, Bugiri): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to thank hon. Odonga Otto who informed this House about what happened and I want to thank the hon. Minister of State for Defence for this statement. 

Honourable members, we have got so many statements from the Ministry of Defence. I feel this one is a genuine statement because when you read it there is much agreement between hon. Odonga Otto’s statement and the honourable minister’s. Other people informed us other than these two concerning what is on the ground. Thank you very much, honourable minister. 

About this issue of making noise, I am from Busoga; it is not something that is only in Pader but also happens in Busoga. There is what we call Namadebe in Busoga; everybody makes noise ad drums in the village. I do not know where these soldiers are from where these things do not happen. Beating is not the solution to it and I want to tell the honourable minister that what is lacking in her statement is the apology to the victims on behalf of the Government. Thank you very much.

3.02
MR MICAH LOLEM (Upe County, Nakapiripirit): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the minister for the statement. I want to go straight to the issue of LDUs. It is true the LDUs have not been paid for so long but I want to make it understood that if these LDUs are catered for by either Ministry of Defence or Internal Affairs, why are they not promptly paid? Wherever you find these LDUs, be it in Karamoja or anywhere else, they are tamed. These were former soldiers and warriors who have never gone to any school but you will find somebody trained in a certain sub-county transferred to another area where he will stay for six months without pay. This man has four or even six women. For us in Karamoja marrying is more valuable than anything else is. That is when you are considered a man. If you have more than six wives you are a great man.  

For instance, you find that these LDUs are transferred from Nakapiripirit to Kotido to work there, leaving their women behind. Therefore, you fail to understand. This is a man going for six months without pay, taking money back home is a dream. They do not have any means of communication, which makes their life even worse. 

My question to the Ministry of Defence is, are these people your forces, are they working for you? If they are working for you, why are you not paying them promptly? Saying that it is the Ministry of Internal Affairs to provide the money and then take it to the UPDF is the source of the problem. Why should you provide uniforms and then the money comes from Internal Affairs? Let everything be provided by Internal Affairs because according to our understanding, the Ministry of Internal Affairs cannot control LDUs. They are on the side of UPDF. The battalions, which operate in certain sub-counties, control them. We need to man these people properly. Let the money also be under the Ministry of Defence other than coming from another source. 

The commanders there who control LDUs are at risk. You cannot call someone who has not been paid for six months for deployment. These LDUs see their UPDF counterparts being paid. How do you tell them to go on operation - and you know the UPDF’s method of work - without any facilitation? For a UPDF to work he has four important things: earn a salary every month, have a cigarette and a wife. That is when you find an army man very active. If you do not give them money, how do you expect them to run?  Give the LDUs money such that they are also very active.

Finally, in Karamoja you find these LDUs being transferred to Nakapiripirit or even Moroto. These are tamed warriors and, like I said, they have never gone to school. You are taming them to catch up with the environment, how to put on trousers, and how to control the other wild ones. You should bring them specifically from say Nakapiripirit to control their own districts. This way, even with no payment, someone can run home, sell a goat or a cow and survive on that. LDUs everywhere are suffering. I have Arrow Boys in my constituency who have not been paid any money since December.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Lolem, you have really made your point thoroughly. Hon. Epetait.

3.08
DR FRANCIS EPETAIT (Ngora County, Kumi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would also like to join my colleagues in thanking the minister for coming up with a very honest statement. It is a pity that what happened in Pader involved a UPDF officer. Much as the minister says the people he offended took his apology, I still think that the action taken by the ministry on the errant soldiers is not enough. Besides, requesting government to apologise to the affected people is not all they can do. 

I would like to suggest that government incurs some of the costs such as the medical bills and reconstructing these structures. I doubt that Lt Abaho has any capacity to meet any of these costs. Really, these are a suffering lot of people in IDP camps who should not be subjected to anymore torture. I want to appeal to government, on a humanitarian note, to find a way of assisting these families.

I am dismayed with the hullabaloo about the payment of LDUs and indeed all auxiliary forces. On page 3 of the report the minister seems to transfer the challenge to the Ministry of Internal Affairs, which according to them is responsible for auxiliary forces. We are aware that year in, year out that is one of the ministries, the Ministry of Internal Affairs, which keeps on getting peanuts for budgetary allocation. I am not surprised that even that little that accrued from the Ministry of Internal Affairs could not be raised. I would like to suggest that the Ministry of Defence, which actually has always had a very big share of the Budget, takes up the issue of budgeting for these forces. After all most of them are under the command of the UPDF. 

Madam Speaker, the Arrow boys last received their salary in December. Half of this year, six months down the road, the boys are working at their own expense. I beg to quote - I wish I had a Bible here, I sometimes do Bible studies - 1 Corinthians 9:7 says, “Who serves as a soldier at his own expense?” On a very serious note, our forces need motivation. A soldier who is armed and hungry may turn out to be very deadly. I am not saying that should happen. I want to commend our forces for being patriotic in diligently doing their job against all odds. However, government must take charge and see how to motivate these boys. In fact when you talk about the uniforms –(Interruption)

MR ERESU: I would like to give the following information. I was directly involved in the recruitment of the Arrow Boys and, therefore, I was their 2IC in command. When we recruited them and got volunteers, the express and ultimate objective was to get rid of the LRA and in principle and at the initial stage, we demanded for one thing from government, the gun. We were given the gun. In principle, we did not want money but later on the Government realised that it was not possible to have someone deployed to do such a very difficult job after leaving his family without any facilitation. That is when the salary aspect was introduced. It is, therefore important that the person who volunteers to defend his people is paid something, no matter how little, in return.  

DR EPETAIT: I thank you honourable colleague for that information. In summary, these auxiliary forces should be given a motivating atmosphere for them to do their work. So, money must be found expeditiously to handle the gap that has been there for a long time. 

Concerning uniforms, the report indicated that only half of the number that was required was issued. In fact in March 2005 the Arrow Force required a total of about 6,786 pairs of uniforms and yet only 2,500 were delivered. That puts the commanders in a tight corner. Whom do you give and whom do you choose not to give? The ministry should find ways and means to get these forces clad decently and enumerated on time.

The ministry should find ways of rescuing the commanders because the auxiliary forces are turning out to blame them, ignorant that it is not their making. Therefore, Madam Minister, I think we share this challenge with you and indeed the Ministries of Finance, Defence and Internal Affairs should harmonise this position.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, this is a straightforward statement responding to matters raised by hon. Odonga Otto. I think most of the points are in agreement with the minister’s statement.

3.16
MR PETER MUTULUUZA (Mawokota County North, Mpigi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the honourable minister for responding to the issues raised by hon. Odonga Otto. I also want to commend the action taken by the Army officers who arrested the concerned errant soldier. I do not expect an army officer to behave like this during this enlightened era. This cultural activity is known everywhere in that part of Uganda and I would have expected the soldiers to be aware of this. Therefore, I hope this soldier will be punished very appropriately.

The issue of salaries is very unfortunate. On several occasions I have heard His Excellency say that unlike in the past, the ministry is now getting enough money to fight the rebels. They are facilitated but it is unfortunate that up to now people who are helping them to fight the rebels have not been paid since January this year. Since the Minister of Defence undertook to facilitate the LDUs, they should make sure that their salary and facilitation are catered for.  

The issue of uniforms leaves me wondering whether one pair of uniforms, since October last year, is enough. These people are in the field and are supposed to put on uniforms all the time, 24 hours, how do they wash their one pair of uniform?  Madam Speaker, as my colleague has said, our gallant sons and daughters fighting in the bush should be motivated so that they can perform their duties very well.

3.19
MS JESSICA ERIYO (Woman Representative, Adjumani): Thank you very much. I want to thank the minister for her response and also thank my colleague, hon. Odonga Otto for raising these issues. I would like to attest that LDUs all over the country have not received their salaries since January. According to the LDUs in my district, they last got salaries in December 2004 and since this year began -(Interruption)

DR NKUUHE: I need your guidance, Madam Speaker. Is the speaker holding the Floor appropriately attired? I have a feeling that she is dressed in a T-shirt.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I have examined hon. Eriyo and I am satisfied that she is decently dressed in a dignified manner, in a blouse and a skirt.

MS ERIYO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for your wise ruling.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order, honourable members! The rules do not say that the blouse should have buttons. It does not say that. It is a blouse and a skirt.

MR WACHA: I think the worry of some members is that the dress might be very suggestive. (Laughter)

MS ERIYO: Madam Speaker, I am actually worried that hon. Ben may be harassing me sexually, otherwise I am happy and appreciative for your ruling. We are discussing a very important matter and I am worried if the minister says that half of the budget for LDUs was not catered for in the Ministry of Internal Affairs’ budget. How did this gap happen, how did it come up in the budget? Because the LDUs are commanded by the Uganda People’s Defence Forces and if their budget is catered for in the Ministry of Internal Affairs budget, is there any coordination? What is happening? The minister will have to answer because I am raising a number of issues for you to answer.

THE MINISTER OF DEFENCE (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the honourable member for giving way. Nearly every speaker has raised the issue she is raising and I felt that it was only fair to the House that I give an explanation. 

Some time ago we had a defence budget ceiling. The expenditure for the Ministry of Defence was limited to a certain percentage of the Gross Domestic Product and because we found a lot of constraints in running the activities we are running under that budget, we decided more than ten years ago - in 1992 - to disaggregate the roles and activities of the UPDF into the various functions that were being performed in the areas of operation. 

As honourable members know, law and order is the function of the Police Force. The question of health care belongs to the Ministry of Health but because of the security conditions in certain areas of Uganda at the time, it was not possible for the Police to discharge its functions in those areas, or for the Ministry of Health to discharge its functions for that matter. So the Army was performing all these roles. It was for instance treating people who were sick because there was no medical care from the Government or the Ministry of Health, and the question of law and order was also being controlled and managed by the Army. 

Therefore, it was decided that budgeting for these activities belonged to other ministries. So when we decided to employ the services of LDUs it was mainly to maintain law and order in their locality. This was a Police function and because the Police was not there to perform it, the LDUs did it under the command of the UPDF. That is why the Ministry of Internal Affairs does the budgeting for that function although these units are under the command of the UPDF. 

Their payments, because it is the UPDF on the ground, are channelled through the Ministry of Defence. Obviously as soon as the Police covers these areas, it will be performing its functions. As you know, the Government has already decided that some LDUs will be recruited into the Police so that they can have adequate training for policing and are converted to police officers and their payment continues from the Ministry of Internal Affairs. I thought it was important to give this explanation. Thank you.

MS ERIYO: Madam Speaker, we are worried because in most parts of Northern Uganda it is majorly the LDUs offering us security and if you are saying they are supposed to be part of the Police and so the defence budget does not cater for them directly, what are we supposed to do?  

Let us recruit more UPDF and phase out the LDUs so that you can be in charge of the budget for the LDUs. Otherwise, let the Ministry of Defence work together with the Ministry of Internal Affairs and we have appropriate budgets for all that the LDUs require. Because whoever I see holding a gun and wearing a UPDF uniform is an LDU, they are not wearing Police uniforms; they are in UPDF uniforms. They are suffering because they do not have this money, they cannot buy food and because of the security situation they can neither go to their farms and produce food nor can their wives produce food because they are displaced.  

To make matters worse, displaced people’s camps have not been recognised especially in my district. People do not even receive relief food from the World Food Programme and they cannot produce food. The situation in my district is terrible! The minister should answer. 

I want to invite the minister to Adjumani District. For the last two months we have had only two camps that have been recognized by the UPDF. But even the UPDF that has recognised the camps, are LDUs. These camps are in Maaji Masa and Maaji Kululu. People in IDP camps that have not been recognised are suffering so how do we link them to being supported –(Interruption)

MR ERESU: Madam Speaker, I seek the following clarification from the member on the Floor. On page 3 of this report there is information that there is what they call a Cabinet sub-committee to make verification of the LDUs, and the minister is putting the blame on this committee for delaying to submit this report so that otherwise the LDUs would have got paid. The clarification I want to get is, did this committee have a timeframe and how long is this committee going to function and what is the cause of their delay?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think you should have given her that information arising from the statement to answer her queries, but let us move on. The minister will respond.

MS ERIYO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to thank my colleague for supplementing the issues that I am raising. The ministry should help us in helping the LDUs’ situation to improve so that they can offer enough security to our people. Otherwise, our people are suffering because some of these LDUs are not properly trained, they are beating up civilians and also run away from their own barracks and detaches.  

I think it is because they are ill trained and they are not supposed to be working the way UPDF works. So, they should be properly trained, equipped and motivated. Otherwise without motivation, they will keep running with the civilians when the enemy comes, which remains the reason why most of our people are desperate and die. They want to be in camps yet they cannot stay there because the camps are not protected. Right now in these IDP camps – (Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, you are making very lengthy submissions.

MS ERIYO: As I wind up, Madam Speaker, right now in the IDP camps that have been established in Maaji we have had an organisation, the African Humanitarian Organisation, offering health services to refugees but because of the insecurity in that area the refugees have been transferred and the local people left. This NGO receives money from the Ministry of Health but because their workers stay far away from these camps, they arrive between 10.00 a.m. and 11.00 a.m. and leave by 1.00 p.m. 

So for over 20 hours the people there do not receive any medical attention. The situation is bad and I call upon the ministry to go and assess the situation there and offer more security to the people in that area. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

3.34
MR EMMANUEL DOMBO (Bunyole County, Tororo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am seeking clarification from the honourable minister. On page 1 of her statement she indicates that Lt Abaho who had apologised would pay the medical bills of the people who had been affected. I want to find out from her, in what capacity would he be paying, as the in-charge of the unit or in his personal capacity?

Secondly, since he is now under detention and being investigated, who is going to be responsible for the medical bills?

Thirdly, the honourable minister on page 3 indicates that whatever is paid to the auxiliary forces is done so at the expense of the regular forces, which has had its resources cut in order to be able to provide for the auxiliary forces. Whereas we appreciate the cost to government, I thought when you integrate a force under your command you also take responsibility for what they are going to do. If you as a minister think this is happening at the expense of the regular force, does this show your appreciation for the services of the auxiliary forces? In case it is just at the expense of the others, in which case this contribution may not be taken seriously, why don’t you just demobilise them so that the regular forces can have their budget and also continue with their activities?

Finally, Madam Minister, there is something that is apparent, although not explicit, in your statement but which became very clear to us as Members of Parliament when under the facilitation of the Speaker we visited Northern Uganda. We had the opportunity to meet some wounded soldiers in Kitgum Hospital and the soldiers in the hospital did indicate to us that there is an apparent tribal difference within the UPDF rank and file among the people who come from Northern Uganda and the people who come from other areas, mainly Southern Uganda. We were a team of Members of Parliament and there are many members who were present during that time who can bear me testimony.

When I read your statement, and I see Pte Tumusiime shooting David Ojok, then Ojok’s brother shooting Tumusiime dead, then Lt Abaho doing certain things, there could be more to the war in Northern Uganda than what the ordinary eye can see and state. I want to find out from the hon. minister, has your ministry –(Interruptions)

MR AACHILLA: Thank you, honourable colleague, for giving way. On the same point I would like to seek clarification upon that incident that let the soldiers go to Lapono where they were before. What measures have been taken by the ministry to minimize such internal uncoordinated migrations within the auxiliary forces? This is from the point of experience that the auxiliary forces or LDUs have more than often acted in such a manner and ended up disappearing in their communities. In an incidence like that of Kabongo, what attempts has the ministry taken to stop such practices so that indiscipline can be avoided and a bad precedence minimised among the auxiliary force? Can I get clarification?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I thought by now we had grasped what is information, clarification and to whom it should go. Members are now making submissions under the guise of information.  

MR DOMBO: Madam Speaker, I want to thank my honourable colleague but I think he is seeking clarification from the wrong person because I was the one holding the Floor. That question should have been addressed to the minister, but since she has heard, she will take the opportunity to respond to it when she gets on the Floor.

I was seeking clarification from the honourable minister on whether through execution of her duties as a Minister of State for Defence this issue has been apparent her and whether it is being addressed. Because if it is not investigated and yet some UPDF officers have volunteered this information to us as Members of Parliament, then it could easily shield the war. So I want her clarification as to what she has done about it so that the Kony war can come to an end. Thank you.

3.40
MR CHARLES ANGIRO (Erute County North, Lira): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the hon. Minister of State for Defence for her statement about the situation of our LDUs in THE North and in Uganda at large. However, I want to seek some clarification from her on the exact number of months that these soldiers have not been paid   because she is stating that towards the end of the financial year, yet it may take about four months. But on the ground we have been told that these forces have not been paid for seven months and this is the eighth month! When you move around and look at the soldiers, walking barefooted, some in slippers with torn pairs of trousers, you just sympathise.  

Secondly, when we have lost some of these auxiliary forces; their families are just left to whom it may concern. Are you taking charge of these families or not? Because we are not aware of what the families are going to benefit. Some of them were ferried during this insurgency and are just neglected in their rural areas there.  

Thirdly, you have told us that the Cabinet sub-committee is trying to harmonise this situation. When was this sub-committee put in place and what was demanded of it? Who are on this Cabinet sub-committee that is trying to harmonise this position and what are they exactly doing? Have they gone on the ground to see what exactly is down there? I understand this Cabinet sub-committee can go on and on while the suffering is also going on.  

What I want to find out is that, is it not a shame for us to discuss this matter when the line minister is here? What they should have done is to ensure that the auxiliary forces are paid. Where on earth do you find that when you have two categories of children in your family some are eating some are looking at those who are eating, what is happening? When the UPDF are getting their salaries these LDUs are just watching them. What kind of emotion do you think can be drawn? I am blaming the ministry and government for turning our children into thieves. This case of shooting a human being thinking he is an enemy has happened even with cows and goats. At night because of lack of food these LDUs have been shooting some of our cows and they are alleging that they were enemies coming. Can’t these people differentiate between enemies and cows? This is shameful. You can imagine how they are tricking us.

At one time there were rampant cases of cows being stolen in my constituency. One day we followed the footmarks up to Ddinu Barracks where they ended, and there has been no explanation given to us. But we are glad this thuggery stopped and this was being carried by the UPDF combined with these LDUs and no explanation has been given to us for it.

Finally, can you tell how many of these cases you have recorded, or this is the first time you are presenting to us after hon. Odonga Otto’s case put before this House? Otherwise, we have so many records of this kind of atrocities because when you link up this one with the military situation down there and the status of military men – this is across the board but the line ministry is quiet about it. When have you ever demanded for these auxiliary forces to be brought under your ministry instead of leaving them under the Ministry of Internal Affairs? Thank you very much.

3.44
MRS SANTA OKOT (Woman Representative, Pader): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, and I want to thank the minister for the report she has given on the Floor of Parliament. I also thank the hon. Member, Mr Otto, for having brought the issue concerning the LDUs and what took place in Pader, to the House. If he had not exaggerated it, it would have been very good information but somewhere he exaggerated and I will give you the information.

The issue of this ghost did not start from Pader; it started from Kitgum District. There is a belief that some soldier called Komakech keeps on changing from a human being to some other kind of spirit, into an animal, into some big wind and so forth. This ghost chasing started from Kitgum and descended on to Pader District. It could now be moving towards Gulu District. It did not take place only in Rwakikoko camp; it was in Acholi Buu, Pajule, Pader town council, Atang sub-county, and I think it could have already crossed Aswa River moving towards Gulu. In all these different areas from Kitgum up to Pader, no officer or soldier behaved like this information officer from Rwakikoko, beating up the people and breaking them up. 

I want to appeal by adding on to the honourable member’s voice that these people who are admitted in the hospital or who got into casualty should be taken care of by the Government because the information officer might not be in position to help them from the hospital now as they are suffering on the hospital beds. Even if he were on duty, that has happened to the people.

Coming to the security situation in Pader District, there was tremendous improvement mainly on the road except that many people have been getting problems when they go to the gardens. This is because of the distribution of little food to the people in the camp. But they have mostly been suffering when they go to the garden. The minister read about the eight people who were killed; these were killed from their garden in Pajule where they had gone to plant crops. 

The main problem is the issue of the Local Defence Units (LDUs). Madam Speaker, you will bear with me. This is not the first day that we are discussing about the LDU issue. This Parliament has really discussed the LDUs, I do not know why the Government cannot take serious steps in handling this issue. You know very well what was happening to the people in the Northern region or the people who live in these camps before we decided to recruit these LDUs rampantly. 

Before the LDUs are recruited or trained, I thought the ministry concerned would be able to put everything in place. In many cases I have been going to the districts to pass out these LDUs and if they read their memorandum in front of you, you would see that from the time of training up to the time they pass out they are not catered for. 

Two months ago I went to pass out 300 LDUs who were trained from Pader for Aruu County. They read that when they started training they were barefooted during the first month yet they were trained for three full months. They were given uniforms towards the last week when I was going to pass them out, and this is a serious issue. If the issue of the LDUs is left under the Ministry of Internal Affairs, which has failed to organise the Police properly, the LDUs will all run away from their work. And if the LDUs leave the work they are doing now, guarding the people in the camps and helping to keep the road tracking, we are going to end up with a very big problem.

Last week I went to Pader District and came back on Monday. I moved from Corner Kilak to Lira, Paluo up to Lapono because I had already got this story of a UPDF soldier shooting an LDU who comes from Lapono. Of course the LDU, after seeing the brother down, he shot the UPDF and then immediately the group went back to Lapono. 

Madam Speaker, when we were recruiting these LDUs, the political and district leaders involved the parents of these young men and women. In our discussion we agreed that these LDUs once recruited would remain in their sub-county. They would remain in their sub-county, guard the camps and keep the road tracking; and we had agreed that these LDUs would be paid a salary. 

We also agreed that the Army would take care of the uniforms and the medical bills and so forth, but this has not happened. We had accepted that if a sub-county is burning, maybe under attack, and these LDUs are there in this sub-county, they could interchange and go and work in another part but within the district, not to be transferred from one district to the other. These LDUs who went back to Lapono - incidentally when I arrived in Lapono there was a war. They started fighting with the LRA who had come to steal cows. So all of them, plus the civilians who had bows and arrows, ran after the rebels. But I stood there and waited for them until they finished chasing them and came back. The elders called all these 74 LDUs of Lapono and I had a talk to them. It is on record that the LDUs from Lapono, Adilong and Panyimul are very hardworking. 

They told us their side of the story and said that they had not left Patongo sub-county because of the killing of this UPDF, but said they were under threat. Even when I arrived, the very LDU who shot the UPDF was in hiding because they said the brigade commander was looking for two of them to be arrested because of killing the UPDF officer. 

The issue is that it seems the UPDF is seen to be superior to the LDUs and that is what is going to cause problems between the two armed forces. If the commanders of the UPDF will not stand out and say, “We are doing the same work, we are doing the same thing, we are helping the people,” the LDUs are now taking it that the UPDF are taken as being superior. This must be corrected. If not, they will never stay together with the LDUs because of this incident of Lapono. 

My request is, let these UPDF commanders talk to them and treat them as equals, and let their salary be also paid every month. This six months’ non-payment is going to make the LDUs lay down their tools.  

Finally, I want to refute the statement of the Member of Parliament where he stated that 300 LDUs joined the LRA in the bush. The parents have said, “We are fed up of the war, and even in the Paara declaration we denounced the LRA as the Acholi people.  Nobody’s son has gone to the bush.” They have said, “If the Member of Parliament has the list of those LDUs, he should present it to the Government. Nobody should take it that any son from Pader District has fled to the bush with the guns of the Government”. Thank you.

3.54
MR ISAIAH IMUMET (Usuk County, Katakwi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for the report. Because of time I will just mention something to do with the transfers of the LDUs. In my constituency and in my district of Katakwi, we had a verbal agreement with the President during a rally that if these young men are recruited they will be guarding the district of Katakwi. However, what has surprised me is that the boys have been shifted to Karamoja and now we are having a gap. When you ask the commanders why that thing has happened, they will tell you that the order “Kutoka juu” – they just put you off like that; that the order “Kutoka juu”.  

Our problem is, the very people who were supposed to guard us have been removed and a gap has existed to the extent that when there is an attack, those boys who are guarding in the camp or the kraals are not allowed to respond even if it is a kilometre away. So we have that problem of unnecessary transfers of those boys and yet they were supposed to guard the people. That is the point I had wanted to raise, otherwise the rest of the issues are the same.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I appreciate that this matter is very topical, but we are going to have the debate on the State of the Nation Address. We shall have the debate on the policy statements as well so you will have an opportunity to contribute further on this when those two items come up. I want to ask the minister to respond.

3.55
THE MINISTER OF STATE, DEFENCE (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, and I want to begin by thanking honourable colleagues for their submission. I also wish to apologise to the people that have been harassed by one 2nd Lt Abaho on behalf of my ministry and on half of the Government. I mentioned in my statement that my ministry does not condone these acts and we have always come out to make sure that we really discipline our officers who behave in such a manner. 

Members have mentioned issues and they have focused more on the welfare of the LDUs. My colleague, hon. Mbabazi, tried to explain the genesis of the problem of the LDUs, how they were recruited in the middle of the budget and how we the UPDF have been toiling to make sure that we sustain them. Members also raised the issue of recruiting LDUs and deploying them in those very areas. Honourables Lolem, Santa and Imumet Isaiah mentioned it. This is the agreement we came to after persuading the parents to give us those sons and daughters to be working under UPDF and to be deployed anywhere in the country, and they refused.

In the ministry and in the UPDF we anticipated problems of indiscipline that could be caused by the people recruited from an area and deployed in that same area. They use that advantage to sneak out, go and sleep with their relatives, come back and disappear. But because we had realised that we wanted their services, we agreed with the people that they should be deployed elsewhere because they are organic to the problems in those areas. I want to assure you colleagues that we have tried to make sure that we discipline both the auxiliary and regular forces. We –(Interjection)- I am going to clarify to you. I know what you are going to rise on.

I did not want to mention member-by-member because it will take time. That is why I am mentioning issues. I was asked, “How many cases have you registered? Is this the first case you are telling us or you have been handling cases?” I am telling this House that this is not the first case. Some cases have been handled but have not been raised on the Floor of Parliament. We do not have to wait for the case to appear in Parliament so that we handle it. We court martial officers, whether from auxiliary or regular forces. The Court Martial is working, the courts are working and whenever we spot an undisciplined officer, we handle him or her promptly. We do not entertain impunity and indiscipline. 

I wish to also point out that it took time to create a very disciplined force called the UPDF. It took time. You know, we recruit from society. Those are our relatives; they come with different characters. Some are thieves, others drunkards, but the institution tries to make sure that we transform them into a disciplined force. Those few cases are inevitable but whenever they occur we handle them. 

Another pertinent question that was raised by hon. Jessica Eriyo and some other members was about the correct number of months that these auxiliary forces have missed. I have been talking about the last payment being January but I am made to understand that in some parts of this country some LDUs last got their salary in December. I will crosscheck because money to those various areas comes from the Ministry of Defence. I was told that we had paid all of them up to January but if there are some who have missed their January salary, I will crosscheck and I will –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, are you talking about the LDUs who are in the operational areas or generally, because even the others have been asking. I do not know whether you are talking about even those in Kamuli because they have been asking me about their salaries. So, I do not know whether you are talking about those in the operational areas or those throughout the country.

MS NANKABIRWA: Madam Speaker, we are dealing with the auxiliary forces as they are operating under the UPDF. When money comes, we pay 1st Division, 2nd Division, 3rd Division, 4th, 5th Division -(Interruption)

MR AWORI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to put it to my hon. colleague in charge of Defence that we have audited reports, which confirm that at varying times during your tenure and your honourable colleagues’ we have had between five and 10,000 ghost soldiers, LDUs and auxiliary forces. When you come here to tell us that you do not have money, you are constrained by money or lack money, do you have an idea how many people you employ, do have an idea really? The audited reports we have confirm that even among the auxiliary forces there are ghosts. The Arrow Boys have 2,000, UPDF 5,000 and even the Police, 1,000 ghosts!

PROF. KAGONYERA: Hon. Aggrey Awori is making very serious allegations. Is it in order for him to make such allegations without any proof? Is it in order for him to make allegations without producing those so-called audited documents that he is alleging to have read? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Awori, I think you had just begun and you are talking about audited accounts. For which year are they? Where are they? Are they available in this Parliament so that we can access them?

MR AWORI:  Madam Speaker, if I had anticipated this statement, I would have brought them. It is a fact. I can challenge the minister to bring the report from 1995 to date. We have had commissions of inquiry and the reports are available. I can lay them on the Table tomorrow; I cannot stop the proceedings of Parliament to go and bring the report.

MR OKUPA: Thank you, hon. Aggrey Awori. From the statement here, we are getting different versions. When hon. Otto raised this issue, the hon. Minister of Defence, Amama Mbabazi, did put it to us here in this House that the issue of non-payment is as a result of ghost auxiliary forces. “We are trying to establish the number of auxiliary forces”, that is the version he gave. That is the reason he gave for the delay in the payment of LDUs.  

Today the state minister has given us a different version about the delay in payment. So, what hon. Aggrey Awori is raising about the ghost soldiers is right. The honourable minister put it to this House when he promised that this statement would be brought in the House today.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, looking at the statement. The minister says that she is not sure how many auxiliary forces she has because of the delay of the verification committee; is it not? 

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, the welfare of the LDUs has been recurrent in the House but the genesis of the problem is the fact that there has been a delay by the Cabinet verification committee assigned the responsibility of reconciling the actual strength of the forces on the ground.

MR AWORI: I would like to thank you for reading the relevant section and I hope that will put the matter to rest. He should acknowledge and apologise to the august House that he wanted to mislead the House by calling me to order. Now the right Madam Speaker has put the record straight. (Laughter)

MR MBABAZI: Madam Speaker, I think it is obvious that hon. Aggrey Awori, as usual, is flogging a dead horse because the problem of ghosts in the Army is a matter we have been discussing over the years. It is a matter, which has been subject to investigation, as this House very well knows. Some very senior officers of the UPDF are under trial in the general Court Martial. So, I am surprised that hon. Aggrey Awori is standing up and speaking as if he is bringing news.

MR AWORI: Madam Speaker, I am surprised to hear this from a distinguished member of the Cabinet, who is really high in the hierarchy of the Government. I do not know what number in the queue of succession he is - and very well educated - to come up and say I am flogging a dead horse only to come on the Floor minutes later and admit that there is a court martial on the matter of ghost soldiers.  

Over and above that, the Speaker had made a ruling by reading a citation confirming the concern I was raising on the Floor. Is my honourable colleague who should be in charge of Defence and knowledgeable on the matters of Defence in order to try to mislead this august House to a state of confusion as in his own mind?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I am unable to enter the mind of the honourable minister to establish whether he is confused or not. I think we should put this matter to rest. The ministry has accepted that there is a problem with the numbers and it is possible that there might be ghosts. Let us leave it to that.

MR MBABAZI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. To conclude the information I was giving, as a consequence of all this, as I have informed this House before, the Government has taken steps to put a system in place to fight the question of ghosts in the army and elsewhere. This Parliament passed an item in the Budget for the past financial year for computerisation of the Army records, for that purpose. I will be happy to inform this House about the progress we have made in this respect as I do present the policy statement on Defence when we discuss the budgetary provisions for Defence this financial year. Thank you.

MS ALASO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I have been quite in touch with the hon. Minister of State for Defence on the matter of the auxiliary forces particularly in the Teso region. She has continuously told me the very things she has put in this statement today, the verification and all that. A few minutes ago in her response she did say that part of the problem is the auxiliary forces. Is that the reflection of our society? Some of them were thieves, and she is panel beating them to a certain acceptable shape in the Army?

I would like the honourable minister to help me; she knows that I go back to give feedback on these matters. I want her to help me understand how she expects people who have worked five months without pay – you know it is Shs 60,000 or not more than that I think. Yes, Shs 60,000 per month and they have not been paid for five months. They have tattered uniforms, no food, their children are sick in the camps, they have lice - the ones in Teso have lice, Madam Speaker, I even wonder whether you know lice. (Laughter) It is this thing that creeps on your body and feeds on you thoroughly and you do not remove that uniform day in, day out and you are carrying a heavy gun. 

I would like the honourable minister to help me know how she expects to discipline such people who live in such painful circumstances, because the question of indiscipline among the auxiliary forces in the Teso region is already on the increase. So, I want to be educated so that I can also tell the boys when I get back home that this is how the next disciplinary action is going to unfold.

MR SABIITI: Madam Speaker, the question of ghost soldiers is now clear and the Minister of Defence has accepted that there are ghost soldiers. Since this problem was identified the Ministry of Defence has continued to get funding for these ghost soldiers. Can’t this money be directed to the payment of these LDUs? 

If you look at the number of LDUs we are talking about and the number of ghost soldiers, surely the money available in the budget would be enough to fully take care of the LDUs. So, may I know from the honourable minister why these people cannot be properly paid yet they are taking over the functions of the Ministry of Defence?

MRS ATENG: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Last week when this report was presented to the House by hon. Otto I approached the Minister of Defence, hon. Amama Mbabazi, and to him raised issues of urgent importance but these issues have not been reflected in this report. I do not know how I can get a response to them because I have not got the opportunity to make a presentation. I need guidance from you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think this incident was specific to something that happened in Pader. That is what hon. Otto raised. So, I do not know whether it was going to turn to what was happening in Lira.

MRS ATENG: Madam Speaker, these issues are not different from what happened in Pader. That is why I felt that I would rather raise them today because the minister is already aware.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Were they raised on the Floor of this House?

MRS ATENG: No, I raised them to him –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Privately?

MRS ATENG: Yes, Madam Speaker. But it is similar. Three weeks ago I went to Aloi sub-county in Lira District and found an LC III councillor called Mr Lageni –(Interruption)

MR MBABAZI: I thank you honourable member for giving way. She did indeed give me information of what was reported to have happened in her area and it is covered in the statement of the ministry. As you know, when I get these reports I pass them on to the relevant office in the Ministry to go and investigate and give us feedback. 

As you can see from the report, which the minister of state has presented, this is the feedback we got in response to the statement by hon. Otto. Unfortunately, we had not got the response to the questions she raised and I want to undertake that as soon as I get these I will be happy to inform her or even come to Parliament and inform you about that particular situation.

I want to also respond hon. Sabiiti’s point –(Interruption)  

MR WAMBUZI: There is something, which hon. Santa Okot raised, which I feel the minister should clarify. She was arguing that the command structure of the UPDF and LDU is not in harmony and she was demanding that the LDUs should be at par with the UPDF. This is something, which worries me and I would not like it to be skipped in his submission.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, you are interjecting. The Minister of State for Defence had not completed responding. I am sure that she will come to that important matter.

MR MBABAZI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. We did carry out investigations. Indeed we found that there had been ghosts in the Army and as I said before, we took collective action in terms of punitive measures against those who were alleged to have been involved in the creation of ghosts because as I said before, some of them have appeared before court and charged with that particular offence.

Secondly, we took collective measures to fill the gaps where they existed. So, I am happy to tell this Parliament that our army is fully established by real soldiers, not ghosts.  

I was talking about the mechanism to fight the creation of ghosts by computerisation, because the methods, which were used for instance to create ghosts included non-reporting of people who had either passed away, deserted or things like that. So, these are the kinds of things we are trying to prevent. We have a fully established military army and we are simply taking measures to ensure that ghosts do not re-occur. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let me ask the Minister of State for Defence to complete her response.

MS NANKABIRWA: Madam Speaker, there was the issue, which was raised regarding how this 2nd Lt Abaho will pay for the medical bills and other expenses. This Lieutenant had offered to do so because he wanted to silence the matter but then we came up with investigations and indeed investigations are continuing.

Secondly, he is also arrested. There is no way he can pay, and even if he were able to, we would not have entertained this. When you cause indiscipline you have to be disciplined. I want to inform the House that after the investigations we shall come up with recommendations as to how we are going to handle medical bills and other expenses that are attached to this exercise, but Abaho himself was the one who had offered to clear the bills.

About the apparent tribal clashes, which hon. Dombo raised, he said that he was informed when they went to Kitgum some time back. Unfortunately, he did not reveal this to me or to the ministry. Maybe I would have investigated them further. I am hearing it for the first time. I have not received any complaints that there are tribal clashes. The incident he is quoting - that I am reporting on - these are normal causalities in forces. Even within the UPDF one can mistake the other for the enemy. It happens. And these are normal causalities. You can mistake your colleague to be an enemy, but they are not rampant. But because 2nd Lt Abaho is from a different region and is in command, it does not mean that those were tribal clashes. Because the brother also decided to shoot, this does not mean that they are tribal clashes. In UPDF and other army institutions, such incidents are normal. 

I wish to report that we are recognising the services of the auxiliary forces. When we visited the places where we recruited these people from, some of the auxiliaries passed through their relatives and asked the President to put them in charge and command some of the units. But we need to pick some of them for courses like company commander’s courses and other courses to train them so that they can take charge. The kind of training that they go through before they pass out to go and beef up with the UPDF is not enough to make them take charge of commanding like the UPDF is doing.  

This will mean that those who will be picked will agree to join the force and be deployed anywhere. Because there are issues that were raised when we are recruiting: “We are giving you these sons, do not deploy them outside the sub-counties, do not deploy them outside the district.” But if you are yearning to take command of certain units, you must be ready to be deployed outside that area where you are organic. These are the issues, which my political commissaries are trying to tell –(Interruption)

MRS ODWONG: Thank you honourable minister for giving way. Madam Speaker, apart from the command structure, there is a glaring issue of discrepancy in the way the LDUs or the auxiliary forces and UPDF are treated. Even at death, when the men and women of the auxiliary forces die in action or at battlefront, they are neglected. Nobody takes recognition of what they have done. But when they do carry out a successful attack against the LRA, they say UPDF has done this. Nobody attributes it to them. It is no joking matter. It is the truth.  

Last but no least, the issue of the command structure as being explained by the minister, some of these members of the auxiliary forces are already trained military personnel at the rank of captain or whatever and they just need a bit of orientation. You cannot say that you cannot give them command of the forces. I think those who confess to be trained and get further orientation would agree to be deployed. On the whole, if there is uniformity in the way UPDF and LDU are being handled, let the uniformity be actualised. Let it not be only by word of mouth.  

DR MALLINGA: Madam Speaker, I think it has been emphasised enough. What I see here is a complete failure in the establishment of the command structure. You cannot have soldiers, what you call the LDUs, not fully integrate them into the UPDF structure and expect to have a normal functioning army. The killing of that solider was very unnecessary. In the barracks before you go out in the evening, you are given a password. If you are outside and you are trying to come into the barracks and you do not know the password, you are advised to stay outside and not come in at all. As you approach the barracks, you are challenged, “Who is there?” You tell them the password and they allow you to advance. If you do not give the password, then the man is free to shoot you.

So, we have a problem of the command structure. When I look at these uniforms, a soldier having one pair of uniforms - on page 3 - for a year, one pair of soaks and gumboots; that is abuse. Such is not a soldier anymore.

Then, Lt Abaho should be handled according to the regulations of the Army. This business of paying the hospital bills does not arise. Let him go through the structure, let him go through the regulations of the Army. I see a lot of discrepancies in what the honourable minister is saying. I think what you need now is to get a senior officer and immediately establish an investigation. Let them recommend to you how you should absorb the LDUs into the Army structure. Otherwise, you are going to continue having problems. Thank you.

MR KABAREEBE: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, and honourable members. In December 2004 I got leave of this Parliament and I moved a motion to allow me table a Bill, the Local Security Protective Bill, 2004 –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No. It was actually in December 2003.

MR KABAREEBE: It was gazetted and distributed to members but as per the Budget Act statement, the then Ministry of Finance is supposed to issue a certificate. By nature of it being a Private Member’s Bill, taking care of Article 93, all the information that was required from the contributions made by Ministry of Defence and Ministry of Internal Affairs was all given. However, up to now the certificate has never been issued and without a law, which protects the LDUs and the Ugandans, you will never get a proper payroll because you do not know your enrolment. 

Two, they will never get paid because the sourcing is from Internal Affairs, which is supposed to go through Defence. You have heard how many times we have got our state cashiers running away with the money.

Three, I have no problem with the Ministry of Defence, because they gave the relevant information. The Ministry of Internal Affairs did the needful but it is unfortunate that you can still get a problem of money failing to reach the LDUs. It has been mentioned that it was underway but when you look at the budget of Internal Affairs that money was there. What happened? So I request you, Madam Speaker, to help us get this law in place. We approached the Ministry of Defence so that they can take up the LDUs. They said that the LDUs could not match the standards of the UPDF. We approached the Ministry of Internal Affairs, they said –(Interjection)– could you protect me from the minister?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, do not intimidate the Member for Rwampara.

MR KABAREEBE: The Ministry of Internal Affairs is aware that they cannot take up the LDUs. They also say that they have their standards so now where are these LDUs?  

First of all, if an LDU dies, do not be surprised if he does not have a coffin; there is no gratuity, because he has no payroll after all. So it will be a big shock if there was a big attack and you have about 100 dead and you fail to get coffins to bury them. Because where would you get them from? Madam Speaker, I wish you could help us to ask government to come in and pass this law. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Fortunately we had a success story recently. You know that our Prime Minister is very effective. Recently he secured the Certificate of Financial Implications for the Copyright Bill. I am sure if we ask him he will be equally effective on this Bill because it has been lying around for two and a-half years. Prime Minister, we have a lot of confidence in your abilities.

MR ETONU: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like clarification from the Chairman of the Defence Committee. When he says that you do not get a payroll of say our Arrow Group in Teso and yet I do see these boys signing payrolls for their money, I get confused. As I came from home this Monday the Arrow Boys were getting their salaries and they were actually signing their January salaries’ payroll. That is the information I have. I want the minister to note that the January salary is being paid.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But honourable members, do we not admit that the question of LDUs has never been resolved? We do not know where they fall. Those in Kamuli have been asking me for their salary and I do not know what to tell them. So, let us not gloss over these issues. There are areas where these things have not been resolved. 

MS NANKABIRWA: Madam Speaker, let me repeat to the honourable colleague, hon. Dr Mallinga, he raised it and I had just explained that the LDUs are under the command of the UPDF and that the UPDF has got a structure. Therefore, when he says that there is no structure, he is not correct. It has yielded results and we have stood on the Floor of this Parliament and paid tribute to the gallant sons and daughters of Uganda, both of the UPDF and auxiliary forces. They have done a commendable job. They have tried to maintain discipline. If the situation were as it has been depicted, things would have been very different on the ground but these boys and girls of the auxiliary forces have worked very well with the UPDF and we have succeeded.

Hon. Alaso, I want to tell you that UPDF provides for other requirements. We buy food, medicine, and uniforms at the rate that we give our regular forces. It is the salary. The problem with food is that because of lack of prompt payment of salaries these LDUs invite their relatives to come and stay with them. Instead of eating this food meant for one person, some end up sharing the food with the other relatives. The salary is the problem that has been identified by many of you colleagues. “Salary, salary”. Because when we were paying salaries promptly, what is coming up on the Floor now was minimal.

I would like to end by thanking colleagues –(Interruptions)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I do not know whether we are going to exhaust all your queries today.

MS NANKABIRWA: I would like to end by thanking my colleagues and pledging that I will be available when we are debating the State of the Nation Address because security is pertinent and these are the issues that will be raised further. We shall be able to clarify on them. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

MR AMURIAT: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am sure that questions arising from the backbench to the front bench are tabled in this House so that the relevant minister may respond to them. I am sure that a question was asked to the Minister of Defence in relation to the Cabinet verification committee, which question has not been answered.  

I would like to know when this sub-committee is expected to deliver its report. For some time now we have been told about this committee and it seems that unless the verification is done, it is not going to be possible to adequately budget for the LDUs and the auxiliary forces. Unless this is a ghost committee I would like to challenge the Rt hon. Prime Minister, whom you, Madam Speaker, have always praised for being efficient, to tell this House what is happening with this committee. Does this committee exist? If it does, how far has it gone in as far as carrying out duties assigned to it are concerned? When should we expect the report from this committee? It has been expressed to this House that matters related to the payment of LDUs and Arrow Boys is a very difficult situation for us. It is serious and government needs to give it the attention that it deserves.  

I would like to go back home today satisfied by the Front Bench that this committee actually exists. 

Two, I would like to be satisfied that this committee is doing its work; and, three that we shall get a report from this committee in the near future. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The Prime Minister is of course an efficient person but he does not run the ministries. So the minister will do that verification on the Cabinet sub-committee.  

MR OKUPA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would be more comfortable if we broke off here having got a commitment from the Ministry of Defence. This will be the message we will take to them, that the Minister of Defence has told us that, “within one month, your money will be paid”, so that we do not enter into another financial year.

Two, I want to invite the hon. Minister of Defence, and I hope Mr Amama Mbabazi is listening. If you looked at the hon. Amuriat –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Amuriat, the honourable member is addressing the Minister and you are engaging him.

MR OKUPA: I want to invite the hon. Minister of Defence to the Auditor General’s report, and specifically to the item of the Arrow Group in Soroti or Teso region.  

The Finance Officer disappeared when the Auditor General’s Officers went to verify.  To-date, Shs 4.5 billion has not been accounted for. This brings to our attention the fact that the Minister could be dodging the bitter fact that the money was eaten.  

Sometimes the money moves in, but it comes back to Kampala. That is why they are failing to provide accountability for the full Financial Year up to June 2004. That creates a big problem.  Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have had a debate over this matter; the Minister had wound up.  But I thought the matter of the Cabinet Verification Committee was important, so that the House may know when you are likely to come here with the –(Interruption)

MS TIPERU: Madam Speaker, thank you very much.  I am giving this information because hon. Amama Mbabazi is here.  Honourable minister, our people are very grateful that the security along Karuma-Pakwach Road is very good, and because of that, people even sometimes stop to maybe give lifts to the UPDF, knowing that they are very disciplined.  

I would like to inform you, honourable minister, that Pakwach-Murchison Falls Road - that is 11 kilometres on Paraa Road - the uniforms of the UPDF there are very faded. So, the people have been a little bit confused.  They may want to stop and give them something, say “thank you” or give them lifts. But they sometimes wonder whether they are UPDF or rebels.  

So they asked me to request you to provide them with better uniforms so that we may know that you also recognise their services. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let us please conclude on this matter, we have said enough about it.

THE MINISTER OF DEFENCE (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Thank you, Madam Speaker.  It is true that Cabinet set up a sub-committee to look into the question of auxiliary forces.  This arose as a result of a report, which came especially from the Lango region, that there had been a considerable desertion from the auxiliary forces by members in that area.  This sub-committee of Cabinet consists of hon. Mike Mukula, hon. Ogong Okot Felix, hon. Ayumu Akaki and the Chief Political Commissar of the Army. This committee is working hard, to the best of my knowledge. 

 The point that the Minister of State for Defence was putting across was that the delay in disbursement of some of the money has been awaiting the report of that committee, which I expect soon.  And this is, to the best of my knowledge, a matter, which is handled internally within Cabinet.  If there is reason for the Ministry or Government to make a statement to Parliament, we will do so.  Thank you.

PERSONAL STATEMENT

MR KASSIANO WADRI (Terego County, Arua): Madam Speaker, I am here to make this statement to Parliament on the Small Arms and Light Weapons Conference, which was held in Mombasa. And this statement is made under Rule 36(1) and (2).  

Madam Speaker and hon. Members of Parliament, I am privileged to brief you on behalf of and with consent of my colleagues, with whom the Parliament of Uganda mandated us to attend this conference.  

Between 26th and 28th of November 2003, UNDF and AWEPA organised a regional conference at the White Sands Hotel, Mombasa, Kenya.  The conference was attended by eight Parliaments of the Great Lakes region in the horn of Africa to enable the legislators from Kenya, Uganda, Tanzania, the Democratic Republic of Congo, Rwanda, Burundi, Eritrea and Ethiopia to discuss the increasing problem of proliferation of illicit, small arms and light weapons in the region.  

Proliferation of illicit small arms and light weapons in the region has led to socio-economic and political problems, which have a far-reaching implication for the region, the continent of Africa and the world at large.  

Madam Speaker, it was for this reason that the conference committed itself with a sad experience from the western world to bring the problem under control.  The conference culminated into the Mombasa Parliamentary plan of action on illicit, small arms and light weapons reduction.  The Ugandan Parliament was represented at this conference by the following persons: hon. Capt. Basaliza Steven, hon. Udongo Betty, hon. Kassiano Ezati Wadri, last but not least, hon. Capt. Matovu David.  

What did we discuss as the impact of small arms proliferation in the region?  Small arms have adverse effects on human development. They create the following impact: increased violent crimes and insecurity through their use; weakening of the health system and education infrastructure as they are plundered and burnt during conflicts; displacement of people due to fear, threat to life, property and insecurity; commercial activities and agricultural production are reduced; decline in Government resource base as a result of reduced production; damage to the social structures of the community; lastly, development aid agencies also tend to cut off aid whenever there is insecurity caused as a result of use of these weapons.  

What did the conference culminate into?  In the face of the above effects, the conference adopted the following Mombasa Parliamentary plan of action:

1.	Improve legislation to address the issue on the marking, record keeping and tracing small up arms; 

2.	Create institutional capacity and infrastructure to ensure continuity of the struggle against small arms proliferation;

3.	Parliamentarians agree to raise awareness about the issue of small arms in their respective constituencies;

4.	Work with the media to attract public debate on the issue of elicit arms;

5.	Ensure that Parliaments in the north, especially Europe, do their share in the struggle against small arms since they are the major source of these weapons. 

What have we done as a country in this direction?  Madam Speaker, Uganda has created the office of a Focal Point Person in the Ministry of Internal Affairs with a secretariat to monitor the issue of small arms on a routine base and implement Nairobi Declaration of March 2000 by creating awareness among the district leaders and the public about the dangers of illicit small arms and light weapons in the region. A Senior Assistant Commissioner of Police by names of Mr Magobu Nabudel heads this secretariat. 

The secretariat is of a multi-sectoral nature consisting of representative’s from the following line: Ministry of Internal Affairs, Ministry of Defence, Ministry of Local Government, Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and NRM Secretariat. 

Last but not least, the civil society in Uganda. Right now as I talk this committee is moving around in the country creating awareness among the political and civic leadership of the districts about the dangers of these weapons.  

At the end of the conference a comprehensive report was made in the form of a handbook. This handbook seeks to serve Parliamentarians during their efforts to further progress on the issues of the small arms and light weapons.  It further seeks to assess what the participating countries might contribute to solve the problems especially with regard to legislation.  

I now wish to take this opportunity to lay a copy of this handbook on the Table. At an appropriate date you in your capacity as the Speaker will be requested to launch this book and have it circulated so that honourable members of Parliament can use it. I beg to move, Madam Speaker. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, hon. Wadri. On behalf of the House I would like to welcome back our delegation to this meeting and certainly, I accept to launch the handbook. When I receive it, I will recommend members to read it so that they can contribute further on issues of small arms and light weapons.  Thank you very much.

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE LOCAL GOVERNMENT (RATING) BILL, 2003

4.55
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Dr Nduhuura Richard): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that a bill entitled, “The Local Government (Rating) Bill, 2003, be read the second time.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It has been seconded.  

DR NDUHUURA: Madam Speaker and honourable members, you may recall that the regulation, administration and collection of property tax by local governments are currently being governed by the Local Government (Rating) Act Cap 242, formally the Local Governments Rating Decree of 1979.  

It is now 26 years since this law came into being and during this time the country has undergone tremendous, social, economic and political transformation, which has rendered the application of the existing Rating law ineffective and out of tune with reality. 

The law was made under a strong centralized system of local governance, its application, therefore, has become difficult and inconsistent with the current decentralization policy, the constitutional provisions and the Local Government Act. There was, therefore, need for Government to prepare a bill, which is consistent with the decentralization policy.  

This bill, therefore, is intended to achieve the following objectives:

1.	Provide for the levying of rates on properties by local governments within their areas of jurisdiction;
2.	Provide for the valuation of property for the purpose of rating and to provide for the collection of the rates.
3.	Provide for the repeal of the Local Governments (Rating) Act Cap 242 or formally the Local Governments Rating Decree of 1979.
4.	Provide for other related matters.

During the process of developing the bill, the Ministry carried out extensive consultation with various stakeholders who included the Ministries of Water, Land and Environment, Finance, Planning and Economic Development, Local Government Associations, the Association of Valuation Surveys, representatives of property owners in Kampala and the Local Government Finance Commission. 

They all agreed that the existing law should be repealed and a new law enacted to reflect the current economic, social and political changes.  

It is the view of my ministry that the provisions in the Local Governments (Rating) Bill, 2003 will provide a legal framework for local governments, which will enable them to maximize on revenue mobilization from this source for improved service delivery to the population. 

Madam Speaker, and honourable members, it must be said firmly that collecting taxes by Government generally is a good thing. A time must come when a country must survive on the resources it generates internally. This philosophy should apply to all levels of governance, Local Governments inclusive.  

I, therefore, wish to appeal to this august House to support the bill and approve it in order to make it become a law by the next financial year.  I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Minister. 

4.59
THE CHAIRPERSON, SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC SERVICE AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Mr Besisira Ignatius): Thank you, Madam Speaker. This is my maiden report. I would like to thank the colleagues for all the support. 

The Local Government (Rating) Bill, 2003 was read for the First Time on 3 November 2003. It was then referred to the Committee of Public Service and Local Government for scrutiny in accordance with Article 90 of the Constitution and Rule 103 of our Rules of Procedure. 

 I now have the pleasure, Madam Speaker and honourable members, to present the report of the committee. 

Objectives of the bill: Madam Speaker and honourable members, the bill seeks to:

1.	To provide for the levy of rates on property by local governments within their areas of jurisdiction.
2.	To provide for valuation of property for the purpose of rating and provide for the collection of these rates.
3.  	To repeal the Local Government (Rating) Act (CAP 242) and to provide for other matters connected therewith.

Madam Speaker, and honourable members, the committee received memoranda and held discussions with various stakeholders namely: the Minister of Local Government and his technical team, Uganda Local Authorities Association, the Urban Authorities Association of Uganda, the Institution of Surveyors of Uganda, the Chief Government valuer, Kampala City Council and hon. Hilary Onek.

The committee in consultation with the Ministry of Local Government held a one-day workshop for all members of Parliament on the 18 September 2004 aimed at creating awareness and soliciting support from stakeholders.  

The members of professional organizations such as valuation of surveyors of Uganda, Officials of Kampala City Council, the Local Government Finance Commission, Local Government Association and officials from other Government line ministries and departments attended it, among others.

The committee also had the opportunity to study the property tax system in Zimbabwe. Some of our colleagues went there and noted the following:

Local Governments in Zimbabwe are run as business entities.  

Urban councils in Zimbabwe have moved to “cost centered budgeting” where revenue obtained from a particular source is ploughed back to improve the services in that particular sector.  With this kind of approach where property tax is used for improving taxes or servicing new estates, taxpayers are able to link their payments directly with improved services.  

All land within the jurisdiction of urban council belongs to that council.  This has empowered the urban councils to be able to survey and plan for the development of such pieces of land, which is not the case in Uganda.

The physical planning function is vested in the Ministry of Local Government and as such the Ministry has a wide policy mandate to compel local governments to comply with urban physical planning requirements.  This approach has enabled the property development process in Zimbabwe to maintain consistency with laid down standards.  

Nobody is allowed to contest for any political office unless such a person has obtained clearance that he or she has fully paid all taxes due.

The committee recognises and appreciates the value of input into the discussions by the above stakeholders.  It also extends its gratitude to the members and staff of Parliament, the press and members of the general public whose opinion in one way or another enriched our discussions.

Observations:

Madam Speaker and honourable members, the committee made the following observations: This piece of legislation is not introducing a new tax since local governments are enforcing the Local Government (Rating) Decree of 1979 to collect this tax.  

The bill is timely, as it will enhance local revenue levels of the local governments. 

While the idea of mass valuation raised a lot of debate, it was noted that it depended on circumstances thereby making it optional.

The bill should be harmonized with other existing laws namely: the Condominium and Income Tax laws to avoid double taxation.  

The bill is service related and therefore provision should be made in the law as to the obligation of each party that is the taxpayer and the Local Government.

Implementation of the law requires good physical planning in all local governments.

Recommendations:

Madam Speaker and honourable members, the committee recommends that the physical planning function currently under the Ministry of Water, Lands and Environment should be transferred to the Ministry of Local Government to ensure harmonized planning in local governments.  

The list of services to be provided by property rates payers should be clearly outlines in the law.

The committee requests you to support the report and urgently pass the bill into law as it is a prerequisite for the next Local Government Development Programme Funds Release from our development partners.

Madam Speaker and honourable members, subject to the amendments to be moved at the committee stage, I beg to request that the committee report be adopted.  Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you, Chairperson.  I think the matter is now open for debate. I have ascertained that this bill has more than one-third signatures of the membership of the committee.  

5.05
DR OKULO EPAK (Oyam County South, Apac):  Madam Speaker, I want to thank you for giving me the chance to contribute to this debate.  Rating and collection of revenue from rents has been a permanent problem in this country. I also recall that during Margaret Thatcher’s time since properties normally belong to the elites, they sought to replace it with graduated tax. It did not work; it caused the collapse of the Thatcher administration itself. 

We are bringing a new law on rating at a time when we have abolished, or as some people would wish to think so, suspended personal graduated tax.  It is important to mention what happened in Great Britain and what is happening here.  They wanted to abolish graduated tax and replace it with poll tax and it created a problem.  Here, we have abolished graduated tax and we are improving the law on rating; we are not abolishing it. 

There is a great possibility that we are debating this matter now and people will misunderstand it to be an indirect way of substituting what was supposed to have been saved from poll tax.  So, sufficient information and education should be given to the masses and be very clear on who you are target to pay this tax.  We have to be very clear on this, otherwise we can cause a little bit of confusion.

Secondly, Madam Speaker, it would be very prudent and educating to a lot of us if when we are repealing an old law, we tell people the problems with the implementation of this law, which we are seeking to improve.   It would be very useful if we can debate it in the wisdom and environment that we are curing a defect. Otherwise, it would appear to be an exercise of making laws and the report of the committee misses this one out completely. 

We have to appreciate the study in Zimbabwe and the comparison of what goes on there and what goes on here. But whether that provides any cure, what does that mean to us? If the situation there is relevant, we may have to make the rating tax more efficient. 

We have these defects here; what will happen here because are we also intending, for instance, to relocate the department of physical planning into Local Government where it used to belong? Are we intending to do that? Are we intending to spend money? Where are the resources? This has not been the practice. 

I remember when we prepared the master plan for the development of the Kampala City and the transportation plant for Uganda; the proposal by the consultants was that payment of road licenses should be used to implement the transportation plan for Kampala, Jinja and Entebbe. 

Recently, the Minister of Works tried to ask whether those taxes should be used to finance or buy resources for the highway authority, which is to be proposed. The Treasury has always resisted it.  Will our local authorities be persuaded; indeed it is a very interesting innovation in Zimbabwe because people resist payment of property tax. 

For instance in Naguru, people have got huge properties, which are of very high value, but the council has never built any roads there. If it were not by the virtue of the East African Community, which had planned the entire road network and put curbs and demarcated them properly, including the plots in Naguru, today that hill would be the most disorderly development you can imagine.  

So, I like the renovation in Zimbabwe. When you collect property tax and persuade me to pay more properties, let me have good roads, let me have street lighting, let me have garbage collection, let me have better drainage; then obviously you can come there and ask me for any amount of money. Already some sections in Naguru have voluntarily collected money to tarmac a road, which is very interesting.  If that spirit can continue, probably it could help. 

I welcome the introduction of this rating tax, immediately in the footstep of abolition of graduated tax because one of the question was how do you substitute it.  I am not sure, that it will, but it has two issues as I have said. One of them I have said creates misunderstanding, but to me it is a welcome development provided it will definitely make the levying and collection of property tax easier.

The third question I have, Madam Speaker, which is not clear here - and I have not read the bill completely - this tax is always levied in gazatted urban areas only. Mark the word, “gazatted” but even some gazatted urban centers have not been subject to property rates.  Now what is this bill going to do with respect to other local governments? The district governments are they also going to value properties and collect revenue from these properties.  

I have seen the proposal for mass valuation. It is one of the things they use in South Africa, but how are you going to collect property rates from grass thatched properties, let me say temporary properties? I know it works somewhere in South Africa because once they have this mass rating system, you can find that all properties of this character will be subject to this kind of rating and you will collect revenue from it.

 I do hope that this is what is going to happen here in that case.  But again my fear is, if it is done people will now be complaining a lot more. They will say, “Look why don’t you give us back our graduated tax rather than this sort of burden? Thank you, Madam Speaker.

5.14
MR STEVEN BAMWANGA (Ndorwa County West, Kabale): Madam Speaker, I have got  a substantive contribution to make on this subject matter because when the Chairman of the committee made his statement, he said that he received memorandum from various stakeholders and he actually thanked them for their contribution. In one way or another, their contribution enriched their discussions.  

I am one of those who gave them a memorandum as a valuation valuer involved in property valuation, but also as a property manager developer in Kampala and once happened to be a member of Kampala City Council Valuation Court, which rarely goes through the rating and objections.  So, I made a substantive contribution; unfortunately they never used this information, but they could have time to go to Zimbabwe to study their rating.  

I would have been happier, Madam Speaker, to enrich this House on this question of the rating as regards properties. What the Minister has not even made clear is whether this rating exercise is going to be extended in the countryside on commercial and industrial properties.

This scope of the property tax is to be broadened to cover commercial and industrial establishments both in rural and urban areas. I agree with my dear brother Okulo Epak who is my colleague in the profession that we already have a lot of problems with this rating and until we have known whether this rating bill has been operational or whether the taxes have been collected and for what purpose, then it will be an exercise in futility to expect people in the rural areas to pay rates when actually within the city centres and urban centres people are not paying tax.  

So, I am trying to actually ask a clarification whether we have enough time so that you can accord me about 10 minutes to be able to enrich this House about this rating exercise?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think this House respects professional knowledge that is why I started with hon. Okulo Epak and you. So if it is going to assist the House, I will give you 10 minutes –(Interruption)

MR SSENGO: I wanted to request, Madam Speaker, that since his enrichment is going to be so valuable to this House, he gives us printed material so that we can study more because we are not valuers or quantity surveyors.  So with our common man’s knowledge we would love to have some written document from him so that we can study more on this particular law.  I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think I will instruct the Clerk to produce copies. When you finish, you hand it over to the Clerk.

MR BAMWANGA: Madam Speaker, I have a copy already with me, which I can lay on the Table.  These are my perspectives on the salient issues in the Local Governments (Rating) Bill, 2003. The object of the bill is meant to repeal the previous Local Government Rating Decree No. 3, 1979.  Its objective is to harmonize the law governing property tax within the Constitution and the Local Governments Act of 1997.  

Secondly, to ensure smooth and effective collection and administration of property tax; and lastly, to streamline and enhance mobilization of Local Government revenue from property taxes.  

Rates are a form of tax on property and paying all rates is a statutory obligation.  The sole aim of rating is to raise collective revenue in order to provide collective services.  Collective services include garbage collection, creating access roads, street lighting, health centres, local police units, public parks and playgrounds.

Under social contract, Government is obliged to provide services. While it is a civic duty for citizens to pay taxes, the purpose for which rates are levied is to render a service in return.  A ratepayer will appreciate to pay rates if these services are rendered and rendered frequently.  For example, in England the ratepayers will refuse to pay taxes if the garbage collection is not done in one day.   

The present rating registration, if the bill is passed into law, local authorities will automatically levy rates at 15 percent from 20 percent of the annual rateable value of the property, less statutory deductions.

The annual rental value; this assumes that a rental income is expectant and it is potential from a hypothetical tenant even when the property is not rented.  

My concern, Madam Speaker, is how the bill proposes to arrive on annual rateable value of the property?  Under Section 11(a) of the bill, statutory reductions for residential properties are computed at 16.6 percent. What is the rationale for computing statutory reductions for residents at 16.6 percent and none at all for commercial and resident premises?

Section 11(b), no statutory reductions are allowed for commercial and industrial properties.  It is proposed that this category of buildings will be valued and rated on gross annual value basis.  

My advice is that gross annual value rating should not be applied to industrial and commercial buildings since they are even designed and built for multiple occupancy.  It is usually the landlord who pays for insurance, maintenance, repair improvements, property income tax and ground rent.  

It is important to note that commercial and industrial buildings depreciate faster through wear and tear than residential buildings because of the heavy traffic by many users.

Application of uniform rates: In ordinary valuation practice, statutory reductions known as outgoings are normally offset from gross rental income to arrive at the net annual income for rent purposes at 20 to 25 percent, but you can see that the bill is talking of 16.6 percent.  Since the property owners must pay the expenses for insurance, maintenance, repairs and improvements on top of property income tax, ground rents, and mortgage repayments in order to attract the rateable value, this should be offset as a cost.  

The law assumes that the property will be 100 percent occupied since no allowance has been taken for what we call voids and vacancies when the property may not be rented out during the course of the year.  

I appeal to the Ministry of Local Government and I had already sent him this memorandum to offset these costs in his statutory regulations by raising the statutory reductions for both residential properties, commercial and industrial property to 25 percent instead of the 16 percent they have put up.

I also want to appeal to the rating authorities to apply a uniform rate of taxation of say 10 or 8 percent instead of the current 16 percent they are proposing across board.

Why do property owners refuse to pay taxes as Dr Okulo Epak has been saying? The main reason why property owners are up in arms over property rates is that no corresponding services are provided by rating authorities, for example, access roads, garbage collection, street lighting and other collective services.  Why pay rates for no services provided? The sole aim of property rating is to raise revenue to provide collective services to the community.

Money levied and collected from property rates must be therefore ploughed back to improve the delivery of services to this community.  Most taxpayers are of the view that the rating authority specifies what kind of services and obligations are expected from them in return for the property rates payers to oblige to pay the taxes.  

Most residents, Madam Speaker, in and around Kampala do service delivery on a self-help alarming speed.  On garbage collection there is street lighting, access road repairs and maintenance.  Most residents, Madam Speaker, further contend that since they have provided services in the area on a communal basis, the rating authority should consider reimbursing the residents the costs in providing these services or offset these costs against the individual property taxpayers accounts.  

There are areas that are serviced by the local authorities with access roads, garbage collection and street lighting; they should be rated differently from those areas, which are not serviced at all although they lie within their area of rating jurisdiction.  On the rate of evaluation, this is something, which is to do with the valuation court.  

While hearing objections at the valuation court, Madam Speaker, this has been my experience. During the current sitting of the valuation court, several objections have been lodged with the court on the grounds for lack of economic power, personal and financial inability to pay property rates.  

For example, there are some elderly people, retired civil servants, ex-servicemen, the unemployed and owner occupiers and there are also those who come with disability, sickness, orphanage, widows and widowers and victims of AIDS who have been coming in courts to plead that they cannot pay any rates. 

The valuation court holds that it has no power to exempt property rate objections on the grounds of personal disability. The objectors are normally advised to appeal to the Ministry of Local Government since section 6 of the Act allows the local authority with the approval of the Minister to reduce or remit payments or rates within the rating of its jurisdiction.  

I wish to appeal to the local authorities to apply to the Minister for consent to remit or review the rate for the destitute or deserving cases especially owner-occupier properties on account of old age, disability or ex-service men and orphans.  

We would also want to know, what should be the actual age limit for the civil servants and ex-service men who qualify to be exempted?  These powers could be exercised by the valuation court, which sits and cross-examines the objectors while it is sitting, or by the town clerk on recommendation of the Division Assistant Town Clerk when the court is not sitting.  

The valuation court strongly recommends that this proposal of the widening the tax base, as already stated, the present rating, is based on the annual rental value of the property, which assumes rental income potential from a apathetical tenant.  

In Kenya, for example, local authorities apply both annual rate, or value for improvements, that is, taxation income and unimproved side value or bare land; that is taxation of capital and wealth for plots which are not developed. In order to widen the tax base and to minimize and discourage speculation and holding of acres and plots, for example, along Kampala road, in case of these busy areas, local authorities should consider levying taxes on unimproved side value basis.  

The current method of rating base on annual rate of the property leaves a lot out to capital value of the improved sides of land, which is a form of tax wealth in urban areas for the rich.  

Finally, since this new law is going to be extended to the countryside, I would like to ask the Minister of Local Government and the Chairman of this committee to sit down and find out whether- since they have been getting not less than 50 percent of the taxes from property, how do they expect to increase their revenue by 75 per cent when in actual fact they are not providing services.  They are only extending their jurisdiction to a bigger catchment area without services.  It will be more difficult.  

Madam Speaker, I thought this was something I should put forward to members so that tomorrow when they are contributing they bear in mind what is going to happen to the people who do not have any income; and what is also happening to people who are property owners and those who intend to develop properties in Kampala, considering that there is also going to be an income tax on rental income.  

Already URA has sent out reminders for people who own properties that are rented that they should declare those rentals so that the URA can be able to tax the income accordingly.  I thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, hon. Bamwanga, for volunteering your professional knowledge. I think members will get these papers and internalise them.

5.28
DR FRANCIS EPETAIT (Ngora County, Kumi):  Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  I am not a valuer and therefore the contributions I am going to make are from a layman’s point of view.

First, in reaction to hon. Dr Okulo Epak’s fears about which type of properties are going to be taxed. Are we going to tax grass thatched huts or not?  There is a bit of confusion in sub-clause 3 and sub-clause 4.  Actually what the bill is proposing is that they will tax residential buildings in urban areas, and for the case of the rural areas, they are saying the Local Government may levy a tax on commercial and industrial area in the rural areas and not residential.  

But, Madam Speaker, I have a very big fear in extending that option of taxing those commercial buildings in rural areas.  You may find a handful of buildings which the Local Government may deem, or the valuer may assess for the tax, a handful of them, and if this tax is pegged on provision of services, if they are saying five in a rural area, tell me what type of service can be given to such a village arising from a small tax.  Because the number of assets to be taxed is just negligible and in any case it is not just enough to have a building.  But the other question is, is the building productive?  

Most rural commercial buildings are really for survival, a hand to mouth. I am afraid to urge this House to recommend a taxation of the other structures in the urban areas.  Really if you go ahead to tax kiosks, it is as immoral as taxing a bicycle rider.  

The committee has also proposed that the department of Physical Planning currently housed in Ministry of Water, Lands and Environment be transferred to Ministry of Local Government.  My observation is that this department is vital, not only for Local Government, but also for the centre.  Water would go in to strengthen its capacity, to give it more mandate, more resources; to increase its capacity to perform the bigger task rather than moving it from the current ministry to Local Government.  

I am afraid that the capacity of Local Government to handle that specialized sector might compromise its already good record. I know there are certain weaknesses in the department of physical planning, but most of those weaknesses have also been attributed to small resource allocation.  If that department can be strengthened in the current ministry where it is, I believe it will be able to discharge that function of carrying out the physical planning in local governments very effectively.

Last but not least, is the question of who does the valuation?  In Clause 8 of the bill, it is proposed that for purposes of valuation of property for rating, the Local Government shall appoint a person who is qualified and registered as valuation surveyor.  Now I do not know whether this valuation is going to be a full time job.  If a property has been valued this year, is the same property going to be valued every year?  If it is not the case, I would go in for an arrangement where a Local Government contracts a registered surveyor or a valuer for a certain period to do the ratings of properties in its jurisdiction for a certain period rather than get such a valuer on full time basis.  Because I imagine the financial implication might be more on a fulltime basis

Maybe we should think of the contractual approach for registered valuers to render services to the local government. This way, the Chief Government Valuer would become an arbitrator in case of disputes from owners of property or between the local government and the contracted valuer. I beg to propose. Thank you.

5.33
MR MBABAZI KABUSHENGA (Kinkiizi County East, Rukungiri): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I wish to support the motion and to commend the committee for a job well done. I think it is very important that we support and implement this Bill, because I believe that it is time for us as Ugandans to pay the price for running our country. We have a budget deficit of 50 percent or less if the new plans work out. 

Despite this, people think we can enjoy social services, expand our infrastructure, and that somehow the World Bank is going to pay the motion and that when eventually we do not make money from what we have invested in, we shall cry out to George Bush and Tony Blair and they will write off our debts. We thank these people for considering us, but we must internalise our policies as Ugandans and know that nobody in the world economic community owes us a living.  

We cannot run our country on charity, especially now that we are talking of removing graduated tax. The implications of this are that more money has to come out of the centre, and since we cannot get it from our revenue, we have no option but to borrow even more to cater for the decisions we are making. Many of us are demanding for districts, while others think it is a bad thing. However, I think if we mobilize resources, districts can create jobs and bring services nearer to the people. We need to concentrate more on where this money is going to come from without mortgaging our children and our children’s children.

I believe every country has got unique sources of prosperity. Our neighbouring country, Kenya, makes a big kill from tourism. Last year, at the African Travel Association meeting, which was held at Munyonyo, we were comparing the revenue of guests that go to Kenya and those that come to Uganda. We found that in one year for example, 5000 American tourists had come to Uganda compared to 500,000 that had visited the Masai Mara National Park in Kenya in two months. Industry and tourism are key aspects, but Ugandans are far from that. We cannot develop these critical sectors unless we build our infrastructure, and we cannot do this unless we have property tax in the rural and urban areas.  
Madam Speaker, I think this would be a good psychological incentive, because we have a culture of hoarding wealth in Uganda. We have got people who are paupers on paper, but millionaires in the bank and in the property market. The only time we get to know about, for example, civil servants building multi-storied buildings, is when those buildings collapse and people tell us, “Oh, that building belonged to commissioner ‘so and so’, permanent secretary ‘so and so’.”  

If we are going to develop our country, we need to tax money at its source. Our money tracking systems are very weak and yet the transactions people use to get their money are very sophisticated. I think it is timely that we begin thinking of going where the money is visible and getting something out of it to sustain the infrastructure and other services that these people use.  

Madam Speaker, another important factor is that the urban and semi-urban areas in Uganda are very ugly and unattractive and because of this, all investors want to cram themselves in Kampala. I was taught, while in primary school, that Mbale was the cleanest town in Uganda. I went there recently, for a family event, and found that it was looking like a slum. I believe that the reason why our urban centres are not being well kept is because the cost of building the road to your house has to be borne by the developer, who is often struggling for money. 

I think this property tax will not only give us the resources needed, but also take the responsibility of maintaining the surroundings, garbage collection, sanitation, etcetera out of the hands of the developer.  Madam Speaker, if you drive through Lyantonde and other towns like it, you will find ugly toilets right by the roadside and you cannot be sure whether the main structure is the toilet or the building. All this is because on the one hand, the urban authorities do not have the resources, and on the other because the builders do not invest money in their properties and do not hold their authorities accountable. Even the Bible says that where your wealth is, there your heart will be also. If people pay taxes, they will follow up those taxes and hold their local authorities accountable.

Madam Speaker, I also want to observe that whereas building is a great investment, in the case of Uganda, putting a tax will make people rationalize buildings a lot more. This may be politically misunderstood and people may say, “You see, the rich want to remain in permanent buildings and they want us to remain in little huts.” However, there are many people who are building who should not be building. 

I have been very involved in the micro finance industry, both in my constituency and in other places. The worst performing loans are those borrowed by people who go and invest it in bricks and mortar. Before they put on the roof, the money has run out, and yet the interests are high. All this is because people do not rationalize building. Having these taxes therefore, will give us sanity and help us rationalize. 

However, much as I support all this, as a country we need to be aware of the many people who have got wonderful houses that cannot be accredited to their own income. There are people in rural areas who are taxed, even when they are not in towns because it is assumed that they have the money, yet they may have had their houses built by a relative or inherited property and sold it. There has to be deeper study into which building has got economic significance and which does not have.  

Madam Speaker, I want to commend the work of this committee and to pray that this work will save our country from dependency perpetually. I support the motion.

5.42
MRS DORA BYAMUKAMA (Mwenge County South, Kyenjojo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am a member of the committee, and I thought I should share with this House lessons I learnt from Zimbabwe to emphasise that this is not a new law but rather, an amendment aimed at realising more money.

Madam Speaker and honourable members, I will be very brief.  One of the lessons learnt from Zimbabwe was that of a tax culture, where people line up to pay taxes. This is not known here and I found it very interesting. On further investigation, we found out that these people have an incentive to pay because services are provided to those particular communities. 

In the city of Bulawayo for example, before you buy a plot you will already find water, electricity and other amenities on the site. Our local governments should take this into account and make the necessary provisions, which will enable them to provide these services.

Madam Speaker, the second observation is the wide tax base -(Interruption)

MR ARUMADRI: Thank you, Madam Speaker for recognizing me. What my colleague, hon. Dora, is putting across about Zimbabwe is not clear to me. It is like the egg and chicken situation. Should people pay taxes first so that these amenities are put in place or should amenities be put in place first by the local government and then the tax payer can say, “since I have got water, electricity and a path leading to my house, let me now begin to pay tax.”  Can you clarify on this please?

MRS BYAMUKAMA: Thank you. I think the report is very clear. It says that local governments in Zimbabwe are run as commercial entities and therefore, they provide these services as a way of attracting people to take on particular plots of land where these services are provided.  In the case of Uganda, because this is not a new law, what we are doing is amending it and starting off with the payment of taxes, which taxes will go to an account and 75 percent of that account will be used to provide these services.  

In our case, it is the other way round but in the case of Zimbabwe, they already have money which the Government gives them by way of loans. So, they work as commercial entities and provide the services before to be able to attract people to those particular areas. I hope I am clear now. 

The second lesson I learnt from Zimbabwe was the issue of the wide tax base. We were given an example of what they call the “dog tax”. If you have dogs, they tax you for that and some people try to hide their dogs but when the dogs bark, then they are given away. 

The point here is that, like hon. Rev. Kabushenga has said, in Uganda we have taken the issue of payment of taxes as if it were punitive and yet we should gladly pay taxes in order to realize better services, be better citizens and hold authorities accountable. When we were at their parliament, we were told of people who had gone on strike because there were no street lights and the member of parliament had to quickly do something about it. This is one particular law, which will enable us to hold Government or Local Governments accountable. (Interruption)

MR PAJOBO: Thank you very much, my sister, for giving way. You talked about Zimbabwe taxing dogs. I wanted to know whether, in Zimbabwe, there are local dogs which we call emisege, that is those which eat from the dustbins, and whether they are also being taxed because I am sure the dogs which are taxed there are pet dogs. Thank you.

DR. NKUUHE: I would like to inform the honourable member that the dogs in Zimbabwe have dog tags, and if your dog is valuable and you are very proud of it, you will pay tax for it. The dogs have to have an owner and a tag so that when it gets lost, there is a free service on radio which returns lost pets to their owners. So dogs are very valuable.

MRS BYAMUKAMA: Thank you, honourable, for giving that information because you lived in Zimbabwe, and therefore, I think you are affirming what I am saying, which is good. 

The other lesson that we learnt, was a very valuable service, in the form of an ambulance or emergency services. If you pay your taxes and you are sick, an ambulance can be called. Therefore, the incentives are many. 

However, I would also like to highlight a few issues, which we may have to address. The issue of valuation, which my brother hon. Steven Bamwanga addressed is very controversial amongst the valuers. We came across different types of valuations, zoning and mass valuation, but all in all, our observation was that this should go hand in hand with land ownership. I may build a triple storied house in Katanga but not on the sewerage, but when it comes to zoning, you may zone my house among those, which may not be of the same type as the one I have constructed. This causes complications and that is why in our report, we said this should optional so that when an evaluation is done, they are able to single out peculiar cases.  

Madam Speaker and honourable members, somebody raised an issue that evaluation and valuation is a very expensive exercise and because it is very expensive, in Zimbabwe, it is done once every five years. However, there is a massive recruitment to keep on updating what should be valued and their billing is very organized, such that when you go to the billing centre, everything is computerized. Also, their record keeping in the Registry of Lands is very advanced. 
Therefore in Uganda, we have to look into the issue of how we can effectively bill and more importantly, how we can manage our Land Registry, taking into account that most lands and constructed buildings may not have land titles.  

These are some of the lessons we learnt, which I thought I should share with this House. I plead with the House to support this important report and motion. Thank you.

5.50
MR JOHN KAWANGA (Masaka Municipality, Masaka): I thank you, Madam Speaker. This is a very important legislation and yet the way we are handling it suggests that we did not study it sufficiently. The conclusion we have had is interesting. The committee has requested us to support the report and urgently pass the Bill into law, as it is a prerequisite for the next Local Government Development Programme Fund release. That may be so but we have had this law for two years and now we are being called upon to rush it.  

I support the motion but I think it is a matter, which we should study a little more if it is going to be useful.  We have had a Rating Decree all along. I would have wanted the report to tell us how it has performed and why they think it necessary to amend it. As it is, there is no mention of that at all and as somebody who lives in an urban area, I think we have to study it a little more. 

First of all, the culture of paying taxes, even in the urban areas does not exist and we have to do something about that. People have to be told why they should be paying tax. In my area when this thing started, people did not understand why somebody should pay tax on a house he built. He says,” I built my house. Why do you want to tax me for it?” This is because we had not explained to the people. I had to go around explaining and some people understood but many others did not. 

This is something we have to take into account. If we want to make this a law, the local authorities and Government have to do something so that the people can comprehend why this is happening. But that is not the only problem. Our people need to understand planning in the sense that, you have to be involved in organized planning before putting up a building. 

This problem is not only in the rural areas but also among the elite. People just start building a house irrespective of where it is facing, not taking into account their neighbours. However, the Physical Planning Authority is so thin on the ground that it is incapable of doing this, and it is not even understood. 

In my urban area, we have got a district land committee, which allocates properties in the municipality without regard to what the plot is going to be used for. They do not even inform urban authorities that they have allocated a plot of land. Whoever is given land by the district committee just gets up and starts putting up a building, with no regard whatsoever as to what is planned for that particular area, and this is happening as we speak.  

This means that even the planning function within the local authorities do not take this concept seriously. We have got a sewerage system yet people put up their houses and set up their own private septic tanks, because they do not think they have to be connected to the main sewerage system. We have a problem because after all this has been said, you go to somebody, ask him to start paying a tax and they do not understand why, including the educated ones. Therefore, before we put this law into force, we have to carry out more education of the authorities, administrators, planners and everyone else. 

The land tenure system is a big reflection of how we are going to handle our planning, our development and how we are going to value the land. In my municipality, we have got about five tenure systems which include; mailo land, lease hold, Kibanja, what people ordinarily call plots, among others. People just wake up one morning, survey the land and sell it. Now, how will the valuer come and put value to this land? Because in most cases most of these areas are not planned. People put up all kinds of structures in the same locality like churches, residences, bars and the like. 

The problems are a lot more and we should not rush this law because the implementation is not going to be easy unless we think it through. I will give you an example. 

One day, I appeared before a valuation court on behalf of one of the missionary hospitals in this area. They had been assessed very highly rates and the missionary hospital could not understand why. They were saying,” We are a hospital and we are rendering a service. Why should we pay rates?” And this was a high placed hospital. When I went to the valuation court, I explained all this and the judge said, “When I went to that hospital, I was charged for the services, therefore, payments are made, and you must pay rates”.  

If people at that level do not understand this, how much more problematic will it be to the ordinary people? Therefore, I stress that in implementing this, we need to have a lot of education for people to comprehend this law, otherwise, it will be misunderstood.

Finally, I will also give another example. In this Bill, there is a schedule for exempted properties and one of the exempted properties is the Aga Khan Foundation and its affiliated institutions. Why should it be exempted? Also why should IPS building be exempted? Somebody should tell us why this is happening. With these few remarks, I support the motion but still think it requires a lot of planning and education before the bill can be implemented. Thank you.

5.57
MR WAMBUZI GAGAWALA (Bulamogi County, Kamuli): I thank you Madam Speaker. I think this is a serious motion and I stand up and support it especially now that Kaliro is becoming a district. I would like to, first of all, thank our new chairman. I have also moved to this committee, although I was not part of this report. Recently, I left the Committee on Works for obviously reasons and moved to the Committee on Local Government for strategic reasons, which everybody knows.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  But, honourable, I was expecting the chairperson to acknowledge the work of his predecessors and just say thank you to the outgoing committee, but he did not. When he was presenting, that is what I expected. You know there is what we call plagiarism.

MR BESISIRA: No, Madam Speaker, I said it.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Did you?

MR BESISIRA:  Yes, I said that I am grateful to my predecessor for having done a good job, but that I was also a member of this very committee.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  At least it is on record now.

MR WAMBUZI: I thank you, Madam Speaker. I think the most important thing to note at this juncture is that this Local Rating Bill, which we are talking about, is a wide world phenomenon. However, it is important to note that rating properties is something to do with the value of land and in fact Government can have a say in the value of particular types of land. For example, Nakasero in the centre of Kampala was developed, given a sewer and street lights. It was the first really urbanized area and its rating was different from Bugolobi, Kiswa, Kamwokya or Mulago. It was the centre of development.  

It is a pity that the country and the Urban Planning Authority have decayed to an extent that they do not have any control in this town. Today, one can do anything in terms of development, yet originally, these bodies were supposed to control developments all over the country, to the extent that one could not start destroying -(Interruption)

DR OKULO:  The weakness of the physical planning department is partially due to three things. One, decentralization in the Local Governments Act, which has given the responsibility for planning to the district council, which does not have the resources, thereby severing the relationship between district councils and the town council planning board to a great extent.

Secondly, human resources development in that department has been the poorest over time. In the past, and I want to say this, Local Government appreciated the role of physical planning because it relates to their functions directly.  Now that it is in Lands, there is an indirect relationship and I see that my friend hon. Baguma Isoke was very happy that Dr. Epetait thought it should be in Lands. I remember when we returned from exile, hon. Kabwegyere who was then the Minister of Lands, wanted to copy Kenya and relocate this same department from Lands but somehow, he was not able to succeed. 

We must look into this because hardly anybody in this country understands physical planning. This includes the Cabinet and Makerere University and I am not ashamed to say this. When you talk about physical planning, people talk like the blind men and the elephant. You touch the trunk and you think it is a snake, you touch the leg and you think it is a big tree.

The problem is that nobody understands physical planning and its effects yet it is the most important function for this country if we want to encourage orderly and enjoyable development. Hon. Kabushenga was saying our cities are hopeless. This goes further to prove that physical planning is a very serious matter, which we must be concerned about. I would wish to see a minister who can really steer the cause of physical planning successfully. Thank you.

MR WAMBUZI: Madam Speaker, you can see the point being emphasized by my senior brother. Without due diligence by the department of physical planning and urban development, you cannot give any property value because somebody can decide to construct a building of six floors in front of your house, which would be criminal, and then they say this is because they are paying higher property rates than you are. This would be contrary to agreed norms of development in any town or council with authority in the world. 

As we pass this law, it is very important to insist that the department of Country and Urban Management and that of Physical Planning, be in charge of deciding what should be built where, how and with what limitations. This is what will keep value to that property. As regards the issue of land, it should be the Government to decide how much a person should pay for a piece of land, say in Kikuubo. This will control what is developed there. 

If, for example, somebody in Nakasero starts putting up a 15-floor building, and then another simply copies that building and builds it in Kiswa, this will cause hell, yet the two will be expected to pay the same rate. I think the issue of rates has got to be pegged to the authority that controls physical development.  

Madam Speaker, much as the gong has rang twice, I would like to raise the issue about Aga Khan and its exemption. How can they be exempted from paying rates yet we know very well that their property is going to be developed. These are pieces of land which have got to be serviced, and because they are going to be given services and developed in a certain way, Aga Khan should pay. I think the issue of who is to be exempted has got to be revisited and pegged down to the controller of development at each site in this country. I thank you.

6.05
DR JOHNSON NKUUHE (Isingiro County South, Mbarara): I thank you, Madam Speaker. I think this is a good Bill and I would like to thank the previous committee and the new committee for steering it. Unfortunately, it is a Bill for the elite who understand it. For it to apply, because it will apply to the elite, non-elite, the rich, poor, rural and urban dwellers, it needs to be socialized. In other words, it has to be internalised and I do not know who is going to do that, because we must accept that we are peasants and you can take me out of the village but you cannot take the village out of me easily. 

That is why, when we come to the urban areas from the village, we behave as if we are still in the village. You find that people want to continue building the way they were in the village. Somebody wants to build a house, a kitchen -(Interjection)- things like that. I did not want to mention this but we have these problems. We left the village but the village is still a part of us. 

I want to quote an author, a South American Professor called Hananan Disoto, who studied capitalism. He says, “It works in the North but why does it not work in the South?” and he gives an example of Cairo. He says, “If you go to Cairo, and you study all the buildings there, they are worth more than all the money that Egypt has borrowed from the World Bank and IMF in the last 50 years. But for all those buildings, none has a land title, none is paying tax. In other words, those buildings are not part of the economy and they are not part of the former sector. There are just out there yet they are worth so much”. 

He continues to say that if you want to come out of poverty, you must give value to your assets, so that they become part of your formal economy and so that you can progress. We are not poor because we do not have assets. Actually, there are a lot of assets but we do not have laws. When you look at Nakasero and compare it to Muyenga,  Nakasero has a lot of value because of its infrastructure. The house in Muyenga might actually cost more to put up but you would get less rent for it than in Nakasero simply because you left the village but the village never left you.  

As regards the recommendations on page 4, the report recommends that the physical planning functions, currently under hon. Baguma Isoke’s ministry should be moved to hon. Kabwegyere’s ministry. I endorse that and I think this has been elaborated. 

Secondly, on page 5, the report states that the list of services to be provided by property rates payers should be clearly outlined in the law. Unfortunately, the report left out many recommendations, for instance, the observations made in Zimbabwe, which I would have preferred to be included in these recommendations. 

On page 3, there are a lot of good recommendations, for instance, Local Governments in Zimbabwe being run as business entities. Why can’t we do the same here in Uganda?  I think it could work because consider the fact that Zimbabwe is in a lot of trouble and yet its Local Governments are functioning. Their roads are still fantastic simply because the tax from rates is related directly to the services that are rendered. I think this can happen here too because there is no magic in Zimbabwe that cannot be repeated here. 

Another recommendation we can borrow from Zimbabwe is to say that urban councils in Uganda should have cost centres in charge of budgeting, whereby revenue obtained from a particular source is ploughed back to improve the services in that sector. I think this makes a lot of sense. If I am a tax payer and I am paying rates, when I see the services provided, I will be willing to continue paying. But why should I pay if I am collecting my own garbage and doing every other thing? You have not given me any service and now you are asking me to pay tax. That is unreasonable.  

I can give you another example of Tanzania, a country notorious for not collecting tax. I know this because I sit on the board of an international organization called IICD. This organisation is trying to explain why we do not need technology to promote services in developing countries. They did a pilot study in Tanzania, in Kinodoni Municipality and they improved the service delivery there.  Their strategy was to collect information, look at what taxes were being paid, lower those taxes and get the people satisfied by seeing the benefits of paying tax. 

They found out that if you lower taxes, people will be more willing to pay. They also found out that if you make tax collection very friendly, easy and straightforward, people will pay. If you give them information and the municipality becomes part of the community, people will be willing to support it. Therefore, you will find that something like this can work. I am glad that Entebbe is piloting this idea of simplifying tax collection to make people willing to pay taxes. So it can be done.

Also, I think that all land within the jurisdiction of urban councils should belong to the councils. It may not be easy here in Uganda, because it will be very expensive to acquire this land but I can assure you, it can be done. If you go to Ibanda, Kaliro or Nakaseke, areas which are just starting up, and you plan early to acquire land while it is still cheap, you will find that it will be much easier to develop in future. 

These are the kind of things we need to do. We need to think ahead, to think outside the box, outside our parties, and to think of Uganda as one and I think it can be done. I had a few more recommendations but especially, I would like to encourage the ministry in charge of planning to work with universities and move this department to Local Government. We have energetic ministers and I believe they can work with the universities just like is taking place in Zimbabwe. In fact, the City Council worked with a particular university and they set up the department of physical planning with assistance from United Nations. If you go to the UN Habitat in Nairobi, they are willing to work with you, and you can then bring that knowledge to stimulate our development.

Gentlemen and Ladies, we do not have a lot of time. The lifespan of an African –(Interjection)- that is the full time. You are only useful for 20 years of that time, which - 20 years is not a lot of time. If we start talking non-stop, we shall continue to be poor and we shall have left the village but the village will have stayed in us. I thank you very much.

6.14
MR DEUSDEDIT BIKWASIZEHI (Buhweju County, Bushenyi): I thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am one of the members of parliament that attended a workshop, which was organized in connection with this Bill. When I attended that workshop, we had a consultant from Zimbabwe who, I think, was hired by Local Government. When he made a presentation I was very excited, because of the revelation of what this tax can do. From his presentation, I was not surprised that Kenya and Zimbabwe, for example, kept on running when donors cut off the aid from them. 

I was not surprised because their local councils- unlike here where we have a clamour for creation of new districts.  The creation of new districts is basically to share the national cake and the money from the centre. That is the feeling. When you look at the revenue or the monies that Local Government uses, most of it comes from the centre.  There is a belief that there is so much money in the centre that if you cut Uganda into very many pieces, you will be able to share equally, but that is a wrong belief. 

In Kenya and Zimbabwe, as honourable colleagues have indicated, Local Governments survive on the local revenue collected. They are so rich such that they do not even rely on the centre. Likewise, the centre can survive on its own revenues and run it’s services irrespective of donor money. Madam Speaker, donor money that is given to us is tax money. These countries tax their citizens to raise this money, which is donated to us, and yet as hon. Nkuuhe has indicated, we sit with a lot money tied up in form of unvalued buildings yet we could get a lot from this.  

Madam Speaker, my concern has been that in this country, we have emphasized mainly consumption and sharing of what is not there, at the expense of wealth creation. I think the way of creating wealth to run or to provide services for our people is not to look at others whom we think owe us a living. Unfortunately, they do not owe us a living. They simply arm-twist us any time they feel like, especially when we are making decisions.

Madam Speaker, there is a recommendation on the physical planning function. I wonder what the problem or requirement is. I think what is important is to have functional physical planning. When you visit towns of developed countries, you wonder how they planned their towns and areas. You can see that they planned for centuries ahead. There are towns with underground roads, underground trains, among others and this causes you to wonder. Therefore, this physical planning is so important -(Interruption)

MR WOPUWA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to inform my colleague that our towns in Uganda and even those in developing countries grew from villages. We are going to have new districts and towns like Busolwe and Kwapa. When you talk about planning from village stage, it is difficult because that takes many years.

MR PAJOBO: I thank my colleague for allowing this information. First of all, even if we pass this law, it will not be implemented as long as we still have a poor land tenure system. Our land tenure system is so bad and you cannot compare us with Kenya, which started a long time ago.

In the 1960s, we tried to adopt socialism, which gives almost everything free and we were not taxed for anything.  Unless we go down and correct some of the bad laws we have, it is going to be difficult because even if we pass this particular law, it will not work.

I am very sad that we have to start education, inform the public and train them in land use. Right now, the records are not there and you should try your best to see that you take this as your own place. You should inform them on how to utilize the land.  Thank you.

MR BIKWASIZEHI: Thank you for the information.  But the issue is, is there anybody in charge of the country?  Is there anybody in charge of those local administrations?  Sure there are people in charge and all we are saying is that, we make laws. Government is there to enforce these laws.  Let us play our role for the good of our country.  If the child has got fever, you give it chloroquine, although it is bitter, because you know it will cure the fever.  Therefore, do your job as people in charge.

Madam Speaker, at one time, it was an obligation to travel with a clearance. One of them had to be a tax clearance.  In some countries, one of the requirements, if you are to stand for a political office as you have indicated in some of these countries is a tax clearance.  When I was young, men rated their importance in terms of the tax they paid. But all that is gone now.  Let us institute those requirements to enforce tax payment. Therefore, I support the bill. Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity.

6.19
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LANDS (Mr Baguma Isoke): Thank you Madam Speaker. I thank the Committee for the report and the Colleagues who have spoken before me who have really focused on the subject matter.  I have not seen in this House, a piece of legislation ringing the views of honourable Okulo Epak and others with whom they do not share the same ideology, focusing on the same matter.  

Madam Speaker, on physical planning, a matter that all speakers have addressed, I have the following to inform the House:

That Government and my ministry in particular, know what physical planning is.  Physical planning is about land planning, in order to bring demographic factors into consonance- into the geomorphology of the land and the demands of the time.  That is physical planning.   

Physical planning is the first land management aspect.  When one acquires land, the first aspect you carry out is physical planning, and then you go into surveying, registration, evaluation and then the rest take off from there. 

 This function is shared in various government departments: Local Government, Works, Education and Agriculture because there is farm planning and rural planning.  There is urban planning and housing.  

Now the lead agency in physical planning is my ministry, which is the lead agency for land management.  Therefore, where it is, is the rightful home.  This debate has been on since the time Dr Okulo Epak was Commissioner for Physical Planning in this country, when the department was in Local Government.  It later moved to Housing and Urban Planning, until when it reached in rationalising service delivery. It was seen that the rational home is where it suits best. So it is now in the Ministry of Lands where it is a good bedfellow with cadastral surveying, titling, and evaluation. These are functions at play in this rating bill.  

Having said that, I want to assure the nation that we are not relaxing.  Honourable Okulo Epak, the most read Ugandan in the discipline of physical planning, did mention the weaknesses about physical planning.  But he forgot one: the weak law.  

This country has not debated the law on the physical planning.  What we have as the Town and Country Planning Act 1964 is a collection of decrease by the Colonial Governors, which were later revised in 1964.  So we, working together with the Ministry of Local Government and the Universities have come up with the principles behind amending this law and through the Leader of Government Business, you will be informed that in the last session of Parliament, we are going to consider the Town and Country Planning Bill.  

Together with it, we are going to consider the Land Use Policy and Physical Planning Policy in this country.  I have already informed you, honourable Speaker, by copy of the letter, that I addressed the Chairman of the Committee on Natural Resources, we are retreating to internalise the principles behind this very important policy on land use this weekend.

MRS BYAMUKAMA: Thank you, honourable Minister, for giving way.  Madam Speaker, the recommendation is that this physical planning function currently under Ministry of Water, Lands and Environment, should be transferred to the Ministry of Local Government to ensure harmonized planning in local governments.  

I have been listening to the Minister, but he is not very clear as to why he may be hesitant to agree to support this particular recommendation.

When you look what we have in terms of local government and decentralisation as a policy, the aspect of physical planning is very important because local governments are units of Government and therefore I thought the Minister would consider leaving the ministry to remain with the principle directive function and transfer the other aspects of this particular function to local governments.  

When you look at what is happening, Madam Speaker, I want to go back to Zimbabwe. You realize that we are sitting on gold.  These people have land earmarked for low-income earners.  They have land earmarked for middle-income earners; they have land for the nkuba kyeyos- these people who have brought in foreign exchange when they go abroad to work, and these channel their monies through banks and have constructors who construct houses for them.  

They are high-income earners and the local government units are earning a lot of money. So by not being very clear, by not giving these particular functions to the local government, we disenable it from, for example, zoning those export zone areas, commercial zone areas as well as sewerage and other facility areas.  When can we move forward? I really feel perturbed!

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But, honourable members, is the problem just of location or the concept?  Do you think there is some magic in the Ministry of Local Government? As soon as they arrive there we shall have all these things.  I think it is conceptual planning.

CAPT. BYARUHANGA: Madam Speaker, this has been the major problem with local governments, and planning as a whole and what we have as mushrooming are just slums instead of towns. The big problem is that the Ministry of Lands does not want to let go of the planning function.  Since we adopted decentralization, there has not been any coordination between the Ministry of Lands and the planning department with the local governments.  So we have slums mushrooming in all areas and –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But the slums were there; like Muyenga was there before we decentralised.  

MR ISOKE: Madam Speaker, I have the answer.  The Constitution has outlined functions for the center and physical planning is not one of them –(An hon. member rose_)- I thought I was answering you.  Physical planning as a decentralised function appears in the functions of local governments in the Second Schedule, part 2, function xi, that is physical planning. Every district has got two types of physical planners. There is one called an urban officer who is in charge of other areas other than the Town Councils, and then there is a physical planner in the Land Office, except the new ones have not received the returns; about 50 districts have got physical planners now.  

The conditional grant finances this function, and the planning schemes they come out with are approved by the Central Town and Country Planning Board, which is housed in my ministry.  Its role is to approve those plans and to keep checking on them and altering them whenever necessary.  

This is the arrangement; you should appreciate that Ministry of Local Government is a miniature macro government.  If all these regulational bodies were to go to Local Government, because there is a function in the Local Government, the Ministry would not move.  So, where it is, this debate has settled it in the way I have explained.  

But, Madam Speaker, let me explain that the law we have does not provide very well for enforcement.  The mayor, the town clerk, the city engineer, the physical planner are not empowered. The law does not give them certain functions to oblige property owners to behave according to the approved scheme of the area; there are no sanctions.  The principles that Cabinet is discussing behind the amended Town and Country Planning Bill have given powers to local authorities to oblige property owners to behave according to the approved planning schemes of the urban areas.  I think that will be put to rest –(Mr Ssengo rose_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: There is something burning the member for Gomba.

MR SSENGO: I thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the honourable Minister for having given way.  I have always been confused about this physical planning they are talking about. If it really exists, how can we have slums surrounding Kampala in Katwe?  I remember way back in the National Resistance Council (NRC) I appealed to Government to move in and do something about Katwe because this is the corridor to Uganda’s capital from the airport. 

 The whole of Najjanankumbi is not planned; Katwe is not planned; all these areas surrounding the capital city; talk of this physical planning, does it really exist?  This country has been there for so many years; the capital city has been there for so many years; nothing is being done.  Surely, are we waiting for angels from heaven to come and help us?  I want to be assisted by the honourable Minister.

DR NKUUHE: Maybe, Minister, you have been in this portfolio for a long time. Can you show us one or two examples where you say this is what we have done with our limited resources so that we can say, maybe you can keep this function?  Otherwise, I am tempted to transfer the function somewhere else.

MR ISOKE: Madam Speaker, every year I come here pleading for money for physical planning and I am given money having indicated my achievements in the previous year.  I have a long list of urban areas, including Kanungu, which have been planned and approved by the Town and Country Planning Board – Gulu, Pader – we are moving to Mutukula because the prison has given land to the town to expand.  The Budget Policy Statement has got a litany of municipalities, which have been expanded.  

What we are lacking, Madam Speaker, is power to enforce those plans.  The ten-year plan of Kampala, which expires this year, is in place.  Every place in Kampala is gazetted for a certain function, zoned for recreation, commercial, housing grade A, grade B, grade C –[An. hon. member: “Enforcement.”]- yes, the problem is enforcement, the law is not providing adequately and this is where we are moving.

Lastly, Madam Speaker, this law is very good because it is linking the Local Government to residents and property owners in urban areas, and those who are doing business.  The link is in service delivery and payment of the rate. In service delivery a list was given by the professional valuers, but they omitted public cemeteries for human beings and dumping grounds for carcasses of dogs, cats and rodents – killing rodents in town is a responsibility of the local governments and property owners have to pay a tax for that.  The drainage system, security patrols, fire fighting, recreational open spaces, all these are responsibilities of the local governments for which property owners have got to pay a tax.

However, hon. Bamwanga raised the issue of rental tax.  This is a different matter, which Uganda Revenue Authority has now embarked on.  The rental tax is an income tax.  An individual with a commercial building, an industrial estate or a residential house that is hired or used for business earns some income. It is this income, which must be declared, certified by the one renting it out, and counter signed by the tenant. That is the basis on which the rental tax is paid. Rental tax is different from property rate in that, property rate is for service delivery while rental income is for income tax. I support the motion.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, tomorrow we shall start with hon. Wopuwa followed by hon. Kasirivu. The House is adjourned to 10.00 O’clock in the morning.

(The House rose at 6.38 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 30t June 2005 at 10.00 O’clock.)




