

Thursday, 22 June 2017

Parliament met at 2.56 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this afternoon’s sitting. I would like to inform Members that the Parliament of Uganda will launch a campaign to end violence against children on Tuesday, 27 June 2017 at Serena Hotel. I invite you to attend. 

You may recall that Parliament was at the forefront of fighting violence against children as exhibited in our tremendous role in the amendment of the Children’s Act of 2016 and the declaration of 2017 as the year of the family for Uganda. There will be other stakeholders to work with, but we just want to urge you to attend so that we play our role and contribute to the realisation of the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs). Let us meet on Tuesday morning at Serena Hotel, Victoria Conference Centre. 

Secondly, this afternoon I had the opportunity of meeting the Speaker of the National Assembly of Equatorial Guinea, Mr Mohaba Mesu. He is here to attend the solidarity summit on refugees. In addition to that, he is here as a special envoy of President Obiang Nguema to deliver a message to the African countries to support a request by Equatorial Guinea for Spanish to become one of the official languages of the African Union. 

I call upon you, Members, to give them support in whatever fora they will be in, because they have a right to speak a language which they understand. I have assured them that we will support their request and I hope that the Ministry of Foreign Affairs will quickly move to ratify the necessary protocols. 

Honourable members, we are going to start a new system of tracking Members’ attendance, both Cabinet members and Members of Parliament. When we bite, you will know that we have bitten. The first session was to allow people to settle down, but now this is session “hakuna muchezo”, so there are repercussions. (Laughter)

Thirdly, honourable members, I would like to inform the committee of the whole House that the projections at the national weather station have been confirmed; so tomorrow, there will be several showers and thunderstorms. So, please do your work. (Applause). The farmers should prepare their gardens.

3.00
MR DEOGRATIUS KIYINGI (DP, Bukomansimbi South County, Bukomansimbi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to raise an issue concerning the closure of coffee factories in Bukomansimbi District and greater Masaka, in general. 

Whereas coffee is the major export crop for this country, it remains the major cash crop for my people in the district. Coffee factories have been closed for about two months now. My farmers have failed to take their children to school because they do not have where to sell their coffee -

THE SPEAKER: Who closed them?  

MR KIYINGI: They were closed by Uganda Coffee Development Authority (UCDA). Madam Speaker, I request you to instruct the Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries to instruct UCDA, which is mandated to supervise and regulate the sector, to immediately open the factories so that my people may get some money to pay for their children school fees and also meet other needs.(Interruption)
 
MR SSEWUNGU: Thank you for allowing me to give information. Madam Speaker, Uganda had cooperative unions where Government had coffee factories. In Masaka, we had Masaka Coffee Union. When these factories were sold off, people began establishing their personal factories and Government would provide coffee seedlings because Government was looking at liberalising the coffee sector. 

What hon. Kiyingi is raising is serious. I also come from a constituency where the major economic activity is growing of coffee, which is the major source of income. The closure has affected us – (Interjections) - I am talking about Kalungu and other parts of Uganda; I normally do not talk for personal interest. 

THE SPEAKER: What is the information?

MR SSEWUNGU: The information I would like to give is: Where Government has given people seedlings to grow coffee and Government does not buy coffee directly, but citizens have come out and established their own factories to cause income for others – 

THE SPEAKER: You are now diverting from this issue. We want UCDA to explain why they have closed the factories.

MR KIYINGI: Madam Speaker, whereas coffee export is a major contributor to our foreign exchange, the Government of Uganda liberalised the coffee sector way back in 1992. The major issue therefore is about the quality of coffee being processed. However, UCDA carried out a blanket closure of all factories without isolating those that have problems with quality. 

This blanket closure has affected our people. Our people have no money and their children have been chased out of school. We, therefore, request that they open the factories and supervise those that are not adhering to the rules. That is my prayer. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Government Chief Whip, inform the Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries to report to us on Tuesday because the farmers need their money.

3.05
MR JOHN BAPTIST NAMBESHE (NRM, Manjiya County, Bududa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The issue of national importance I am raising pertains to the re-opening and marking of the boundary of the Mt Elgon National Park. This exercise commenced early this year and was received with open hands by the local community and leadership of the greater Elgon zone.

Madam Speaker, the cadastral map that they were supposed to use to determine the boundary was of 1993. However, the technical team has changed this and they are using the one of 1938, which was during the reign of the Queen, and this has generated tension. There is simmering tension in the region and it has already degenerated into harassment, extortion and even death.

In Mukoto, Manafwa District, in the constituency of hon. Apollo Masika, who is indisposed, a one Job Wangutusi was shot dead by a trigger-happy police officer when he demanded to know why even schools and health centres III had been affected. According to this cadastral map of 1938, a number of settlements, including schools and health centres III, have now been curved and included as part of the Mt Elgon National Park –(Mr Woboya rose_)– I will let you give information after I have made a prayer. 

Madam Speaker, we received this exercise with open hands because, first of all, it was going to resolve the impasse between the people and Uganda Wildlife Authority (UWA). Secondly, we knew it was going to improve the relationship between the local populace that live along the fringes of Mt Elgon National Park and the UWA staff. However, it has now turned into a powder cake. If this is not checked, it might culminate into the clashes that happened in Apaa, which we witnessed here yesterday.

Madam Speaker, the prayer I am making is that this exercise, which we all cherish and need, should be brought to a halt temporarily. Secondly, the trigger-happy policeman who shot this man in cold blood and is at large should be apprehended and prosecuted. The other prayer is that the minister, hon. Persis Namuganza, who directed the use of this excessive force, should be reprimanded. Please, give information. (Laughter)

MR WOBOYA: Madam Speaker, I would like to add to what my honourable colleague has presented. It is really a deplorable situation, which is likely to result into a very violent situation. 

When the Government deployed surveyors to go to the ground, they considered the boundary marks of 1936. By 1936, most of the areas we are talking about in Bugisu and Sebei regions were actually forests. However, as we speak now, there are settlements in those areas. Therefore, if you say you do not consider the boundary that was later opened in 1993 in the case of Bugisu and 1998 in the case of Sebei, it means that you are going to include most of the areas that now have human settlement.

Madam Speaker, I visited the area and held a meeting with elders and some leaders. We found out that in a place called Zesui Subcounty in Sironko District, one health unit has been curved into the national park, if you go by the 1936 boundary. At least a school is also included as well as several homesteads. 

Another piece of information I would like to give is that about 30 people have been arrested by UWA - the trigger-happy gentleman that my friend referred to. It is going to be a very bad situation unless immediate action is taken. What we are calling for is that we should have the boundary marks of 1993 considered. In 2010, Madam Speaker –

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, you are now going into a submission. Let us hear from hon. Keefa Kiwanuka.

3.10
MR KEEFA KIWANUKA (NRM, Kiboga East County, Kiboga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am sorry that the ministers are not here – [Mr Rukutana: “We are here.”]- I was referring to the minister in charge of energy. Okay, Government is here. I would like to raise the issue of how prepared we are in the event of a fuel shortage or when the supply of fuel is somehow interrupted. 

We all know that in the event of our fuel supply being interrupted, there will be food shortage and food prices will go up. It can also cause problems for businesses such as the millers, and transport fares can also go up. It can cause a real crisis in the country as it was in 2007. This can happen due to a number of factors -

THE SPEAKER: Honourable, you are speculating that there might be a problem in the future. (Laughter). No, please do not misuse the opportunity to bring representational issues.

Concerning the boundary, yesterday we had a lengthy debate and I am glad that the Deputy Attorney-General was here. Please, take into account the issues of the conflict between the national parks, reserves and the population. This is what is happening in the Elgon region.

3.12
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (HOUSING) (Dr Chris Baryomunsi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would also like to thank the honourable members from the Elgon region for raising the matter. It is true that that there has been work ongoing. Government also invested a lot of time in sensitising the population and working with the local leadership. It is unfortunate if there are irregularities going on. We shall take remedial actions immediately. 

On that note, I would like to invite Members of Parliament from the Elgon and Sebei regions to come for a meeting tomorrow at 9.00 a.m. in the board room of the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development. I am going to liaise with my counterpart, the minister in charge of tourism, and we shall have a meeting with you. We shall invite the surveyors and study the issue. 

If there are wrong things being done, they will be corrected. Therefore, let us meet tomorrow at 9.00 a.m. to sort out that matter. Thank you. (Applause)

3.13
MR ABDULATIF SEBAGGALA (Independent, Kawempe Division North, Kampala): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Allow me, on behalf of the Muslim community in Uganda, to extend our innermost appreciation to you for hosting close to 1,000 Muslims from all over the country last Friday. (Applause). Thank you very much and indeed, the Iftar dinner was a memorable one.

Madam Speaker, allow me also to wish you and honourable Members of Parliament happy Eid al-Fitr celebrations, which may fall on Sunday or Monday. As the Parliamentary Imam, I would like to wish all Ugandans nice celebrations of Eid al-Fitr, and Ramadan Mubarak. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Convince them to make it on Sunday, please. (Laughter) 

Honourable members, the minister in charge of agriculture will come and present on the closure of coffee factories in Bukomansimbi. 

Item No. 3 is deferred because the minister is not available. Let us go to item No. 4. I invite the chairperson of the Committee on Commissions, Statutory Authorities and State Enterprises to present his report.

MOTION FOR PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON COMMISSIONS, STATUTORY AUTHORITIES AND STATE ENTERPRISES (COSASE) ON THE INVESTIGATIONS INTO THE CIRCUMSTANCES UNDER WHICH THE REWARD OF SHS 6 BILLION WAS GIVEN TO 42 PUBLIC OFFICERS WHO PARTICIPATED IN THE HERITAGE OIL AND GAS ARBITRATION CASE

3.15
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON COMMISSIONS, STATUTORY AUTHORITIES AND STATE ENTERPRISES (Mr Abdu Katuntu): Thank you, Madam Speaker and dear colleagues. 

On behalf of the Committee on Commissions, Statutory Authorities and State Enterprises, I do present a report on the circumstances under which a reward of Shs 6 billion was given out to 42 public officers who participated in the Heritage Oil and Gas arbitration case.

Madam Speaker, before I present the report, I beg to lay on the Table the minutes of the proceedings and all documents which are referred to in the report together with the verbatim audio recordings, the Auditor-General’s report, bank statements from Bank of Uganda of the Petroleum Fund; and submissions from the finance ministry, Uganda Law Society, the petitioners, the Inspector General of Government, hon. Syda Bbumba the then energy minister, the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development and from the external lawyers. I beg to lay.

THE SPEAKER: The documents will be recorded.

MR KATUNTU: Madam Speaker, I also lay on the Table the original report duly signed by members of the committee. The report is of a few pages – only 42. 

On 9 January 2017, hon. Michael Tusiime, Mbarara Municipality, moved, and hon. Anita Among, Bukedea District; hon. Elijah Okupa, Kasilo County; and hon. Wilfred Niwagaba, Ndorwa East seconded a motion for a resolution of Parliament to investigate circumstances under which a sum of Shs 6 billion was paid out to 42 public officers who participated in the arbitration case between the Government of Uganda and Heritage Oil and Gas.

The House unanimously adopted the motion and referred it to the Committee on Commissions, Statutory Authorities and State Enterprises. On 19 January 2017, the Speaker referred the matter to COSASE with the following terms of reference:

1. 	Investigate the claims that public officers solicited for a payment, honorarium, bonus or golden handshake totalling to Shs 6 billion from His Excellency the President, contrary to standard practices of rewarding public officers.

2. 	Investigate the basis of determination of the beneficiaries for the bonus payments including the full account of the role of each beneficiary in the court cases.

3. 	Examine whether all the proper and legal procedures under the laws of Uganda were followed in making the alleged payments.

4. 	Scrutinise all supplementary requests and other budget allocations provided to public officers in facilitating the court processes in Uganda and abroad.

5. 	Establish all revenues so far received by Government for the Petroleum Fund.

6. 	Examine any other matters related to the above and make policy recommendations for the sound management of public finances.

7. 	Do anything incidental to and pursuant to these terms of reference.

8. 	Report back to the House within two months.

The committee was given a period of two months to report to the House. However, due to the big number of witnesses the committee had to interact with, the period was extended by four weeks to accommodate all of them. 

Methodology

The committee used the following methods:
    i) Public hearings;
    ii) Reviewed relevant documents;
    iii) One field visit to London;
    iv) Meeting with His Excellency the President.

For avoidance of conflict of interest, the committee resolved that the mover and two of the seconders, who are members of the committee, namely hon. Anita Among who is also the vice-chairperson and hon. Elijah Okupa, be excluded, and were excluded, from the committee proceedings. However, they were allowed to attend as movers of the motion.

Public Hearings

The committee carried out public hearings with the following institutions: 

    1. Uganda Revenue Authority;
    2. The Attorney-General;
    3. The Auditor-General;
    4. The Solicitor-General;
    5. The Governor, Bank of Uganda;
    6. The Inspector General of Government;
    7. The Tax Appeals Tribunal;
    8. The Head of Public Service/Secretary to the Cabinet;
    9. Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development;
    10. Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development;
    11. Hon. Syda Bbumba, former Minister of Energy and Mineral Development;
    12. Forty beneficiaries of the Shs 6 billion;
    13. Mr Andrew Mwenda;
    14. Uganda Law Society;
    15. The Non-Governmental Organisation Forum;
    16. The Civil Society Organisation Group; and 
    17. The Elders’ Forum.

In all, the committee interfaced with 106 individual witnesses.

The committee reviewed documents submitted by the petitioners, Uganda Revenue Authority (URA), the Auditor-General, Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development, Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs, Bank of Uganda, the Inspector General of Government (IGG), Uganda Law Society and Non-Governmental Organisations (NGOs). These are tabled as attachments to the report.

The following members of the committee travelled to London and interacted with the external lawyers, Curtis Mallet-Provost, Colt & Mosle LLP:

    1. Hon. Abdu Katuntu; 
    2. Hon. Tumuheirwe Turyamuhweza; 
    3. Hon. Medard Sseggona; 
    4. Hon. Sheila Mwine; and  
    5. Hon. Michael Tusiime as the mover of the motion

The committee had two interfaces with His Excellency the President at State House.

Summary of the Evidence Collected 

When Heritage Oil and Gas Limited (HOGL) sought to transfer its interests in respect of exploration area 1 and exploration area 3A to Tullow Uganda Limited and Tullow Operations Pty Limited in January 2010 at a consideration of US$1.4 billion, Uganda Revenue Authority issued assessments totalling to US$ 434 million in capital gains tax. The assessment was objected to by Heritage Oil and Gas Limited, which paid US$ 121 million being 30 per cent of the tax. However, URA successfully collected US$ 434 million from Tullow (U) Limited, being the 70 per cent balance, through its agency notices. 

This sale required approval from the Government of Uganda in accordance with the Production Sharing Agreement (PSA). Before the approval, Tullow and Heritage purported to complete a sale and purchase transaction without the Government’s approval and Tullow paid US$ 1 billion to Heritage for the transfer. Heritage then paid US$ 121 million to URA and further deposited US$ 283 million into an escrow account held by Tullow and Heritage with Standard Chartered Bank. 

Government objected to that and indicated to Tullow that the said transfer by Heritage was invalid due to the fact that the conditions in the PSA had not been met, prompting Tullow to enter into a Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) with Government, where Tullow agreed to pay US$ 313,447,500 being the balance of the assessed taxes payable by Heritage in the assessments issued. 

Heritage Oil and Gas Limited then filed two applications with the Tax Appeals Tribunal (Applications No.26 and No.28 of 2010) for review of URA’s decision to tax the transaction. Both applications were successfully defended by URA who was awarded costs in both applications. Heritage appealed to the High Court against the tribunal ruling, confirming URA’s decision to tax Heritage’s transfer and sale to Tullow, but the appeal was dismissed with costs on 30 September 2011.

In addition to the above proceedings, on 16 May 2011, Heritage also initiated arbitration proceedings in London against Government in accordance with Article 3 of the United Nations Commission for International Trade Law Arbitration Rules, 1976, on the basis of the arbitration clauses contained in the two PSAs.

Heritage Oil and Gas Limited also filed Application No. 06 of 2011 seeking to stay proceedings at the Tax Appeals Tribunal soon after instituting the arbitral claim in London. However, the application was dismissed by Tax Appeals Tribunal and so was the appeal arising from it at the High Court of Uganda with costs under Civil Appeal No. 14 of 2011.

The committee was informed by the management team of Uganda Revenue Authority, led by the Commissioner-General, that before the final arbitration ruling, the Uganda Government team briefed Cabinet on 19 November 2014 on the progress of the Heritage arbitration and H.E. the President promised to reward the team if they won the case. 

The final award on the merits of the arbitration was delivered on 24 February 2015, wherein the full panel of three arbiters agreed in favour of Uganda Government and dismissed the entire claim of Heritage and awarded US$ 4,083,840 in costs. The then Attorney-General, hon. Fred Ruhindi, on 13 April 2015 wrote to H.E. the President, reminding him of his promise to reward the team and requested him to consider a reward for the noble team. He also attached a list of 24 proposed beneficiaries.

The committee was informed that the Attorney-General further led the Government team to meet H.E. the President at his country home in Rwakitura on 17 May 2015 where the victory in the Heritage arbitration case was among other things discussed. The committee was informed that H.E. the President thanked the team and directed the Commissioner-General to propose an appropriate reward for them. We were informed that the President also guided that the other public officers who had tremendously contributed to the success of the case but had not been included on the first list generated by the Attorney-General be included too.

The Commissioner–General, in a letter dated 26 June 2015, wrote to His Excellency the President proposing a Shs 6 billion reward for 42 public officers that were involved in the case, justifying that the reward would enable beneficiaries do something tangible. The letter stated, inter alia, “Your Excellency, the amount recommended as a reward is an amount that will enable the beneficiaries to use the funds for something tangible i.e. to leave a legacy to remind them and their offspring of their contribution to the nation…” (Laughter) It continues to say, “…For instance, the recommended amount could enable one to either acquire a decent plot of land, pay a deposit on a mortgage or perhaps facilitate finishes on home construction.”

Following the proposal made by the Commissioner-General of URA, H.E. the President, in a letter dated 16 November 2015, directed the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development that the 42 public officials of the Government team be paid a token of appreciation amounting to Shs 6 billion and that the applicable taxes be deducted. His Excellency the President’s letter stated thus:

“As you may be aware, the Government of Uganda won a case against Heritage Oil Ltd in London arbitration and was awarded US $434 million. I met with a team of officials that handled that case and they requested to be considered for a reward in appreciation for the work done.

Given the amount of money that was recovered for the Government, I agreed that Government pays them some money as a token of appreciation. I therefore, direct that a team of 42 Government officials be paid Shs 6 billion. The applicable taxes should be deducted.”

It is from the above letter of H.E. the President that the process of payment of Shs 6 billion to the 42 beneficiaries was triggered. The payment process was managed by the Commissioner-General of Uganda Revenue Authority and this inquiry thus came as a result of the above stated facts.

The committee was further informed that the beneficiaries of the reward were categorised into three - core, non-core and support staff - based on the roles they played and the duration the individual beneficiaries spent with them. 

The core category comprised of public officers who participated in the case throughout and had technical input in the case both at the Tax Appeals Tribunal and at the London Arbitration Tribunal. The non-core team comprised of beneficiaries who provided leadership to the Government team, supervised, managed and oversaw the budget process as well as updating stakeholders on the case. The support staff category comprised of officers who provided logistical support to the team as they deliberated, prepared and handled the case.

As a follow-up to H.E. the President’s letter of 16 November 2015, the Commissioner-General of URA wrote to the Permanent Secretary/Secretary to the Treasury (PS/ST) in a letter dated 19 December 2015, requesting him to formally designate her as the accounting officer through whom the reward would be paid and to formally requisition for the Shs 6 billion. The Permanent Secretary/Secretary to the Treasury, in a letter dated 2 May 2016, designated her as accounting officer as requested, but advised her to seek authority to re-allocate funds from the Tax Refund Account to the relevant item to enable her make the payment from the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development.

The Commissioner-General, as advised and in a letter dated 5 May 2016, sought authority from the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to reallocate Shs 6 billion from the URA Tax Refund Account to the URA Expenditure Account so that the 42 public officers could be paid. She also suggested that a supplementary budget to URA for that amount be considered and handled by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. The Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development did not grant this authority. However, by letter dated 19 October 2016, he requested the Auditor-General to issue an audit warrant for Shs 6 billion.

The committee further learnt that the Permanent Secretary/Secretary to the Treasury, in a letter dated 8 July 2016, wrote to the Commissioner-General authorising her to meet this expenditure from the resources available to URA in the financial year 2016/2017, and that supplementary funding of an equivalent amount would be provided in the course of the financial year. Arising from that communication, the Commissioner-General of URA went ahead and effected payment.

The committee was informed by the beneficiaries of the reward that it is common practice both in public and private sector governance worldwide to reward individuals for excellence, and that rewarding outstanding performance in itself is good because not only does it make people aware that good work will be rewarded, but it also motivates others to strive for excellence.  

Madam Speaker, all the beneficiaries denied soliciting for the reward. Apart from Mr Ali Ssekatawa, they were alive to the fact that it is wrong for public officers to solicit rewards. The Elders’ Forum and the Inspector General of Government further emphasized this fact by stating that this act of monetizing rewards is morally wrong and also sets a bad precedent for others in public service.

The beneficiaries gave the basis for the reward as Articles 98 and 99 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda. They suggested that the President, being the fountain of honour, exercised his executive powers and directed that the team be given the reward. His Excellency the President informed the committee that it was his decision to reward the team and referred to the reward as “Okurongora”, a Runyankole word akin to a token of appreciation and that it was culturally appropriate to reward those who have done a good job.

However, in regards to Articles 98 and 99 of the Constitution being cited by the beneficiaries as the legal basis for the “handshake”, the committee received contrary opinions from the IGG and the Uganda Law Society. The opinion of the IGG, forwarded to the chairperson of COSASE and dated 22 February 2017, states thus: “In view of Article 99(3), there is no support for the preposition that the President has the authority to act outside the corners of the law and the Constitution, including in the bestowing of awards and honours to recipients.”

The Uganda Law Society opined thus: “It is thus our considered opinion that the President does not have any prerogative powers, except the Prerogative of Mercy which is explicitly mentioned under Article 121 of the Constitution, but which does not apply to the instant matter. At best, if the President is desirous of initiating any rewards to outstanding civil servants, which would have an effect on the Consolidated Fund, this can only be done through an appropriation or Supplementary Appropriation Act.”

Parliament appropriated funds to a tune of Shs 56,666,564,547 to the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs under vote 007 and Uganda Revenue Authority under vote 141 to facilitate the Government team to pursue the Heritage Oil and Gas and Tullow cases both locally and internationally. 

Out of the above amount, Shs 51.22 billion was through supplementary requests while Shs 5.439 billion was through the normal budget appropriation process. The facilitation was for payment of per diem, warm clothing, visa fees and air tickets, administrative costs, expenses, ICT equipment, sitting allowances as well as legal fees to external legal counsel hired by Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs and Uganda Revenue Authority. 

The committee established that a British law firm Curtis Mallet-Provost, Colt & Mosle LLP was hired by Government through the Attorney-General to handle the arbitration in London and URA for provision of legal services in relation to High Court and Tax Appeals Tribunal proceedings between Heritage Oil and Gas Limited, Tullow (U) Ltd and Tullow Operations Pty and URA at a cost of US$ 8,621,236.

The committee further established that whereas the costs awarded to URA by the Tax Appeals Tribunal and the High Court of Uganda has not been taxed and recovered, up to approximately US$ 15 million has never been recovered. The bill of costs is yet to be filed. The International Arbitration Tribunal in London did award the Ugandan Government costs amounting to US$ 4,083,840, which also remains unrecovered.

The committee has established that a sum of US$ 704,370,255, which had been ring-fenced for infrastructure and energy development, accrued to the sector since petroleum activities started. On enactment of the Public Finance Management Act (PFMA), 2015, the Petroleum Fund was established.

The Petroleum Fund as at 14 March 2017 had a total amount of US$ 72,564,842 and Shs 10,003,383,387 as the balance on account. 

It was also established that after Tullow Operations Pty Ltd and Tullow (U) Ltd selling off 66 per cent of their shares in Exploration Area 1 (EA1), EA2 and EA3A to Total E&P Ltd and China National Oil Company (CNOOC) at US$ 2,933,330,400, URA assessed the sale for capital gains tax of US$ 475,924,120 which was disputed by Tullow. Tullow applied to the Tax Appeals Tribunal, which revised the tax liability to US$ 407,095,366. 

Tullow further appealed to the High Court against the Tax Appeals Tribunal ruling and also filed an arbitration case with the International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes (ICSID) in Washington D.C., claiming Government breached Article 23.5 on taxation of the Production Sharing Agreement for EA2.

Following Cabinet approval, the parties agreed to an out-of-court settlement of US$ 250 million as full and final settlement of all disputes relating to capital gains tax by Tullow and that Tullow waives any of its future right to the application of Article 23.5 of the EA2 Production Sharing Agreement in respect of any assignment or transfer of its interest. The sum arrived at, after the consent settlement, was less by US$ 157,095,366 from the Tax Appeals Tribunal (TAT) award. It was also agreed that the Production Sharing Agreement for EA2 be amended to remove the contentious Article 23.5. 

Analysis of the Terms of Reference/Committee Observations 

Madam Speaker, the first term of reference was to investigate claims that the public officers solicited for payment, honorarium, bonus or golden handshake totalling to Shs 6 billion from the President, contrary to standard practices of rewarding public officers.

Black’s Law Dictionary, Eighth Edition, on page 1427 defines “solicitation” as, “The act or instance of requesting or seeking to obtain something.” The Oxford Advanced Learner’s Dictionary, Seventh Edition, on page 1403 defines “solicit” as, “To ask somebody for something such as support, money or information; to try to get something or persuade somebody to do something.”

Madam Speaker, whereas the movers of the motion alleged that the various public officers solicited for the reward, all the beneficiaries denied ever soliciting for it. The committee observed that all the beneficiaries had been informed that the reward was offered to them by the President. When the committee met H.E. the President, he stated thus: “It does not matter whether they solicited or not; I am the one who gave them the money.”

The committee obtained and reviewed two correspondences in regard to the initiation of the “handshake”. 

By letter dated 13 April 2015, Ref: MJ/AG/39, with subject, “Commendation of the Uganda Government Arbitration Team”, the Attorney-General, hon. Fred Ruhindi, wrote in part: “As Your Excellency fully understands, the process of defending Government in a foreign territory required unprecedented sacrifices and concentration on the side of the team, including preparation of documentation into the late hours of the night, collection of evidence and continuous working without breaks in many instances. 

When this Government team appeared before you in Cabinet on 19 November 2014, Your Excellency promised that you would reward their tireless efforts when the final award from the Tribunal came out. Considering that the Tribunal has now issued the final award, this is to humbly request that you consider a reward for this noble team that has exhibited exemplary service to the country. 

A full list of members is attached.”

In addition, the committee reviewed H.E. the President’s letter dated 16 November 2015 to the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, with the subject, “Appreciation of the Team that delivered a win for the Government of Uganda against Heritage Oil and Gas Limited in the London Arbitration.” He states thus: “As you may be aware, the Government of Uganda won a case against Heritage Oil Limited in London Arbitration and was awarded USD 434 million. I met with a team of officials that handled that case and they requested to be considered for a reward in appreciation of the work done. 

Given the amount of money that was recovered for the Government, I agreed that Government pays them some money as a token of appreciation. I, therefore, direct that a team of 42 Government officials be paid Shs 6 billion (Six billion shillings only)…” 

It is evident from the President’s letter and testimony corroborated by the Commissioner-General’s letter that the team which met the President at his country home in Rwakitura on the 17 May 2015 requested for a reward and the President agreed to reward them. It is also clear from the letter of the Commissioner-General that the President instructed her to propose an “adequate reward” following a request by the team to H.E. the President.

By letter dated 26 June 2015, the Commissioner-General proposed the monetary reward of Shs 6 billion. Additionally, she also proposed a letter of commendation to each beneficiary and to the external lawyers.

From the above, therefore, it is evident and clear to the committee that the team that visited the President in Rwakitura on the 17 May 2015 did solicit for the reward and they included, but are not limited to, the following:  

    i) Hon. Fred Ruhindi
    ii) Ms Doris Akol
    iii) Mrs Allen Kagina
    iv) Mr Ali Ssekatawa
    v) Mr Peter Muliisa
    vi) Mr Martin Mwambutsya
    vii) Mr Francis Atoke
    viii) Mr George Kalemera
    ix) Mr Honey Malinga
    x) Mr Ernest Rubondo

The committee observed that it was not possible for all the beneficiaries to have solicited for the reward. Many low ranking officers never participated in the said meeting where the solicitation took place. Even other senior officers, for example, Ms Jennifer Musisi, Mr Moses Kibumba, Mr Keith Muhakanizi, hon. Peter Nyombi, to mention but a few, did not attend the said meeting. 

The committee reviewed the Constitution, in particular Articles 98 and 99 as relied on by the beneficiaries. It further reviewed the National Honours and Awards Act, 2001; the Public Service Standing Orders; and the Uganda Revenue Authority Human Resource Manual. The committee reviewed evidence presented by the URA board and management team on the reward system within the organisation. 

Madam Speaker, Article 98 of the Constitution provides thus:
 
“(1)	There shall be a President of Uganda who shall be the Head of State, Head of Government and Commander-in-Chief of the Uganda Peoples’ Defence Forces and the Fountain of Honour.”

Article 99 of the Constitution also states thus: 

“(1)	The executive authority of Uganda is vested in the President and shall be exercised in accordance with this Constitution and the laws of Uganda.

(2)	The President shall execute and maintain this Constitution and all laws made under or continued in force by this Constitution.”

In interpreting the provisions of the Constitution above, the committee received opinions from the Inspectorate of Government (IGG) and from the Uganda Law Society. Ordinarily, Madam Speaker, in regard to this investigation, the committee would have sought legal opinion from the offices of the Attorney-General and Solicitor-General. However, considering that both offices were under inquiry in this probe, the committee was unable to seek an opinion from them.

After a thorough review of both Articles of the Constitution, the Inspectorate of Government’s conclusion - It is already cited above. I have also cited the conclusion of the Uganda Law Society on page 19.

The committee agrees with the opinion expressed above that whereas the President can make rewards and awards, such must be in accordance with the Constitution. All expenditures touching the Consolidated Fund must have parliamentary approval and appropriation.

Under the National Honours and Awards Act, 2001, it is provided under sections 3, 4 and 5 that the President has powers to confer a title of honour on any person on the advice of the Presidential Awards Committee, in respect of persons upon whom the title may be conferred.

The committee observes that by letter dated 26 June 2015 to H.E. the President, the Commissioner-General of URA acknowledges instruction from the President to propose an adequate reward. In her proposal, she suggested a cash reward of Shs 6 billion as well as letters of commendation. The latter, she proposed, should be at a public function.

Considering that the “handshake” of Shs 6 billion was a reward and not an award, it could not have been provided for under the National Honours and Awards Act. However, the proposed letters of commendation would constitute awards within the meaning and provisions of the Act. This award could have only been possible following the procedures provided for under the Act.

Public Service Standing Orders

The reward of public servants is provided for under the Public Service Standing Orders, 2010.  

The committee noted that the principles on which rewards are made under the Public Service Standing Orders are prescribed under section A (a-m), paragraphs 19-24. Whereas under paragraph 19, individuals, teams and institutions may be rewarded, under paragraph 20, the scheme is restricted to non-monetary awards. The procedure for awards is also provided for under paragraph 22 and entails the construction of an awards committee by the responsible officer to receive, evaluate the nominations and approve the awards. Therefore, for this “handshake” to qualify as an award under the Public Service Standing Orders, the herein above procedure should have been followed. This was not the case.

Uganda Revenue Authority

The policy of rewards in URA is provided for distinctly from the Public Service Standing Orders. From the evidence obtained by the committee from URA, this “handshake” was not provided for under the Human Resource Manual -

THE SPEAKER: Honourable chairperson, just give us a minute. There are some children who are visiting us from Kitara High School in Hoima. They are represented by Dr Bategeka Nkoto and hon. Tophas Kahwa. You are welcome.

MR KATUNTU: In conclusion, the committee observes that the payment of Shs 6 billion was contrary to standard practices of rewarding public officers as provided for in the above laws and regulations.

Term of reference No. 2 was to investigate the basis of determination of the beneficiaries to the bonus payments, including the full account of the role of each beneficiary. The first list of beneficiaries was first determined by the Attorney-General, hon. Fred Ruhindi, in a letter dated 13 April 2015 to H.E the President. He requested him to consider a reward for his noble team that exhibited exemplary service to the country and attached the list of the 24 beneficiaries. They are listed in a table that goes up to page 22.

Hon. Ruhindi then followed up the matter with a telephone call to H.E the President and secured an appointment for the 24 members to meet with the President at his country home in Rwakitura on 17 May 2015. During the meeting, H.E. the President accepted to reward the team and tasked the Commissioner-General of URA to recommend an adequate reward to the team. The President also instructed the team to ensure that everyone including support staff who had contributed significantly to the matter in one way or another be included on the list. 

Various meetings took place in Attorney-General’s Chambers to discuss the reward and how to apportion it. During the committee’s interface with the officers concerned, the committee was informed that there were no minutes of those meetings. The committee therefore, observes that the absence of minutes for meetings involving inter-governmental departments was a serious and regrettable flaw in management of affairs relating to this matter. The only evidence available for the committee to consider was the oral testimony of the officers/beneficiaries. 

Evidence from officers of Uganda Revenue Authority and the Attorney-General’s Chambers indicated that the beneficiaries were categorised into those categories, which I mentioned before - core, non-core and support staff.

Every participating institution was requested to send names of staff but the core members had already been identified in the Attorney-General’s Chambers. The Commissioner-General of URA, on 26 June 2016, wrote a letter to H.E the President, proposing a reward of the Shs 6 billion reward. The list sent to H.E the President had been improved to 42 members, from the original list of 24 members, as a result of H.E the President’s directive. The beneficiaries are as reflected in the table below. 

Madam Speaker, 22 officers were to be awarded Shs 200,000,000 each in the first category. In the next category, the non-core were supposed to get Shs 100,000,000 each. In the last category of support staff, each was supposed to get Shs 50,000,000 and this included, as you can see in the table, secretaries and office attendants. The core and non-core officers are described in page 27. Let us go to page 28.

The committee interacted with 40 of the 42 beneficiaries of this reward. The former Permanent Secretary/Secretary to the Treasury, Mr Chris Kassami (RIP), had since passed on. Mr Moses Kajubi is no longer in the service at URA and could not be traced. Most of the officers submitted that they were happy with the reward, except the former Permanent Secretary in the Ministry of Energy, Mr Kabagambe Kaliisa, who testified that he would have preferred a non-monetary reward. 

Many of the beneficiaries claimed that they did something extraordinary by putting in extra hours in executing their duties. However, other beneficiaries, notably hon. Fred Ruhindi, testified that there was nothing extraordinary outside his normal schedule. 

It is the finding of the committee that much as all the beneficiaries performed their duties diligently, there was nothing extraordinary outside their official schedules.

Term of Reference No.3 required the committee to examine whether the Shs 6 billion payment passed the legality and procedural propriety test. In this report, the committee had earlier on examined the different legislations that would govern a payment of this nature. The committee addressed itself to the provisions of the Constitution, the National Honours and Awards Act, 2001 and the Public Service Standing Orders, 2010.

However, in resolving this term of reference, the committee further examined the Public Finance Management Act, 2015 and the Uganda Revenue Authority Act, 1991. All the beneficiaries of this reward testified that there was nothing legally wrong. They averred that His Excellency the President is empowered under Articles 98 and 99 of the Constitution to authorise this type of payment. 

Mr Andrew Mwenda, the singular witness who appeared in his personal capacity, supported the reward as lawful. 

However, as earlier on stated in this report, other witnesses, who included the Inspector General of Government, the President and other officers of the Uganda Law Society, Justice James Ogoola, the Chairman of the Elders Forum (former Principal Judge and former Chairman of the Judicial Service Commission), were of a contrary opinion. Civil society organisations that included the NGO Forum, concurred with the views expressed by the IGG, Uganda Law Society and the Elders Forum. 

The Legality of the Payment

Madam Speaker, section 16 of the Uganda Revenue Authority Act, 1991 provides that no expenditure shall be made out of the funds of the authority, unless that expenditure is part of the expenditure approved by the board under the estimates for the financial year in which the expenditure is to be incurred or in the supplementary estimates for that year. 

The committee reviewed the budget for financial year 2016/2017, which had been approved by the board and subsequently appropriated by Parliament for URA activities and discovered that the Shs 6 billion “handshake” was had not been budgeted for. The committee further received evidence from the board of URA to the effect that such money had not been provided for and that they were hearing of that expenditure for the first time, when they appeared before our committee. 

The Commissioner-General of URA confirmed that they did not consult the board because according to them, it was not necessary. The Commissioner-General of URA initially testified that this expenditure was not a URA activity. She later changed her testimony to admit that indeed it was a URA activity but as stated above, it was not necessary to consult the URA board. In their final submission on 23 March 2017, URA management states - 

They put it in writing and it is quite long but I think you have to bear with me, let me read it because it is necessary. It reads as follows: “The Board of Directors submitted rightly that they did not approve the payment. Whereas we regret keeping the board in the dark about the payment, in our considered and legally backed opinion, the URA Board did not have a role to play in approving the payment since they had already approved the budget estimates in May 2016 under the chairmanship of hon. Gerald Sendaula.

The board under hon. Sendaula expired on 30 June 2016 and the tenure of the board under the chairmanship of Dr Simon Kagugube began effective 12 July 2016 and held their first board meeting on 24 August 2016, way after the case had been concluded, payment approved and effected.

In fact, the board under hon. Sendaula commended the team for their professionalism, expertise and exceptional performance exhibited in this case. Sample letters of commendation have been tendered. We had hoped that the committee would invite hon. Sendaula, the board chairman that presided over the time when the case was going on, to shed light on the deliberations on this matter made at the board.

Notable is the fact that this payment was made under instruction of the Permanent Secretary/Secretary to the Treasury subject to a supplementary provision under the Public Finance Management Act, 2015 as amended, a process that is managed by the Commissioner-General as the accounting officer, the Permanent Secretary/Secretary to the Treasury and the honourable Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development.

The provisions relating to supplementary estimates in the Public Finance Management Act, 2015 as amended do not provide any role for the URA Board of Directors. When the Public Finance Management Act was passed in 2015, and since the PFMA 2015 takes precedence over other laws in matters relating to management of public finances, these provisions relating to supplementary budgets superseded and rendered inactive the provisions of section 16 of the URA Act. This is confirmed by guidance circular issued by the Permanent Secretary/Secretary to the Treasury dated 20 January 2017, which states in clause 1 that, ‘Where there is conflict between the PFMA and any other law on matters of public finance, the PFMA takes precedence and the other law is null and void to the extent of its inconsistency’.” 

Madam Speaker, the argument that the Sendaula URA Board is the one that approved the 2016/2017 budget and therefore are the ones that could have been invited to testify does not hold water. The Shs 6 billion payment was not provided for or approved by the Sendaula board budget.

Secondly, the payment was contrary to the provisions of the Public Finance Management Act, section 22, which provides thus: 

“Virements 
(1) 	The Minister may, upon request by an Accounting Officer, vary within a vote, the amount of the money allocated to the vote. 
(2) 	A virement made under subsection (1) shall not- 
(a) 	be more than ten per cent of the money allocated for an item or an activity of a vote where the virement is from one item or activity to another; 
(b) 	be contentious; or 
(c) 	result into a future liability for the vote or the Government.”  

Regulation 16 of the regulations provides for the procedure of virements.

According to the Auditor-General’s report, the funds were obtained from monies earmarked for rent and renewal of licences for IT systems, clearly showing that the “handshake” was never budgeted for by URA. An additional Shs 289 million was obtained from the legal and administration support services, which exhausted this particular budget item.

Whereas the Commissioner-General had attempted to obtain approval on the advice of the PS/ST, the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development never gave the authority as provided for under the Public Finance and Management Act. The purported authority given on 8 July 2016 by the PS/ST is not founded under the Public Finance Management Act and therefore void.

It is therefore, the observation of the committee that this virement was ultra vires to the PFMA. 

The contention by the Commissioner-General that the PFMA takes precedence over the URA Act is also not founded in law. The committee has perused both legislations and found no provision that subjects the URA Act to the Public Finance Management Act. I will just explain here that if Parliament intends for a law to be superior, it clearly states, “notwithstanding any other law” and then it provides. Therefore, if it had intended to subject the URA Act to the Public Finance management Act, it should have specifically stated, “notwithstanding any provision in the URA Act…” That way, we would know that the provisions of the Public Finance management Act are superior to that of the URA Act. 

Madam Speaker, the committee takes note of the circular dated 20 January 2017 from the Permanent Secretary/Secretary to the Treasury, which states, among other things: “Where there is a conflict between the Public Finance Management Act and any other law on matters of public finance, the Public Finance Management Act takes precedence and any other law is null and void to the extent of its inconsistency.” 

A careful review of both laws reveals that there is no conflict between both legislations in regard to the subject matter. The committee further notes with concern that senior lawyers at the Uganda Revenue Authority and the Attorney-General’s chambers would cite the Permanent Secretary/Secretary to the Treasury, who is a non-lawyer, as their authority to interpret the law. (Laughter) 

I will repeat that statement. Madam Speaker, the committee further notes with concern that senior lawyers at the Uganda Revenue Authority and the Attorney-General’s chambers would cite the Permanent Secretary/Secretary to the Treasury, a non-lawyer, as their authority to interpret the law. (Laughter) In any case, Madam Speaker, the principal legal advisor to Government is either the Attorney-General or Solicitor-General. However, to run away from there and go to the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to start interpreting the law and citing them as the authority is what we noted with concern. 

The purported authority cited by the Commissioner-General from the Permanent Secretary/Secretary to the Treasury is not provided for under the Public Finance Management Act.

The committee observes that many of the beneficiaries were not employees of Uganda Revenue Authority and as such, should not have benefitted from URA funds. A precedent had been set when the Inspectorate of Government (IGG) advised against the payment of a token of appreciation to a senior state attorney, Ms Patricia Mutesi. The National Social Security Fund, after a long legal battle with a construction company, Alcon International, secured victory in the Supreme Court, saving the institution millions of dollars – vide civil appeal No. 15 of 2009.

The Board of Directors of NSSF sought to reward Ms Mutesi, who was then a state attorney at the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs but also a member of the legal team that defended NSSF. However, the IGG in her directive to the Board of NSSF, copied to the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs as well as the Attorney-General’s chambers, advised that it would be irregular for Ms Mutesi to benefit from funds of an institution where she is not employed. 

The committee agreed with the directive above and found that payments to any beneficiaries not in employment with URA were irregular. All Government institutions have their votes from which budgeted items are paid for in accordance with the Public Finance Management Act. 

Designation of the Commissioner-General of URA as Accounting Officer

The designation of the Commissioner-General of Uganda Revenue Authority (URA) as the accounting officer for purposes of payment of the “handshake” was irregular and idle in as far as section 11 of the Public Finance Management Act is concerned. Section 11 (2) (g) empowers the Permanent Secretary and Secretary to the Treasury to appoint accounting officers in accordance with the provisions of the Public Finance Management Act.

The above provisions imply that an accounting officer is designated to be responsible for an entity, which is a vote, for purposes of accounting, for which an appropriation is made by an Appropriation Act. 

The instant case where the URA Commissioner-General, who was the accounting officer of vote 141, to be designated again for purposes of funds was not only idle but irregular - the Shs 6 billion funds were to be paid from vote 141. Indeed, the supplementary expenditure request for these funds is under vote 141.

Conflict of Interest

According to the Public Service Standing Orders, a conflict of interest arises when a public officer puts himself or herself in a position where his or her personal interests conflict with his or her duties and responsibilities as a public officer. The Public Service Standing Orders provide that the public officer is supposed to inform his or her supervisor of the nature or extent of his or her interest. 

Madam Speaker, after a review of all the evidence on record, the committee observes that the Commissioner-General of URA put herself in a position of conflict of interest to pay out monies to herself and her team from the URA funds without the knowledge of the board and in contravention of the Public Finance Management Act and the Uganda Revenue Authority Act. The payment, as earlier stated, was without regard to the budgetary process of Uganda Revenue Authority. 

The committee in its deliberations established the existence of conflict of interest in the payment process of the Shs 6 billion by the Commissioner-General of URA and the involvement of the Attorney-General and Solicitor-General who could have advised the President. Article 119 of the Constitution provides for the office of the Attorney-General as the principal legal advisor to Government. The committee reviewed all the evidence on record and established that the role of the Attorney-General’s chambers was central and prominent in all matters regarding this reward. 

In her letter to His Excellency the President, copied to the Attorney-General, the Commissioner-General states - I have already cited that before but it states thus: “I believe it would be motivation sufficient for them to gallantly face future challenges and bring glory and victory to our nation. The amount proposed constitutes less than one per cent of the amount in the award and is 50 per cent of the costs awarded to the Government of Uganda. After such a ground-breaking achievement, I believe this to be a reasonable amount to thank and congratulate the team and do hereby recommend it. The proposed reward enables Government retain 50 per cent of the costs awarded to fund its priority areas.” 

Madam Speaker, the above position by the Commissioner-General of URA was incorrect and misleading. The committee established, on interviewing the external lawyers in London, that the sum of US$ 4,083,000 awarded as costs has never been collected yet the letter to His Excellency the President gave an impression that they can retain 50 per cent of it in the last line. The position actually remained the same at the time of writing this report. The committee is of the considered view that had the Attorney-General not been a beneficiary, he would have advised the President thus:

1. 	The costs being used as justification for the payment had not been recovered.

2. 	The payment of the “handshake” was in contravention of the Constitution, the Public Finance Management Act, the URA Act, and the Public Service Standing Orders.   

3. 	The payment of non URA staff from the URA funds was illegal. 

Indeed, during the interface with H.E the President, he informed the committee that had he been advised on these matters, he would have handled the matter differently. In fact, the President was surprised to learn from the committee that the costs mentioned in the Commissioner-General’s letter referred to in (1) above had not been collected.  

Under term of reference No.4, the committee reviewed all supplementary requests under URA and Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs. In addition, the committee requested the Auditor-General to carry out a special audit of all supplementary and other budgets allocations in facilitating the court process in Uganda and abroad.

Madam Speaker, the committee established that Parliament appropriated a sum of Shs 56 billion. Out of this, Shs 54 billion was under vote 007, Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs; while Shs 2.5 billion was approved under vote 141. The total supplementary budget appropriated amounted to Shs 51 billion, while Shs 5.4 billion was got through the normal budget process. 

The committee established that whereas the amount of funds released is Shs 54 billion, only Shs 38 billion was spent. The unspent balance of Shs 18.4 billion was returned to the Consolidated Fund. The monies were used to pay for legal fees both local and abroad, administrative costs and to facilitate public officers in form of sitting allowances, per diem and air tickets to and from London, among others.

The committee established that out of the total expenditure, Shs 26 billion was spent on legal fees to this law firm - Curtis. The total amount of money spent in respect to local cover was Shs 9.5 billion.

The committee has established that whereas Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs was obliged to deduct 15 per cent withholding tax on all payments in respect to legal fees, totalling to Shs 3.6 billion, only Shs 2.1 billion was deducted, resulting into a shortfall of Shs 1.4 billion. The tables below explain it.

The committee observed, therefore, that all funds released to both Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs and Uganda Revenue Authority for the period under review in both cases of Tullow and Heritage were accounted for. The committee, however, notes that a sum of Shs 1.4 billion, which was due as withholding tax was not deducted by the accounting officer.

Under term of reference No. 5, the committee reviewed submissions from URA, Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, Bank of Uganda and Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development. In addition, the committee requested for a special audit of the Petroleum Fund in order to establish all revenues received by Government in respect to the Petroleum Fund.

A review of the submissions above and the special audit report of the Auditor-General dated 7 March 2017 revealed that Government has so far received, from petroleum related activities, a sum of US$ 709 million. Out of this, US$ 633 million was transferred to the Consolidated Fund while a sum of US$ 72 million is being held in the dollar account and Shs 10 billion in the Petroleum Fund shilling account.

The committee established that prior to the enactment of the Public Finance Management Act, 2015, Government had adopted a policy to ring-fence all petroleum revenues to infrastructural development under the legal regime of the Public Finance and Accountability Act. Consequently, all petroleum revenues collected prior to the PFMA were used to finance various infrastructural projects related to power generation and transmission. 

The committee has established that when the PFMA came into force on 23 February 2015, a total of Shs 1,367,725,564,296 was still held on the petroleum holding account of URA. However, on instruction by the permanent secretary and the Accountant General in a letter dated 24 June 2015, this balance was transferred to the Consolidated Fund on 29 June 2015 instead of transferring it to the Petroleum Fund as an opening balance. The table below shows the figures in detail.

Madam Speaker, we were supposed to examine any other matters related to the above and make policy recommendations under term of reference No.6. Public servants should be rewarded for exemplary work because it motivates them to excel and deliver good results for the country. However, the reward policy of Government should be codified for certainty and transparency. 

During the interface with H.E. the President, it was agreed that a law should be put in place to guide the donation budget. We discussed this matter with him in detail, put questions to him and he agreed with us that there is no policy, and he said he does not mind having a law in place. We are going to make a recommendation in that regard.

The committee, therefore, recommends that in addition to the already existing Public Service Standing Orders on rewards, specific standards must be clearly spelt out on who qualifies to be rewarded. The reward system should also be aligned to regional best practices and international standards regarding reward systems.

Monetary rewards should generally be discouraged, though provision for such monetary rewards can only be considered while rewarding public officers for extraordinary work performed under extraordinary circumstances and in accordance with a clear Government policy and law.

Madam Speaker, this year alone we are providing Shs 74 billion in this budget, which is US$ 20 million. Today we have President Museveni and there could be a reasonable way on how he gives out his donations. However, what if we get President Katuntu and you just give him Shs 20 billion to donate as he wishes, what will happen? The reason we agreed with the President is because we need a policy, guidance, legislation that can govern the management of a donation budget. 

There is need for strengthened supervision of the Ministry of Energy and Minerals in as far as oil revenue is concerned. The committee recommends closer supervision and monitoring of the activities of the Petroleum Authority and the National Oil Company. These are young companies that were created recently. The relevant committees of Parliament should receive quarterly reports from both the authority and the oil company.

Reallocation of resources already budgeted for and appropriated by Parliament should be strictly adhered to in accordance with the PFMA. Parliament should, while examining supplementary requests from the Ministry of Finance, undertake a detailed scrutiny to avoid abuse of appropriated funds. On this note, I would like to congratulate the Budget Committee for the work they did during this process that has just ended because they went into detail. That is how they found out that even this request of Shs 6 billion was being baptised “non-teaching staff.” I am sure the Ministry of Finance and URA thought that you did not have the time to go and scrutinise all these in detail. 

The committee, as highlighted above, pointed out the fact that Government business was run informally. While interacting with witnesses, it was noted that witnesses frequently referred or based their arguments on meetings held between the team but there were no minutes to that effect. 

Public Service Standing Orders and human resource manuals of statutory institutions like Uganda Revenue Authority should provide for the manner of conducting Government business on record. Madam Speaker, one of the experiences we had was when we invited the Secretary to the Cabinet. This gentleman came and told us what happened in Cabinet and we asked, “Do you have minutes?” He said, “No, we do not have such but it happened.” You can imagine a Secretary to the Cabinet and things are transpiring there but there are no minutes! 

There is a lot of informality in the way this Government works. Having a Cabinet meeting without records and a secretary who is supposed to keep records is testifying - In our view, if anybody said that whatever is in Cabinet was recorded when the secretary said that it was not, it is either the secretary lying or the Cabinet minister who said that everything is on record but does not know what goes on there. 

Term of reference No. 7 instructed us to do anything incidental to and pursuant to these terms of reference. On 17 February 2017, the committee received a petition from Oil Governance and Transparency Alliance (OGOTA), a consortium of NGOs. In the said petition, the different NGOs requested the committee to investigate what they termed as “illegal tax waiver” of US$ 157,095,366. According to the petition, these funds accrued to Government with regard to the sale by Tullow of part of its interest in exploration areas EA1, EA2 and EA3 to CNOOC and Total. A sum of US$ 475924,120.05 had been assessed as capital gains tax by the Uganda Revenue Authority. Tullow objected to the aforementioned assessment and on 24 February 2011, Uganda issued what we call an “objection decision” revising the tax assessed to US$ 467,271,971. A memorandum of understanding was concluded between the following parties:

1. 	Government of Uganda represented by Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development;
2. 	Uganda Revenue Authority;
3. 	Tullow Uganda Limited;
4. 	Tullow Uganda Operations Pty Limited.

The parties agreed that 30 per cent of the assessed tax would be paid and the balance would be paid after the objections and appeals have been concluded in accordance with the Income Tax Act. Both Tullow Uganda Limited and Tullow Uganda Operations Pty Limited filed an application for review before the Tax Appeals Tribunal contesting the assessments and objections by URA. Upon hearing the dispute, the Tax Appeals Tribunal ruled that both Tullow Uganda Limited (TUL) and Tullow Uganda Operations Pty Limited (TUOPL) pay a capital gains tax amounting US$ 407,095,366 being tax payable after deducting the pre-investment relief. Tullow Uganda Limited and Tullow Uganda Operations Pty Limited appealed the decision of the tribunal to the High Court. 

However, before the High Court could determine the matter, URA and Government of Uganda entered into consent with both Tullow Uganda Limited and Tullow Uganda Operations Pty Limited. In the consent, a sum of US$ 250 million was agreed upon as full and final tax liability of both, which had been assessed and upheld by the Tax Appeals Tribunal at US$ 407 million.

A sum of US$ 157,095,366 had been waived as a result of that consent. The petitioner, therefore, required the committee to examine the validity of the waiver. 

The committee interfaced with officers from the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs and the Minister of Energy and Mineral Development during the period under review, hon. Syda Bbumba, and H.E. the President. The committee reviewed the production sharing agreement and the testimonies of the above mentioned Government officials. 

Hon. Syda Bbumba testified that she signed the PSA on the advice of the Office of the Solicitor-General. She further stated that she did not read the said agreement much as she signed it. She informed the committee that she signed based on the strength of the letter from the Office of the Solicitor-General signed by a one Ms Elizabeth Nakkungu for the Solicitor-General dated 3 October 2001. 

The committee heard from hon. Syda Bbumba that the PSA, which she signed, was not negotiated by herself, but by a team of experts from the ministry and that it was similar to all the other PSAs signed by her predecessors, hon. Hilary Onek and Daudi Migereko.

In addition, she informed the committee that whereas Cabinet had discussed the principles of the PSA, the agreement itself was never considered in detail. In the interface with H.E the President, he informed the committee that the then Minister of Energy, hon. Syda Bbumba, acted on that matter without consultation. 

The Solicitor-General informed the committee that he advised a settlement because it was in the best interests of the country as, in his view, Government had a bad case.

The committee observes, therefore -
1. 	That it is true that US$ 157 million, which would have accrued as part of the capital gains tax was waived;

2. 	That the contention arose out of a clause in the PSA which provided for waiver of tax signed by the then minister, hon. Syda Bbumba;
3. 	That the dispute would not have arisen if the PSA did not have a waiver of tax;
4. 	That the then Minister of Energy, hon. Syda Bbumba, did not have authority to waive tax in that transaction and her action of not having read the agreement before signing was highly irregular;
5. 	That all the then ministers of energy who signed PSAs with a similar clause acted ultra vires the law.

Under term of reference No.8, the committee was instructed to report in 60 days from 19 January 2017 – 19 March 2017. However, given the volume of work of the committee and the many witnesses, including travelling to London, it was not possible to accomplish the assignment in two months. The committee requested for an extension from the Speaker, which was graciously granted. However, Parliament suspended all activities of standing committees, including COSASE, until the completion of the budget process. It was also not possible to finalise this report within the extended period which the Speaker had granted. Through a progressive report, the Speaker was informed of the tentative date when the report would be ready, and that was 29 May 2017.

Conclusions and Recommendations

The committee has already made policy recommendations under term of reference No.6. However, below are other specific conclusions and recommendations arising out of this probe:

1. 	The funds paid out were for activities budgeted for under the URA budget. This “handshake” expenditure was not a budgeted URA activity and, therefore, a diversion of the Shs 6 billion without lawful authority was contrary to the Public Finance Management Act.

2. 	The payment of the Shs 6 billion “handshake” from URA budgeted for activities without the board’s knowledge and/or approval was in contravention of section 16 of the Uganda Revenue Authority Act, 1991.

3. 	H.E. the President’s approval of this “handshake” was bona fide. However, it was an error of judgement on his part.

4. 	The committee concludes that the argument of the beneficiaries that the payment was rooted in Articles 98 and 99 of the Constitution was unfounded and misleading.

The committee, therefore, recommends as follows:

(a)	That all funds paid out of URA account to the beneficiaries of the “handshake” should be refunded.

(b) 	All officers who flouted the law should be held accountable and in this vein, the IGG should institute investigations with a view to establish the culpability and possible offences.

(c) 	The Executive should come up with a Bill within 90 days to regulate and streamline the presidential donations budget as agreed upon between the committee and His Excellency the President.

(d) 	The supplementary request of the Shs 6 billion currently before Parliament should be rejected because the diversion was illegal; it infringed on the Public Finance Management Act and it further created a liability which is forbidden.

(e) 	Parliament should revisit section 8 of the Petroleum (Exploration, Development and Production) Act, 2013 with a view to amending it and provide for technical people to be signatories to the PSAs. The reason being that we gave powers to ministers, but how do you continue giving that power to these ministers who sign agreements without reading them. It was one of the most embarrassing moments that the minister committed this country to an agreement in billions of dollars and she says that she did not read the agreement but the law says that she is the one supposed to sign the agreement. This is the time to revisit this law.  

(f) 	All recoverable costs incurred by oil companies should be submitted to Parliament quarterly. 

Madam Speaker, under the law and production sharing agreements, all expenses being incurred by the oil companies are called recoverable costs. They take what we call “first call” on the oil revenue before a country gets a penny, and you must recover the cost. However, as we talk now, it is in billions of dollars.
If I was to ask the Members of Parliament who knows the exact amount, nobody does.

Our proposal, therefore, Madam Speaker, is that both the Petroleum Authority And National Oil Company should submit these recoverable costs by the oil companies to the relevant committees of Parliament every quarter or three months and then Parliament can follow up on how the industry is doing.  

(g) 	The Attorney-General should take immediate steps and measures to recover the costs which were awarded, and it is over a year. We were awarded US$ 4,083,840 by the International Arbitration Tribunal, but they have never collected this money and he should report to Parliament within 90 days. This particular Attorney-General, including his senior in office, were not in office at that time. 

(h) 	Uganda Revenue Authority should take immediate steps and measures to recover the costs awarded by the Tax Appeals Tribunal and High Court, which we have estimated to be in the region of US$ 15 million, I think within 90 days too.  

(i) 	The Auditor-General should, as soon as possible, carry out a  special audit into deductions of withholding tax on fees paid to the external lawyers; Curtis, Mallet-Prevost, Colt & Mosle LLP by URA and report to Parliament also within 90 days.

Madam Speaker, all documentary evidence including the verbatim recordings have been laid on the Table.  

Madam Speaker, I beg to move that this House adopts this report and the recommendations therein. I beg to move. Thank you very much for listening to me. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable chairperson of the Committee on Statutory Authorities and State Enterprises together with your members, for this comprehensive report to this House. I note that the necessary signatures of more than one-third are available and members are free to debate. 

However, I wanted, as members are cogitating on the report, to permit hon. Osegge to give an interim report on another matter and then we go back to the debate on this one. It is just a report that is not for debate; it is simply information.

INTERIM REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC ACCOUNTS ON THE LOAN OF USD 200 MILLION FROM THE EASTERN AND SOUTHERN TRADE DEVELOPMENT BANK (PTA)

4.48
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC ACCOUNTS (Ms Angelline Osegge): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. This is an interim report of the Committee of Public Accounts on a loan of US$ 200 million from the Eastern and Southern Trade Development Bank (PTA). 

Madam Speaker, on 26 April 2016, Parliament of Uganda passed a loan to borrow USD 200 million from the Eastern and Southern Trade Development Bank (PTA) for fiscal purposes. 

It should be noted that this loan had been objected to pending clarification for the intended purpose, until Parliament was prevailed over because of what was presented as medical supplies emergency. Therefore, a schedule was tabled by the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development indicating the entities that were to benefit from this loan and they included: National Medical Stores (NMS), Rural Electrification Agency (REA) and Ministry of Works and Transport. 

Madam Speaker, on 30 November 2015, the Permanent Secretary and Secretary to the Treasury (PS/ST) acknowledged funding constraints of NMS as explained by NMS and advised for the funding facility. The loan referred to above was approved by Parliament, which would be used to address the funding gap that was expressed by NMS. 

Subsequently, the loan was obtained in November 2016 and the first batch of US$ 97 million, which is Shs 345.3 billion, was released by PTA Bank. 

Madam Speaker, eventually, the Committee on Public Accounts learnt that the National Medical Stores was not going to avail drugs to hospitals due to a funding deficit of about Shs 68 billion that was requested for as a supplementary budget. 

On 6 June 2016, the Permanent Secretary advised NMS that the resources would be available in the financial year 2016/2017. As a follow up, on 17 August 2016, the PS/ST requested NMS to submit procurement contracts for items in foreign currency requirement for financial year 2016/2017. National Medical Stores obliged. 

Madam Speaker, the said funds have to date not been provided to the said entities. This fact was brought to the attention of the Minister of Health and the PS/ST on 27 March 2017. Subsequently, Public Accounts Committee (PAC) learnt that the Ministry of Health was actually not going to avail drugs to hospitals due to lack of these resources. 

What did the Public Accounts Committee do? The committee then on 7 June 2017 invited the Governor Bank of Uganda, Accountant-General, the Auditor-General, the Minister of Health, the General Manager NMS, Executive Director Rural Electrification Agency (REA), PS/ST and the Permanent Secretary of the Ministry of Works and Transport for a meeting. 

Madam Speaker, so far the committee has established that as per the Hansard records, at the time of the loan request, the narration of the bank statement from Bank of Uganda and the letters of the PS/ST, the priority funding was for medical supplies under NMS, Rural Electrification Agency and Ministry of Works and Transport. 

The committee called a follow up meeting for today, 22 June 2017, inviting the Minister of Health with the PS, the General Manager NMS, the PS Ministry of Works and Transport, PS Ministry of Energy, Executive Director REA, the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and the PS/ST, and the Accountant-General. 

Madam Speaker, all these entities received their letters and there were no regrets until today 10 a.m., when the meeting was supposed to sit. A letter was brought from the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development saying that he was not able to attend. Madam Speaker, I would like to note that all the other entities were able to attend and they were available at the meeting time. 

On receipt of the letter, I, the chairperson, telephoned the minister on his mobile phone in an attempt to establish a way forward. However, to my dismay, the minister stated that PAC cannot do anything to him; he cannot and shall not come and hang up. 

THE SPEAKER: Order, Members. 

MS OSEGGE: Madam Speaker, on receipt of the letter, I telephoned the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, hon. Matia Kasaija, on his mobile phone and this was in an attempt to work out a way forward. However, his response was “I will not come; PAC cannot do anything to me. I cannot come and shall not come.” Afterwards, he hang up. I therefore immediately called the Rt. Hon. Speaker for further guidance and hence this intermediary report. 

Madam Speaker, we also called the committee and briefed all the members of what was going on and they are aware of what is happening. 

What way forward do we propose as a committee? Madam Speaker, we want to note that the committee shall not allow anybody to abuse or denigrate its work or members. 

The committee is firmly proceeding with the inquiry next week on Tuesday. If necessary, the committee shall invoke the High Court powers as enshrined in Article 90 (3) (c) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda to enforce attendance of the Ministry Of Finance officials. (Applause) 

The committee observed with great concern the consistent impunity, arrogance and expression of indispensability of the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, hon. Matia Kasaija and the PS/ST, Mr Keith Muhakanizi, when referring to Parliament both in parliamentary committee meetings and in the public media, as was recently reported where the PS/ST wanted to direct who should inquire into this matter other than Parliament. 

Similarly, on the unfortunate day of 8 June 2017, the minister while presenting the national Budget stated that Parliament is corrupt and he can mention them. Madam Speaker, we thought this was an abuse of Parliament and following your advice, we decided to come up with this report.  I beg to report, Madam Speaker. Thank you. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, on 8 June 2017, the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, unprovoked, just decided to attack Parliament. I do not know why he did it – totally unprovoked and uncalled for. 

MR LUBOGO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to elucidate on the issue that the Chairperson of PAC has just raised concerning the behaviour of the finance minister when it comes to attendance to parliamentary committees. The committee of Tourism, Trade and Industry invited the minister to come to a committee meeting. The committee was in session and the minister kept informing us that he was just at the door steps of Parliament.

We waited for about two and half hours, but he could not move from those door steps to reach the committee room, so we had to adjourn. We made another arrangement for the minister to come and meet the Committee of Tourism, Trade and Industry –(Interjections)- it is the finance minister I am talking about. He refused to come and attend the committee meeting even the second time. Madam Speaker, you recall that we wrote to your office, seeking your intervention in this matter and requesting you to compel him to come and attend the committee meeting. 

This has become a habit for the ministers of finance. There is a way they look down upon committees of Parliament and they think that we cannot do anything to them. I, therefore, think that this is the right time that this Parliament comes out strongly and takes a step - we need to put our feet down and fight this behaviour exhibited by the Ministry of Finance. 

In addition to that, as you guided me the last time I was in your office, we are still waiting for that day when the minister will be compelled to come and face the Committee of Tourism, Trade and Industry. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I allowed hon. Osegge to report because she told me that she was failing to do her work because the minister had totally refused to attend and that he had also insulted the committee and said that he was not appearing before them. For those two reasons - the one of the Budget Committee and the one of the Public Accounts Committee - I am referring the hon. Matia Kasaija, Member of Parliament for Buyanja County, to the rules committee for discipline. (Applause) Thank you. We can now go back to the COSASE report.

MOTION FOR PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON COMMISSIONS, STATUTORY AUTHORITIES AND STATE ENTERPRISES (COSASE) ON THE INVESTIGATIONS INTO THE CIRCUMSTANCES UNDER WHICH THE REWARD OF SHS 6 BILLION WAS GIVEN TO 42 PUBLIC OFFICERS WHO PARTICIPATED IN THE HERITAGE OIL AND GAS ARBITRATION CASE

(Debate Continued)

4.59
THE DEPUTY ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Mwesigwa Rukutana): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank the chairperson of the committee for this detailed report. I am not taking the Floor to challenge the veracity of the report or the recommendations. However, I would like to note some slight contradiction, which we should clear before we debate. 

Recommendation (a) states that all funds paid out of the URA account to the beneficiaries of the “handshake” should be refunded. Recommendation (b) says that all the officers who flouted the law should be held accountable and in this vein, the IGG 	should institute investigations with a view to establish their culpability and possible offences.

I find these two recommendations rather contradictory. The contradiction is in this regard: Supposing the IGG carries out investigations and finds out that actually the officers are not culpable or guilty yet you have already condemned them to refund and –(Interjections)-  be held accountable.

THE SPEAKER: Let him give his opinion, please.

MR RUKUTANA: Since it was a considered view that further investigations are required, why don’t we shelve all the other recommendations and uphold the recommendation that the IGG should institute investigations. Ordering somebody to make a refund is a punishment; you would have punished the person before he is duly investigated – 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, this is a debate, why don’t you allow the Member to give his part and then you respond later?

MR RUKUTANA: Honourable members, as I said earlier, it is not my intention to challenge the veracity of this report. However, let us be sober and say that since more investigations are required, let us not condemn the officers or subject them to some punishments until the IGG has carried out her investigations into the matter to establish whether the officers are culpable or not. That is my point.

MR KATUNTU: In circumstances like these, we do need to discuss issues soberly and without emotion. First of all, when the Attorney-General stood up, I expected him to have read the Public Finance Management Act. If he read it, I am surprised that he would raise that very issue.

Madam Speaker, under the Public Finance Management Act, sections 78, 79 and 80, there are two liabilities that are created. Under section 79, criminal offences are created and when you look at our recommendation about the IGG, we are talking about possible criminal offences. The issue about refund arises because we have clearly found out that the money was paid out contrary to the Public Finance Management Act and the Uganda Revenue Act.

We are not asking the IGG to investigate that; there is already a law established by us. Under that Act, if we can just go by kindergarten English, -(Laughter)– a refund is money which you receive when you are not supposed to receive it or if you receive more than what you are supposed to receive, then you refund what is not yours. That is what they call a refund and we do not have to complicate it.

However, in the process, the committee notes that there are possibilities of criminal offences having been committed, but we are not a prosecuting agency as a committee of Parliament. We have therefore referred that to the IGG. If the Attorney-General had addressed himself to sections 70, 79 and 80, I would be surprised he would raise the same issue.

Lastly, I think we are having a conflict. I think the President was also in a dilemma on this. The offices that are supposed to have advised him are the ones involved in this sort of thing. (Applause) Therefore, as we take the advice of the office of the Attorney-General, we should also take that into consideration. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

MR NIWAGABA: Madam Speaker, in addition to what hon. Katuntu has said, I rise to give more information -

THE SPEAKER: To who? (Laughter) Let us be orderly. Let hon. Rukutana finish and I will call you.

MR RUKUTANA: Madam Speaker, I have listened to the –(Interruption)

MR KATUNTU: Madam Speaker, we need guidance from you. Our Rules of Procedure do not allow a Member to speak on the same subject twice, except in a committee. Is it procedurally correct for the learned Attorney-General, who should really know these rules, to speak on the same subject twice when the rules specifically prohibit it?

THE SPEAKER: Had he finished? If he had finished, he cannot come back. (Applause) Was he giving information or responding to what you said?

MR RUKUTANA: I was not only giving clarification, but responding to the submission –

THE SPEAKER: No, it will come at the end when other Members have also spoken.

5.08
MR DAVID ABALA (NRM, Ngora County, Ngora): Madam Speaker, I want to refer to the Bible before I begin. The book of Exodus 20:15 says, “You shall not steal.” (Laughter) What I see here is real theft of public funds by our officials. That is number one. 

Secondly, the officials ignored the existing law. They ignored the procedures that are in place. You can imagine that in Uganda Revenue Authority, they ignored the board. They thought the board was useless and had no value because they basically wanted money. I saw the appetite for money in this meeting. There was real appetite. (Laughter) They misled the President because of appetite for money.

Thirdly, Madam Speaker, if you look at this kind of thing, it shows a lot of negligence of duty. The office of the Attorney-General is supposed to follow up on US$ 4 million, but up to now that money is languishing outside this country. We are crying here that there is no money, yet the money that was supposed to have been used for the development of this country is not here.

Madam Speaker, that is why I agree with the recommendation here. Everyone who has been mentioned here must be brought to book. The money must be refunded as early as immediately. (Laughter) We do not need to play around. This term is what we call “hakuna muchezo”. Let us not kid around. That is basically my comment.

Finally, as we talk here, the problem is that they have been saying they never requested, yet they actually requested. This is real stealing. This is something that should not be accepted in this country. Allow me to conclude by saying that unless we put our feet down, we shall not sort out this issue of corruption. This high level of corruption must be fought tooth and nail and it must end. I thank you very much.

5.11
MR ALEX RUHUNDA (NRM, Fort Portal Municipality, Kabarole): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I commend the committee for the good job. When you go through the report, you can see that actually this group of individuals knew what they wanted and they were playing around with every office to ensure that they get their catch. To me, therefore, this cannot even qualify for a reward. 

It is very unfortunate that they are highly paid people – we are not talking about civil servants who earn little. These are highly paid people and they are in charge of big responsibilities in our country. With all the facilitation they receive – we are talking about Shs 56 billion and we know what it means. If you are a careful person, you can even save something big out of it. 

How can we have in offices individuals of that character yet from what has been publicised over the years, they are looked at as angels. Really, if the good ones that we have been thinking that we have in the country have been portrayed like that, what is happening? We have been seeing the bad ones such as Kazinda and others being exposed. Now, these good ones who deserve a reward - what is now happening to our county? I think there is a very big problem. 

Are we going to allow the presidency to be abused or the President to use his office wrongly? These are fundamental questions. How can a whole Secretary to Cabinet who sits in Cabinet - actually, I had thought that the Attorney-General, in his wisdom, was going to come and defend them, indicating that what the committee report says is not true. However, for him to go and confuse the other party and make us believe that you do not really write minutes. Dr Baryomunsi, you make decisions without really recording -(Member timed out.)

5.15
MS JUSTINE KHAINZA (NRM, Woman Representative, Bududa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the committee for the work well done. My major concern is on flouting the Public Finance Management Act. Several provisions were not abided by; for instance, section 22 of the Act where the minister authorised that this money should be got from within the budget of financial year 2016/2017 yet from the findings of the report on page 29, it is clearly stated that this money was not budgeted for. 

As the minister in charge of finance, it would be proper that you uphold the laws that we make in this Parliament. It was very unfortunate that this money that was not even budgeted for came through a virement. That means the vote was not even there. This was wrong and illegal. The Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should really look into this because it is an abuse of the powers of Parliament.

Also, I sit on the Budget Committee and when you look at the procedure of these supplementaries that different ministries bring, at times you wonder whether the ministries are aware of section 25 of the Public Finance Management Act. This is because the law is clear; a supplementary budget must be unavoidable, unforeseeable and absorbable. Therefore, was this unavoidable; would Uganda have gone ablaze if we did not give them the Shs 6 billion? (Laughter) 

Therefore, we should respect our own laws, particularly section 78 about the liability on failure to meet the requirements; it is my prayer that this section be applied. I agree with the committee recommendation that this money be refunded because it is within the law. Section 78 clearly talks about liability on failure to meet the requirements by the officers in charge. Those who flout the law should be held liable; I agree with the committee recommendation that the monies should be recovered. 

However, on page 26, I note that the list of persons awarded was not all inclusive. For instance, we have a one Mr Bernard Sanya, who was part of the tax assessment group, and he was excluded. Next time, if there is to be an award, we should see that all people are catered for. No wonder, on page 35, you see that non-Uganda Revenue Authority staff were paid – (Member timed out.)

5.18
MR GEOFFREY MACHO (NRM, Busia Municipality, Busia): Madam Speaker, I really do not know where I can begin from. The recommendations of the committee are very right and timely because if we implement them, the ruling Government and the NRM party, to which I belong, will become stronger.

I would like to thank the committee because all the recommendations - I see the Attorney-General jeering and this is what we talked about conflict of interest. These are the problems we are facing in our Government of NRM. People who would have done the right thing and advised the President, who is the fountain of honour, are misadvising him because of conflict of interest and “eating”.

However, it is good that my mentor keeps telling people that this is kisanja hakuna muchezo. Since it is kisanja hakuna muchezo, we would like to show Ugandans that this is “kisanja hakuna kukula”. As a result, I have stood to support the recommendations of the committee on the basis that the image of the Government of the Republic of Uganda must be protected. Most of these things that we do shock the region, Africa and the world at large. We always do what would have come last.

I, therefore, Madam Speaker, agree with the recommendations of the committee that these people must pay the money. Even people who misguided the President must take responsibility for it -(Interruption)

MR NAMBESHE: Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you. Sorry for interrupting the Member. However, is it in order for the Attorney-General to be watching YouTube –(Laughter)- when serious issues of recovery of monies that have been misappropriated from the taxpayer’s coffers are being discussed? Is it in order? (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Attorney-General, I was also wondering what you were reading there. You are out of order. (Laughter)

MR MACHO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for guiding our Attorney-General not to watch pornography while the proceedings of Parliament are going on. (Laughter) I, therefore, further propose that these people should be held responsible. 

I was shocked to hear of a minister who signed a concession without reading it. We are sitting with these people in the august House; what integrity do we show this country Uganda as leaders? I, therefore, suggest that in future, the civil servants who are found responsible for such misconduct - some of these hold key positions in this country - should be vetted like it is done in other countries like in Kenya and Tanzania so that -(Member timed out.)

 5.21
MR GEORGE OUMA (NRM, Bukooli Island, Namayingo): Madam Speaker, allow me to first of all thank my dear friend, hon. Katuntu, and the committee at large. When you stood to bring the report, I felt, like others, that you may not bring the exact report. However, in your conclusion and recommendations, I thank the committee very much. Regardless of where we belong, Uganda can only become a good state when Members tell the truth.

It is something laughable, as my friends are saying, and if we are not careful, the good head of state of this country will become a laughing stock because of members who fail to advise him due to personal interests. We remember very well that even when this issue came before this Parliament, it was hidden under a supplementary; it was concealed under non-teaching staff payments.

If Parliament is disregarded, we are going to land into problems. People are taking us for granted that we cannot check what is right or wrong. I only thank the committee and say the recommendations put forward by the committee should be upheld and this country is going to run as a good country. Thank you very much.

5.28
MR HENRY KIBALYA (NRM, Bugabula County South, Kamuli): Madam Speaker, I just need to take up from where my colleague ended. 

One, I would like to add on the recommendations of the report; the issue that hon. Ouma talked of - where somebody prepared and hid the information into payment to non-teaching staff. That is criminal. Therefore, let us have that added there so that we have those people taken to task and charged in the criminal courts.

Madam Speaker, the word “reward” - it is just unfortunate that Gen. Elly Tumwine is not here because he is normally in charge of rewards, medals and awards. We were going to consult him on the formula he normally uses. He has never come up with monetary rewards; he is always giving medals and other things. Maybe this time the President was not given notice very well.

However, this is a situation where the Commissioner-General constitutes herself, with a given number of people, into a rewarding committee and even agrees on the amount to be given. This is a situation where the President said everybody who participated should be included - everybody right from the beginning of the process before going abroad. We would have had more than 42 people because the drivers that drove those commissioners were also doing great work. We saw on television where a lady who was preparing tea and another who was photocopying said “I got Shs 32 million”. To her that was a windfall; God had spoken to her. 

Madam Speaker, if we have to entertain such things, then we are going nowhere. A situation where the President says, “I will pay” and we as Parliament also listen to that and agree that the President is going to pay - where is he going to get that money from? It means that next week some other people will go abroad and the President will give them a “handshake” and at the end of the day, it will be the same issue. 

We must agree as Parliament that the President should not pay this money. These people are highly paid; they were paid per diem and salaries to execute that work. When they camouflage from the other side and again say, “We need this because we did this and the other” tomorrow another team from another department will also say they are entitled to a reward. At the end of the day, we shall not have order – (Member timed out.)

5.27
MR HAMSON OBUA (NRM, Ajuri County, Alebtong): Thank you, Madam Speaker. In my 11 years of uninterrupted service as a Member of Parliament, let me say that this report from COSASE, in my opinion, is a landmark report. It is full of facts, which are based on evidence and I can emphatically say that it is conclusive. 

Debating this report is very difficult as it waters down the findings and recommendations of the committee, in my honest opinion. I would propose that we allow limited debate and conclude this business. 

Madam Speaker, the report highlights the various provisions of the law, which were raped in broad daylight from the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, 1995 as amended, to the URA Act, to the Public Finance Management Act, to mention but a few. It highlights the political, legal and moral wrongs committed, including all the atrocities. 

Madam Speaker, I find myself very constrained to debate this report and I would like to move that if the House could accept, maybe after some limited debate - Madam Speaker, with your permission and with the mood in the House, looking at the fact that this is one of the best reports in the history of Parliament, with classic findings and recommendations based on facts and law, I would like to move a motion that the question be put.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, let us allow a few more Members to contribute - four or five. 

5.30
MS ANNA ADEKE (Independent, Female Youth Representative): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to also add my voice to express my gratitude to the committee for a job well done. Specifically, taking it up from where hon. Obua stopped, I would like to emphasise the moral fibre that the Shs 6 billion “handshake” is slowly but surely degenerating -

It is unfortunate that the debate has come at a time when the public has settled and the President has made a statement about it. However, if you felt the level of public outrage because of the money that these individuals took, they were not, in any way, entitled to receive that money for something within their job descriptions. There were so many young lawyers there who were reading the documents and burning the midnight candle but they did not appear on this list.
 
The rot in the civil service is terrible and it is the top officials who are the top culprits. The example that we are setting for the public is very bad. We have people who deserve even more than these individuals. I doubt that Doris Akol sat through hours in the night to read all these documents because they were many. Other people did the work and they were not rewarded. 

In addition to what the committee is recommending, we need to add that we deserve a public apology from these individuals. Madam Speaker, there was a maximum degree of impunity that was exhibited by these individuals while they were sitting before the committee. How can you defend soliciting? They saw no problem with it. Even if we tell them to refund, as individuals, they see nothing wrong with them soliciting for money, misleading the fountain of honour to give them money for their jobs; a salary that we, as taxpayers, are paying. 

We need to correct that impunity. There has to be name shaming of these individuals. They have to individually and publicly apologise to the country that they have messed with our resources. Even if they are going to refund the money, they must apologise and set a good example because we are there and we are learning from them. We are in the civil service and they are rotting slowly, sweeping away the culture that has been in our civil service – (Member timed out.) 

5.33
MR GASTER MUGOYA (NRM, Bukooli County North, Bugiri): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. First and foremost, I must commend the committee for coming up with a comprehensive report. However, I wanted to inform honourable members that conflict of interest is no longer a criminal offence in our criminal justice system, by virtue of the precedent that was set in Ojangole’s case. 

As Parliament, if you can precisely recall, we made what we called a consequential amendment under the Leadership Code (Amendment) Bill and we consequentially amended conflict of interest as provided for under the Anti-Corruption Act. In principle, what can be done in as far as this report is concerned, is merely making a referral. If it pleases the Inspectorate of Government, they can refer this matter to the tribunal because most of these actions and omissions constitute breaches under the Leadership Code.

I would like to comment on something that was mentioned by the committee that the decision taken by the President was bona fide. As a student of judicial studies, – actually, I was one of the best students and I need to praise myself - I must say that you came up with a chronology of analysing facts and applying them to the law. That was a systematic way of bringing out this matter openly and precisely and I must commend you. 

However, where you say that the decision of the President was bona fide, I find a slight iota of contradiction. In obiter dictum, I can say that if he acted in good faith, honestly, openly and sincerely without deceit or fraud, truly and actually without stimulation or pretence; innocently, in the attitude of trust and confidence without notice of fraud, then I find that a big problem. How will you now criminalise the actions –(Interruption)– Allow me to finish –(Interruption)           

MR ODONGA OTTO: Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I am seeking clarification from my learned friend who is attempting to do very risky business. Notwithstanding that, let me seek the clarification. 

The committee chairperson has told the House that sections 71, 79 and 80 of the Public Finance Management Act require that before you spend public funds, there has to be a procedure for spending those funds. Therefore, the clarification I am seeking from my learned friend is: can you address your mind to the law? Are you aware that there are statutory offences under the Public Finance Management Act that bring sanctions on those who do not comply with the law? What are you talking about and where did you come from before you came here? (Laughter)    

MR MUGOYA: Thank you so much. Madam Speaker, I am trained in handling judicial matters and there is no specific formula when you are analysing a subject matter. It depends on the art you use to frame your facts, come up with issues, subject –(Member timed out.)

5.39
MR GAFFA MBWATEKAMWA (NRM, Kasambya County, Mubende): Thank you, Madam Speaker. This is the time to act as many of our Government officials are so arrogant. If you read today’s papers, some of the beneficiaries of the “handshake” were stating that they will not refund the money. Therefore, they are taking Parliament for granted and they think that we are toothless.

Honourable members, we need to live exemplary lives. One of the beneficiaries sits in this House - hon. Rwakoojo - and hopefully, she will be among the first beneficiaries to pay back this money. 

Madam Speaker, according to the committee report, one of the beneficiaries, Mr Chris Kassami, died. However, I would like to suggest that if his relatives cannot refund the money because the direct beneficiary died, his properties should be sold. If he has no property, the body should be exhumed and we put it on auction so that we recover our money. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Mbwatekamwa, I would like to remind you that under the Public Health Act, it is an offence to interfere with the dead. (Laughter)

5.41
MR ODRIA ALIONI (Independent, Aringa County South, Yumbe): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to start by commending the committee for the good work done. 

The fact is that illegal expenditure took place. I support the recommendations of the committee but I feel that one important aspect is missing out. The President has many presidential advisors and these fall under different sectors - financial, political, among others. Out of all these presidential advisors, together with the office of the Attorney-General, how could His Excellency go ahead and support such an illegal expenditure? 

I would therefore like to request that a recommendation be made by the committee to His Excellency the President that before such decisions are taken, he must do extensive consultations. It is a shame, and if such activities are to continue - I wonder where this country is heading if all the civil servants demand for a “handshake” for the good job they do.

Therefore, I would like to request that a recommendation be made to His Excellency to make good use of his advisors before he takes such decisions. I submit. (Interruption)

MR GILBERT OLANYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank my colleague for giving way. The information I would like to give to my colleague is that we have so many people who work tirelessly for this country but they have never been rewarded. Our Rt Hon. Speaker, for example, started serving this nation since the National Resistance Council (NRC) but she has never been rewarded. We have many generals and soldiers who sacrificed for this country, who fought the war in northern Uganda, but they have never been rewarded.

Madam Speaker, I do not know what is special with this “handshake”. His Excellency’s words that whether they requested for this money or not, he would have given it to them are very unfortunate for our lovely country. Thank you. 

5.45
MR IBRAHIM KASOZI (FDC, Makindye Division East, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to also commend the committee for the good work they have done. However, I would like to add a recommendation about those to be investigated. I think it would be prudent for them to step aside from their respective offices so that investigations can be carried out without interference so that we reach a conclusion. 

Madam Speaker, I also find it perturbing that on several occasions, there is a blame game or an excuse game from the President’s side. If you recall Basajjabalaba’s saga, the President was misled. Today, the President was still misled. In such situations where the President continues to be misled, the country is losing out. 
Most of the beneficiaries got scholarships to study oil and gas law. That could have been construed as a reward but what was the rationale of giving them a monetary reward? 

I believe that as Parliament, we should find a way of handling this excuse game and situations where the President appoints people whom he knows will mislead him and Government incurs losses. I do not know how we can stop that so that the President is not continuously misled by those who are appointed. I thank you. 

5.47
MR FRANCIS MWIJUKYE (FDC, Buhweju County, Buhweju): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. If we must fight impunity then we must act now. One philosopher said, “The worst thing in society is not the existing evil but the silence of good people who could do something for a moral cause to be done.” 

Madam Speaker, somebody proposed how much everybody should get and requested that she should be the accounting officer. The same person did the grading of who should be core or non-core. Following what was in the media, the arrogance from the same person makes us pose a question: what can we do? I would like to suggest that this - (Interruption) 

MR SSEWUNGU: Madam Speaker, I rise on a point of order. This House has two sides, the ruling side and the Opposition side. The honourable member holding the Floor has come to the Opposition side and what I was hearing, while he was presenting, does not favour my side. Is he in order to cross from his side to this side yet you gave us rules on how we can handle matters outside when we want to have consensus? Is he in order? 

THE SPEAKER: I did not see him cross. (Laughter) 

MR MWIJUKYE: Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I do not know where the interest of the Attorney-General is, given what we are discussing. His attempts always mislead Parliament. Before we started this debate, you will remember that he attempted to stop us from having this debate. Today, as we started the debate, again he attempted to stop us. Instead of advising us, he is always attempting to mislead Parliament. 

Of course given the fact that the Office of the Attorney-General was involved in this and misled the President, I think we also need to send a message to the Attorney-General that he should always act in good faith so that he does not always mislead the President and Parliament – (Interruption)

MR RUKUTANA: Madam Speaker, is it in order for the honourable member holding the Floor to impute improper motive on the part of the respected Attorney-General? (Laughter) 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, he is out of order. 

MR MWIJUKYE: Madam Speaker, thank you very much for the ruling - (Member timed out.) 

5.51
MR ALLAN SSEWANYANA (DP, Makindye Division West, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. First of all, I would like to thank the committee and the chairperson for the boldness they have shown and for their commitment throughout this process of reporting to Parliament. 

When you are talking about money issues, everything is disturbed. You have just witnessed the electricity; the lights have been disturbed because of the discussion on money issues for the first time. It shows the boldness that the chairperson of this committee has exhibited amidst all the challenges. 

In the interest of this Parliament, Madam Speaker, I beg to give a simple handshake to the chairperson of this committee, hon. Katuntu, as a sign of appreciation because we do not have as much as the President does. (Laughter) 

Alluding to recommendation No.2, where it is said in the report that all funds paid out from the URA account should be returned by the beneficiaries, I would like to propose a small amendment. According to the letter written by Madam Doris Akol to the President, as mentioned in the report, it was indicated that they were going to buy plots of land and build houses or complete unfinished houses. These are all goods that appreciate and make profit. 

When you take Shs 200 million from the bank today, after two years it would have made between Shs 5 million to Shs 15 million in interest. As such, it would be prudent and fair for these people not to return the actual money, which was given to them but bring it back with interest. This will serve as a punishment. When you tell them to bring that money, it will not be a very good example to other public servants, who have been doing such things as arranging for themselves rewards in form of money. I thank you, Madam Speaker. 

5.54
MR JOHN BAPTIST NAMBESHE (NRM, Manjiya County, Bududa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the comprehensive report and also to raise my complaint because my name is conspicuously absent among those that moved this very important motion. However - (Interruption) 

MR KATUNTU: Madam Speaker, I concede that hon. Nambeshe and hon. Ogwang were among the movers of the motion. Both names were omitted inadvertently. 

MR NAMBESHE: Most obliged. Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I would request that we give some quality improvement to one of the recommendations, particularly paragraph (b) under the recommendations, which reads, “All officers who flouted the law should be held accountable…” 

I know that it is within the mandate of the office of the IGG to institute investigations but during these investigations, there may be undue influence on the part of the officers who are active in office. It is therefore my considered view that these officers who initiated this, and we said that it was evident that they solicited for the “handshake”, for example the Commissioner-General, be compelled to resign. She should actually step aside to allow investigations to take their course. 

Madam Speaker, concerning the President’s pledge to take the responsibility and refund the money on behalf of the beneficiaries, well, he has a lot of latitude as the fountain of honour and he can indeed pay from his donation budget but –(Interruption) 

MR SAMSON LOKERIS: Thank you very much, hon. Nambeshe. The information I would like to give is that in the report, we have seen that the President was the man behind all this but I have not seen any recommendation in the report against the President. You are here trying to punish people who were only told that they were going to be appreciated.

I believe that the most important thing is that we should not penalise the beneficiaries. Let us wait and see the recommendations that the committee gives about the President. That is the information I would like to give.

MR NAMBESHE: Thank you for the information. Indeed, there is no mention at all about the pledge alluded to by the President to pay or rather refund the Shs 6 billion on behalf of the beneficiaries. However, in my view, even if he paid, they should also be seen to pay because they got double payment. They got the per diem and the allowances to travel abroad on taxpayers’ money – (Member timed out.)

5.58
MR MARK DULU (NRM, Adjumani County East, Adjumani): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I can see that Members of Parliament are very excited. However, on the other hand, I sympathise with the chairman of the committee and his members, simply because I can see a danger or a risk of covering holes by digging new holes. This would mean that there is no single period in time where we would remain without holes at all. However, I am 100 per cent sure that if we are to cover this particular hole, then we need to dig new holes. 

The letter stated very clearly the purpose of the money given. I, therefore, suggest that if there is a possibility for us to establish the properties of these particular beneficiaries, we can then attach them so that we really know that the money that will be used for the refund is not coming from the same basket from which it was got. (Interruption)

MR AOGON: Thank you so much, my friend from the other side. The information I would like to give is that both our ministers and technocrats look at us as small people because they have other means of getting money and they, therefore, have big monies in their accounts. So, they do not obey us when we make recommendations; they just ignore them.

It is, therefore, very important, like you said, that investigations which have been done and the recommendations that have been made be followed. It is also important that recoveries be made from properties of those that are culprits. I think this is the time. Thank you.

MR DULU: Madam Speaker, lately, it is very simple to establish sources of funds. If we cannot go against the properties that I was talking about, we should be precise and leave the drama. Let us do what the Ghanaians did a few years ago; they took a tough stance and as I talk, the first 10 troublesome people are dead. (Laughter)

6.01
MR GODFREY ONZIMA (NRM, Aringa County West, Yumbe): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to make my comments based on two issues, and I would like to first thank the committee for coming up with this report. The first issue is the intention of the reward and the second issue is how the rewarding was executed. When this issue emerged –(Interruption)

DR LYOMOKI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. A motion for a question to be put had been moved by hon. Obua and you ruled that we listen to some few comments. We have been listening to these comments and from all that has been spoken, I do not see anything new. We are actually diluting the report.

The report had very rich issues but we are trying to debate and even undermine some of the issues that were raised. Is it procedurally right that we carry on a debate and in the process continue to undermine a very important report that has come up? From all the contributions, there is no one that has deviated from the contents and the resolutions of the report. Is it procedurally right?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the report covered eight terms of reference and I would have been happy to hear confirmation of those terms and the findings from the Members. That is why I would like to have a few more people speak and then we can conclude. 

MR GODFREY ONZIMA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I said that my issues will cover two major areas; one is querying the intention of the reward and the second is about the execution of this reward. When this issue came up and was awash in the media, I attended a meeting that was organised by the President. In this meeting, the President mentioned that when the issue of the courts became so serious, even some of the initial lawyers that were supporting Government were bought off. 

Two, he said that some heads of state were telling him to leave the case because Uganda would lose a lot of money. The President almost abandoned the case but the three ladies, namely Akol, Kagina and Musisi, convinced him to pursue the case at any cost. They advised him that they will get young lawyers that will be able to support Uganda –(Member timed out.)

6.05
MR MICHAEL AYEPA (NRM, Labwor County, Abim): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the recommendations. However, we said that the officers that received the payment should refund the money but I do not see anything like that in the recommendations. 

I do not see, in the recommendations, the penalties given to the ministers that signed the agreements that caused financial loss to Government. Perhaps something should be included in the recommendations so that the ministers who caused a loss to Government of Shs 157 billion are also held responsible for causing that financial loss to our Government. I think that is missing in the report.

Secondly, Madam Speaker, the current board chairperson of URA, who said that the handshake was a very good thing, should resign – if that is how I got it.

Madam Speaker, let me talk about the office of the Attorney-General. This country relies on the advice from the office of the Attorney-General; even the President relies on the advice of the Attorney-General. Why must the office of the Attorney-General continue to cause these problems to the country? When you look at the issues of court awards, there are problems there. There is a lot of corruption in that office. What should we do with the office of the Attorney-General? (Laughter) These are issues we should look at. You cannot continue relying on people who are unreliable. (Laughter) Thank you, Madam Speaker.

6.07
MR JAMES BABA (NRM, Koboko County, Koboko): Madam Speaker, I have three points to make. The first one is to thank you, Madam Speaker, for selecting this committee that did an extremely good job. (Applause) I would also like to particularly commend the chairperson and the vice-chairperson for the excellent leadership. (Applause)

Secondly, I would like to comment on two factors. The first one is the action of the previous Commissioner-General of Uganda Revenue Authority, Allen Kagina, for putting her feet down that these people must pay those taxes and that if need be, we go to court. I think we owe her a compliment for standing up for that. That was even before any consideration for benefits was done. Allen Kagina stood her ground that these people have to pay the taxes no matter what because it is in compliance with our laws. 

We also need to compliment these young lawyers who went to London and took on the former colonial powers with their legal system and defeated them hands down in their own legal system. We need to commend them for that.

However, having said that, I would like to support the recommendation of the committee that for the first time we must take on people who flout laws, regulations and procedures. They are supposed to advise the President and follow financial regulations, including observing the Public Finance Management Act. The IGG should investigate this thing and these people should be thoroughly punished. Thank you very much. (Applause)

6.09
MR JOSEPH KASOZI (NRM, Bukoto County Mid-West, Lwengo): Madam Speaker, I would like to join colleagues and really applaud our committee for a job well done. They really exhaustively carried out their investigations and made us proud. 

However, I would like to take issue with the committee’s recommendations (e), where the committee says that we should revisit section 8 of the Petroleum (Exploration, Development and Production) Act with a view of amending it and providing technical people to be signatories to the production sharing agreements. I am sure their recommendation was informed by one of our own, who signed a document without reading it. 

Madam Speaker, we have over reliance on the technical people at the expense of political supervision. I am hesitant to accept this recommendation. The other day we were here crying about the technical people who signed the Bujagali agreement committing Uganda and we lost lots of revenue and we had to “fire-brigade” in order to get out of the contract. The Umeme people signed that contract committing Uganda without political supervision. 

Therefore, I do not support this recommendation. We need political supervisors on all these agreements. We need them to commit and sign. Maybe we can say that both the technical people and political supervisors can append signatures to these contracts. However, we should not entirely leave agreements committing a country to be signed by technocrats only. I beg to submit.

6.12
MR JOHNSON MUYANJA (NRM, Mukono County South, Mukono): Thank you, Madam Speaker. First, I would like to appreciate the mover of the motion because it was not easy at the time when we sat as a caucus. I remember very well and I would like to appreciate the work of the committee. (Applause)

Madam Speaker, we have focussed a lot on the Shs 6 billion, which is very important, and because of that we know the people who are to refund the money. However, what about the US$ 150 million, which was waived illegally? The waiver is illegal. According to the report, His Excellency the President confirmed that he was not aware. Can we come out clearly with the names of the people who were involved in that agreement and the waiver because that is a big loss? 

When talking about the Shs 6 billion, we know the people who should refund but what about the US$ 157 million; who are those people who are going to refund it? We have heard only one name - hon. Syda Bbumba - but there must be many people who were involved in making that agreement. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Let us hear from hon. Nankabirwa.

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Madam Speaker, I had indicated that I would speak last to inform Parliament.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, let us get hon. Mpuuga.

6.14
MR MATHIAS MPUUGA (DP, Masaka Municipality, Masaka): Thank you for your indulgence, Madam Speaker. I would like to congratulate hon. Abdu Katuntu, the former alternate Attorney-General, for a job well done. I have two issues principally to raise on the record.

The first one is that the actions of the Ninth Parliament are in part returning to haunt some of us who were there. The issue that hon. Muyanja was trying to bring up was partly the reason we had a recommittal of the upstream legislations in the Ninth Parliament. Those who were here can remember the recommittal of clauses 8 and 9 that in effect divested the scrutiny powers of Parliament. 

I think this challenge today should really allow us to reflect on the need to amend the upstream and downstream oil legislations to bring back the powers of Parliament to scrutinise all forms of agreements that relate to oil transactions. This partly explains why the minister inadvertently had to sign a document she had not read. If it were about Parliament doing prior scrutiny, perhaps this could have been avoided.

Secondly, I would like to imagine that we have a Government officer charged with recovering taxes. Why would we have withholding tax not recovered? We would like to have a recommendation clearly indicting the Solicitor-General for failure to recover withholding tax yet the Solicitor-General paid the team that handled this matter.

Madam Speaker, I would like to invite Parliament to actually add a very clear recommendation on recovery of the withholding tax. Perhaps the IGG could interest herself in the failure to recover withholding tax. My view could be the wrong but this money could have been somehow collected. The Attorney-General is very smart not to know that when you are making a payment, you recover withholding tax. This is unprecedented.

Madam Speaker, in the same vein - (Member timed out.) 

6.17
MR SILAS AOGON (Independent, Kumi Municipality, Kumi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to add my voice to appreciate COSASE and more so the leadership of that committee. I would like to beg that if hon. Abdu Katuntu has been thinking of not contesting, then he should change his mind and contest because it is very important for this country. You never know if another person was given that responsibility, they would have shied away from doing the right thing. I am happy that you did the right thing.

Madam Speaker, like some of the speakers have observed, the office of Attorney-General is very vital to this House. It is very unfortunate that sometimes that office abuses what they are supposed to be doing by attempting to block debate of this very pertinent nature whenever we are supposed to debate. I feel it is the right time as a Parliament that we stamp our authority. Scientifically, this is the litmus test that we must go through as the Tenth Parliament. If we do not do the right thing, everybody will ignore us.

Therefore, whoever stands up to speak should be firm and defend the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda –(Interjections)- I feel before you give information, let me first inform this House  –(Laughter)- that the people who are always undermining our committees and our own honourable Members of Parliament do that because they know they get a lot of money in crooked ways. They know we share our little money with the voters and therefore, we cannot say anything to them.

However, God gave us the powers; when will we use the powers? This is the time. It should not be the President to refund the money but those who misused the money, and that is my view. We should do surveillance to make sure that they do not run to State House to get this money. They should pay the money as a deterrent to this bad act from such people –(Interruption)

MR MAJEGERE: Thank you, honourable member. In the report, there is an external lawyer who was paid US$ 8,621,236 but the report does not give details of how much that external lawyer contributed. There is nothing much in the report about the contribution of the external lawyer. 
 
MR AOGON: Thank you for the information. Madam Speaker, you know the kind of suffering the people of Teso are going through because of the money that we have failed to get. You can imagine we are eating termites to survive yet someone was playing around with the money that this country is supposed to use for the people who are suffering in Kumi –(Interruption)

MS NAUWAT: Thank you, hon. Aogon, for giving way. Madam Speaker, the information I would like to give is that whereas individuals are taking a lot of money, Parliament has allocated to some districts like Amudat in this coming financial year Shs 5 billion for both development and recurrent expenditure. However, we are now giving Shs 6 billion to only 42 people. That is very unfair and therefore, this money should be refunded and be topped up for districts like Amudat and Buvuma. (Applause)

6.21
MR KENNETH EITUNGANANE (Independent, Soroti County, Soroti): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for giving me the opportunity to make a contribution. 

I have sat and listened to honourable colleagues and the scenario on how issues happen in this country is very disturbing. Allow me, in a special way, to thank you for standing firm. I remember when this incident arose, somebody run to court seeking an injunction to stop us from playing our role. Madam Speaker, thank you very much.(Applause) I would also like to thank hon. Abdu Katuntu and his team for the wonderful job. You have made us, as Parliament, proud and keep up the spirit.

Madam Speaker, it is common knowledge in this House that this money was spent from a supplementary budget. It, therefore, required that a supplementary request would have been presented to this House for us to deliberate on but it never happened. Responsibility in leadership demands that all of us should make a clear decision in the face of good or bad advice for us to provide good judgement for the people of this country.

Madam Speaker, look at the 42 people who benefitted from this bonanza. If you take the cream, these are top earners; these are the people we have entrusted with the resources of this country and they are taking this money with impunity. It is very unfortunate and like you insisted last time when we had the end of year party that the Parliament is ready to bite, this is the time that we need to be firm and bite. For the first time in history, let us speak and walk the talk because at the end of the day, what we are going to come up with is going to set a precedent. 

The only honourable thing these people should do is to refund this money and resign. They have lost public trust and have no moral right for them to continue holding these offices, which are very important. They are the custodians of most of the resources of this country; by the time we wake up, there will be another saga and yet we have just been hearing another report, which is calling for our action.

Madam Speaker, I support the recommendations of the committee and we should go ahead and adopt them. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, yesterday we violated the rights of the Muslims; so I do not want to go beyond 6.30 p.m. Let me just invite hon. Oguzu and then the chief whip. 

6.25
MR DENIS OGUZU (FDC, Maracha County, Maracha): Thank you, Madam Speaker. A few days ago, I returned from my constituency and in the village, I saw midwives helping women deliver babies without gloves on their hands. They also did not have light and they were using hurricane lamps. To me, those are the people who deserve the “handshake”, if a “handshake” is to make sense.

There are those who have often doubted whether we have a contradicting President, who on one side promotes patriotism and on the other hand thinks some people must be rewarded with cash. I think all of us are very disappointed. From this, it is clear that the fish starts rotting from the head. 

The committee has clearly highlighted that there is a risk of the country losing money in these oil deals especially from recoverable costs. In some countries, I have seen that before any expenditure by oil companies is paid by the Government, the expenditure must be based on pre-approved expenditure plans and budgets. I would like to know from the Government Chief Whip –(Interruption)

MR PETER LOKERIS: Thank you very much, honourable colleague, for giving way. You are actually advising the right way, that before you pay anything, which will be accountable as recoverable costs, a committee must sit to approve it.

In our case, an estimate is made, the committee sits and looks at the request and the work programme and after it has been seen and the budget represented, it is taken to the Auditor-General to look at. That is the expenditure to be incurred at the workplace, which will be regarded as recoverable costs. All these are done before and approved so that they do not over-value the work they are doing to be included as recoverable costs. Thank you.

MR OGUZU: From the process that the minister is explaining, we can clearly see where the defects are. That is how the country has been losing money because it is not clear who is involved in that process. 

From this report, we have seen syndicate corruption, where individuals connive and craft ways of stealing Government money. That must stop. I want clear information given to Parliament on whether the expenditure is based on pre-approved budgets and plans by the Parliament before the expenditure is certainly paid for; or do the companies spend money first and then we come and pay? That would be contrary to the Public Finance Management Act. 

Secondly, I would like to know from the committee if the tax waiver a few individuals provided to the oil company still stands or we are going to recover that money. If we are going to recover it, they must tell us how we are going to recover it.

Finally, this is an opportunity for Parliament to prove that we are not just a rubber stamp but we stand with the people of Uganda. (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: As hon. Katuntu comes up, I want to say that I am a bit uncomfortable with the proposal that the technical people should be the ones to sign these agreements without the political leaders. They could run away with Government resources!

MR PETER LOKERIS: Madam Speaker, we spent days here debating the oil laws. My friend, hon. Katuntu, gave a lot of input to make sure that the laws we made recently were very comprehensive. We discussed the issue of signing the PSAs because the others were signed before we made the laws. We said that the minister signs but there is a technical team, which first looks at all the applications and does the due diligence on those applications and companies.

When we formed the National Oil Authority of Uganda, we indicated that it should also work together with the technical staff to look at the nitty-gritty issues in all these PSAs before the ceremony is done, where the minister after having been informed and satisfied with this, signs the PSA. It is not one person who sits down and signs.

Those laws are very comprehensive and standard because we also got input from other laws in the rest of the world. We compared and we have done very well now. If someone neglected to read before these laws we passed came into being, that was unfortunate; now read them. Thank you.

MR MAJEGERE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank hon. Katuntu for the good work done. I need clarification from the chairperson. Evidence is very clear that the external lawyer did not do much but US$ 8,621,000 is just too much. Is there no way the Government of Uganda can scoop part of that money back?

6.32
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON COMMISSIONS, STATUTORY AUTHORITIES AND STATE ENTERPRISES (Mr Abdu Katuntu): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank you, dear colleagues, for your contributions and compliments. 

I will start with the honourable Minister of State for Minerals. We do not have to repeat this conversation but if you so wish, we can have it. I remember I stood here and cautioned that as politicians we should go out of contract signing and you insisted then that you wanted to be signatories. Evidence coming up now is that you even sign agreements you have not read, and the reason you do it is because the experts have advised so. 

Let me warn you again. You may wish to sign these agreements but the problems that come with these agreements are many; hon. Syda Bbumba will not be the last one. As far as hon. Syda Bbumba, hon. Obaloker Onek and hon. Migereko are concerned, we have suggested that the Inspector General of Government (IGG) should take up all these matters where possible offences were committed. After professional evaluation, if any of them is found to have breached the law, like we sort of see here but without going into detail, those people should be brought to book. That goes too for the public officers who are involved in this “handshake” and even the ministers who signed these PSAs. In our meeting with the President, he was very clear about who has powers to waive tax and he did tell us that hon. Syda Bbumba did it without consultation.

Madam Speaker, sometimes it is embarrassing to find some of our colleagues appearing before us and we are not asking them how efficient they are but we are asking questions about possible criminal activity. It is very embarrassing for all the committees when we are trying to interrogate your wrongs. You should save us this embarrassment; the civil servants are accountable to us and we do not mind asking them the hard questions. 

Secondly, hon. Gaster Mugoya talks about conflict of interest. In this report, we do not look at conflict of interest as a criminal matter but we realise that conflict of interest is now under the ambit of the Anti-Corruption Act. That is what we bring out here. We do not say that they put themselves in a position where there was a conflict of interest. Whether that is ethical or not, the Inspector General of Government will find out.

Concerning stepping aside, Madam Speaker, we were conscious of the fact that since we are not the prosecuting or investigating agency for criminal prosecution, there is where we can stop and the other institutions take it up from there. The IGG in her work can say, “Look here, the nature of this case is such that I cannot investigate when you are still in office, therefore step aside.”

I think if we demand that at this stage, it will be premature. However, we think and hope that the IGG will do a professional job without fear and favour and in any case, we do not have any reason to doubt that as of now. That is why we did not propose stepping aside.

My colleague, who has just walked out, asked why we did not talk about the President. I think he is from Karamoja. Yes, the President has his own immunities under the Constitution, which we should be alive to; he cannot even be prosecuted while in office.

Secondly, we know very well that the reason the President came in is because of this animal called “donation” and obviously, the request from the officers. The officers requested for this reward knowing the President had some money which he can use to donate. We are saying that Parliament should look at this and we discussed it in detail with the President. 

Madam Speaker, I would like to inform you that we had a very candid discussion with the President and we asked him very hard questions. He actually seemed to be taking in all the questions we asked including saying, “yes, if you want a national policy” and that is when he brought in the Runyankole word “Okurongora”. He said, “I could be the head, so long as I have my donation budget”. There are circumstances where the President has some discretion with funds, and it happens all over the world.  

However, there is need for guidance because appropriation is done by us. There are some cases, which are not deserving at all, and we need to debate and say the President should be looking at a deserving case. A case like this would not pass as deserving. Therefore, we held this discussion with the President and we thought there was a problem, and indeed we said Parliament should look at it and have a clear policy.              

We also said that there was an error of judgement; those words were used deliberately. Why? A colleague has said that the beneficiaries are the best paid. However, I will give an example to this House; the decision to award this money arose out of this contestation but the first institution to award this money was the Tax Appeals Tribunal. If the Tax Appeals Tribunal did not award this money, that would have been the end. Did the President extend a handshake to the members of the Tax Appeals Tribunal? Where is the fairness in that? That is why we are saying there was an error of judgement. The institution that took the decision to award this money was the tribunal –

THE SPEAKER: Under Justice Hellen Obura.

MR KATUNTU: Yes, I was coming to that. Secondly, Heritage Oil and Gas appealed to the High Court. Her lordship Justice Hellen Obura upheld the decision of the Tax Appeals Tribunal. Did the President pay Justice Obura? If these two had decided otherwise, that money would not have been paid. Therefore, where is the fairness? Therefore, wasn’t there an error of judgement on the part of the President? 

First of all, it would have been wrong for the President to start rewarding judges; who would go to that court where one of the parties eventually paid a judge? It would cause lack of confidence in the Judiciary. This “handshake” caused a lot of problems because the judges are saying, “We do the work and people who come to present their cases go all the way laughing to the bank”.

Furthermore, look at these people called UPDF; they put their lives on the line in Garamba, Central African Republic, Congo. (Applause) It is between life and death for them. Some of them are in Somalia and others have been returned in body bags and coffins. Instead, we say they should organise themselves into some sort of Operation Wealth Creation and we give them planting materials. Was this not an error on the part of the President? I can go on and on to show you how wrong it was.

When we arrived at that conclusion, it was not out of nowhere but it was after considering these things. Madam Speaker, we had a four-day retreat to discuss these issues and really, I am very proud of the members of COSASE. Sometimes, I take away the limelight and it is not fair to them because it is not my decision but the entire committee’s decision. Some of these ideas are theirs but because we did not want uncoordinated movement of troops, we agreed that I should be the only one to speak on behalf of the committee. However, after today, all members have been released; they will be able to explain themselves, but we had gagged them. They could have even explained some of these issues better than me. Therefore, this was a group project and I am proud to be the team leader of these very incredible people. 

There was an issue raised by one of my colleagues but he has moved out. He said that in a meeting which he attended somewhere, the President said that the other people were buying off lawyers. That is not true. For each and every witness who appeared before us, we did ask, “Were you under any circumstance where you would be tempted by a bribe from Ms Kagina and Doris Akol?” All of them said “no”, and the record is there. 

I can only go by the record. I do not assume because we were aware that some people were saying that they offered bribes to these people. We asked a straight question and in our record they said, “No, we just did our work and we were never under any circumstance.” How would you want us as a committee to believe otherwise?

Even with the President, the only incident that I can tell you where he referred to us was when he came from South Africa, but I will not go into detail. It was only once, and he said he sent Ms Kagina to explain to that person in South Africa, whom I do not have the liberty to mention although the President told us. Therefore, it is not true; the record we have is otherwise.

Concerning property attachment, ownership of property is constitutional, property rights are constitutional; we cannot sit here in Parliament and say, “attach Tumukunde’s house”. (Laughter) I am talking about John Tumukunde and he is not a member of this House. I know for sure that the colleague facing me is Gen. Henry Tumukunde but I am talking about John Tumukunde. We cannot sit here and attach John Tumukunde’s house because it is a process involving even courts of law. Not even the police have got the powers to attach people’s property. You need to go through a legal process - what we call asset recovery in law - and now, we need a law for asset recovery. Therefore, nobody should sit and say that we should attach their property; no, things do not work that way. 

In any case, Madam Speaker, even when judges write their decisions, they do not implement them. They do not attach. Do they? They stop at judgment and court brokers take over from there. Even us, we can stop at our report and recommendations and then other agencies of Government take it up from there. If they do not, then it will be them that would have failed in their duty, not the committee or the whole House. We have put a timeframe of 90 days. 

Madam Speaker, hon. Majegere asked about the lawyers. You see, the lawyers entered into a contract with the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs. We looked at it and they raised the bill according to what they had agreed to and it was paid. Whether it was fair or unfair, it was willing buyer willing seller. Therefore, at the end of the day, we did not want to go into details because the lawyers were paid according to the contract as it was. I think that is what I picked, Madam Speaker. 

Lastly, these were well-thought-out recommendations. We are conscious of the powers of the committee and the powers of the House. We are aware of the evidence we had and that is why we have laid on the Table the verbatim recording. Even if anybody wants to challenge these recommendations or this report, he is welcome. 

However, if we have a fair judicial system, I do not see anybody overturning this because it is founded on evidence. We would have wished to have other recommendations but we did not have the evidence to do that. Therefore, the evidence we have is the one we based on to have these recommendations. 

Madam Speaker, I thank you very much and I really beg again that this House adopts our report with the recommendations. 

THE SPEAKER: Can we vote or you are going to speak to the report? Let us hear from the Government Chief Whip, who is today’s Prime Minister.  

6.49
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I also want to first of all thank you for your guidance on this matter, when it came on the Floor of Parliament. (Applause) 

From the debate, it has been very clear that this matter needed to be handled the way it has been handled - time for the people to be heard, for laws to be consulted, for everybody including the head of state to be consulted. 

Secondly, I would like to thank the committee, especially the chairperson. I am not surprised that hon. Katuntu has represented the team the way he has. (Applause) I, for one, have been interacting with him for many terms here in Parliament. Congratulations, hon. Katuntu, and your entire team. (Applause) 

Please, when you heckle and ask for a “handshake”, the Hansard will pick it and yet we said solicitation is not good. (Laughter) Therefore, wherever you say, the Speaker needs a “handshake”, you are soliciting for a “handshake”. 

It is also clear that more time is needed for other agencies to complete or conclude what this committee has started. I have stood up here to say that Government has been present. When the committee report was read in this House, we noted that more than 30 Members of Parliament have contributed and none of them have opposed in any way what the committee has recommended. (Applause) I have not heard it; so, I have recorded it and my role is to carry the report with the recommendations to the Leader of Government Business and to encourage him to make sure that the report is laid before Cabinet. 

You have seen how my Cabinet sat and kept quiet. Some were itching to speak but they did not know because we have not taken a stand as Cabinet on the report. They are bound by the principle of collective responsibility and so, they have been here interested in the matter but because we have not taken any stand, they were in such a queer situation. Therefore, we will - (Interjections)- hon. Peter Lokeris came in as a minister in charge of the sector to give information but it was not a substantive debate. 

I think the correct procedure for me will be to carry this report, make sure that a substantive minister takes it over to Cabinet to move it. Thereafter, we will discuss it and then we begin assigning the relevant agencies to begin on the implementation of the recommendations that have been put forward. 

Also, Madam Speaker, there is nothing that will stop Government from coming back to you and this House for further guidance just in case. It is important that we work together in order to come to a real conclusion; for example, if you put- (Interjections)- excuse me, the Speaker is there for us to consult. 

We have put timeframes. If in the course of implementation an agency is faced with a challenge, there is nothing wrong with coming to inform Parliament through the Speaker. We can come back to the House through the Speaker and inform you of the challenge we have encountered. That is what I meant. 

However, I will carry the report, present it to the Leader of Government Business and then Cabinet will have to take it over from there. I thank you very much and Eid Mubarak to our brothers and sisters, in case Eid comes before Tuesday next week. 

THE SPEAKER: Okay, honourable members, I put the question that the question be now put. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: I now put the question that the report of the committee on Commissions, Statutory Authorities and State Enterprises be adopted. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you again, honourable members. Honourable members, hon. Tumukunde is inviting Members to a function at Immaculate Heart Girls Secondary School in Nyakibaale on Sunday, 25 June 2017. Those who wish to go should be here at 6.00 O’clock on that Sunday because there will be a coaster to take you to Rukungiri. There is a fundraising there. 

Honourable members, of course, Eid Al Fitr will come in probably before we meet again. I also want to take this opportunity to wish our Muslim brothers and sisters a happy Eid and all of you join them and make it more vibrant. 

The House is adjourned to Tuesday next week at 2.00 p.m. Thank you very much.

(The House rose at 6.55 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 27 June 2017.) 
