Monday, 27 June 2011

Parliament met at 2.10 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I wish to welcome you back to Parliament and to congratulate you upon successfully completing the induction seminar. I must say it was very intensive and required concentration and commitment. I appreciate your attendance in large numbers and your very effective participation. I am confident that you have been able to acquire some skills and knowledge that will facilitate your work. 

Drawing from the experience of the seminar, there are a number of issues we have to point out. However, before I do that, I want to take this opportunity to thank the Leader of Opposition and the Shadow Cabinet for making space so that the Independents are able to sit in this Chamber; the Independents will be sitting there and the Opposition will be sitting here. I really want to thank them because it is the reason we are able to sit today. Otherwise, we would have been in the Conference Hall which is very uncomfortable. 

Hon. Members, we need to develop a reading culture. In order to be an effective legislator, it is important that you are knowledgeable in the way you perform your work. Information is power and when you talk from a point of information you will be very effective. We have put at your disposal the Parliamentary library which has all the resources and information, both electronic and in hard copy. I urge you to use this facility for your own self-development. 

I wish to point out that being conversant with the Constitution and the Rules of Procedure is vital. Make every effort to use these documents. I hinted to you at the Induction Seminar that Part 7 to Part 18 of the Rules of Procedure are the areas that will govern the bulk of your work. So, I appeal to you and renew the appeal of hon. Shankar – our friend from the Lok Sabha of India who advised you to take one hour a day to read the Rules of Procedure.

Furthermore, on the conduct of Members of Parliament, you are people’s representatives and this is a very high position locally and nationally. For this reason, it requires an MP to exhibit good conduct wherever he or she is to reflect the dignity and status of that office and to know that now you are very much in the limelight and are being watched both in your behaviour and conduct, which should be exemplary. So, I appeal to you to be exemplary in speech, manner of dress and interpersonal skills.

I remember telling you that both the Eighth and Ninth Parliaments had a high attrition rate of about 60 percent. In my view this attrition rate is attributed to, possibly, the fact that some Members lost touch with their constituencies. It is, therefore, important hon. Members that right from the beginning, you work out a schedule of going back to your constituents regularly to meet and inform them about what we do in Parliament and receive a feedback; hold public meetings and let your constituency office be open to receive the electorate. On my part, I will establish a calendar for each session so that you can plan your activities both in the plenary, committees and the constituencies.

I also wish to remind you of your role as Ugandans; you remember when you took oath, you took the oath of office and the oath of allegiance. You swore to be faithful and bear true allegiance to the Republic of Uganda. And in the Induction Seminar, we were all reminded that Uganda comes first before our parties or ourselves. So, in everything we do, we must ensure that the interests of Uganda are supreme. Please, strike a balance between serving your parties and constituencies, but put the country first. I am sure if this guides you, you will be able to happily carry out your mandate.

During the seminar, we also reaffirmed the fact that there are a lot of expectations of you as Members of Parliament; you are expected to be the “Bank of Uganda” for your constituencies, to attend funerals, weddings and contribute to all sorts of things. I urge you to again strike a balance between what you can do and what you cannot do. Do not promise roads because you cannot construct them in your constituencies. You will have to use your offices here and your positions as Members of Parliament to negotiate with Government about the roads and hospitals. So, do not make promises which you cannot keep. If you do that, you will be able to effectively represent your constituents.

I also encourage you to study all the policy statements; we informed you that you are free to attend all the committees of the House. You may not vote in those committees where you are not members, but you may attend. Therefore, I would like to appeal to you to read the policy statements; find time to go and discuss the subject of your interest in committees other than to which you are assigned and then you can ask your colleagues to vote on your behalf. Please, study the policy statements very carefully.

On financial discipline, I have said this ever since I first met you; it is important that you manage your finances. As much as possible, plan the activities you want to accomplish for the constituency as well as personal projects by costing and providing for them. The important things on the revenue side must balance the expenditure side. If one of them does not balance, you will get embarrassed. Do not allow yourselves to be in a state of indebtedness where you are not able to meet your needs.

On time management, hon. Members, time is of essence to whatever we are doing. Although many people believe that Africans do not understand time, I want us to make a difference. In the last Parliaments, we did not do well on the issue of time. I appeal to you to re-focus and begin to be very time conscious. I intend to keep time as I did today and I will ensure that all our activities are handled in a timely manner. 

I also inform you that the parliamentary services are available for you; you have been informed about all the departments of Parliament, a number of booklets have been given to you in your handbags. So, if there is something you are not sure about, check with the Office of the Clerk and you will get the necessary information. We have the necessary expertise to assist you in everything you want.

I said that the just concluded seminar is only the beginning of a series of those that we are planning. We intend to ensure that you are fully empowered to carry out your responsibilities. In due course, we intend to organise induction seminars for the Parliamentary Commissioners, the chairpersons and deputy chairpersons of the committees on their roles. We will provide induction for all Members so that they are able to execute their mandate.  

From time-to-time, depending on the need, we will organise refresher special training for you. And this morning, I was meeting the Ambassadors of the European Union and their friends to ask them for opportunities for attachment of Members of Parliament to their respective parliaments. So, we shall continue to keep our doors open. 

I am happy to announce that the pigeonholes are now available. Every Member of the House has a pigeonhole and all your correspondences and documents will be placed in there. They fill up quickly because the public and the society supply a lot of information to us.  Please, ensure that you empty them from time to time. 

We are in a period of transition and just settling and getting acclimatised to Parliament, but the real work of Parliament begins today. I, therefore, want to inform you that I will be issuing the Order Paper well in advance to enable you plan your input. 

I will also be enforcing Rule 25 of the Rules of Procedure, which requires the Leader of Government Business to make a statement to the House every end of the week regarding business of the following week. I urge you to execute your duties and I wish you a very pleasant week. 

I also wanted to announce, hon. Members that the Inspector General of Government has sent the form for you to fill – you are required to fill forms every two years during the month of March. But because you came in after March, you need to fill the forms which are at the reception. Please, fill them in as quickly as possible so that you meet the deadline.  The Leadership Code is very important and I do not want to elaborate the problems we might have if we do not fill them in. It is a requirement that we must handle this matter every two years. So, please, do so. Thank you very much. 

MOTION FOR PRESENTATION OF NAMES OF MEMBERS DESIGNATED TO BE PARLIAMENTARY COMMISSIONERS IN ACCORDANCE WITH RULE 10 OF THE RULES OF PROCEDURE

2.22
THE THIRD DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER (Lt Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali): Madam Speaker, this programme is okay, but I think the Government Chief Whip is held up; but he will be here shortly. So, we could proceed with the programme and when he comes in, he will deliver that. Sorry for that, Madam Speaker.  

THE SPEAKER: Apparently the movers and the seconders of the motion appear not to be ready, so let us move to the next item. 

MOTION THAT PARLIAMENT DO RESOLVE ITSELF INTO A COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY FOR CONSIDERATION AND APPROVAL OF VOTE-ON-ACCOUNT FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2011/2012

2.24
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach):  Madam Speaker and hon. Members, the authority for Vote-on-Account is derived from Article 154(4) of the Constitution, which reads as follows;
“If the President is satisfied that the Appropriation Act in respect of any financial year will not or has not come into operation by the beginning of that financial year, the President may, subject to provisions of this article, authorise the issue of monies from the Consolidated Fund Account for purposes of meeting expenditure necessary to carry on the services of the Government until the expiration of four months from the beginning of the financial year or the coming into operation of the Appropriation Act, whichever is earlier.”

The approval of Vote-on-Account by Parliament enables Government to withdraw funds from the Consolidated Fund to meet the government’s expenses before Parliament approves the budget. Vote-on-Account is computed based on budget provisions for the first four months of the financial year, that is, a third of the non-statutory annual budget, which is eligible for appropriation by Parliament. 

The proposed total budget for the next financial year, 2011/2012 stands at Shs 10,216,803,324,023, of which Shs 1,694,992,201,443 is for Statutory expenditure and of which, Shs 8,521,838,122,581 is for appropriation –(Interruption)

MR EKANYA:  Madam Speaker, I did not want to engage my colleague before the right time, but I am compelled because the honourable Minister of Finance is reading a document that Members do not have and that violates our practice. 

MR OMACH: Madam Speaker, if the Members want me to read the figures in the resolution, I can do so. In the resolution, the prayer, therefore, is; “Be it resolved that Parliament approves Vote-on-Account amounting to Shs 2,840,612,707,860 allocated to the various Votes.” I beg to move, Madam Speaker. 
   
THE SPEAKER: Justification? 

MR OMACH: Madam Speaker, it was when I was justifying that they were querying the figures I was reading. So, I have given to all Members copies of the resolution and the details of the attachment which we sent to you, Madam Speaker, including the list of the accounting officers proposed for the next financial year. All these are attached and they have been put on the Table.   

Madam Speaker, I had already justified. I said that approval for Vote-on-Account by Parliament enables Government to withdraw funds from the Consolidated Fund to meet Government’s expenses before Parliament approves the budget. Vote-on-Account is computed based on the budget provision for the first four months of the financial year and that is a third of the non-statutory annual budget, which is eligible for appropriation by Parliament. That is the figure that I provided to you.

MS BINTU: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am seeking your guidance, especially when some of the Members who are supposed to be sitting this side are sitting the other side. I seek your guidance; the NRM members are supposed to sit this side and not the other side and the Opposition should be the ones the other side. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, in my communication, I thanked the Leader of the Opposition and the Shadow Cabinet for agreeing to share the space so that we can all sit in this Chamber. Otherwise, we would be sitting in the Conference Hall. That is why some of the Members are sitting there. I am sure it is better than sitting in the Conference Hall.

If there are still Independents on this side, please move across so that we can sit comfortably. We have agreed on sharing space.

2.36 
THE SHADOW MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Geofrey Ekanya): Madam Speaker, I wish to seek some clarification from the Minister. There are self-accounting institutions, according to what you presented, but there are also institutions that have been established by an Act of Parliament, which the minister needs to explain why there is no provision in this Vote-on-Account to cater for wages. If you look at vote 116 - National Medical Stores; vote 117; vote 118 - the Road Fund; and vote 121 - I have looked at the Road Fund Act, which is at my disposal. It establishes the Road Fund. It has a board, a secretariat and staff and, therefore, it is fully operational unlike some of these other organizations.

Number two, if you look at the Vote-on-Account, sectoral allocation, the overall resource envelope stood at Shs 8 trillion as per the National Budget Framework Paper that was presented to us. But during the Budget Speech, the minister indicated that Government has managed to get extra resources amounting to Shs 484,700,000,000. We would like to know the criterion under which the Minister of Finance has gone ahead to reallocate these monies to some institutions.

It is important because under the Budget Act, the Members of Parliament engaged Government during that time and information regarding this extra resource was not brought to the attention of the Members. During the Budget Speech, the minister brought it, but you find that some sectors of the economy instead have a minus. For example, Office of the President has got extra allocation of 7 percent, State House 4.5 percent of the extra, Office of the Prime Minister 26.9 percent, Ministry of Defence 8.1 percent, and Public Service 41 percent.

Of course, regarding Public Service, the minister may justify that this is paying of arrears and gratuity, but you find an important sector, which is Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs and Government requested this Parliament to divide this sector into two ministries. We now have Ministry of Justice and then we have Attorney General and we have a deputy.

But to my surprise and that of the Members, instead they have decreased the allocation of this sector by 11 percent. Then Ministry of Finance that does not carry out any development activity gets extra 15 percent allocation. 

I would also wish to really thank the Ministry of Finance. He added 33 percent to agriculture. So, please, could you justify this re-allocation mechanism, what the purpose of the money is and why you decreased the budget of some of these sectors. Why is it that some votes do not have wage components? How are they going to operate in this first quarter? Thank you.

2.38
DR CHRIS BARYOMUNSI (NRM, Kinkizi County East, Kanungu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Because of no space, I am forced to come to the front here to make my comment. I also want to thank the Minister of Finance for the motion. I would like to seek clarification. In the past, Parliament has always passed the Vote-on-Account in time, but the ministry delays to release funds. Civil servants get their salaries in August and September, and generally, the release of Government money is delayed when actually Parliament has done its part. 

I appreciate that this time the minister has brought the list of accounting officers because it has been one of the challenges; that the ministry delays to appoint these accounting officers. I would like to get confirmation from the minister that once we consider this Vote-on-Account, this time round, money will be released on time because we have been reading in the press where - if the press reports are accurate - the Ministry of Education and Sports returned Shs 10 billion and then some institutions under the same ministry have closed, particularly the primary teachers’ colleges because they do not have funds. Really, such irregularities are not acceptable. We would like to get the clarification from the minister that this time, the monies will be released in time so that effective 1st July as the financial year starts, the monies are released and there will be no disruption in Government services.

MR OMACH: Madam Speaker, Vote-on-Account will be released in good time and that is why we have given you the list of the accounting officers as we present the Vote-on-Account.

On the issue that was raised by the honourable Shadow minister of Finance, about the decision, when we give the budget framework paper, Parliament and Cabinet guide us. Once we get this guidance, then we make adjustments accordingly. The Cabinet guided us on issues of consumptive items. A number of areas where there were a lot of consumption items were removed and money was put in areas which are not consumptive.

In the case of institutions which are not put on the general traditional payroll, these staff are paid not from these particular votes, so they are all catered for and people will get their salaries and allowances. This is what I can say, Madam Speaker.

MR EKANYA: Madam Speaker, with all due respect to my colleague, he has not answered the question. I am asking a very simple question. I did not even want to ask him to give us details for this Vote-on-Account. In future, we need to have these details, especially when you are starting a new Parliament. Some of my colleagues were not here when we passed the Budget Framework Paper, so most of them do not even have this detail. Maybe, that is for the future, but for now, you remember that the Opposition walked out last year when we were passing Vote-on-Account because there was an item of building a market in Sudan.

I remained here alone to defend it, thinking that it would help propel trade in the region, but to my surprise, up to today, there is no activity. So, I have been crucified by the Opposition because I remained. This means that the issue of providing details about Vote-on-Account is very important for the future. 

The question I raised here is very important. You cannot have a Road Fund Act establishing the organisation with a board, secretariat and staff and you say that the staff continue to draw their salary from Ministry of Works.

MR OKUPA: Thank you, hon. Ekanya. I think Ministry of Finance should be very clear. I have served on the Committee of Physical Infrastructure for the last seven years. 
It has been a challenge to us as to why the Ministry of Finance does not to leave the Road Fund to operate on its own. Ministry of Finance still wants to hold the money; it is not a surprise that what we are seeing here today is exactly what they have been telling us for the last seven years.

This is a time when we must allow the Road Fund to operate as it is in the law. We are not going to continue this way. Sorry hon. Minister, we shall ask you to get back and operationalise the law.  This business of you holding the Road Fund close to your chest cannot be allowed when we have potholes all over this country. Our constituencies’ community roads are not operational. Please, we do not want you to act the way you acted on the National Planning Authority because that is how the ministry operates.

MR EKANYA: That they should have their wage provided for. I do not know what we can do; whether we defer passing the entire Vote-on-Account until the minister comes back tomorrow because it is not only the Road Fund which is affected.

There are other institutions which are not self-accounting; if the minister had said Parliament, the Auditor-General and those other self-accounting institutions, they are fine, but you cannot say that there is no allocation of salary for say the Dairy Development Authority, how will they operate? Then, why are you passing money? This leads to corruption in these institutions. 

They are only providing for non-wage, money that is meant for monitoring activities, buying stationery and other items, but how will these officers work in office? So, I beg to move, Madam Speaker, that we defer this Vote-on-Account to tomorrow until the minister comes with the appropriate allocation as provided for in the law. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, is it true that you have not provided for wages, because these funds are supposed to assist Government to run for four months?
 
MS KARUNGI: Madam Speaker, I seek some clarification. Hon. Baryomunsi talked about Education and our institutions have closed. I want to know whether money is going to be released for these institutions because there is a great outcry in the country.

2.47
MR WILBERFORCE YAGUMA (NRM, Kashari County, Mbarara): The way I understand Vote-on-Account is that this money is authorised by Parliament to enable Government operate while Parliament debates and finally passes the entire budget. It is, therefore, with my understanding that if Parliament was able to debate and pass the budget within this month of June, it would not be necessary to have Vote-on-Account. The fact that we are not able means that it is very crucial that we pass this Vote-on-Account to enable us operate.

That notwithstanding, I would imagine that the 25 percent of the budget should cater for those crucial areas, but if you are going to cater for travel inland, travel abroad and allowances, then it will defeat its meaning.

Madam Speaker, you are aware that we have a crisis in our schools. Primary Teachers College students were sent home. There is Universal Primary Education capitation grant. Capitation grant is very small. As we wait to pass the budget in three months’ time, these schools are operating. I would request the Minister of Finance to make sure that the entire UPE and USE funds are sent so that these very crucial institutions continue operating.  I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: For the record, hon. Members, I received a petition this morning from the Association of USE schools, which I did undertake to pass on to the Committee on Social Services after it is formed tomorrow. 

The matters you are raising are actually in their petition; that they are not able to operate. But I told them that after tomorrow when the committee is set up, I shall pass on the information so that they can invite the minister and the schools. But now, hon. Minister, is it true that the wages are not there? Yes, hon. Tanna?

2.50
MR SANJAY TANNA (Independent, Tororo Municipality, Tororo): I would like to start by thanking you, the Parliamentary Commission and the Leader of the Opposition for allowing Independent Members of Parliament to sit on this side, and for creating space for us and recognising us as a shade of opinion as prescribed in the Constitution of this country.

I would also like at this juncture to raise an issue regarding what has been discussed. Today morning, as Independent Members of Parliament, we visited the conjoined twins in Mulago Hospital because both the Member of Parliament for Kabale Municipality and the Woman Member for Kabale are Independent Members - they raised an alarm and as Independent Members of Parliament, we went to visit the couple and the twins. I am failing to express myself on what I saw in Mulago Hospital. There were 64 children in boxes called incubators, but only one of those boxes was functional. On a similar point [HON. EKANYA: “Guidance, Madam Speaker.”]

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I think we are pre-empting the State of the Nation Address and the debate on the Budget.

MR TANNA: No, it is on the issue of wages as raised by hon. Ekanya, and I am only substantiating hon. Ekanya’s point. Tororo Municipality – I have a message on my phone – the only doctor there, is the municipal doctor, who says they have not been paid for two months; the staff at all health centres of Tororo Municipality are complaining. So, we want the hon. Minister to substantiate whether this is the money that is going to cater for their wages, because the wages are not reflected in that document.

THE SPEAKER: Minister, can you please tell the country what has happened to the wages because this is very important?

MR OMACH: Wages are paid and if there is anything to the contrary that comes to us, we handle as they come. But when we get wage requirements, it comes from the ministry responsible, through Public Service and ours is to release.

Now, there can be shortfalls or overlaps and this is normally corrected through a supplementary, but as of now, we have not received any supplementary requests to adjust salary –

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, I think the Shadow Minister was saying that he cannot see the provision for wages for other ministries and that is what he is asking.

MR OMACH: These other institutions are paid as contract staff. Their salaries are treated differently from the traditional staff of the –(Interjections)- they are catered for in this  [HON. MEMBERS: “Where?”] Well, I will give you the details, but they are all catered for under salaries.

THE SPEAKER: Can we stand over it while you consult? 

MR OMACH: Now the purpose of the Vote-on-Account is for us to be able to handle issues like the honourable member from Tororo is saying, because now if there is any need for additional requests from any ministry, we can only be able to allow them to allocate from within their own ministries. If there is anything which they were intending to return to the Treasury like it happened with the Ministry of Education and Sports where there was an excess of Shs 10 billion, which we allowed them to utilise for the USE and also for the various teachers’ colleges, and which they have appropriately handled. 

So, this passing of the Vote-on-Account will enable Government to start operating by 1 July. If there are any issues which require any details, we are going to look at the budget - there is a budget policy statement from each ministry which is going to clearly indicate the various votes that they want this Parliament to pass and so we will go into those details.  

As the honourable Shadow Minister has stated in regards to the Road Fund, we can go into further discussion on this.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, I think they are asking, “Have you provided for the wages?” [HON. MEMBERS: “Yes.”] Can we stand over it while you consult? Okay hon. Members, let us stand over this item and go back to item No. – let us go back to the item of the Parliamentary Commission for now while you consult.

MOTION FOR PRESENTATION OF NAMES OF MEMBERS DESIGNATED TO BE PARLIAMENTARY COMMISSIONERS IN ACCORDANCE WITH RULE 10 OF THE RULES OF PROCEDURE

THE SPEAKER: Can I ask the Government Chief Whip to move?

THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr John Nasasira): I thank you, Madam Speaker. Under Rule 10(5) of our Rules of Procedure, I wish to move that the following names be designated as Commissioners for the ninth Parliament: Hon. Dombo Emmanuel Lumala, Member of Parliament for Bunyole East –(Applause)- Hon. Dr Chris Baryomunsi, Member of Parliament for Kinkizi East –(Applause)- hon. Bintu Jalia, Member of Parliament for Masindi and hon. Elijah Okupa who has been designated by the Opposition. (Applause) I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members – 

MR WADRI: A few minutes back I heard the hon. Minister without Portfolio and also Government Chief Whip, submit names of persons to serve on the Parliamentary Commission. But as per our Rules of Procedure, designation of persons to serve on the committees of Parliament is very specific. I would like to seek your indulgence on whether procedurally he is right to designate a Member of Parliament from the Opposition when that side has a counterpart equally charged with that responsibility.  (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: You know that in the new spirit of cooperation, I believe the Government Chief Whip was assisting his counterpart. (Laughter) But let the Leader of Opposition – where is the Opposition Chief Whip?

3.00
THE OPPOSITION CHIEF WHIP (Mr Hussen Kyanjo): Madam Speaker, thank you very much. I want to congratulate my colleague, the Government Chief Whip for providing that list to this Parliament. But I am also happy to announce that the Opposition has designated hon. Elijah Okupa to serve on the Parliamentary Commission. Thank you. (Applause)

MR NASASIRA: First of all, I would like to correct what hon. Wadri has said. I am not the Minister Without Portfolio. Secondly, I think my honourable friend is suffering from predecessor syndrome –(Laughter)– because he was the Opposition Chief in the last Parliament. Otherwise, I would like to inform the House that I consulted the Leader of Opposition before I mentioned the names of those Members of Parliament. I am happy that has been confirmed.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, hon. Members, under the Administration of Parliament Act, the Parliamentary Commission comprises the Speaker, who is the Chairperson; the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Planning, who has designated and written to me that hon. Jacan Omach would represent her; the Prime Minister and four backbench commissioners. So, we now have the names from both the ruling party and the Leader of Opposition.

I now put the question that this House do approve the following honourable members: Emmanuel Dombo, Chris Baryomunsi, Jalia Bintu and Elijah Okupa as the backbench Members of Parliament to the Parliamentary Commission.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO AMEND THE RULES OF PROCEDURE TO INCREASE THE NUMBER OF MEMBERS IN THE STANDING AND SESSIONAL COMMITTEES TO ACCOMMODATE THE EXPANDED MEMBERSHIP OF PARLIAMENT

THE SPEAKER: Yes, Government Chief Whip.

3.03
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr John Nasasira): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I wish to move a motion for a Resolution of Parliament to amend Rule 135 and Rule 161 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament, under Rule 56. The motion reads:

“WHEREAS Article 94(1) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda provides that subject to the provisions of this Constitution, Parliament may make rules to regulate its own procedures, including the procedure on its committees;

AND WHEREAS Article 90(1) of the Constitution provides that Parliament shall appoint committees necessary for the efficient discharge of its functions and Rule 131 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament was made in the same spirit;

GIVEN that under Article 92 of the Constitution, Parliament is mandated to prescribe the powers, composition and functions of its committees by its Rules of Procedure and Rule 132 of the Rules of Procedure is in tandem with Article 92 of the Constitution;

NOTING that Rule 135 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament provides that subject to these rules, each standing committee, apart from the Business, Budget and Appointments committees shall comprise 20 Members selected in accordance with the rules;

FURTHER NOTING that Rule 161 of the Rules of Procedure provides for each Sessional Committee to consist of 20 Members selected from among the Members of Parliament

AND AWARE that under Rules 132(1) and Rule 159(1) of the Rules of Procedure, there are 12 standing committees and 13 Sessional committees respectively;

CONSIDERING that the ninth Parliament has 380 Members, excluding the Speaker, the Deputy Speaker and Ministers;

FURTHER CONSIDERING that under the current Rules of Procedure, it is not possible to have each backbench Member of Parliament serve on a standing and Sessional committee without contravening Rule 135 and Rule 161 of the Rules of Procedure that put limits on the size of the committees to 20 Members;

AWARE THAT if each of the 380 Members were to be allocated to the Sessional and Standing committees, each sessional committee would have 24 Members and each standing committee  would have 25 Members excluding the Business Committee since the majority of its Members is composed –(Interruption)”

MR WADRI: Order, Madam Speaker. We are in the Institution of Parliament, which runs under a multiparty dispensation. Our Rules of Procedure are very clear to the effect that the Members of the Opposition sit on your left hand side and those of the ruling party on your right hand side. We have got four doors reserved for either sides of the House that Members can use to access this Chamber.

But a few minutes back, while you were in your sit, I saw hon. Daudi Migereko and hon. Tress Buchanayandi, the Minister of Agriculture, walk across the Floor from the Opposition side door into the NRM side. Therefore, is it in order for those Members of Parliament to cross the Floor as if they are in a market when you are already fully seated in your chair?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I believe the two ministers were consulting the Members on that side about the budget. That is why they entered the Chamber from that side. Minister, please Proceed.

MR NASASIRA: Madam Speaker, before I was interrupted by a very unruly order, I was saying this: “AWARE THAT if each of the 380 Members were to be allocated to each Sessional and Standing committees, each of the Sessional Committee would have 24 while each Standing Committee would have 25 Members excluding the Business Committee since the majority of its Members are chairpersons of other committees;
AND FURTHER AWARE that full participation of all Members of Parliament on committees is permitted for equal representation and efficient discharge of Parliament functions through its committees;

NOTING THAT increasing the number of Members on the Sessional and Standing committees will enable every Member to serve on one Sessional and Standing committee except as may otherwise be provided for by the Rules of Procedure;

NOW THEREFORE, be resolved that Parliament amends Rule 135 and Rule 161 to vary the number of Members on the Standing and Sessional committees from 20 to 30. I beg to move, Madam Speaker.”

THE SPEAKER: Okay, is it seconded? Yes, hon. Hussen Kyanjo.

3.10
MR HUSSEIN KYANJO (JEEMA, Makindye Division West, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. In one of the meetings where we shared this experience with my senior colleague, the Government Chief Whip, we were able to dig into the experiences of the technical staff of this Parliament and we tried to discover whether there was any possibility of having either extra committees or something closer to that in order to accommodate all Members. What came out as a compromise was the position my senior colleague has presented to this House and I am here to second that position to allow every Member to participate on both the committees and to ask for the cooperation of all the Members to agree on this position in harmony. I beg to move. 

3.11 
MR STEPHEN BAKKA MUGABI (NRM, Bukooli County North, Bugiri): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I appreciate the motion on the Floor, but during the induction that we had in the conference hall, Members had issues with several rules and you advised that there is going to be a committee on Rules and Privileges that will look into all the rules. 

Therefore, I propose, if it is not too late, that the motion be changed to suspend that particular rule such that the Committee on Rules and Privileges can be able to look into the several issues that the Members had and we present a comprehensive report for the amendment of rules. The motion should then read, suspension of that particular rule to enable the committees be expanded and then later, the Committee on Rules and Privileges can go ahead to gather issues from Members. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

MR MUJUNI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Considering the fact that the composition and formation of committees is very important for this House, and considering the urgency of the formation of committees to start on the parliamentary work, and also given the fact that as Parliament we have the power and the mandate to amend the rules before us, I beg to second the motion that we amend the rules to allow the composition of the Members of Parliament to be 30 to allow the composition of committees to start their oversight work. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Members, let me explain the genesis of this motion. We sat down with the Chief Whips and distributed up to 25 Members per committee. We had 55 Members unaccounted for and we felt that it would be unfair to lock out 55 Members from any of the committees. So, we thought that you would accept that we only alter the figures for the number of committees so that the committees can be constituted and then the rules committee can sit down and handle all the other business. This is to enable all the Members to have a committee. We really had a problem because 55 Members had no committees. 

3.13
MR ODONGA OTTO (FDC, Aruu County, Pader): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity. To avoid a situation where we may need to have a similar motion, I think if you read rules 135 and 160, what we are actually trying to do is to get rid of the number of 20 Members. But I also think it would be a little dangerous to say 30 because a situation may arise where 30 may not even be the ideal number. 

So, I suggest we amend the motion – in fact I am now moving an amendment – to make the provision to read as, “Each committee shall consist of 20 Members elected from among Members of Parliament…” and then we can make a provision for consultation of the Speaker so that we do not tie our hands in setting 30 as the number. If we make provisions for the Speaker to be consulted as and when the need arises to expand the number even to 31, we do not still have to come back for another formal motion. So, that is the amendment I am moving at this stage. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Odonga Otto, the need has arisen. I am telling you that I could not accommodate 55 Members. 

MR ODONGA OTTO: What I am saying is that we do not have to state 30, just like we stated 20. Let us leave it open in consultation with the Speaker so that the number does not probably bring us back here again tomorrow, because 30 would be tying our hands the same way 20 has tied our hands. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, there is also a danger that some committees will be over-subscribed and others under-subscribed. You recall in the Eighth Parliament that there was a committee which never raised 20 Members yet there were those that had more than 20 Members. 

MR ODONGA OTTO: And that is exactly why I want your discretion because there is no way a committee would be under-subscribed on the advice of the Speaker, or even the reverse. (Laughter)

3.15
MR MEDARD SSEGGONA (DP, Busiro County East, Wakiso): Thank you, Madam Speaker. While I move in concurrence with hon. Odonga Otto, I think it is a question of language. What we should be saying is “…not less than and not more than…” because from the information we have received on the Floor, it appears there is a possibility of having less and a possibility of having more Members, who we cannot account for. I, therefore, suggest that we say, “…not less than 20 and not more than…” such that we cater for a situation where we have five Members or where we cannot raise 30 Members for the committee. 

MR KYANJO: Madam Speaker, we are making a fire brigade measure, to avail opportunity to the committees to start work. In the meantime as you have rightly guided, the entire matter of the Rules of Procedure is going to be dealt with by the relevant committee and will be debated by this House. It is, therefore, not necessary, in my opinion, to begin to fix conclusively this idea, when we have a wider opportunity of having the committee studying it professionally and bringing it to this House. 

So, I beg that Members bear with the position we have brought mechanically for now, so that we can begin business and after that, the committee will sit down and bring the most refined position where every individual who has got extra knowledge in this field will contribute positively. 

THE SPEAKER: Actually, may I urge Members that this arrangement will be in place for only this session and the rules committee, which I suspect is going to be the busiest for now, will have to handle all these issues in detail and make a report to us to debate. But Members must have committees and we must set up the committees for the due session. 

3.17
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr John Nasasira): Madam Speaker, it is important that we mention a figure because a figure determines the quorum and 30 gives allowance, even if Parliament were to expand by another 20 or more Members. So, I pray that the Members support this amendment that we move. 

3.17
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Nathan Nandala-Mafabi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. First of all, I want to confirm that we, in the Opposition, want to work together; that is why we have allowed our colleagues to sit this side – even hon. Nasasira is free to come -(Laughter)– the only problem I have is that the frontbench is reserved for my ministers. 

So, my colleagues are here temporarily, but you will be sitting behind. If we go by numbers, we have 12 standing committees and if you multiply them by 20, you get 360 and yet the Members who will be on the committees are those that are not ministers. So, if you subtract about 70 of them, you will remain with about 310 Members. We need to do some mathematics because of quorum issues which you have raised. I think we should know exactly how many Members are supposed to serve on committees and those are the exact numbers we should divide and get the right numbers. 

Moving on to sessional committees, when you talk about 30, you will need 390 Members and yet the number is about 300. So, I thought my Chief Whip from the Government side would apply some mathematics. I suggest, and that is why I am about to concur with the numbers of hon. Sseggona, that we have a minimum and a maximum, although that one has a danger. Let us get exactly what we need for now and then we let our Committee on Rules and Privileges come up with the exact numbers, which will be applicable after this session. I thank you. 

3.21
MR EMMANUEL DOMBO (NRM, Bunyole County East, Butaleja): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I had come to seek clarification regarding the implication of hon. Bakka’s proposal, if we only suspended the specific rules under which the committees are set up in order to allow the government and the Opposition whips to go and constitute committees. When the permutations have been thought out, they will be incorporated into the rules. As I walked over, somebody raised the issue of quorum. He said there may be some committees with quorum requirements whose numbers are very specific and must be mentioned in the Rules of Procedure. I do not know whether it is possible to resolve the numbers on the committees and the required quorum or let them make decisions now. 

Another issue, which we should put in mind, is that although this House is prevented from legislating in anticipation – but, Madam Speaker, at one time, there was a proposal to expand the number of districts. In that case, the number of Members of Parliament is likely to expand. These are complications which we could bear in mind as we discuss this issue. But would it be possible to suspend the specific rules for now in order to enable the Government Whip and Opposition Whip reconstitute the committee, and when they are done, they come and report to the House? The formula they come up with would be finally incorporated into the rules. I am seeking your guidance.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, believe me, in the last three weeks, I have sat with the whips and we have tried all the strategies. Really, there are Members who will not get committees. I am appealing to the Members to just accept the increase for this first session only and then task the Committee on Rules and Privileges to sit down and work it out scientifically – because Members must have committees! There are Members who do not have committees if we go by the old rules. 

3.23 
MR BARNABAS TINKASIIMIRE (NRM, Buyaga County West, Kibaale): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to support the Motion moved by my honourable Chief Whip because practically, when you look at the birth of twins, at least there must be a first person to come out. (Laughter) This is why I would not buy the idea that we only suspend and bring the amendments at a go when the Committee on Rules and Privileges will be ready. Let us follow the path of the Motion my Chief Whip has moved such that we can have the birth of Isingoma. I want to move a motion that a question be put. 

THE SPEAKER: Okay, hon. Members, I put the question that the question now be put.
 
(Question put and agreed to.)

I now put the question that this House do approve the Motion as moved by the Government Chief Whip and seconded by the Opposition Chief Whip.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Motion adopted.)

That would enable the whips to organise and we set up the committees tomorrow so that we can start business. 

MOTION THAT PARLIAMENT DO RESOLVE ITSELF INTO A COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY FOR CONSIDERATION AND APPROVAL OF VOTE-ON-ACCOUNT FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2011/2012


THE SPEAKER: Minister of Finance?

MRS OGWAL: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I realise that the government had to seek the intervention of Parliament to increase the number of ministers in this current Government, and I have been meant to believe that there are over 70 appointed ministers. I do not know how many have sworn-in, but more or less than 70. I have observed with a lot of concern that ministers, who were appointed to serve this country, have not taken their positions. Where are they sitting? Maybe they do not know where to sit. Can the Speaker guide these ministers as to where they are supposed to sit? If those who have been appointed and sworn-in are not ready to serve, I believe we have a flood of other MPs on the government side who could be appointed to serve as cabinet ministers. I am seeking guidance. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I am sure the ministers know that they are supposed to sit on the Front Bench.

MR OTTO: Madam Speaker, I think, other than the Minister of Defence taking his right seat, the Leader of Government Business should tell us where the other ministers are. Seventy is quite a number and we have only about 20 in the House, and we know there is no cabinet meeting today. Where are the others?

LT GEN. MOSES ALI: Madam Speaker, the reason why up to 70 ministers were appointed is because at any one time, there should be a minister here; whether cabinet minister or minister of state because they have all taken oath. So, you do not need to have a particular minister here; I think all ministers are represented and that cannot stop the business of the House.

THE SPEAKER: Now, Minister of Finance, let us go to the wages. 

3.31
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The salaries for the traditional civil servants are indicated under column No.3, which is wages. And salaries of staff, who are on contract, are indicated under non-wage, which is column No.4. We have agreed that the amount pertaining to salaries and wages of these contract persons will be identified and indicated as we go into supply. 

We have also agreed that within one week, we shall be able to provide the details of the salaries and wages, which are going to the contract staff, and other details will be in the estimate book, which will be provided to all Members of the House next week. 

3.33
MR GEOFFREY EKANYA (FDC, Tororo County, Tororo): Madam Speaker, the minister is presenting a block Vote-on-Account and the subheading for the recurrent budget indicates wage and non-wage for some votes. But when it comes to this institution, where the ministry erred by not separating – today, he would read this one separately and create a new subheading. For example, the Road Fund. Instead of the subheading reading: “Only non-wage recurrent vote”, it would now read that, “This allocation is for wage and non-wage.” He should read all those votes where the ministry erred and next week he should table here a detailed breakdown. 

But he cannot just say that we agreed without reading it because it has to be captured in the Hansard that Vote 116 – the subheading is not only for non-wage. Whatever we pass here will be immediately picked up by the Auditor-General, and how will he audit this if it is only reading one component of non-wage?

He was trying to make an argument that these are contract staff; but that does not stand. We have other institutions like UNRA, they also have contract staff, but the wage and the non-wage are separate; and so many other organizations. So, he must read it clearly and if it is acceptable to Parliament, he must say: “The following institutions have allocations of wage and non-wage” so that it is captured in the Hansard. And next week on Tuesday, he should table separate allocations, which the Auditor-General will then use for purposes of auditing. 

THE SPEAKER: But they are not very many – you can identify those which have been put under non-wage and speak to them separately so that they go in the Hansard and we pass the Vote-on-Account.

MR OMACH: Madam Speaker, my staff is already working on this; they are not very many. So, as we supply votes like Vote 116 - National Medical Stores, we will be able to read the wage component under this.

THE SPEAKER: So, would you like us to suspend for ten minutes?

MR OMACH: No, they are already working on it and as we go into supply, we should be having all the figures ready.

MR WADRI: Madam Speaker, hon. Fred Omach Jachan is a senior Member of this House. He has been in this work for quite a while. And he very well knew that as we approach July, Government would be coming with a request for Vote-on-Account to be appropriated by Parliament. Surely, is the hon. Minister justified to come and tell us that his technical staff will be ready with the document, when we are at committee stage, yet he knows that this information should be at his finger tips - he should have laid it on the Table and given it to Members so that Members are able to know what they are appropriating! Why wait until we are at committee stage before we get this information?

I, therefore, wish to move that we stand over this particular item since Government seems not to be ready to carry out its responsibility of tabling before Parliament a request for Vote-on-Account; we will only accept it when they are ready with that document. To me, I think they have not attached urgency to the issue at hand; so we can push it to tomorrow or any other day when they are ready with the document so that we are able to proceed with the document in our hands. But as of now, we are in the dark.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I want you to take note of what hon. Tanna said, that there are children in Mulago who urgently need this money. So, I want to suspend the House for 20 minutes to enable the minister to sort himself out; we need to supply this money today. So, House suspended for 20 minutes. 

(House was suspended at 3.37 p.m.) 

(On resumption at 4.40 p.m._)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, we suspended the House for 20 minutes to make some adjustments to the Vote-on-Account presentation, but we realised that it was necessary for all the Members to have the adjusted copies which was not possible in the 40 minutes for which we suspended. I would like now to adjourn the House to tomorrow at 2.00 p.m. so that the minister can circulate the adjusted copies to all the Members of the House. House adjourned to 2.00 p.m. tomorrow.

(The House rose at 4.42 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 28 June 2011 at 2.00 p.m.) 

