Disclaimer: The electronic version of the Official Report of the proceedings of Parliament (Hansard) is for information purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Office of the Clerk to Parliament.


Wednesday, 19 June 2019

Parliament met at 2.45 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this afternoon sitting. I would like to remind the whips to deal with the issue of the sessional committees because there is lethargy and uncertainty at this moment. I think you should handle this so that people know where they are or where they are not so that we can start working.

There is only one matter of national importance. I do not know where hon. Ogwal is; she is not here. Okay, let us hear from hon. Peter Ogwang.

2.48
MR PETER OGWANG (NRM, Usuk County, Katakwi): Madam Speaker, thank you very much for the opportunity. It was actually hon. Cecilia Ogwal who was meant to raise the matter but we discussed it as a team.

I stand here on a matter of national importance. Two days ago, there was a documentary, which ran on BBC. The title of the documentary is “stealing from the sick.” The documentary exposes the rot in the health sector of Uganda, specifically on how drugs are stolen from Ugandan Government hospitals, right from Kampala and across the country.

What is so painful is that we seem not to know what the problem is and so, I would like to thank the journalists who carried out a thorough investigation as far as identifying how the corrupt pharmacists – to begin with – in various hospitals across the country are colluding with corrupt, wrong personnel in the police, the hospital administration, clinics, district health officers, et cetera; the racket is big.

Therefore, we thought it wise that you allow us to show this documentary. Why do we request for this? It helps Members to understand the magnitude of how drugs are delivered to the hospitals but one or two days later, responsible officers tell the country that there are no drugs in the hospitals.

The fundamental question is: where do these drugs go? The documentary exposes the details of how drugs leave the hospital and are taken to be sold in private clinics in various parts of the country. For instance, in the documentary, there are cases in Arua, where nurses connive with people purporting to be journalists helping to investigate the scam, to the extent of them buying drugs which are marked “Government of Uganda drugs: Not For Sale.” Therefore, Madam Speaker, it is our humble appeal to you that you allow this House to watch this documentary.

The last one, as part of our prayers, is: can Government follow up to investigate and prosecute all those who have been shown in this documentary because they are there? It is not that they are not seen; the people’s faces are there because they did not know that they were being recorded.

Secondly, can these journalists also try to act professionally; issues of Uganda should not be taken to the international scene? They did a good job. What was wrong with them bringing such a documentary to you, Madam Speaker, to inform the Parliament about what is happening?

I appeal to the journalists to learn to keep what is for us. For instance, this documentary is international today. You just log on and see it there online. Can we love our country? We know corruption is bad but can we also, once in a while, try to hide what is for us because I do not think what is for Britain is shown all over BBC for us to see?

They did an excellent job but for purposes of protecting Uganda, it is our humble appeal that we thank these journalists for the work done. I would really like to commend them for unearthing the rot in the health sector. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

2.52
THE OPPOSITION CHIEF WHIP (Mr Ibrahim Ssemujju): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I join my colleague who is praying and requesting you to allow Parliament to watch this documentary. The only area of disagreement is to turn journalists into informants. Journalism is meant to be for public consumption. I think the request should be to Government maybe to do and film similar documentaries like journalists are doing.

Otherwise, I am reluctant to join you in asking that journalists – because corruption is not for Uganda. The moment one steals, they are supposed to be exposed to everybody. You can’t say – and I think that is the reason you want the Speaker to grant your request to have this matter watched - if you did not want the country, you should be condemning them for filming it, which you are not doing.

Therefore, I join him in requesting that we watch this documentary but I disagree with him on the point that when we have got people who are stealing; that is an in-house issue that we must cover up and then discuss internally.

THE SPEAKER: How long will it take? Can we view it for five minutes? Is it big - may be 10 minutes.

(A video presentation was made.)

THE SPEAKER: Okay. Honourable members we agreed that we watch for 10 minutes. If you could halt it- I understand this film takes almost an hour. I ask the Committee on Health to study it and then give us a report because we cannot take two hours watching this unless we make a special arrangement. However, let us ask the Committee on Health to study it and give us a report.

Is Dr Bukenya here? Anyway, clerk, please inform them to study that film. Thank you. 

There was another matter by hon. Balyeku.

3.07
MR MOSES BALYEKU (NRM, Jinja Municipality West, Jinja): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand on a matter of national importance. In Uganda, we have something we call patriotism but which we fail to practice in terms of service delivery and to love our own nation.

The Uganda Cranes is going to participate in the African Cup of Nations (AFCON). This Parliament has been a champion of sports. We have been agitating for funds and encouraging the country to qualify. When we qualified, we were all jubilant.

When it comes to giving Ugandans a chance to watch these games, the Government cannot do that. What is the purpose of sending our team to go and participate in international games when Ugandans cannot watch on television their own country participating? 

Madam Speaker, we have what Signet and UBC which is 80 per cent of Ugandans watching; not DSTV which is owned by a few people who can afford it. Why has Government denied Signet and UBC only Shs 1 billion to allow Ugandans to watch Uganda Cranes as far as deep in the villages?

It is not prudent for us as Parliament to enjoy facilities of taxpayers and yet those people cannot also enjoy their national team when it is participating. I would like to pray and request that you ask the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to go and look for money to give to Signet and UBC - only Shs 1 billion such that Ugandans can enjoy football because it unites us. 

Everybody is happy that the Uganda Cranes are going and we have even allocated them money even in the Budget. However, the Government of Uganda – Shs 1 billion for Ugandans to watch television - you have been wishing the Uganda Cranes success all over the social media. You are one leader who has done it very well.

Madam Speaker, you have wished them success and Parliament has done so but what about the people in Mbulamuti? How will they watch it? What about those as far as Koboko, Iganga, Dokolo; how will they watch? They all cannot afford satellite television -

Madam Speaker, it is my humble prayer that you ask the minister to go and look for money now and pay Signet so that Ugandans can watch television. It is in your power; instruct him to do so that Ugandans can watch television.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I would like to thank hon. Balyeku for raising this issue. Just before I came down to the plenary, I received a letter which was described as “urgent” from the Uganda Broadcasting Corporation. I would like to read it. It was written to the Speaker. 

“Request for support to television live broadcast of AFCON. We would like to request for support for the rights acquisition to broadcast the 2019 AFCON in which the Uganda National football team, the Uganda Cranes, will participate from June 21 to July 19 2019. 

AFCON is the biggest tournament organised by the confederation of African football every two years with the biggest youth in topographic football audience. This age group falls on European, African and domestic leagues with obsessive passion.

UBC engaged AUB in a negotiation, which was concluded with the final offer of £35,000, earning a 53 per cent discount from the usual offer. The offer includes £11,340 on outstanding subscription... Apparently we owe something in the background.

UBC is required to pay £24,8660 for the rights of the 10 tournaments as it clears the outstanding dues.

The purpose of this letter is to request your office to lobby Government for £35,0000 clearance of the first dues and the 2019 rights dues for the live broadcast of the tournament. We thank you, in anticipation.”

This is from the managing director of UBC. Therefore, our national broadcaster is desperate to permit Ugandans to watch their children. We have been here encouraging them to go to the finals and now they are there. Now the Bakiga in Bunyonyi will not be able to watch them.

3.12
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Planning) (Mr David Bahati): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. It is obvious that we will support UBC to broadcast live our team; there is no doubt about that.

The only procedural issue is that we are surprised that we have not been approached. Therefore, we encourage the Minister of Education and Sports and the Minister of Information, Communication Technology and National to put in the request and then we work on it urgently rather than UBC moving around and bothering members of Parliament. 

Therefore, you have our confirmation that when we get a request from the Ministry of Education and Sports working with the Minister of Information, ICT and National Guidance; we shall work on it appropriately.

THE SPEAKER: The Minister of Education and Sports is here. Hon. Ssemujju -

MR SSEMUJJU: Madam Speaker, thank you very much. The clarification is, we recently borrowed a lot of money for UBC in this Parliament. The idea was to make UBC a competitive platform that should even be able to meet its obligation, including the subscription and then be able to attract advertisers like any other platform.

Therefore, the clarification I seek is whether that money - first of all, there is a process, there is where they got and whether they are restructuring and whether that money can be able to meet simple things like Shs 1 billion. We borrowed nearly over Shs 70 billion for UBC.

MR KASIBANTE: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Hon. Ssemujju almost spoke my mind but will just enhance it. Playing football for example is a sport but broadcasting that sport is business. Uganda Broadcasting Corporation is a corporation that does business. When you broadcast a football match, you attract advertisers.

Before this letter could come to the Speaker, it should have gone to the potential advertisers. For Shs 1 billion, if you broadcast the entire AFCON, it could multiply by 10 if you get money from advertisers. It is good that the Minister of Education and Sports. Before the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development makes a requisition, UBC in charge? Isn’t it a business corporation? When you broadcast football, don’t you get money?

I can only inform you that the television rights are bought. Africa Cup of Nations (AFCON) is not a Ugandan competition and even if you qualified, you cannot get it free. There is a television station that got rights and you can only sub-lease from it. However, it is a business that UBC can transact and get its own money without even using any other budgeted item. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: The Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development has said he is waiting for a requisition. Is it from the ICT minister? I do not know who is supposed to requisition. 

3.16
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (HIGHER EDUCATION) (Dr John Muyingo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. For sure, Ugandans are waiting to see their boys play. If it is just a matter of generating a request, it can even be done before we leave Parliament today. (Laughter)

However, I am not sure whether broadcasting the tournament using our television is a responsibility of the Ministry of Education and Sports. I strongly feel that if any request is to be generated, it has to be done by the minister responsible for UBC. I would like to get guidance.

THE SPEAKER: That is why I was asking. In fact, this business belongs to the office of the Minister of Information, ICT and National Guidance so he is directed to immediately put in a requisition so that the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development can facilitate it. This is not much money. (Laughter) Can we have feedback tomorrow when we convene? Thank you.

MR MACHO: Madam Speaker, there is a matter concerning the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. I came from Busia this morning. Yesterday as I addressed my people, there was a very big question on Bank of Uganda.

Madam Speaker, I was shocked that even as I was driving to Kampala, I heard two statements; the Government spokesperson was giving a statement concerning the Bank of Uganda saga. I call it a ‘“saga” because we have many Government spokespersons who are giving different statements.

The police spokesperson, CP Enanga has told the whole nation that there is a problem that the pallets that came were more than the ones that were supposed to be received by Bank of Uganda. Moreover, at the same time, the Government spokesperson, Mr Ofwono Opondo, is saying, “No, the condition is normal.”

We all know that whenever a country gets excess currency that has not been ordered, it brings a problem in the economy. I, therefore, would like the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development who is here to clarify to Ugandans and build confidence in them. For a matter to come to an extent of a team from the Anti-Corruption Unit, moreover, from the President’s Office is a very serious one.

Therefore, I do not know whether we are proceeding well that this matter has been in all circles of this country for almost three days and no statement has been given at all by the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, the matter has been in the public domain. You can tell us what is happening.

3.20
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, all of us know that this case was reported to the Anti-Corruption Unit of the President’s Office and right now it is being handled by the Criminal Investigations Directorate (CID) of the Uganda police. 

It is true that there is an issue to do with an air cargo plane, which was carrying our currency to Uganda and was found with extra items. At the moment, the investigators are investigating and we are waiting for a report.

What we can assure the country at the moment is that we do not see any indication that this incidence is going to affect the economy in terms of inflation or otherwise. However, we are on top of it to ensure that if there was anything wrong, it is found out. 

Therefore, I beg that we give the investigators a chance. We have given them very little time to tell us what was on the plane. Then we shall come here and inform the whole country. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the matter has happened and it is under investigation. I do not know whether we can discuss without going into the evidence. I think it would not be right.

We cannot resolve contradictions here because if we start, we will say the Governor is not right or the other one is. I do not think that is right. Let us wait for the report of the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development.

MR OSHABE: Madam Speaker, I think this is a very important matter. As Parliament, we must ask the minister or give them a certain period of time on when they are supposed to come and report back to Parliament.

If we just leave it open – it began as currency, now it has turned into cargo. If you give them another six months, it will be items and by the end of the year, it will be something different. Can we proceed by giving the minister a given period of time when he must come back and brief us on what is going on with Bank of Uganda? 

Madam Speaker, you are aware that we have just finished one scandal with commercial banks. Now there is another regarding currency. Ugandans need to hear what Parliament is doing about the continuous sagas in Bank of Uganda.

THE SPEAKER: The difficulty will be for us to start investing yet the CID and State House are investigating already. Can we give a fortnight for an interim statement?

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, if you allow, we can give an interim statement next week on Tuesday on how far we have gone. However, I would like to assure hon. Oshabe that we do not know whether they are bags or currency. What we know is that there were items on the plane. Thank you.

MS CECILIA OGWAL: Madam Speaker, I think the concern of Parliament at this moment is who is investigating who? We are concerned because we are getting contradictions from the police and other agencies where we would have got the confidence that the Government is in control and doing something.

As of now considering the way the matter is, I even wish this Parliament takes a step further. We may have to call in the Scotland Yard. (Laughter) Yes, things have gone out of hand. 

If we had acted earlier on the report of the Committee on Commissions, Statutory Authorities and State Enterprises (COSASE) and caused an overhaul of the Bank of Uganda, probably we would have intercepted this issue. 

However, we slowed down because our role is only to guide Government. We have guided Government but there is no implementation. Another crisis has come up after the Shs 90 billion, and other crisis is likely to come. Madam Speaker, we need a more serious investigation that will go deeper, overhaul Bank of Uganda and give us confidence that the Government is in control. This is my proposal.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable members. The minister has undertaken to bring an interim report on Tuesday next week. Therefore, let us allow him to bring that report. If we are not satisfied, we can proceed to Scotland Yard. (Laughter)
 
3.25
THE CHIEF OPPOSITION WHIP (Mr Ibrahim Ssemujju): Madam Speaker, I think the issue is not just this particular incident. The issue is the integrity of the Central Bank and the safety of the currency. This is just an illustration. After the investigations by Parliament, the next thing that you do not want to hear is that the Governor, Bank of Uganda is calling State House to investigate. 

Therefore, the statement must not just address this particular issue but the integrity of the Central Bank; whether people are not sleeping on the job and whether the currency - not just the one they brought from wherever but the one they are keeping at the Central Bank. If there is a suspicion that this one could have been stolen, what about the one they have? The Governor speaks as if he is a very helpless person; calling State House to come and help him. Is he sleeping on the job? The integrity is what we should be addressing, not just this particular incident, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I would like to remind the Government that the Treasury Memorandum on that report is due around 12th July. Your six months are almost over. I propose that we skip item (c) because I do not see the other parties here. Let us go to item four.

3.27
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Serere): Madam Speaker, I had an issue of public importance, which I had spoken to you about. I call this a matter of public importance because it involves senior members of society. On 19 September 2016, His Excellency did a noble thing and appointed presidential advisors. 

Unfortunately, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and the Office of the Minister for the Presidency has not lived up to the expectation of providing facilitation to these members. To date, some of them have even passed on before they could get allowances or facilitation.

We had Prof. Mondo Kagonyera, Dr Nathan Karema, Dr David Kazungu, Lt Col Anthony Kyakaabale, Col William Omaria, Bishop Nicodemus Okille, Pr Christopher Besweri Kaswabuli, Mr Victor Kobel, Mr Henry Makmot, Mr Ogwanga Ochoo, Mr Michael Dramadri, Mr Maimuna Juma Yusuf, Mr Patrick Lajul, Mr Patrick Zikanshagiza, Mr Richard Kaijuka, Ms Concy Oboma, Ms Ann Mary Kabasindi who has since passed on and Ms Jane Frances Kagaayi.

To date, these elders have not received anything from their appointment. May we ask the minister responsible for the presidency - this letter was copied to him - why he has not acted on the appointment of the President by providing the necessary facilitation that is needed to enable them perform their duties, Madam Speaker? I can lay this on the Table, Madam Speaker.

3.30
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, it is true that those senior citizens were appointed to be presidential advisors and they have not taken up their offices for the last one year. However, the good news is that in this budget, which we passed on 28 May 2019, we provided the resources needed to facilitate their offices. Therefore, beginning with July, they will start working.

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, may I inquire from the minister; this appointment has an effective date and one financial year has passed. Are you going to pay the arrears of that financial year? It is not just from July because that is what was committed here as information to them.

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, that is an administrative issue that we shall handle internally.

THE SPEAKER: Okay.

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, allow me to lay this letter dated 19 September 2016 from State House and signed by His Excellency the President appointing the people that I have read as presidential advisors. I beg to lay.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable minister, we look forward to hearing from you, having accomplished that issue in July. 

Honourable members, we assigned the Committee on Health to watch that film but I request hon. Ogwang to supply the link to the Clerk so that members can have it on their iPads and study it in their own time.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FOR THE COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC ACCOUNTS, COMMISSIONS, STATUTORY AUTHORITIES AND STATE ENTERPRISES ON THE AUDITED PUBLIC ACCOUNTS OF SELECTED STATUTORY CORPORATIONS FOR THE FINANCIAL YEARS 2013-2014 TO 2015-2016

3.33
THE CHIEF OPPOSITION WHIP (Mr Ibrahim Ssemujju): Madam Speaker, hon. Francis Mwijukye lost his father and many of our colleagues have gone to Buhweju for the burial. However, on this particular matter, I think we need your guidance. The reports that are in question were done and processed by the committee whose tenure expired but they were laid on the Floor of Parliament.

Madam Speaker, money was used to process this work. The guidance I am seeking is whether the current leadership of the committee can present reports they did not process or whether we may have to adopt them as Parliament because a lot of work went into doing this work. That is where I am seeking guidance, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the Committee of COSASE is a committee of the House like any other committee. The work they do is for this House; it is not for individual groups of members. Therefore, I would like to defer this to tomorrow so that we can have either the present chairperson and vice chairperson or the outgoing to present because it is our work; we spent time on it. Thank you. It is deferred to tomorrow.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON HUMAN RIGHTS ON THE RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE 19TH ANNUAL REPORT OF THE UGANDA HUMAN RIGHTS COMMISSION, 2016

3.34
MS JANEPHER NANTUME EGUNYU (NRM, Woman Representative, Buvuma): Madam Speaker, this is a report of the Committee on Human Rights on the recommendations of the 19th Annual Report of the Uganda Human Rights Commission.

Madam Speaker, this report is big and it is already on the members’ iPads. I beg that I read the executive summary of the report; the introduction, the methodology we used to get this information and the concerns of the Uganda Human Rights Commission that were noted with greater concern. We will then go to the committee observations and recommendations.

THE SPEAKER: Yes, you do not need to read everything. Members can even read the methodology. Just read the introduction and go to the executive summary and finish with the observations.

MS EGUNYU: Most obliged, Madam Speaker.

In accordance with Article 52(2) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, the Uganda Human Rights Commission (UHRC) is mandated to publish periodic reports on its findings and submit annual reports on the state of human rights and freedoms in the country. 
The 19th Annual Report of the Uganda Human Rights Commission of 2016 was laid before the House on 25 May 2017 and referred to the Committee on Human Rights for further scrutiny, in accordance with Rule 182 (c) of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament.

The committee has considered the report and now wishes to report.

Methodology

In accordance with the Uganda Human Rights Commission Report, the committee held meetings with the following relevant Ministries, Departments and Agencies: 

    1. Ministry of Internal Affairs; 
    2. Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs; 
    3. Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development; 
    4. Uganda Prisons Service; 
    5. Uganda Police Force; 
    6. Uganda Law Reform Commission; 
    7. National Environment Management Authority; 
    8. Ministry of Health; 
    9. Office of the Directorate for Public Prosecutions; 
    10. Ministry of Education and Sports; and
    11. Ministry of Public Service.
In addition, the committee received written responses from the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. 

Madam Speaker, we had to observe entity by entity and we began with the Ministry of Internal Affairs, specifically the Uganda Prisons Service and the Uganda Police Force. 

Uganda Prisons Service

We began with the Uganda Prisons Service and this is what was noted. In most of the things that were noted, we had to make observations and recommendations. 

Observations 

The committee observed that enforcement of the prescribed working hours for prisoners - because the inmates are supposed to work six hours per day. The committee observes with concern that in some prisons the six hours per day as stipulated in the Uganda Prisons Service Standing Orders was not being adhered to and prisoners are being made to work for longer hours.

The committee recommendations are as follows:

    a) While it may be necessary to take prisoners out to work, Uganda Prisons Service should stick to the provisions in the law; they should not exceed the number of hours provided for in the law.
    b) Officers found to engage in human rights abuse should be held personally liable. 
    c) Prisoners’ earnings should be recorded and paid to them.

Revision of remuneration of prison labour

The committee observes that the revised rate was still very low compared to the market rates. Uganda Prisons Service is not bound by the guidance from Uganda Bureau of Standards. Therefore, it should not rely on their stated rates.
The committee recommends that remuneration of prison labour should be revised.

Introduction of rehabilitation programmes to the prison

The committee observes as follows:

    a) Although rehabilitation programmes are in place in most prisons, some prisoners are not keen on benefitting from the programme.
    b) Teaching facilities/scholastic materials are not adequate and in some prisons there are not enough teachers for all the subjects.
    c) Students lack adequate reading and studying conditions; and
    d) The committee is also concerned about continuity of education in that an inmate enrolled in prison offering primary education is not able to continue their studies because of lack of further education facilities and services at the same prison.
    e) The committee recommendations are as follows:
    f) The prisoners should be encouraged to embrace these programmes since they offer them skills that they will use when they are out of prison.
    g) Prisoners enrolled in primary, secondary and tertiary education should be provided with enough scholastic materials and adequate learning conditions; and
    h) The Ministry of Education and Sports should ensure that enough teachers are posted in prisons. 

Provisions of protective gear to detainees

The Uganda Human Rights Commission established that detainees in only 38 per cent of the prison farms had protective gear. Although the Uganda Prisons Service tried to provide protective gear every financial year for inmates engaged in productive activities, not all prisons were covered.

The committee observed that prisoners’ safety while working on prison farms is paramount. Therefore, it is an obligation of prison authorities to provide protective gear, like gloves and gumboots, to ensure safety of inmates. 

The committee recommends that funds be availed to enable Uganda Prisons Service provide protective gear to all inmates in all prisons, to enable them work under favourable conditions, especially prisoners involved in using chemicals for spraying pesticides. 

The committee further recommends that some of the proceeds from the prison farms should be used to purchase some protective gear. 

Provision of toilet facilities to prison farms

The committee is concerned that there are no toilet facilities for the prisoners while they are working on farms. The prisoners are required to walk back to the prisons to use the prison facilities. 

The committee recommends that provision of toilet facilities for prisoners while working on farms should be done as a matter of urgency to stop exposing the prisoners to dehumanising conditions when they need to respond to the call of nature.

Right to adequate food

The Uganda Human Rights Commission reported that in 70 per cent of prison farms, prisoners are provided with three meals constituting porridge for breakfast and posho and beans for lunch and supper. 

However, in prison farms such as Namalu in Nakapiripirit and Patongo in Agago Districts, breakfast is not provided and a consolidated meal of posho and beans is served between 3.00 p.m. to 5.00 p.m.

Committee observation

The committee commends the prisons that provide three meals to the inmates. However, the committee is concerned that some prisoners are not only denied adequate meals but are also not provided with drinking water while they work on the farms. 

The committee recommendations are:

    a) Prisoners should be provided with adequate meals and drinking water while at work. 
    b) Feeding in prisons should be standardised throughout the country; and
    c) The Uganda Prisons Service should monitor prison farms in Kayanja and Mutukula in Rakai Districts.

Separation of Juveniles from adult offenders

The Uganda Human Rights Commission recommended that juveniles should be separated from adult offenders.

The committee observes as follows:

    a) This has been a constant concern in all Uganda Human Rights Commission reports but little has been done.
    b) From its oversight visits to prisons and police stations in selected districts, the committee noted that many police stations lack reception centres for juveniles hence children in conflict with the law are kept in the same cells with adults.

Committee recommendation

The Government should strictly implement the Uganda Human Rights Commission (UHRC) recommendations and United Nations guidelines to ensure that children are separated from adult offenders while in detention. 

Congestion in prisons: 

1. 	The committee observed that many of the prisons are dilapidated, especially those in local governments. 
2. 	Majority of the prisons are inaccessible to Persons With Disability (PWDs).

Committee recommendation

1. 	Community service, plea bargaining and holding court sessions in prisons should be implemented to reduce congestion. 
2. 	The judiciary should put in place a specific programme to clear prisons of petty offenders. This will decongest prions.

On bucket waste disposal system, it was observed that the bucket waste disposal system was still being used in most prisons. Uganda Prison Service stated that plans were underway to eliminate the use of the bucket system in 158 prisons that were using the bucket system. 

Committee observation 

The committee commends the Uganda Prison Service for the effort that it has put in place to eliminate the bucket system in prisons.

Committee recommendation

The committee recommends that the Uganda Prison Service must ensure that there is complete elimination of the use of the bucket system because this practice is dehumanising and infringes on human dignity thereby contravening Article 24 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, which states that no person shall be subjected to any form of torture, cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment. 

On the right to access to justice, the UHRC reported that in some districts, new judicial officers had been deployed leading to improved access to justice for prisoners. Furthermore, positive highlights of improved access to justice including plea bargaining sessions were being conducted in Gulu and Lira High Courts.

Committee observation

During the committee oversight visits, it was established that some prisons lack means of transporting prisoners and staff to court and prisoners had to walk long distances to court. The committee is concerned that the long distances pose challenges to prisoners, especially the sick and the physically impaired therefore, denying them access to the courts. 

Committee recommendation

The Government should allocate sufficient resources to the prison services to acquire the necessary transportation of the prisoners.

The UHRC reported that it did not find cases of torture reported by inmates against staff and the Katikkiros in over 80 per cent of the prisons inspected. However, there were still reports of torture where the Katikiros usually beat up their fellow inmates for reasons such as lagging behind while working on the farm.

Committee observation

The committee observed that despite the Anti-Torture Act coming into force, cases of torture by the UPS are still rampant. In addition, the intervention of the UPS of training of officers is not achieving its desired results of eradicating torture in the police cells. 

Committee recommendation

The police force should have mechanism to ensure that the training of officers on the implementation of the Anti-Torture Act is effective. 

General committee observations on prisons:

1. 	Some prisoners had torn uniforms. 
2. 	Some prisoners are kept in prisons that are very far from their home districts. 
3. 	The facilities for women in prisons like beds, toilets and sanitary towels are not adequate. 
4. 	The money paid to the unskilled prisoners, Shs 280, is too little and inadequate to sustain the prisoners and their families. 
5. 	Water systems in many prisons have broken down leading to the blockage of the many water borne toilets resulting into a very bad stench and other inconveniences.

Committee recommendations

 1. 	The public should be sensitised about Anti-Torture Act in order to enjoy their rights even when they are offenders. 
2. 	The Ministry of Internal Affairs (prisons department) should work hand-in-hand with other ministries to dispose of cases, especially petty cases in order to ease the congestion in prisons. 
3. 	There should be improvement in the dressing of prisoners. 
4. 	All prisons should be provided with vehicles to transport prisoners to court and farms.

Uganda Police Force

Complaints management in 2016

1) 	Torture in Uganda: This is a persistent human rights challenge. 

The UHRC recommended that Uganda Police Force should adhere to the law and equip its officers with the necessary facilities to enable them to efficiently perform their duties and fulfil the constitutional obligations to bring suspects to court.
The UHRC still recommended that state agencies should ensure that errant officers that perpetrate torture are prosecuted under the Prohibition and Prevention of Torture Act 2012, in addition, to facing internal disciplinary action.

Committee observation

Article 24 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda and Section 3 (1) of the Prohibition and Prevention of Torture Act 20l2 state that no person shall be subjected to any form of torture, cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment.

Article 44 provides for non-derogation of the enjoyment of freedom from torture, cruel, inhuman and degrading treatment. 

Committee recommends that: 

1. 	Government should put in place the necessary regulations to ensure the full implementation of the Prevention and Prohibition of Torture Act, 20l2 and that appropriate training on the Act is carried out for security services to ensure its effective application.
2. 	Government specifically UPDF and other security organs should ensure that the enforcement and implementation of the Anti- Torture law is in compliance with the constitutional guarantees and the country’s obligations under international and regional law to respect and protect the right of everyone in Uganda, to exercise their human rights to freedom of expression and peaceful assembly.
3. 	Government should take concrete measures to ensure effective implementation of the anti-torture law including full and transparent investigation of all torture incidents and prosecution of perpetrators.

The UHRC recommended that the Ministry of Internal Affairs should invest in the use of forensic investigations; equip and train Uganda Police Force (UPF) in the use of modern investigative mechanisms, including setting up specialised units to investigate the crime of torture.

UHRC recommended that UPF should sensitise their personnel on the implementation of the Robben Island Guidelines and the Luanda Guidelines on conditions of arrest, police custody and pre-trial detention.

UHRC recommended that the Ministry of Internal Affairs should ensure that juveniles are separated from adult offenders in all detention facilities and that children who are incarcerated with their imprisoned mothers are catered for. This is a recurrent issue that needs to be urgently addressed.

General Committee Observations

The committee made the following observations:

1. 	Torture: Article 24 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda and Section 3 (1) of the Prohibition and Prevention of Torture Act, 2O12 state that: "No person shall be subjected to any form of torture or cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment." Article 44 provides for non-derogation from the enjoyment of freedom of torture and cruel, inhuman and degrading treatment. 

Furthermore, Article 28 (3) (a) provides that "Every person is presumed innocent until proved guilty or until that person has pleaded guilty.”

These are the foundation of our criminal justice system, it is important that Government adheres to the principle of presumption of innocence for all suspects until their cases are proved against them.

2. There is ineffective implementation of the PPTA due to various reasons, such as, lack of knowledge of the legal provisions treating torture as a breach of the professional code of conduct and the lack of goodwill to investigate perpetrators of torture.

3. Delayed payment of tribunal awards to victims of torture since the monies are expected to cater for the specialised treatment and rehabilitation of survivors of torture who have in most cases lost their livelihood.

4. There is rampant use of mobile phones in crime. It was noted that all kidnaps are carried out with the aid of mobile phones. Police officers have failed to establish who the people who use those mobile phones to commit crimes are. 

5. There is impunity and failure to punish perpetrators. Acts of torture are condoned by some leaders of institutions that are supposed to combat the vice. The committee is concerned that some leaders' attitude, practices and behaviour such as the promotion in rank or transfer of services of alleged perpetrators shows acceptance of the practice. 

6. 	Some law enforcers have been accused of breaking the law on torture but they have subsequently been recruited into the security agencies. 

7. 	There is lack of government specialised treatment and rehabilitation centres for survivors of torture. 

8. 	There are several known places in the country where the police are still torturing people. 

9. 	There is excessive use of force on suspects and prisoners. The committee is concerned that torture has continued with impunity and there are so many extra-judicial cases. 

10. 	Suspects are made to pay for police bond which violates the right of citizens. 

11. 	There is lack of alternative investigative tools and techniques.

12. 	There are very many civilians in possession of firearms and some of them are using the firearms to commit crime.

13. 	The poor way of handling cases is leading to congestion of prisons. 

14. 	The matter of juveniles being incarcerated with adults is a recurrent matter in all the reports.

Committee Recommendations

1. 	Government should put in place the necessary regulations to ensure the full implementation of the Prevention and Prohibition of Torture Act, 2Ol2 and appropriate training on the Act should be carried out for security services to ensure its effective application. 

2. 	Government, specifically UPF and the UPDF should ensure that the enforcement and implementation of the Anti-Torture Law is in compliance with the constitutional guarantees and the country's obligations under international and regional laws to respect and protect the right of everyone in Uganda, to exercise their human rights and freedom of expression and peaceful assembly.

3. 	More scene-of-crime officers should be trained.

4. 	Uganda Police Force (UPF) should carry out public education and sensitisation on their different roles, in order to change the attitude of the public towards police.

On the issue of alcohol and illicit drug abuse by youth and children in selected districts in Uganda, UHRC recommended that Ministry of Internal Affairs and Uganda Police Force should put in place appropriate digital security tracking systems on all border entry points for crime prevention purposes focusing on drug trafficking.

Committee Observations

1. 	There are several negative effects of illicit drug and alcohol abuse that include affecting health, loss of life, crime, juvenile delinquency, domestic violence, family breakdown, school drop-outs, low levels of productivity, impact on the rights of girls and young women, among others. Therefore this is a matter that needs to be addressed with utmost urgency. 

2. 	The committee further notes that there are several challenges faced in addressing illicit drug and alcohol abuse because these vices are brought on by: youth unemployment, inadequate access to specialised health services for alcohol and drug addiction, public ignorance and lack of information about its effects, influence from the alcohol manufacturing and marketing industry.

3. 	There are still gaps in existing legal and institutional frameworks as elaborated.

4. 	The consumption of alcohol in schools mainly in sachets has greatly increased.

Committee Recommendations
The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should allocate adequate funding to the Anti-Narcotic Unit of the Uganda Police Force to recruit and train anti-narcotic and customs officers to detect and investigate drug traffickers and purchase appropriate narcotics tracking equipment.

The Ministry of Internal Affairs should work with the Ministry of Education and Sports to establish some training/technical institutions to train youth on life skills. This will engage the youth and therefore deter them from engaging in unbecoming activities as a result of idleness or unemployment. 

Punishment of victims of drug and alcohol abuse should be aimed at reforming or deterring culprits. There is need for stronger penalties that will act as a deterrent. 

The existing laws should be amended or reviewed as a matter of urgency to address the gaps as observed by the committee so as to provide for strong and deterrent penalties. 

The Government should control the packaging of spirits in sachets and should implement the recommendation by Parliament to restrict packaging of not less than 250 ml quantities.

On human rights issues in the 2016 general elections, UHRC recommended that Uganda Police Force should respect human rights at all times when policing elections by, for instance, employing crowd control methods that take into account respect for human rights. Errant officers who violate human rights should be held to account and punished in order to fight impunity.

Committee observation

Every Ugandan of voting age has a right to vote. Therefore, there should not be any circumstance that curtails the enjoyment of human rights during the election process.

Committee recommendations

All Government institutions, the Independent Electoral Commission, security agencies, political players, non-state actors and other stakeholders must work together to ensure that elections are free and fair. 

Government should facilitate the UHRC and Independent Electoral Commission to sensitise the masses on the need to have peaceful elections, and also ensure that the Police Professional Standards Unit acts within the law. 

The Uganda Human Rights Commission recommended that the Uganda Police Force should invest in training and retraining of law enforcement agents to equip them with modern investigation skills, techniques and equipment to avoid the use of torture in obtaining information.

Committee observation

The committee is concerned that the outcome of training of the law enforcement agents is not visible. If the knowledge and skills acquired from the training is applied, it will make investigations easier and we would see less cases of torture.

Committee recommendations

    1. Those charged with training of the law enforcement agents should make sure that the trained officers have actually acquired the requisite skills.
    2. Crimes today have become very sophisticated and, therefore, the investigators should have the skills and techniques to detect crimes and criminals. 
    3. Uganda Police Force should be given sufficient funding to ensure that the officers are well-equipped. 
    4. Trained officers should exercise utmost restraint in dealing with the electorate and always ensure that they are within the confines of the law.

Ministry of Gender Labour and Social Development

Emerging human rights concerns

The UHRC expressed concern over child marriages and related human rights implications in selected districts of Lango, West Nile, Busoga and Karamoja region. The UHRC recommended that the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development should ensure that there is provision of livelihood programmes to improve economic empowerment of victims of child marriages and to lift people out of poverty, generally.

Committee observations

    1. The Youth Livelihood Programme was abused because the youth were not getting what they sign for and even the little they get they share among themselves and do not use it for what it is meant for. 
    2. The youth were not sensitised before the programme was put in place. Therefore, the programme was abused.
    3. The Youth Livelihood Programme was meant to assist the poorest of the poor but this is not the case. 
    4. The term “child marriage” is a misnomer and it should be treated as defilement and should be severely punished. This vice should not be tolerated.

Committee recommendations

    1. There should be sensitisation on the implications of early marriages. 
    2. The culprits of child marriages should face the law; defilement should be treated with all the contempt it deserves. 
    3. Parents and the general public should be sensitised regarding the law on defilement and on the nurturing and upbringing of their children. 
    4. The Youth Livelihood Programme is a very important programme that will engage the youth. Therefore, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should avail the required funds to enable the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development revamp the programme.
    5. The youth should be trained in the objectives of the programme and its intended benefits so that the proceeds from the programme are not misused.

The UHRC recommended that the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development should undertake community sensitisation on the human rights implications of early and forced marriages as well as the Kigali and African Union declarations.

Committee observation

The committee observed that Government has enough money to enable it disseminate information on the human rights implications of early and forced marriages but because of the poor choice of the media that it uses, the information does not realise the desired impact because only a small percentage of the population receives the information.

Committee recommendations

    1. Better and more localised ways of disseminating information should be used in addition to using radio and TV that only reach a small percentage of the population. 
    2. The ministry should have a programme where they engage the youth who seek employment abroad. The youth should be made to understand that if they are able to raise the money to take them abroad, then such money can be used as start-up capital for business. 
    3. The ministry should work with the local governments to sensitise people about the effects of early marriages and teenage pregnancies.

The UHRC recommended that the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development should ensure that the unemployed youth who are no longer in formal education should be equipped with skills so that they are not lured into early marriages or defilement.

Committee observations

The committee observes that the ministry is developing very many programmes at the same time but at the end of it all, there is limited impact created, for instance, the Youth Livelihood Programme. 

Committee recommendations

    1. The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development together with the National Action Plan on Culture and Creative Industry should provide funds to enable the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development implement the project proposal on culture and creative industries aimed at, among others, creating centres of excellence, regional culture hubs and procurement of equipment to help creative youth in music and film industries. The ministry should carry out impact assessment of each of these programmes on the communities before embarking on new programmes and review those programmes that are not performing well. 
    2. The Government should provide sufficient funding for programmes that are doing well, especially Women Entrepreneurship Programme.

The UHRC recommended that the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development should adequately facilitate community development officers to end early and forced child marriages.

Committee observations

    1. The committee commends the ministry for its efforts to end early and forced child marriages. All children have a right to enjoy their childhood and should not be forced into early marriages.
    2. The committee wondered about the effectiveness of the para-social workers and child-to-child helpline. The committee observed that there is no visibility of the para-social workers in the parishes and wards.

The committee recommends that: 
    a) Article 34 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda provides for the rights of children. Therefore, the rights of children should be respected.

    b) In every parish and ward, there should be two social workers charged with the responsibility of monitoring children affairs.

    c) Government should ensure that the structure of the parish chiefs is filled and adequately facilitated.

UHRC recommended that together with the Ministry of Education, Sports, Science and Technology Development, Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development should expeditiously develop school guidelines prohibiting alcohol and drug abuse by children in line with the National Drug and Psycho-tropic Substance Control Act, 2016 detailing how to deal with pupils and students that are alcohol and drug abusers.

The committee reiterates that the recommendation of the UHRC to put in place guidelines should be implemented. 

The UHRC recommended that the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development, in conjunction with the Office of the Prime Minister, should continue supporting the Youth Livelihood Programme and Women Empowerment Programme to sustain alternative livelihoods for vulnerable groups, especially in Karamoja.

The committee commends the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development for the progress made in supporting the youth and women through the Youth Livelihood Programme and Women Empowerment Programme that is helping to sustain alternative livelihoods for vulnerable groups in Karamoja.

The committee is concerned that there is disparity in allocation of services within Karamoja.

The committee recommends that: 

    1. The programmes are okay but Karamoja needs affirmative action. Therefore, Government should increase its attention and facilitation to this region.
    2. There should be equitable distribution of resources.

The UHRC recommended that Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development, together with the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs should strengthen their treaty reporting and coordination function in order to increase efficiency and timely and accurate treaty body reporting by the responsible Ministries, Departments and Agencies.

The committee notes that reports on state national obligations have been pending for far too long, especially CCEDU and this does not reflect well on the state nor does it indicate serious implementation and actualisation of the rights of women.

The committee recommends that the ministry should make follow up to ensure that reports that are under process are implemented and submitted as required.

The Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development and Ministry of Foreign Affairs should do better to ensure that state reporting is up to date.

Parliament should be provided with a comprehensive report on the status of state reporting on all treaties.

UHRC recommended that the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development should follow up on implementation of voluntary pledges and recommendations made by treaty bodies in order to enhance the promotion and protection of human rights.

The committee recommends that the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development should expedite the process of developing the compendium to enable ease of the follow up of the pledges and recommendations made by treaty bodies. Most of the pledges, if realised, will enhance the promotion and protection of human rights.

The committee is concerned that Government does not take the recommendations of the UHRC seriously.

The committee is further concerned that a process that begun in 2015 is not complete to date. This shows that there is little interest in ensuring that the plight of workers is addressed.

The committee recommends that the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development should address the issues that were raised by Cabinet on the scope of wage and coverage as soon as possible. Consultations on this matter should not take too long because the law is required and once it is in place, it will set up sector specific minimum wages for the country.

Recommendations of the UHRC should be taken seriously and they should be implemented to the letter.

UHRC recommended that, together with the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development should ratify and domesticate the ILO Convention no. 189 on decent work for domestic workers and work closely with embassies to ensure that the conditions of work for domestic workers are human rights compliant.

The committee learnt that there are 95 companies licensed to export labour. The committee is concerned that this is a very big number, especially that there are reports of domestic workers being abused by their employers.

The committee is further concerned that the ministry has so far signed bilateral agreements with only two of the receiving countries; Saudi Arabia and Jordan.

The committee notes that the laws only address domestic workers. The ministry should initiate a legal framework for those intending to go abroad to work.

The ministry should ensure that the labour laws are signed.

The ministry should report to the House on the implementation of the laws on externalisation of labour on a quarterly basis, especially on the signing of bilateral agreements with the receiving countries and follow-up mechanisms for Ugandans being exported.

There should be a review of an enabling legal framework.

The ministry should endeavour to sign bilateral agreements with as many of the receiving countries as possible.

Uganda Human Rights Commission interventions in 2016
The UHRC recommended that Government should strengthen the institutions dealing with child related issues such as probation and social welfare office to address the increasing cases of child maintenance and violation of rights of children, right from the village level.

The committee observed that Government should facilitate the probation and social welfare officers in all districts to ensure that they do their work.

Government should facilitate the police to ensure that the child protection unit is effective.

Government should facilitate the call centre to ensure that it is effective.

UHRC recommended that the ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development should ensure that there is adequate sensitisation of the population about the responsibility of parents to their children.

The committee notes that despite the existence of positive legislation on the rights of children, cases of child neglect and child abuse are still rampant in the country. Some parents have been negligent in their parenting role. This contravenes Article 31(4)of the Constitution that states thus: “It is the right and duty of parents to care for and bring up their children.”

The committee recommendations are as follows:

The ministry needs to partner with the local governments and media houses to ensure that there is adequate sensitisation on children rights. 

Parents and guardians who are found to abuse children, including those who deny them food, torture, give corporal punishment, involving them in child labour and denying them education, burning or harming them in any way, should face the law and get punished accordingly.

The Uganda Human Rights Commission recommended that the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development together with the Ministry of Internal Affairs should ensure that juveniles are separated from adult offenders in all detention facilities and those children who are incarcerated with their imprisoned mothers, are catered for.

Observations

The committee observed that remand homes are very few and that some of them are in a very sorry state. Children are taken there to get reformed but instead due to poor conditions, they come out worse.

The committee recommends that Government should equip and provide adequate facilitation to the remand homes to enable them serve their purpose.

We also visited to Ministry Of Justice and Constitutional Affairs and among the things that we looked at was prohibition and prevention of torture.

The Uganda Human Rights Commission recommended that Government through the Parliament, Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs and Ministry of Foreign Affairs should ratify the Optional Protocol on the United Nations Convention against Torture and adhere to all its provisions as another step towards the stemming of torture in Uganda.

The committee recommends that the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs follows up this matter to ensure there is Cabinet approval since it has financial implications. 

The committee notes that the ratification of the Optional Protocol on the United Nations Convention against Torture is very key and therefore, its implementation should be expedited.

The Uganda Human Rights Commission recommends that the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs should prioritise the payment of the Uganda Human Rights Commission Tribunal Awards to victims of human rights violations as they roll out the implementation of the policy of institutional liability to payment of tribunal awards.

The committee notes with concern that the outstanding arrears of court awards of Shs 680 billion is a lot of money. Failure to pay this money to the claimants is an infringement on their rights. The committee notes that this issue has been a persistent problem and not much has been done.

The committee recommends that the ministry should provide Parliament with a list of all court awards. 

The Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs should apply for funding to clear the arrears in the court awards. The responsibility of court awards should be decentralised to the different Government departments. 

The Uganda Human Rights Commission recommended that the judiciary should device ways to expedite the hearing and disposal of all election petitions in the shortest time possible and that the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs should ensure the implementation of the recommendations made by the Supreme Court in its ruling in the Presidential elections petition.

The committee observes that this is long overdue and the longer it takes for election petitions to be heard, the more it affects the candidates because it is costly. The Constitutional Court gave two years to handle this matter. Sometimes this is not the case.

The committee recommends that the process of the Constitutional Review Commission should be taken seriously since it will provide for and expedite the hearing and disposal of all election petitions.

The Uganda Human Rights Commission recommended that matters should be handled amicably and in a timely manner, to ensure that victims of human rights violations are promptly compensated by allocating a specific percentage of their quarterly allocations.

The committee notes with concern that the Legal Aid Policy is still pending Cabinet approval yet there are many victims who need to be compensated.

The committee recommends that the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs quickly initiates legal aid legislation, which when enacted will ensure that poor and vulnerable persons access justice.

The Uganda Human Rights Commission recommended that Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development, Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs should strengthen the treaty reporting coordination function in order to increase efficiency, timely and accurate treaty body reporting by the responsible agencies.

The committee appreciates the effort being made in this regard and recommends that the process be expedited to ensure there is a fully functional National Action Plan that will address human rights issues.

We also visited to the Office of the Directorate of Public Prosecutions. The Uganda Human Rights Commission had recommended that the Directorate of Public Prosecutions should ensure that errant officers that perpetrate torture are prosecuted under the Prohibition and Prevention of Torture Act, 2012 in addition to facing internal disciplinary action.

The committee notes that section 15 of the Prohibition and Prevention of Torture Act that criminalises the use of evidence obtained through torture in the prosecution of cases basically targets the prosecutor.

The committee recommends that the Office of the Directorate of Public Prosecutions be allowed to recruit investigators for such specialised investigations in the proposed Bill.
The Uganda Human Rights Commission recommended that the Uganda Police Force, Uganda People’s Defence Forces, Uganda Prisons Services, Office of the Directorate of Public Prosecutions and the Judiciary should sensitise their personnel on the implementation of the Robben Island guidelines and the Luanda guidelines on the conditions of arrest, police custody and pre-trial detention.

The committee observes that while the office of the Directorate of Public Prosecutions reports that they ensure suspects are not detained for more than 48 hours and that as a principle, confessions made by the suspects after being kept in detention for over 48 hours are not used by the ODPP and that RSA's in their localities are enjoined to make impromptu visits to detention centres and to check on the registers to ensure the detention time provided by the law is adhered to - these are very difficult to implement.

The committee recommends that it is very important to have a law in place to provide for all issues to do with non-use of confessions of people held beyond 48 hours. 

Uganda Human Rights Commission recommended that the Office of the Director of Public Prosecutions (ODPP) should be adequately facilitated and staffed to enable it expeditiously handle criminal cases in a timely manner to ensure that suspects are produced before courts within the acceptable lawful timelines, which will lead to the reduction of the number of complainants on the rights to personal liberty. 

The Uganda Human Rights Commission recommended that Government should strengthen the institutions dealing with child-related issues such as the Family and Child Protection Unit of Police, the Family and Children’s Courts, the Probation and Social Welfare offices, as well as local council courts to address the increasing cases of child maintenance and violation of the rights of children right from village level.

Committee recommendation

The committee commends the Office of the Director of Public Prosecutions for its role in addressing complaints relating to human rights violation. The committee, therefore, recommends that the department be adequately facilitated to enable it train its stakeholders on how to carry out forensic investigations.

National Environmental Management Authority (NEMA)

The Uganda Human Rights Commission recommended that NEMA should fast track the environmental law and policy reform process to address evident gaps. The reforms should aim at increasing penalties for different environment and natural resources-related crimes and illegal activities. 
The committee recommends that handling of the National Environmental Bill should be expedited because there is urgent need for a law to address environmental degradation. 

The NEMA Board should consider and approve the Petroleum Waste Management Regulations to ensure that as soon as the Bill is enacted into law, the law takes immediate effect. The committee commends NEMA for its efforts. 

Ministry Of Education and Sports –(Interruption)

MS KAWOOYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I did not want to come in at this time when we are following that very extensive, comprehensive and researched report. However, the guidance I am seeking is that the report touches on many sectors, gives recommendations from the Uganda Human Rights Commission and those of the committee. Each Government sector has its own shortfalls or recommendations.

My question is, wouldn’t it have been better - especially the remaining pages - because I have been counting until I lost count – for the chairperson picks on the subject matter, reads it out, moves to the recommendations then to the committee. 

When we are going to discuss that report, I am wondering whether we are going to follow page by page or look at the general recommendations that Members of this Parliament should pronounce ourselves on because there are some areas we are interested in; then they are back. Then, most of the issues touch Chapter Four of the Constitution on human rights.

I am kindly seeking guidance and requesting that the chairperson takes us through, other than going up. Some of us are mixing up issues from this to that. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think the chairperson is proceeding well. First of all, she is only reading the subject, observations and recommendations. She is not going into any other details and whenever she is going to a new subject, she says she is now going to the Ministry of Education and subjects or now moving to Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs and you have it on your iPad.

We cannot dismantle the report of the Uganda Human Rights Commission. This is how it came. It came in this form and that is why the committee also handled it in that form. Proceed, please.

MS EGUNYU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I now go to the Ministry of Education and Sports.

On the point of human rights implication of strikes in universities in 2016, the Uganda Human Rights Commission recommended that all universities should have a clear, non- bureaucratic communication strategy specific on industrial action and student strikes so as to enhance effective communication and handle grievances appropriately and quickly.

Committee observation

The committee observed that strikes have continued, despite having strategies in place to stop them.
The recommendations in the White Paper on the Makerere University visitation committee should be implemented. 

Lecturers in public universities should be paid by Government and those engaging in business or income generating projects should use the funds for SACCOs to earn extra income for them. This will supplement their income and help to address strikes that result from low pay.

Students should be sensitised under the proposed communications policy about the negative impact of strikes.

Enforcement of strategies in place to avert strikes should be the ministry’s priority. 

Uganda Human Rights Commission recommended that Ministry of Education and Sports, in conjunction with the Ministry of Public Service, should carry out a comprehensive and consultative review and reform the salary scale structure for both academic and administrative staff in universities.

The committee commends the two ministries for ensuring that there is equity. The Constitution of Uganda, Article 40 (1) (a) and (b) provides that: 

Parliament shall enact laws:  

(a) 	to provide for the right of persons to work under satisfactory, safe and healthy conditions” and  
(b) 	“To ensure equal payment for equal work without discrimination”.

Uganda Human Rights Commission recommended that the Uganda Law Reform Commission should consider reviewing the Universities and Other Tertiary Institutions Act, 2001, especially in respect to the University Council provisions.

The committee observes that the Government White Paper is taking too long.
Appointment of the White Paper drafting committee should be expedited, in order to enable the review of the Universities and Other Tertiary Institutions Act, 2001, to make clear provisions on the University Council. 

The Uganda Human Rights Commission recommended that the university staff associations and the students’ unions should adhere to the principles of the right to strike and follow the process of collective bargaining, so as to institutionalise the mechanism of arbitration, prior to strike action.

The committee commends the ministry and the university for putting in place mechanisms to address industrial actions.

The committee recommends that the policies in place should constantly be monitored to ensure that they are effective and produce the desired outcomes. 

The mechanisms of arbitration should also address the needs of students with disabilities.

Uganda Human Rights Commission recommended that universities should develop sustainable and innovative ways through implementable strategies to generate income and revenue and ensure financial liquidity so that salaries can be paid on time every month.

The committee observed that some universities have not yet adopted the practice of carrying out research activities that generate income for the university.

The committee recommends that all education institutions should adopt the practice of carrying out research activities that generate income for the university.

On drugs and alcohol abuse, the Human Rights Commission recommended that the Ministry of Education and Sports and Ministry of Science and Technology should expeditiously develop school guidelines prohibiting alcohol and drug use by children in line with the National Drug and Psychotropic Substances Control Act, 2015 and detailing how to deal with pupils or students that are alcohol and drug abusers.

The committee observes that;

    i) Alcohol and drug abuse does not usually begin at school.
    ii) Some children in boarding schools pack it in their luggage from their homes to school. 
    iii) There seems to be no detection and punitive measures in place for young people consuming alcohol in sachets. 
    iv) The committee notes that higher institutions of learning like Uganda Christian University (UCU) have good practices where first year students are accommodated within the university complex and they are checked at entry.
    v)  It was noted that drug and alcohol consumption and abuse was prevalent in private schools especially those that have Sudanese students who were violent and unruly. Foreign students should not be handled with gloves simply because they are foreigners, and in some cases, because they have a lot of money. They should be thoroughly checked as they get into schools.
    vi) All responses presented targeted school-going children in schools yet, they are influenced and taught these habits by their peers in trading centres.
    vii)  Laws relating to alcohol and drug abuse are in place but the enforcement is lacking. 

The committee recommendation thus;

    i) Communities and parents should be more involved in children’s lives. 
    ii) The ministry has tried to ensure that all school rules have deterrent and punitive measures on drugs and alcohol abuse embedded. However, this needs to be accompanied by counselling services in every school and senior women and men teachers should spearhead this. 
    iii) Other universities can study the practices of UCU with the view of instilling such discipline in students. 
    iv) The Ministry of Education and Sports should take lead and work with other ministries and Parliament to sensitise and ensure the resources needed to combat this vice are available. 
    v) There should be a policy on sale and consumption of alcohol and the opening and closing hours of bars. 
    vi) In addition to measures in alcohol, there should be measures targeting the youth outside the school that influences school going children. 
    vii) Punitive measures for those found consuming banned substances like alcohol and drugs should be deterrent.
    viii) There should be a department of guidance and counselling in schools responsible for handling issues relating to drugs and alcohol abuse cases. 
    ix) There should be strict enforcement of laws relating to alcohol and drugs abused. 

The committee reiterate its earlier communication that the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives should address the packaging of alcohol and implement Parliament’s recommendation that the minimum quality should not be below 250 millilitres.

Uganda Human Rights Commission recommended that the Ministry of Education and Sports, in conjunction with the National Curriculum Development Centre, should review the curricular to be consistent with Article 29 of the UN Convention on the Rights of the Child, which provides that education should develop each child’s personality and talent to the full potential and encourage children to respect their parents and cultures.

The Uganda Human Rights Commission recommended that any Government interventions like schools within ethnic minority groups settlement should ensure that the teaching is offered in such a way to ensure that their traditional way of life, practices and languages are preserved. 

On the use of local languages leading to deterioration in general performance of students and on the learners not performing as expected or unable to compete favourably with Kampala pupils who study in English and on the end of cycle examination, the committee was concerned about the challenges of obtaining instruction materials to facilitate teaching in native languages. 

The committee noted that the ministry does not have a list of recommended authors in the instruction in the curriculum of teaching local languages. Teaching in a native language, for example, in Kaliro became a challenge due to dialects. Lulamogi is not a Lusoga spoken anywhere and yet the children are taught in Lusoga, which is not their native language. 

The local language is suited for a certain level of critical understanding of culture of the community. However, instructional materials currently used are not adequate. Teaching in the mother language lacks uniformity. The teachers, themselves, in some places can hardly speak English, which makes it impossible for them to translate English into local languages. 

The committee recommends that the ministry should consider adding French and Chinese languages besides English, which is a universal language on the curricula to widen the scope. 

The ministry should clarify what the policy entails because today, students do not speak proper English and there is poor communication even at the university level. The local language should be taught alongside English from the onset and the policy should cover all local languages.
 
Teachers especially in rural areas need refresher courses on how to instruct in local languages. There is need to ensure that the local languages are not “murdered” in the process. 

Since the local languages are recognised as an important medium of instruction to enhance comprehension by children, Ministry of Education and Sports should take keen interest in developing the local language. 

The committee made the following general observations and recommendations in regard to the Education Sector: 

i) 	On feeding children in schools, there should be a standardised policy on feeding children in schools whereby parents contribute to avoid situations where some children are not feeding. The ministry should publicise guidelines contained in the Education Act, Cap 13 of 2008 that spells out how school feeding should be done in order to ensure that children enjoy the right to food.

ii)	On sexuality education, the committee observed that there are social media reports of nursery schools teaching homosexuality. This was further observed that there seems not to be safety measures in place to ensure that the sexuality education policy is not abused.

The committee recommends that every school should have a senior female and male teacher for counselling of the girls and boys in school with regard to sexuality. 

A sexuality education policy should be clarified and disseminated countrywide.

There are other recommendations that are here, which members can read.

Ministry of Health

There was concern on alcohol and illicit drug abuse by youth and children in selected districts in Uganda. The Uganda Human Rights Commission recommended that the Ministry of Health should orient health workers (psychiatric nurses and clinical officers) situated at the regional referral and district hospitals on how to probe, identify, treat or refer drug and alcohol addicts to appropriate facilities while treating mental health cases.

The committee observes thus;

i) 	Alcohol and drug abuse have become widespread countrywide yet workers in almost all districts lack the requisite skills to handle cases of drug and alcohol abuse. Generally, society has a negative attitude towards handling or supporting alcohol and drug addicts to overcome their addiction. This negatively trickles down to access to health care services.

The committee recommends that regional centres for cases of mental health should be established and facilitated with adequate health personnel. This is not possible for all mental disabled patients to travel to Kampala.

Government should also increase the budget to the ministry to enable it extend the Mental Health Gap Action Project to all districts in the country.

Uganda Human Rights Commission recommended that the Ministry of Health should develop and include indicators to obtain evidence-based data on drug, tobacco and alcohol abuse and treatment within the Health Management Information System and health facility registers.

The committee observed that revision of the Health Management Information System tools to include indicators to monitor abuse is commendable. However, the committee notes that using those registers to obtain information on alcohol and drug use status cannot yield the intended results or impact in practice. There are chances that some people may not disclose their use status.

The committee recommends that Ministry of Health should include test kits for alcohol and drugs among the supplies they provide to hospitals and health centres. This will enable health workers to identify alcohol and drug addicts.

Uganda Human Rights Commission recommended that the Ministry of Health and the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries should engage in public sensitisation and mobilisation on the importance of food security and the dangers of growing illicit drug crops and plants.

The committee observes that the sensitisation campaigns are limited and are not adequately targeting the people at the grassroots. People are now giving up growing food and have opted to growing drug plants while some have resorted to taking drugs and they have no time to engage in growing food. This has negatively impacted on food security. 

The committee recommends that Sensitisation campaigns should be extended to upcountry schools and not be limited to urban centres and schools.

Government should also come up with a policy to control the growing of tobacco.

Uganda Human Rights Commission recommended that together with the Uganda Police Force, Ministry of Health should popularise and sensitise law enforcement and customs officers, judicial officers, Directorate of Public Prosecutors and the public on the new National Drug and, Psychotropic Substances Control Act, 2015, particularly, its implementation and criminal sanctions.

The committee observes that the Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances (Control) Act, 2015 prohibits cultivation or growing of narcotic drugs or psychotropic substances. The Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances (Control) Act, 2015 was assented to on 19 April 2015. 

Recommendations;

The Statutory Instrument setting the commencement date of the Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances (Control) Act, 2015 should be formulated as soon as possible. 

Efforts to address drug abuse should be implemented throughout the country. 

The provisions of the Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances (Control) Act, 2015 should be publicised in order to make the public aware that it is a crime to cultivate or grow narcotic drugs.

The Uganda Human Rights Commission noted that the Ministry of Health together with the Ministry of Trade Industry and Cooperatives and Parliament should table and enact the Alcohol Drinks Control Bill, 2017 that will repeal the out-dated alcohol laws that currently regulate the sale, manufacture and consumption of alcohol such as the Enguli Act Cap 86, the Liquor Act Cap 93 and Portable Spirits Act, 1995.

The committee observes that the existing legal framework has gaps hence cannot effectively regulate the sale, manufacture and consumption of alcohol yet alcohol abuse is rampant.

The committee recommends that Government should urgently fund the ministry to enable it conduct the Regulatory Impact Assessment Report on alcohol. The ministry should expedite the process of drafting the Bill.

On the Plight of unaccompanied refuge minors in the West Nile Region, Nakivale and Kyangwali Refugee Settlements.

The committee observes that the Refuge Health Strategic Plan has not been circulated. 

The committee reiterates the Uganda Human Rights Commission recommendation that the ministry provides the psycho-social services for the minors and adults because of the trauma that comes with being displaced from one’s home and family.

The Refuge Health Strategic Plan should be disseminated.

The Uganda Human Rights Commission was also concerned about the maternal and reproductive health rights situation in selected health facilities in Uganda and recommended that the Ministry of Health together with the National Medical Stores should supply the adequate number of essential medicines, supplies and equipment to all health facilities needed for maternal and reproductive health service delivery. 

The committee observed that many drugs expire while still in storage in the National Medical Stores (NMS) yet many health facilities still lack essential drugs and many patients die because they cannot access these drugs. 

It was noted that districts do not take time to assess and establish the required drugs and therefore, end up submitting to NMS lists of drugs that are not updated to suit the prevailing needs.

The committee recommends that the ministry should procure the right drugs that are needed by the people. It should also ensure that district health units conduct a needs assessment of the drug needs of each health facility based on the prevailing disease burden of each area.

The Uganda Human Rights Commission recommended that Ministry of Health and the Public Service Commission should recruit and fill the existing vacancies of critical staff, especially those that offer maternal and reproductive services to address the countrywide shortage of human resource.

The committee observed that health facilities remain grossly understaffed and even the few that are recruited resign and opt to work in the private sector due to poor pay. In almost all health centres, only nurses are always on duty without any doctor.

The committee reiterates the UHRC recommendation that Ministry of Health and the Public Service Commission should recruit and fill in the existing vacancies of critical staff, especially those that offer maternal and reproductive services to address countrywide shortage of human resources.

UHRC recommended that the Ministry of Health and Ministry of Public Service should revise and improve the salary scale and structure for health professionals, especially critical staff that offer maternal and reproductive health services, especially in hard-to-reach areas as a way of attracting and retaining health professionals.

The committee observed that some areas that qualify as hard-to-reach, including islands, are not included or captured by the ministry. Some hard-to-reach areas lack the necessary equipment, including appropriate ambulances, especially in the islands.

Some staff that are recruited to work in e hard-to-reach areas abscond after they get on the payroll because they lack motivation to stay and work in those areas.

The committee recommends that the Ministry of Public Service should urgently revise the hard-to-reach incentives to make them more attractive to employees in the district. 

The ministry should revise, on a regular basis, the hard-to- reach spots or areas to ensure that only those that qualify are on the list and bring on board those that had been previously left out.

Government compliance Recommendations with UHRC Annual Report recommendation
The UHRC reported that it is concerned about the following recommendations that have not been implemented or complied with and recommends that the ministry expeditiously acts on them. 

The committee observed that:

Although there is an increase in the budget allocation of the Health Sector, the increase is not reflected as improved health services.

While the committee notes some progress made by the ministry in implementing the UHRC recommendations, a lot needs to be done. 

It should be noted that the committee considered the above recommendations in its previous report to Parliament and made recommendations to the ministry in regard to all the above issues.

The committee therefore recommends that the ministry should urgently take appropriate measures to ensure that the recommendations regarding the under listed are implemented – those can be read. 

Ministry of Public Service

The UHRC recommended that the Ministry of Public Service and the Ministry of Health should revise and improve the salary scale and structure for health professionals, especially critical staff that offer maternal and reproductive services in the hard-to-reach areas. 

The committee observed that the low pay of medical workers has resulted into poor delivery of health services. The committee noted with concern that the Government promised and committed itself on enhancing the salary of medical workers. However, only doctors’ salary enhancement was done and not for the other medical workers. 

There is very slow progress on review of the salary of medical workers employed in the Local Government hospitals and this is observed as perpetuated discrimination. The high rate of maternal mortality in the country is also as a result of Government's failure to raise the health sector budget to 15 per cent as per the Maputo Protocol and other International Treaties on health.

The committee reiterates its earlier resolutions by Parliament urging the Government to enhance the salary and emoluments of medical workers across the board.

The Government should, in line with its duties and responsibilities, allocate more funding to the health sector to address the recurring issue of low pay to medical workers.
The committee urges Government to expedite the introduction of the National Health Insurance Scheme.

The Health Service Commission should ensure that the staff structures in the medical fraternity are filled. 

UHRC recommended that the Ministry of Public Service, in conjunction with the Ministry of Education and Sports, should carry out a comprehensive and consultative review and reform the salary scale structure of both academic and administrative staff.

The committee notes that the delay in reviewing and harmonising salary structures across public universities was a major cause of grievances from academic and non-teaching staff in public universities. 

The committee recommends that the ministry should, as a matter of urgency, follow up this matter with Cabinet to ensure that this problem is brought to its logical conclusion.

UHRC recommended that Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and Ministry of Public Service should increase the financial, human, capital and infrastructural investments in maternal and reproductive priority interventions to meet the Strategic Development Goals and Health Sector Development Plan targets.

The committee observes that Uganda committed herself to the implementation of various international treaties on achieving maternal health rights. The Maputo Protocol of the African Charter on Human and People's Rights on the rights of Women in Africa, 2003 calls upon state parties to ensure that the right to health, including sexual and reproductive rights, are respected.

The meagre allocation for maternal health has stifled the progress made in the realisation of the SDGs, which is a key indicator for social economic development. The committee calls upon Government to increase funding to the health sector as a matter of urgency.

The Uganda Human Rights Commission recommended that the Ministry of Public Service, together with the Public Service Commission, should recruit and fill the existing vacancies of critical staff, especially those that offer maternal and reproductive services. 

The committee observes that understaffing in public hospitals, especially in critical positions, underscores the poor attention/priority given to access to health not only as a fundamental human right but also as an interdependent and interrelated human right.

The committee calls upon the Government to prioritise devising long lasting mechanisms of attracting, recruiting and retaining critical health workers in all key positions in public hospitals. 

Government should also provide funding for the structure that has been put in place.

Madam Speaker, I beg to report and beg that Parliament adopts this report. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable chair and your committee, for that very elaborate and compressive report for 2016. Honourable members, first, I would like to instruct the Clerk to Parliament to extract the recommendations, sector by sector, so that when we conclude the report, we will adopt them as presented or as amended.

Secondly, honourable members, the report touched many ministries. We need the Ministry of Internal Affairs to answer for the police and prisons. There is also the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs, the Attorney-General, the Ministry of Education and Sports, the Ministry of Water and Environment, the Ministry of Trade and Industry, the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development, the Ministry of Health, the Ministry of Public Service and the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. They are all not here yet there are some serious policy issues that need to be addressed.

I would like to know, for instance, why there has been no amnesty at all in so many years. In other countries, when there is Christmas, Eid al-Fitr, Independence Day celebrations, some prisoners are given amnesty and they go home. The overcrowding in those places - Someone can be 90 years old but still in prison. How much time is that person left with? I called the Minister of Justice and asked him why he was not working on the prerogative of mercy or amnesty but he has not got back to me. 

Further, I would like to know why the Minister of Health has failed to give an effective date for the law on narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances. Since 2015, it has not been in effect. I do not know why. 

We would like to know from the Ministry of Education and Sports why they are forcing teachers to teach in vernacular when there are no vernacular teacher training colleges anymore in this country - Yes, they are not there. 

Why are we not ratifying or domesticating international conventions? Why are you not reporting? The Convention on Elimination of all forms of Discrimination Against Women (CEDAW) is now nine years I think, but no reporting is being done. People go to the Human Rights Council in Geneva; our people go there with reports but no one knows what is contained in those reports.

The Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs - how do they disseminate the laws we have made here? Who is responsible? Do people know the laws? Do they have access to them? I think the minister should answer all these issues in addition to what the Members are going to say.

There is the issue of creative arts. They do not have a ministry - the designers, people like hon. Lubwama who are acting and so on, are just swinging around looking for a home, advice, comfort, leadership. We want the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development to tell us what they are doing about this issue because it is a very lucrative industry but it is just there hanging by itself.

When I went to visit the prisoners, they told me that a person might be arrested in Koboko but they will be brought to Luzira where they have no relatives who stay nearby and no one can travel from Koboko to come and visit them. Even if they are given bail, there are no sureties because they are too far away. 

All these are policy issues which we think the ministers should answer in addition to what the honourable members are going to say. Therefore, I would like to defer the debate. Clerk, will you be ready on Tuesday? Circulate the recommendations to the Members so that when we come to debate, they will be ready.

MS KAWOOYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the good guidance. However, maybe I did not understand you well when you talked about Ministry of Foreign Affairs. I heard about the treaties, the instruments, ratifications and the issue of human rights, which you have been talking about everywhere you go, at every summit you attend.

There is the issue of labour export. We came here with this issue but I did not hear anything about it. We had stopped it -there is the formal and informal - but the minister came in and opened it.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I was only highlighting the ministries and the issues I want answered from my perspective. When we open the debate, you are going to speak out your issues and that is why I want the ministers to come here.

MS KAWOOYA: On that issue, I do not know whether -

THE SPEAKER: No, it is here. Hon. Kawooya, the issue of labour export is here. The committee is concerned about the number of companies, the lack of regulation, failure to lay instruments here; it is here in this report.

MS KAWOOYA: Madam Speaker, you are aware of the current issue with Ministry of Foreign Affairs -

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Hanifa Kawooya of Sembabule –(Laughter)– when the Minister of Foreign Affairs comes here next week, arising from this report you are going to ask him -  Who is going to answer now? I know what you are talking about but wait for the ministers to come and you will be given an opportunity to speak. There is no one to answer your questions today and we have not started the debate. I want the recommendations to be extracted and given to you in preparation for the debate to come.

MS KAWOOYA: What if that girl has been sentenced to death?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, take your seat. Clerk, will you be ready on Tuesday? Okay. Thank you, honourable chair. Get ready for debate on Tuesday. Hon. Bahati, make sure your colleagues are here; these are very important issues. Thank you very much.

BILLS 
SECOND READING

THE LANDLORD AND TENANT BILL, 2018

5.22
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I am the acting Government Chief Whip and acting Leader of Government Business; therefore, I am in a good position to move the motion for the second reading of the Bill.

Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Landlord and Tenant Bill, 2018” be read the second time. 

THE SPEAKER: Is it seconded? 

(Motion seconded.)

THE SPEAKER: It has been seconded by several Members. What is the justification for the second reading?

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, currently there is no comprehensive law regulating the relationship between the landlords and tenants. As a result of the lack of a comprehensive law, there is lack of proper regulation of the landlord-tenant relationship, hence a lot of disharmony among the key players in this industry. 

Colleagues, you have heard a number of complaints from tenants regarding issues of agreements and how they are handled. Therefore, the policy behind this Bill is to regulate the relationship of landlords and tenants; to reform and consolidate the law relating to the letting of premises; provide for the responsibilities of landlords and tenants in relation to the letting of premises; and to provide for other related matters. 

Once it is passed into law by this House, it is one of the pieces of legislation we think can help correct the disharmony between the landlords and the tenants but also help us, as an economy, to move the real estate sector forward in a more harmonised way. Madam Speaker, I beg to move. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I would like to consult you on whether we can receive the report and then debate when the ministers are here. Can we receive it and debate either next week or tomorrow?  

MR SSEMUJJU NGANDA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I think we can receive the report. However, even the ministers for this sector are consumers of this report. You have just postponed one assignment because the ministers are not here. We are now going to receive another report and wait for the ministers. Probably, the Leader of Government Business should explain where the ministers are.

This Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development has four ministers. If we have a matter on the Order Paper and none of them is showing up, it should be a concern for this Parliament. We can receive the report nonetheless. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable chairperson, you can present the report. The debate will ensue when they are here because there are issues they have to answer.

5.26
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON PHYSICAL INFRASTRUCTURE (Mr Robert Kafeero): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker and honourable members. This is a report of the Committee on Physical Infrastructure on the Landlord and Tenant Bill, 2018. 

Madam Speaker, allow me to lay on the Table the original report of the Landlord and Tenant Bill, 2018. I also beg to lay on the Table minutes of the proceedings of the committee while considering this Bill.

The Landlord and Tenant Bill, 2018 was read for the first time on 12 February 2019 and referred to the Committee on Physical Infrastructure for scrutiny and report back in consonance with rule 128 of the Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of Uganda. 

The committee considered the Bill and hereby reports. This Bill has been uploaded to your iPads so you can be able to follow. Since it is on your iPads, you can peruse through the background to the Bill. 

Object of the Bill

The Landlord and Tenant Bi11, 2018 seeks to:

    a) Regulate the relationship between the landlord and tenant;
    b) Reform and consolidate the law relating to the letting of premises;
    c) Provide for the responsibilities of landlords and tenants in relation to the letting of premises; and
    d) Provide for related matters.

As the minister said, currently there is no comprehensive law regulating the landlord-tenant relations. The Rent Restrictions Act and the Distress for Rent (Bailiffs) Act cover only limited aspects of the landlord and tenant relationship. As a result, there is lack of proper regulation of the relationship and hence disharmony among the key players and disruption of the industry.

The Bill, therefore, seeks to introduce a comprehensive and modern legal framework to enable the relationship of landlords and tenants develop in an orderly manner. The Bill provides for the making of tenancy agreements; terms and conditions which form part of, or are to be implied in, every tenancy; responsibilities of landlords and tenants in respect to the payment for utility charges; duties and obligations of landlords and tenants; rent and security deposit; assignment of tenancy and sub-leasing of premise; termination of tenancy; vacation of premises, eviction and related matters; and general matters.

Methodology

We met a number of entities as listed from (i) up to (xvi). The committee also held a public hearing on 12 February 2019 where we received and reviewed written memoranda submitted by 37 witnesses on the Bill. The list has been attached as Annex A.

We also reviewed relevant literature including the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, 1995; the Rent Restriction Act, Cap 231; the Distress for Rent (Bailiffs) Act, Cap 76, among others.

Compliance with Human Rights

Housing has been universally declared as one of the three essential human needs besides food and clothing. The right to adequate housing is also considered a human right under the Universal Declaration of Human Rights (1967) to which the Government of Uganda is a signatory. According to General Comment 4 of the United Nations Universal Declaration of Human Rights, the minimum requirements of adequate housing are as listed below from (a) to (g). 

The Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, 1995, under General Social and Economic Objectives, mandates the state to ensure that all Ugandans have decent shelter among other basic needs. Arbitrary and forceful evictions have been central to the violation of the right to housing in Uganda. The Bill seeks to guarantee security of occupancy of tenants and habitability of premises, which are crucial for the realisation of the right to adequate housing.

Compliance with the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs)

The Bill is in tandem with SDG 11, which aims at making cities and human settlements inclusive, safe, resilient and sustainable, particularly target 11.1, which seeks to ensure access for all to adequate, safe and affordable housing and basic services by 2030. 

Madam Speaker, the committee made the following observations and recommendations as enshrined in part 9:

1. Delineation of Provisions for Residential from Business Tenancies

The committee takes cognisance of the general view by stakeholders to separate the provisions for residential and business lettings by creation of separate laws as is the case in other countries where the landlord and tenant relationship is regulated by two separate pieces of legislation. In Kenya, for example, the commercial tenancies are regulated by the Landlord and Tenant (Shops, Hotels and Catering Establishments) Act, while residential tenancies are regulated by the Rent Restrictions Act.

The justification for the delineation is to cater for the intricacies and peculiarities involved in the financing arrangement and management of business tenancies, which are different from residential tenancies. Residential tenancies have a higher component of social security considerations while business tenancies have stricter and business-oriented terms. For example, it is now a settled law that tenants of business tenancies require a longer termination notice period (three months) than residential tenancies to avoid business disruptions. 

Additionally, business premises are often designed and fitted to the specifications of a particular tenant and require a higher security deposit than residential tenancies. Stakeholders were, therefore, concerned that commingling of residential and business tenancies in one piece of legislation implies that some legal provisions will be applicable to one form of tenancy and inapplicable to the other.

The committee, however, observes that enacting separate laws for residential and business tenancies is not feasible since most of the provisions in the Bill are applicable to both tenancies. In any case, several countries such as South Africa have the same law for both residential and business tenancies. The committee is of the considered view that the peculiarities of the different tenancies can be taken care of within the same law.

2. Erosion of the Doctrine of Freedom of Contract 

The committee observes that the landlord and tenant relationship is essentially contractual in nature and is governed by the principle of freedom of contract. Additionally, Uganda is currently a free market economy, which guarantees landlords and tenants the freedom to contract on terms and conditions that are mutually beneficial to them. Therefore, statutory regulation of the landlord and tenant relationship should be confined to circumstances where there is a substantial risk that one party may take an unfair advantage over the other due to the unequal bargaining power that is inherent in such relationships.

The committee, however, notes that a number of clauses in the Bill seek to unduly interfere with the right of the parties to contract freely, which is the very essence of free market economies like Uganda. For example, clauses 3(2), 8(3), 27(3) and 41(6) provide for the prescribed formats of tenancy agreements and notices, which restrict the freedom of landlords and tenants to decide the terms and conditions that should govern their relationship.

In addition, clause 11 of the Bill restricts a landlord and a tenant from entering a tenancy agreement unless it is strictly in line with the provisions of the Bill. These clauses, inter alia, introduce inflexibility and artificiality in commercial transactions, which may stifle the growth of the rental housing industry.

The committee, therefore, recommends that legal provisions, which militate against commercial practice and unduly interfere in the operation of free market choice, should be deleted to stimulate investment in the rental housing industry and foster harmonious co-existence of the sector players.

3. The Imbalance of Interests Between Landlords and Tenants 

The committee notes that while the object of the Bill is to regulate the relationship between landlords and tenants, the bulk of its provisions are skewed heavily in favour of the tenants at the expense of the landlords. For example, clause 6(b) of the Bill seeks to impose a continuing obligation on the landlord to ensure that the premises are kept fit for human habitation during the tenancy. This is unfair since it does not envisage circumstances where the tenant negligently damages the rented premises during the tenancy, rendering the premises unhabitable.

Relatedly, clause 20 seeks to impose an unfair obligation on the landlord to keep the premises safe and free from health hazards. In realistic terms, this provision is impracticable to implement given that the term “health hazard” is not defined and the landlord may not be in a position to know whether or not the rented premises constitute a health hazard. Additionally, clause 51 provides that a landlord shall not subject a tenant to annoyance. These clauses are not only ambiguous but also impose unfair obligations on the landlord and interfere with the landlord’s enjoyment of the right to property as enshrined in Article 26 of the Constitution.

The committee re-echoes the resounding call by stakeholders to establish a landlord and tenant law, which balances the interests of landlords and the tenants in a free market economy by ensuring that the landlords earn reasonable income from their investments while at the same time protect tenants against unfair practices and exploitation. The committee thus recommends that provisions in the Bill, which are intended to tilt the balance in favour of one party at the expense of the other, should be accordingly deleted.

4. The Format of Tenancy Agreements 

Clause 3 of the Bill provides that a tenancy agreement may be written, oral or implied from the conduct of the parties. The provision is intended to allow the parties room for flexibility and freedom to contract using a format that is convenient for them. 

The committee is cognisant that informality of tenancy agreements has been a major cause of disputes between landlords and tenants due to the uncertainties which are characteristic of informal arrangements. While formalising all tenancy agreements is highly desirable, it is not achievable in view of the high illiteracy levels in the country.

Clause 3(3) of the Bill seeks to strike a balance between oral and written agreements. It provides that where a tenancy agreement is not in writing, the landlord shall keep a record of the particulars of the parties to the tenancy, the premises comprised in the tenancy and details of the rent payable and the manner of payment.

The committee is content with clause 3 as it will militate against the inherent challenges of enforcing unwritten tenancy agreements and will augment Government efforts in enforcing payment of rental tax and  incidental charges.

5. Requirement for Tenancy Agreements of a Certain Threshold to be in Writing

Clause 4 (a) of the Bill seeks to ensure that tenancy agreements of twenty-five currency points (Shs 500,000) or more are in writing. The essence of a written tenancy agreement is that it eases enforcement as it gives parties more certainty thus reducing the risk of disputes. The committee notes that a similar provision exists in the Contracts Act.

The committee is cognisant of the proposal by stakeholders to lower the threshold to ten currency points (Shs 100,000) as a majority of the landlords in Uganda charge rent in the range of ten currency points and above.

The committee concurs with the proposal for the tenancy agreements of ten currency points or more to be in writing. This will reduce on the informalities in tenancy agreements, streamline landlord and tenant relations, and foster harmonious co-existence between landlords and tenants which is crucial for the orderly and sustainable development of the rental housing industry. In addition, formalising tenant-landlord relations will augment Government efforts in broadening the rental tax base.

6. Payment of Rent in Uganda Shillings 

Clause 23(2) of the Bill provides that all rent obligations or transactions shall be expressed, recorded and settled in shillings unless otherwise provided under any enactment, or is lawfully agreed to between the parties to an agreement under any lawful obligation.

The committee is cognisant of the current practice of charging rent in United States dollars and the attendant challenges and inconveniencies of converting the Uganda shillings to US dollars in order to pay rent. In addition, charging rent in foreign currencies is perceived by tenants as a crafty way of raising rental rates on a monthly basis in view of the incessant foreign currency fluctuations which are characteristic of Uganda's economy. 

In the same vein, the committee notes that Uganda is a liberalised economy where Foreign Direct Investment (FDI) has been encouraged to permeate and accordingly, many developers of large-scale properties source their financing in foreign currency, mostly US dollars and service their loans in US dollars. Therefore, compelling them to charge rent in Uganda shillings would be rather unfair and unreasonable. 

The committee observes that clause 23(2) of the Bill seeks to create a balance of interests of both landlords and tenants by protecting tenants who may not wish to pay rent in dollars while at the same time allowing room for flexibility for landlords and tenants who may wish to transact in foreign currencies to do so. While the committee is content with the spirit of the provision, it proposes that the same be recast for clarity.

7. Payment of Rent in Advance

Clause 25(1) of the Bill seeks to limit the payment of rent in advance. It provides that a landlord shall not require a tenant, in case of a tenancy of more than one month, to pay rent more than three months in advance, and in the case of a tenancy of one month, to pay rent more than two weeks in advance.

The committee observes that while the clause is intended to protect tenants from unreasonable demands by landlords for lump sum rent payments, it restricts the freedom of contract of the parties and discourages long-term tenancies which have adverse effects on the security of tenure of tenants since no landlord would be willing to offer a tenancy longer than the rent payment.

The committee is cognisant of clause 25(2), which seeks to allow room for flexibility in cases where the tenant, in his or her discretion, in writing opts to pay rent in advance beyond the prescribed period. However, this leaves the matter to the discretion of the tenant and does not consider the interests of the landlord.

The committee is, therefore, of the considered view that the parties should be allowed the freedom to contract out of the statutory limitations on advance payments. 

8. Placement of a Cap on Rental Increments

Clause 27 of the Bill provides that a landlord shall not increase rent at a rate of more than ten per cent annually or such other percentage as may be prescribed by the minister by statutory instrument.

The committee notes that the provision is intended to curb the rampant arbitrary and unconscionable rental increments in the country especially in relation to business tenancies. It is worth noting that the Bill maintains the spirit of section 2 of the Rent Restriction Act, Cap 231, which prohibits renting out premises at a rent fee, which exceeds the standard rent.

The committee, however, observes that rental markets operate within the overall macroeconomic environment in the country, therefore capping rental increments distorts the market forces as it does not recognise changes in the costs of finance, inflation and currency fluctuations. This is a disincentive for investment in the real estate industry as it slows down recovery of return on investment. 

The committee further observes that the Bill is already embedded with adequate safeguards against arbitrary rental increments, which are intended to mitigate the social dislocation occasioned by the increment. For example, clause 27 (2) provides that a landlord must give a tenant notice of 90 days while clause 27 (5) provides that a landlord shall not increase the rent payable under a tenancy at intervals of less than 12 months. In addition, clause 27 (4) protects tenants under a fixed term tenancy from rental increments before the expiry of the term unless the agreement provides for rent increment within a fixed term.

In view of the foregoing, the committee recommends that rental increments should be left to the determination of the market forces or expressed by the parties by way of agreement.

Security Deposits

Madam Speaker, clause 32 of the Bill provides that landlords shall require a tenant to pay a security deposit for the purposes of securing performance by the tenant of his or her contractual obligation. 

The committee notes that security deposits are currently not regulated by the law yet most rental agreements require payment of security deposits. The committee is cognisant of the numerous allegations by landlords of tenants vacating rented premises with outstanding rent or without undertaking repairs on the rented premises for which they are liable, and of security deposits being insufficient to cover the repairs. Tenants, on the other hand, complain about landlords unlawfully retaining the security deposits at the end of the tenancy or landlords alleging that they applied the security deposits to repair the premises when in fact the premises are not damaged. 

The Bill seeks to address these, among other issues. Clause 32(3) specifically provides that the landlord shall specify to the tenant, in writing, the terms and conditions under which the security deposit may be withheld upon the termination of the tenancy. 

The committee concurs with clause 32(1) and (3), which seek to streamline the management of security deposits thereby ensuring transparency and mitigating the occurrence of conflicts between landlords and tenants over the same. However, given the poverty levels in the country, the committee is of the considered view that security deposits should not be a mandatory requirement, to allow parties who may wish to contract out of the provisions the freedom to do so.

Clause 32(2) of the Bill provides that security deposits shall not exceed the rent payable for one month's occupancy of the premises or one-twelfth of the rent for one year's occupancy, whichever is less.

The committee observes that given the peculiarities of the business premises, which are often designed and fitted to the specifications of a particular tenant, security deposit of one month’s rent may not be sufficient to repair the premises on termination of the tenancy. The committee is therefore of the considered view that the security deposit for business premises should be increased to three months’ worth of rent fees.

Clause 32 (5) and (6) seek to impose restrictions on commingling of security deposits by requiring the landlord to deposit the security deposit in a trust account held by the landlord for that purpose. 

The committee observes that the provisions are unreasonable and impracticable in view of the low levels of financial literacy in Uganda where only about 27 per cent of the population possess bank accounts. The committee proposes that the said clause be deleted.

Abolition of the Remedy of Distress for Rent
Clause 31 of the Bill seeks to abolish the remedy of distress for rent and accordingly, clause 56 seeks to repeal the Distress for Rent (Bailiffs) Act, Cap 76. Distress for rent is an ancient self-help remedy, which permits the landlord to recover rent arrears without recourse to court, by taking goods from the demised premises and selling them.

The committee observes that while distress for rent is a cheap, convenient and expeditious mechanism for the landlord to recover rent, the remedy has been overly abused by landlords often subjecting tenants to inhuman and degrading treatment in the course of enforcing the remedy. The Distress for Rent (Bailiffs) Act, Cap 76, lacks adequate judicial controls for safeguarding the interests of tenants in the course of levying distress. 

According to section 2 of the Act, a landlord in person, or his or her attorney, or a legal owner of a reversion is permitted, as of right, to levy any distress for rent without any recourse to court. Consequently, the exercise of the right to distress for rent is often fraught with violence and impunity resulting in bloodshed and loss of business, especially in downtown Kampala where malpractice and unethical conduct by landlords is rife. 

The committee is cognisant of the concerns of stakeholders that the abolition of the remedy of distress for rent would render it practically impossible for landlords to recover rent, since the Bill provides for recourse to court as the only mechanism for dispute resolution yet the court system is already grappling with a huge case backlog thus unable to expeditiously resolve rental claims disputes. However, the committee notes that the Bill addresses these legitimate concerns.

Clause 30(2) recognises the application of the Judicature (Small Claims Procedure) Rules, 2011 to recover rent arrears. Small claims court procedures are designed to quickly and inexpensively dispense justice in cases involving small claims of rent not exceeding Shs l0 million in value. The procedures for instituting a small claim are simplified, and legal representation by an advocate is not allowed, making the procedure less complicated and accessible to the indigent.

The committee, however, notes that the small claims procedure locks out landlords with rental claims exceeding Shs 10 million from accessing quick justice. In addition, only natural persons are allowed to institute an action in court, although a body corporate may become a party to an action in the court as a defendant. The committee thus recommends that the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline should consider a reasonable increment in the threshold for small claims procedures to cater for rental claims above Shs 10 million.

Unlawful Eviction of Tenants

Clause 48 of the Bill provides that where a tenant fails to vacate the premises after notice to vacate the premises has been given in accordance with this Act, the landlord shall apply to court for an eviction order. Clause 49(1) further provides that a landlord shall not, except in accordance with this Act, evict a tenant from the premises or require, compel or attempt to require or compel the tenant to vacate the premises. According to clause 49(2), a landlord who evicts a tenant from the premises in contravention of the Act commits an offence and is liable to a fine not exceeding two hundred and fifty currency points or imprisonment not exceeding one year or both.

The committee is content with the above proposals, which are intended to protect tenants from the rampant arbitrary and forceful evictions by landlords. This will go a long way in ensuring that the rights of tenants are respected and their occupancy guaranteed.

Recommendation

The committee recommends that the Landlord and Tenant Bill, 2018 be passed into law, subject to the proposed amendments. 

Madam Speaker, I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable chair and the Committee on Physical Infrastructure.

Honourable members, as I indicated, we shall want the Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Development to be present tomorrow. Therefore, debate on this matter is deferred to tomorrow. House adjourned until 2.00p.m. tomorrow. Thank you very much.

(The House rose at 6.07 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 20 June 2019 at 2.00 p.m.) 

