
THE REPUBLIC OF UGANDA

IN THE PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA

Official Report of The Proceedings of Parliament

FIFTH SESSION - 12TH SITTING - FIRST MEETING

________________________

Tuesday, 28 June 2005

(Parliament met at 10.12 a.m. in Parliament House, Kampala)

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Kiwanuka Ssekandi, in the Chair)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you and thank you for the manner in which you have handled the business before us. All of you have been candid in the way you have communicated what you think is right despite your differences. It is in this spirit that the debate should be taken; that members have been sincere, and not spoken out of anger or personal emotional love, but out of sincerity.

However, it appears to me that the procedures are not clearly understood. This issue of Bill No.3 is not being ended today. We have four stages to undergo before we pass a bill of this nature. We started with the First Reading, before the matter went committee. In the second stage, which is the Constitutional Stage, we handle the motion for the Second Reading, which we are handling today. At this stage, we are not dealing with the details, but handling the principle or mission behind the bill. 

Therefore, today, we are not deciding one way or the other, but concluding this stage so that we move on to the next one, which will be the most important. The committee stage is where the bricks will be laid to build the law. Today, if you are not happy with the outcome, you can continue advocating for your position during the committee stage, because that is where we are going to determine the kind of bill we shall pass. Therefore, people should not be worried or be in a state of despondence. Rather, you should continue to be calm and sober in handling this particular matter. Once again, I thank you for your contribution.

MAJ. GEN. KAHINDA OTAFIIRE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Yesterday, we had the shock of receiving a list, purportedly extracted from credible Movement sources. This list is of the people, to be supported supposedly, by the Movement in the forthcoming elections. I have credibility in the Movement and have had occasion to serve as service chief. This is what we call “dirty tricks” and I would like to call on all Movement MPs present here to ignore this list. 

The Movement has not anointed anybody as yet to stand on its ticket in the next elections. If anything, that is why we are in this House, to open up term limits. The candidates that will stand on the Movement ticket next elections, will be and I repeat, will be chosen by the delegates conferences of the various constituencies. The Movement is not going to anoint anybody. You will have to fight for your candidacy in the primaries. I thank you, Mr Speaker, and I beg to lay this bogus document on the Table for everybody’s inspection. Thank you.

10.20
MR ODONGA OTTO (Aruu County, Pader): Mr Speaker, I want to thank you for this opportunity and for your guidance during through this sensitive moment in the history of our country.  

Mr Speaker, I am concerned that, given the fact that sometime this week we shall go to committee stage, the amount of threats on the lives of MPs have increased, not only for those supporting the kisanja but even those opposing it. I wonder whether this House could consider two things, either going back to secret ballot or providing one escort per Member of Parliament. Otherwise, in the next two to three months, someone might get shot, because of voting for or against. I did not have time to come to your office this morning, otherwise, I would have presented some documents showing threats to those who are opposing this bill.

From what I see in the papers and the e-mail my colleague hon. Aachilla received, this is too much! Even if he is in the Movement camp, his life is under threat. Mr Speaker, I am seeking your protection since you have guided us during these two months. If we do not provide security for MPs, this thing might turn out into a suicide mission. We shall see caskets coming to this House if we do not take precautions. I seek your guidance.  

THE SPEAKER: This is regrettable if what you say is true, because then, the country is taking a retrogressive step yet the issue of tolerance has been developed for many years. If intolerance has come to the level of threatening somebody’s life, I think this is deplorable. We should ensure that when we move today, we move forward, not backward. Each one of us should ensure, and when I say each one of us I mean the entire population, that we are tolerant. We have to accept differences and because somebody is taking a different position does not give cause to harm him. I was in the Human Rights Commission with a number of people here and this is what we saw happening many years ago. This is 2005 and we do not expect that.  

As for your request, we will have to consult other people because Parliament does not have that security. Okay?

10.25
THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I wish to assure all Members of Parliament and the nation at large that, if any Member of Parliament is threatened, Government is ready to protect that member and you should give your name to the Minister of Internal Affairs. I am also available. I wish to assure you that we have the capacity to protect members of parliament and the nation at large, and this can never be doubted. I am serious on this matter and as far as I am concerned, these are dirty political tricks, which we are going to overcome. I thank you.

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) (NO. 3) BILL, 2005

(Debate continued)

THE SPEAKER: People have not followed the order I had given again. I expected people to be on time but they are not here.

10.26
MR MWESIGWA RUKUTANA (Rushenyi County, Ntungamo): Mr Speaker, I want to take this opportunity to thank you for giving me the chance to air my views and indeed, the views of the people of Rushenyi, on this historic bill for the amendment of the Constitution. I represented the people of Rushenyi in the Constituent Assembly, which enacted the Constitution that is being reviewed today. Honourable members, since I was in the Constituent Assembly, I can boast that I know fairly well the reasons, the mood, the course of events, and the actions that led to the enactment of the various provisions of the Constitution, which we are amending this time round.

Mr Speaker, before I embark on my few points, I want to share with honourable members the definition of a constitution and what it entails, as put down by renowned scholars. According to D. Smith, a renowned scholar in constitutional and administrative law, in his book entitled, Constitutional and Administrative Law, 4th Edition, page 18, published by Penguin Books, he wrote and I quote, “The form and content of a Constitution will depend, first on the forces at work when the Constitution is established or amended. 

Secondly, on common sense considerations of practical convenience pertaining at the time and thirdly, on precedents available to the politicians and the advisors who draw up the Constitution.” In other words, Mr Speaker, a Constitution is a reflection of people’s attitudes, aspirations, wishes, and feelings at a particular point in time when they are enacting it or indeed, amending it.  

Having said that, I want to give my experience in the Constituent Assembly. When we enacted the Constitution in 1995, we were influenced by experiences drawn from the past and the then pertaining circumstances. Because of that, we know that a constitution, being a reflection of people’s attitudes, wishes and aspirations, can never be static. We know that it is subject to change because people’s attitudes and aspirations change over time. 

There is no society, which is static on any matter for any length of time. Society develops and changes, and people’s thinking and minds evolve with time. That is why we put a whole chapter, 18, with very elaborate articles to guide us in future, should need arise for us to change what we enacted then, and put it in tune with the wishes and aspirations of the people who may be reviewing it. Honourable members, I will demonstrate that now, the time has come.  

The people of Rushenyi and I have closely examined the amendment bill. They have given me instructions to put it on record that as regards most of the articles, they will move along with the majority of Ugandans. That is not to say that they are in full agreement with each and every article that is in the amendment bill. The people of Rushenyi are civilized and they know that a constitution is a compromise; you cannot have it all. That is why they will not quarrel with anybody because if anything, they did not like most of the issues in the bill. That is why they have put their hands into the majority arena and will go ahead with the majority view on a number of issues in the bill.  

However, they have instructed me to specifically air out their views on Article 105(2). They are saying that this article has outlived its usefulness. They know that, at the time they instructed me to restrict presidential term limits, they were very scared and were actually still panting. They had experienced the leadership of Obote I, Amin, Lule, Binaisa, Paulo Muwanga, Obote II, Mzee Lutwa, and all those that we know. Most of these regimes, as honourable members will know, had inflicted deep wounds on the people of Rushenyi which, by 1995 when we enacted the Constitution, were still bleeding. 

There was the feeling that Ugandans were cursed and that we would never get to a situation where we could have orderly and democratic transfer of state power through the ballot box. Honourable members, considering those last prayers, the Rushenyi people could not imagine that any one individual president could serve one term, a second one, a third one, a fourth one, and still remain good and useful to the country. But since 1995, the Movement under the leadership of President Museveni, has not only soothed their feelings, but healed them. I may even say that the scars are already cured.

Allow me to demonstrate, dramatically, differences between two presidents just to stress the point. In 1982 I was a student at Makerere University and I happened to be a student leader. We had a mission to visit our then president, President Milton Obote, to seek political guidance. I remember we matched from Makerere University and found President Milton Obote at his house somewhere in Kololo, Mpala Avenue as hon. Awori knows. 30 minutes after we entered, President Obote appeared on his balcony. 

When he appeared with his colleagues, unfortunately Aggrey Awori was absent at that time and I do not know where he was, the first question he asked was whether we had had something to drink. The President then ordered that drinks should be given to his children. He directed the Minister of Supplies to deliver a full lorry of Nile Beer. The lorry was parked; we scrambled for the drinks and even the President treated himself to a huge bottle. May I say it was my first time to see that nice bottle of wine called Matteus. He sat on the balcony while we were down. There was no lunch; we drunk -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: It is time, honourable.

MR RUKUTANA: I am concluding. We drunk and sang and what I remember about that mission was how sweet the President’s deep voice was when he sang to his tune on Nyamurunga. After midnight, we were told the night was still very young and another lorry was delivered. We drunk until morning, then we went home. I want to conclude by contrasting this with what I saw on the 6th June 2005 when students from Makerere and other tertiary institutions came to meet President Museveni at State House. When they came, they were treated to a decent meal of matooke, beef, peas and tea.  

In a short time, the President met them, gave each of them a chance to present his views and listened to their presentations. Afterwards, he got his marker went to a blackboard and started lecturing them on the causes of under development and on what we need to do to transform our economy from peasantry to a modern economy. He led a study on the achievements we have registered and told them the limitations and bottlenecks we have to overcome in order to transform this country. 

Now, when I compare those two instances, you will know that I have reason to say that the wounds have healed and time has come for us to remove term limits because the past days, which influenced us have long gone. I thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Are you saying that people should not clear their throats? (Laughter)

10.37
MR TWAREBIREHO TUNGWAKO (Bunyaruguru County, Bushenyi): I thank you, Mr Speaker, for allowing me to contribute on this very important debate. I thank the committee for doing a good job of presenting this report. Honourable members, I just want to begin by quoting a famous writer, Robert Bolt in his book, A man of all seasons. At one time, when Thomas Moore was squeezed to side with King Henry VIII of Notch, he said of one’s conscience that he had one thing to which the king was smaller than, and that was his conscience. At another time, they sent his daughter, Margaret to convince him to sign and support the king. She told him, “daddy say the words of the mouth and in your heart, think otherwise.” But Thomas Moore refused and said, “The words of the oath are the words you talk to God”.  

Mr Speaker, as we decide on this very important bill, I request everybody to revisit his or her conscience and see that what one is going to vote for is in accordance with one’s conscience. 

Secondly, honourable members, we should remember the oath we took. We are supposed to do everything without any fear or favour, and that is what I urge every one of us here to do. 

I wish to thank the Minister of Internal Affairs, the Chairperson of the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs, and his team for having recommended that the Banyaruguru become a tribe. This is a community that existed from 1st of February 1926. The history of the Banyaruguru is clear. They moved from Ssentamu in Buganda in 1898 at a time of succession wars between Junjju and Semakokilo. 

Part of the people moved to the east and those are the Bakenyi who are now a tribe. Others moved west and these are the Batagwenda tribe who are represented by my younger brother, hon. Byabagambi. We crossed Bunyaruguru but remained without identity. We thank the minister and the entire committee for that good recommendation. 

Mr Speaker and honourable members, I have consulted the people of Bunyaruguru on this issue and they totally agree that dual citizenship is okay and that lack of it has denied some Ugandans abroad from getting employment because they are not citizens. As we were told by His Excellency the President, the revenue earned by these people is a lot and I think if they became citizens of other countries, they would earn even more and this money would be brought back to develop our country.  

Mr Speaker, on presidential, parliamentary and LC V elections being held on the same day, we also support that for a few good reasons. Firstly, it is cost effective and secondly, as the report on violence revealed, it will decrease on election violence. His Excellency or whoever would be in power at any other time would not be tempted to campaign for individuals because he would fear he would tamper with some of his supporters. 

Mr Speaker, on the issue of judges, you are a very seasoned lawyer and some of us are your juniors in the legal profession. However, with my experience, I would say that judges are supposed to be seasoned persons. You do not bring a young man or lady of 35 years to become a judge. He/she is in his or her useful stage where you can seclude him or her from society. The people of Bunyaruguru analyzed this and found that to become a judge, one should at least be above 40 and should have worked for at least ten years to gain the desired experience.

Permit me, Mr Speaker and honourable members, to touch on the very important and crucial matter of opening political space and the opening of term limits. On those two issues, we have been unfair to Ugandans and most especially the peasantry class, which we pretend to represent. The  Sempebwa Commission went around the country and collected data and in its report, it is reported that 70 percent of Ugandans rejected multipartism. Despite this, we have been forging ahead to make sure that it comes. 

As we talk daily, we always recall and pronounce the words of the Constitution, that the Constitution is paramount and therefore the people are paramount. Yet when it comes to this issue, even after having given their opinion, and without going back to the constituencies to consult, we have decided to go multi-party. We are so unfair because after that, we go to the people in the villages and tell them to open up political space when actually, deep in their hearts, they are not happy. 

On that, Mr Speaker and honourable members, I beg to be with the people Bunyaruguru and propose that when, unfortunately, multipartism comes through, we still have a provision in the Constitution, like has been the case, that every after four years we revisit to ask the people whether it is still ideal. 

Mr Speaker, on lifting term limits, the same confusion has been raging around. I will not endeavour to go into details, but will specifically give reference to what my colleagues have already presented during this debate, before this House. I will not go very far but will start with what my young brother hon. Rukutana has stated. The fears that were there in 1995 he says, have gone away. He forgets one thing which is that His Excellency Museveni is different from other people and that when he has gone those fears might come back again. 

The people of Bunyaruguru are saying, ”We love Museveni”, but if you open for everybody, how sure are we that the new person will be of the same good sense that can hold Uganda together like Museveni has done? In effect, Mr Speaker and honourable members, the people of Bunyaruguru have got reservations. I agree with hon. Byabagambi and hon. Kityo that there should be something that is different, that we should have a transition where Museveni is given another term but leave term limits because you never know who will come. 

From hon. Rukutana’s contribution today, we can all see that everybody is talking about His Excellency Museveni, not just anybody. Mr Speaker, I do not see why we are being ambiguous. Let us say what we want for Uganda and let us not mix up things. Everybody who supports the Movement has not talked about any other person other than His Excellency Museveni. They are all contributing and saying His Excellency Museveni has been exemplary and we agree. But why go into lifting term lifts which may bring problems tomorrow?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member wind up, because -(Interruption)

MR TUNGWAKO: Thank you, Mr Speaker, let me wind up. I would wish to say that as we go on deliberating and preparing ourselves to vote on these important issues, let us be very candid and simple. Let us not quarrel bacause we are one House, one Uganda and above all, let us remember that what we are doing today, what we are doing for tomorrow and for posterity. Posterity will stand to judge us when we go against our conscience and do not follow the Oath we took as we started office. I thank you.

10.48
MS AANIMU ANGUPALE (Woman Representative, Arua): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for the opportunity to contribute to this debate which is very crucial and critical for this country. I would like to thank the committee under the chairmanship of hon. Jacob Oulanyah, for chairing such a sensitive issue, which is leading towards the turning point of this country. 

Two weeks ago, when I was coming from my constituency, I read something in The New Vision, which made me feel sad. The paper stated that, all Members of Parliament who are going to vote otherwise, are going to be printed out and stopped from getting visas to travel outside the country. 

Members of Parliament, that to me, was cheap politics. It brought into my mind a thought as to whether Uganda’s leaders are not confident of their country or themselves. Why should you reflect on cheap things when we are trying to make a Member of Parliament, which will govern this country?  Mr Speaker, I think amendment of the Constitution is very important because we need to fit to global changes. Therefore, I support the committee on their move to amend this Member of Parliament, which will govern the people of this country.

Honourable Speaker, we have one challenge whatever party or affiliation we may belong to. Our challenge is to transform rural society which is backward and dependant, so that it can have better capacity to produce and manage resources, to meet global challenges. Whatever we do in this country, I think that is our challenge and in order to achieve this, I believe we should build a good environment by building our institutions. We should prepare the Army, the Police, the economic sector, the agricultural sector, the health sector, the education sector, so that the country runs smoothly. 

This brings my attention to a saying by one American leader. I am not an American, but I want to talk like an African politician and give reference to issues, which I think are very important in this amendment review. One President of America, John Kennedy said,” Do not ask what people should do for you, but ask yourself what you can do for the people”. At this very moment, what can this parliament do for the people of Uganda? This is the question we should be asking ourselves. We should ask questions which are relevant to what we are doing right now, here. 

Mr Speaker, I would like to draw the attention of members in this House, to the history of this country. We know how politics was imported into this country to divide us and make us think colonially. And all along, that is what is in the minds of Africans and particularly Ugandans. This is our very thinking. I would like to say, let us now think like Ugandans and do things which are good for us and which will benefit the generation of this country.

Mr Speaker, with these opening remarks, I would like to urge that we stop antagonistic debate aimed at reducing other Members of Parliament. We know that everybody here has got the capacity to represent the people and is capable of doing anything they would like. 

Mr Speaker, I would like to start by tackling Article 105 which is of interest to everybody. I support repealing of Article 105(2), to make it eligible for any president to stand one or more times. As long as Article 1 of the Constitution states that power belongs to the people, the people will decide. I am irritated when Members of Parliament stand on the Floor of this House, character assassinating one individual Ugandan against the Constitution. The people will decide because they know who is the right leader. 

When I was in USA during the US elections, only two parties surfaced for the elections, that is the Republicans and the Democrats. We happened to go to the Libertarian president and I asked him, “Why are you not fronting your presidency?  We are only hearing of two presidents under two parties. What is wrong with the Libertarian party? You sound very good”. That president gave me some very wise information.  He said, “Look here, politics is all to do with popularity. You have to popularise yourself with the society and then launch yourself as president”. In their case, they were not yet prepared to launch a president because they had not yet manoeuvred the society to vote for their president.  

With this example, I would like to urge other parties, who are advocating for stopping presidential term limit only because of one person’s popularity, that let them popularise themselves properly with the society. Ugandans will vote for them as long as they are citizens of this country, but let us not limit one politician  -(Interruption)  

MR SEBULIBA:  Thank you, hon. Angupale, for giving way. Mr Speaker, I want to inform my colleague that other candidates want to popularise themselves but the institutions in place do not allow them. Recently, the FDC has been harassed and many others likewise. When they try to open up their offices, RDCs come in. These are the things we are talking about, where one individual is given a chance, while others are not. This is where the things go wrong. That is the information I wanted to give you.

MR MIKE SEBALU:  I would like to inform you about the party to which Sebuliba Mutumba belongs. They are leaders who popularise themselves in the names of Ssebagala and others and they end up fighting and in court. There are no institutions stopping them. (Laughter)

CAPT. BASALIZA:  Point of information. 

MS AANIMU:  Thank you very much but I am being mindful of my time, honourable. You will excuse me. Mr Speaker, to answer hon. Sebuliba Mutumba, I want to state clearly here, that let us not panel beat crucial issues.  Some months back, this parliament debated on a Bill which was for opening up the Multiparty System. Hon. Sebuliba Mutumba’s team went ahead and said it was not enough to open them up at the district level, but that they would also like to go down to the society. 

The Movement system went ahead and accepted their query and said, “let us open up”; and now the referendum is here for us to open up and allow other parties to come and struggle for power. I think by June/July, we shall be opening up for hon. Sebuliba Mutumba to contest for power and that clearly answers his query that we are moving very systematically to allow other Ugandans participate for power. Let us not cover up good things in a black blanket, to suit the interest of foreigners and to condemn our country.  Rather, let us love our country and we be Ugandans. I think all Ugandans know that we are going to open up. 

Mr Speaker, let me now go to other articles -(Interruption) 

THE SPEAKER:  No, time is up.

MS AANIMU: Let me rush, give me only two minutes.

THE SPEAKER: No. What you can do is say you support this position or not.

MS AANIMU: I thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Due to lack of time, I support the committee and I have better ideas than you, hon. Mao, because the people of Arua elected me and they will elect me again; not because Mao will campaign for me but because I will campaign for myself and represent the people of this country in the House. I shall not be intimidated by an individual because of my views. I support the committee on their view and I thank  them very much. I thank you.

10.59
MRS GERTRUDE KULANY (Woman Representative, Kapchorwa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also want to take this opportunity to thank the committee for their good report. I want to confess that I was a member of the Constituent Assembly and I supported the term limits. But, politics is not static but dynamic. Things have changed and we have to move with the times. So, I support the lifting of the term limits because of the following reasons.  

Mr Speaker, at that time when we were in CA, we were under the Movement System, but now, we are moving to Multiparty System where each party will look for its own candidate.  The issue of saying that we bar some people from participating, I think, is not fair to individuals. Further more, the Constitution, as many of us have said, states that power belongs to the people. If people are still satisfied with the leadership of an individual, I do not see why we should stop them from choosing that candidate to lead them. Therefore, this issue of presidential term limits should be lifted.

Mr Speaker, as a woman, we have benefited a lot under this leadership and we have been empowered. Before this government came in place, the women were only confined to the kitchen, but as I speak, many of us have been empowered, we hold big positions in Government and we are participating in the decision making of this country. For that reason, we want continuity of this leadership, which thinks seriously about the contribution of the woman. I am praying very hard that the Domestic Relations Bill will be passed under this leadership, which is sensitive to women issues. For that reason, I want continuation of this leadership.  

People have been saying that we should not peg this issue to President Museveni. I want to say that I think there is reason to peg the President on this leadership, because he has exercised and shown us that he is the best so far. I am not surprised over 60 percent of Ugandans still cherish his leadership. 

My district in previous regimes used to be very backward, but as I speak, we are at per with the rest of Uganda and this is because of good governance. My people have said they want to continue with this leadership.

On the issue of CAOs, I speak from experience in my own district, and say that this issue of decentralizing CAOs is still premature. Most of the funds utilized in the districts come from the centre. Therefore, if the centre has no control over who is going to supervise their funds, it is not surprising, as some people have said, that corruption is being decentralized. Personally, I support the issue of bringing back the recruitment of CAOs to the centre, because as I speak, for the last two years, my district has not had a chief administrative officer simply because of political wrangles in the district. I believe, for the sake of good governance, that CAOs should be centralized and the districts carry out the supervision.

I support the issue of dual citizenship. This is because I come from an area where, because of history, some of our people live across the border. I believe that if we allow dual citizenship, we shall have peaceful interaction with our neighbours. Furthermore, Ugandans living abroad are contributing a lot to the economy of this country. From budget readings, they are the third in terms of bringing revenue to this country. I believe if dual citizenship is granted, we shall benefit more from this.  

As regards swahili, Mr Speaker, I think we should include it as our second official language. This is because I come from a border district and swahili would come in handy for us. Also since we are heading for an East African Federation, and our two sister countries have swahili as their second language, this would assist us in terms of communication. With those few remarks, I support the Bill. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER:  Now, we will have hon. Onzima, followed by hon. Sebagereka, hon. Basaliza, hon. Kalule Sengo and hon. Kahinda Otafiire. I will cover all of you, do not worry.  Let us take just seven minutes or else I will start the system of cutting you short. I did not want to do that, but I have a system here which I want to stick to.

11.05
MR ALEX AADROA ONZIMA (Maracha County, Arua):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. To me, unlike to many other members of Parliament, this is a very important debate, which touches on the very existence of this country and its political stability. I want to make my contribution from the heart of my heart and as a Roman Catholic, in the Name of the Father, of the Son and of the Holy Spirit -(Hear! hear)

Mr Speaker, I do not go to my constituency to get instructions from the voters, and neither do I go there to get orders or directives. When I go to my constituency, I introduce a political topic, throw light on that topic, and  then give my voters the opportunity to air their views until we come to a consensus. What comes out of that meeting is what we, as the people of Maracha own, and that is what I present. Therefore, it is not a matter of going to one’s constituency, for the people to tell you something and even if you know it is wrong, you still come here and tell people that it is your position. That is not how I manage politics in my constituency.

Mr Speaker, President Museveni came into power in the year 1986 and has been praised by many members, among them young men who were in the bush and fought together with him like hon. Kazoora and others. The man made it very clear that he was not going to be like the majority of African leaders who want to die in that office. It took them ten years to run this country without a constitution and this was deliberate. Towards the end of the tenth year, they came up with the Constitution, which in essence is a Movement Constitution, because the majority of the delegates in the Constitution making process were Movement delegates and they took a decision to go for change, and have a two five year presidential term limit.  

That was the position and they had very genuine reasons, as has been articulated by many members here, regarding the political turmoil we went through under Idi Amin and other governments that came up after he was overthrown. I support those people who fought and removed Idi Amin, despite the fact that I come from West Nile, because I stand for the truth. I support and thank people like Yoweri Museveni, who went ahead to fight and overthrow the UPC government.  

To me, that was the beginning of a new political dispensation in this country, which would take us towards political stability and that was the hope I had. While they were fighting, I was in Congo, exiled by the then UPC Government. We thought this was a new beginning, and I shared this with hon. Prof. Kagonyera the other day when we had a party here.

MR AWORI: Mr Speaker, we all embrace the parliamentary democratic system for the good of society. Is my honourable colleague in order to encourage and espouse a system where there is use of violence to overthrow a constitutionally elected Government?

THE SPEAKER: No; but there are what we call revolutions and the courts back those kinds of revolutions. Revolutions are sometimes brought about by violence and there is a decision of court that a new government can come in by a revolution.

MR BAKKABULINDI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Is the honourable member, holding the Floor, in order to insinuate that this is a Movement Constitution when, while being sworn, he owed this same constitution? Is he in order?

THE SPEAKER: No, I think he is saying that the Constitution came at a time when the NRM was in control and so they must have initiated and encouraged it.

MR ONZIMA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. We then had this Constitution, which was enacted in 1995. It became very clear that Museveni, having ruled this country for ten years, could get another ten years, if the people so wished. In 1996 I gave him my vote, and then in 2001, I changed my position. Before the ten years elapsed, these people went and gathered at Kyankwanzi and said,” Well, I think we made a mistake. Power belongs to the people. Let us have this constitution amended for selfish reasons”.  

Mr Speaker, let me state it clearly that, in my opinion, we should put the interests of this country, particularly its political stability, first and foremost. Other things like whether one person is loved, the FDC Movement, and others, should come later. Personally, when you have a presidential term limit, it has more advantages than the disadvantages. If you elect Onzima as president today, as I administer this country, I will be looking backwards at my footsteps, and asking myself whether what I am doing for this country is going to secure my life after five years, when I am out of office. I will wonder whether what I am doing is going to gather support for me from Buganda, West, North, and the East to ensure a tenure of ten years in office. 

Term limits will make the incumbent conscious of what he is doing, and that will bring security, first to himself and then to the entire country. But when you say a person can rule for 50 years, as we have been hearing some senior members say, you are going to create problems for this country. I want to add that when I look at the Parliamentary Directorate and at the qualifications of members of parliament, I actually envy them because many people have very high qualifications like PhD’s, Professors, Masters, Bachelors while I do not have any of these. 

I would have expected this wealth of knowledge to help us make peaceful, professional, rational and objective decisions for the interest of this country. When we talk about collective Cabinet responsibility, let us look at what happened in Zambia and Malawi. The people first looked at their country, and not at the presidency. That is what we want in this country. In Uganda, we have heard a lot from the Uganda Joint Christian Council, from Uganda Law Society, from US organizations and others, all not in favour of lifting the presidential term limits, in the interest of the country. 

Let us not be selfish. I, for one and the people of Maracha, have decided that, that Article is in the interest of the country, it must be entrenched further, and nobody should tamper with it. Some people have gone ahead to say that if President Museveni wants to go ahead and lead, we should repeal that Article and let him stand. Let us leave that to him; God will sort him out. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

11.18
MRS KAKOKO SEBAGEREKA (Woman Representative, Kayunga): Thank you, Mr Speaker for availing me this opportunity to contribute to this very important motion. Honourable members, I was a member of the Constituent Assembly and this very motion came on the Floor of the House in 1995.  It was not a very popular suggestion that we should put term limits but some supported it. The same thing happened in the 70’s when the American Constitution was being made. King George III, who was King at that time, was greatly feared and a very big threat to the politicians. That is why they put the term limit. I want to quote, that when they were putting that term limit, they said: “Elections are for getting rid of politicians who do not perform; term limits on the other hand are for the elimination of politicians who perform.”

In that vein, I want to inform you, Mr Speaker and hon. Members that changes are not static.  I want to say that term limits are there and the on-going elections, after every five years, are a check and balance to ensure that dictators do not take over this country.

I want to thank the committee for the good report and all the Members who have positively contributed to this motion, because Uganda has to move with the rest of the countries in the globalized world. We have to make sure that both the civil society and the Government are working together without fear or favour.  

I want to inform this august House that our President is one of the most popular Presidents in the whole of Africa at the moment and he still has the grip of the people.  I consult the people every week, and they feel – (Mr Otto rose_) – protect me, Mr Speaker from hon. Otto Odonga.

THE SPEAKER: You are in safe hands.

MRS SEBAGEREKA: The people of Kayunga want the term limit lifted because of the merits that they have seen.  They say that term limits are not good for a good president; they are a creation for former presidents who will sit in Uganda, to be taken care of as former Presidents, which will not be good for our economy.

Most of the European countries, except Italy, do not have term limits. It is only Italy and there, every person claims to be a former president.  Italy is a developed country and it has funds to support those former presidents. 

So the people of Kayunga say that the devil you know is better than the angel you do not know; and so they support the report.

Mr Speaker, I also want to contribute to the language – (Mr Otto rose_)

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Speaker, I rise on a point of order. The hon. Member holding the Floor has just said that the devil you know is better than the angel you do not know. Is she in order to insinuate that the President is a devil, because this is a very serious matter and for the records of the Hansard – 

THE SPEAKER: It is only an English saying; that is how they say it in English, so she is right.

MRS SEBAGEREKA: I would be the last person to think that the President is a devil, so I am sure that you can read between the lines, thank you.  Mr Speaker, I want to touch on the issue of language – 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Member, you have only two minutes now.   

MRS SEBAGEREKA: I was one of the people who vehemently opposed Swahili as a national language in the Constituency Assembly, but now, I support Swahili to be the second official language.  The national language will evolve. I support Swahili because it is used as a lingua franca; it is a language that will enable Ugandans to travel through East Africa and other borders throughout Africa.

Mr Speaker, I want to support the notion that Chief Administrative Officers (CAOs) should be appointed from the centre because of the marginalisation that ensues when we are canvassing for political offices. The local governments always seem to marginalise the Chief Administrative Officers.  Since CAOs are professionals, they should be given a margin so that they can able to get themselves into other posts.

I want to end by thanking the media for being very objective these days.  I also want to thank all the Members and remind you that we must debate this motion with a lot of patriotism.  I thank you.  

11:27
MR ARAALI BASALIZA (Fort Portal Municipality, Kabarole): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity to contribute to this important debate.  I would like to thank the committee for the good report.  

First of all, I would like to say that I came here after signing a contract with the people of Fort Portal Municipality and they instructed me that I should not betray them.  So I would like to support the lifting of the term limit, that is Article 105(2).  Because the people of Fort Portal Municipality have instructed me to come here and support the lifting of the term limit.  

You know, they already had sent me here before, during the Constituent Assembly. We are the people who instituted these term limits. But we instituted them because of our history, which was marred with bad leadership. But now, they have realised that there is good leadership in Uganda, and the world is improving. Therefore they see no reason why we should not lift the term limits.

Mr Speaker, when we talk about lifting limits, we over-concentrating on the incumbent President.  Yes, it is true that he has ruled this country very well, but we are lifting this term limit also for those who will come in future. If they govern this country well, then this Article should continue in the Constitution.

Article 1 of the Constitution stipulates that power belongs to the people and that is very important, especially now as we lift the term limit.  Now, if power belongs to the people, the people should be able to elect their leaders.  Why then should the Constitution limit the people?  Are we supposed to be slaves of the Constitution that we made on behalf of the people? Should it compel the people to elect a person whom they do not want?  

This is fundamental because the incumbent President has ruled the country so well.  He has destroyed the myth of bad leadership in this country.  We are always hoping for the best and he has shown that more is coming.  Now, if we continue with these developments, which the present government ushered in under the leadership of Mr Yoweri Kaguta Museveni, there is hope that better things will be done.

The people of Fort Portal Municipality have seen a lot of improvement.  For example, now we talk about the road from Kampala to Fort Portal, which has been tarmacked.  It takes us three and a half hours to reach Fort Portal.  So we have a reason to hoping for better.

People are arguing that the Constitution should not be amended.  But there is nothing, which cannot be amended.  The only thing, which cannot change, is “change”.  I call upon the honourable Members, not to be chained to the slavery Constitution; we should be able to amend the Constitution for the better of the people of Uganda.

Mr Speaker, I would like to come to the issue of dual citizenship. There are very many of our people abroad who have taken citizenship in those countries; why should they be deprived of citizenship in their home country?  It is important for them to be psychologically liberated so that they can come back to their country to feel at home and invest here- so that they can feel that they still belong to Uganda.  I met some of these people when I was in Dubai recently.  They were complaining about this same issue of not having dual citizenship, and I think it is very important.  

Let me also address the issue of CAOs.  As RDC, I have worked with many CAOs and I have seen how the leaders have made them prisoners in districts.  If the centre appoints them, they will be liberated.  They will not be victimized.  You may even find that some districts do not have people who qualify to become CAOs.  So they get CAOs from other areas and treat them as strangers in their own country, just because they are not in their own districts.  But if they are put at the centre, they will be treated as Ugandans.  So I would like to support the centre to appoint CAOs.

Lastly, I would like to say that, we are going to be very decisive today as we make these important decisions, for the future of our people and that of our children.  Whatever we do, we should vote wisely, and voting wisely is by lifting the term limit.  Thank you very much.

MR KALULE SSENGO (Gomba County, Mpigi):  Thank you, Mr Speaker.  Because of the limited time, I will concentrate on Article 105, Sub-section 2.  If time allows, I will also comment on dual citizenship and the official language.

I support the lifting of term limits. (Applause) My support is based on two main elements.  I am looking first at continuity and stability.  As you may appreciate, Mr Speaker, good leaders are very rear commodities in Africa.  So if a country is lucky to have a good leader, I think he should not be limited by term limits.  Leadership should be open for him so that he can continue doing a good job. 

Again, if we borrow a leaf from some of those very stable institutions, my colleague from Maracha said that he was a very staunch Roman Catholic.  But he is forgetting that the Catholic Church is one of the very stable institutions in the world.  In the Catholic Church, you do not have term limits for the Pope, the Bishops, and priests. Because of that, we have a very stable institution. (Applause)  So, if we want to build stable countries, especially in Africa, we ought to open up terms and allow leaders to do a good job.  You will appreciate that when you give someone a very short period to do an activity, he is bound to do a very shoddy job. 

I have also read, that some of those countries with term limits, the leaders –(Interruption)- Mr Speaker, I will request my colleague not to interrupt because of limited time.  

I am told that some of those countries where there is term limits, the leaders tend to be corrupt because they know that they are leaving the following year.  But if a leader knows that he has enough time to do a good job, then he will not be corrupt because he will know that he is there to serve the people.

I also want to talk of some of these long-term programmes.  In this country, we have what we call the vision 2005.  Now, if you have a good leader and he is going to handle a programme of that nature, I think you are bound to get very good results, because he will not be leading hastily.  He will know that he has the time and because of that, you are assured to get very good results.

Mr Speaker, I am of the view that, since we are going into competitive politics, the parties can effect this question of term limits within their internal mechanisms. We are going into competitive politics; let the parties decide for their leader the number of terms they should lead.  Why not?  DP may limit its leader to two terms, UPC can decide to limit their leader to one term, and FDC can decide that their leader will serve for five terms  

People should not think that this lifting of terms is for only the Movement; we are in competitive politics.  Tomorrow it may be FDC in power, so we are opening it for FDC, UPC and for the honourable Members from Maracha, honourable Mabikke and for everybody else.  

I understand that hon. Mabikke is intending to contest.  So honourable Mabikke, when you become the President, we will have lifted term limits for you too.  So long as you perform well, you will have five or whatever number of term that you will deserve. 

Mr Speaker, I do not really see any problem with lifting of the term limits.  If I took this House back into our history, I remember when we were under the colonial rule, we did not have term limits; when UPC was in power, we did not have term limits and nobody complained; when Obote II came into power, we did not have term limits and they did not complain.  So I do not see why they are complaining now.  

Is lifting term limits bad just because some people are not in power? It seems to be the case!  There are people who are arguing just because they are not in power yet I remember very well that when they were in power, they never complained about term limits.  

Mr Speaker, I want to remind my colleagues that even our colonial masters in Britain do not have term limits. Why then should they insist that we must have term limits in Uganda?  I think we borrowed our system from Britain and they do not have term limits.  I also understand that the present Prime Minister of Britain is serving a third term. So I do not really see any problem.

Mr Speaker, allow me in these final minutes to comment on the issue of dual citizenship.  One of the reasons for dual citizenship is to allow in the inflow of resources and the coming of investors.  But now, I am having a problem, suppose we allow dual citizenship for people of Congo; a man will be a Congolese and be a Ugandan and you allow dual citizenship for people of Sudan because they have interests here. So a man will be a Sudanese and a Uganda at the same time; you allow a man from Rwanda to be Ugandan and Rwandese.  

Eventually, we will gradually moving into a political union, because if a man is a Ugandan and a Sudanese, then why do you not say Uganda and Sudan are one country so that you do not have this problem of dual citizenship. So, Mr Speaker, this dual citizenship in Africa, especially with neighbouring countries, will be the first step towards achieving political unity of these countries around us.  

With those few remarks, I fully support the lifting of term limits, and I want all my colleagues to take it in good faith.  Let them support it, we should not hate each other just because we have lifted the term limits.  Thank you, Mr Speaker.

11:47
MAJ. GEN. KAHINDA OTAFIIRE (Ruhinda County, Bushenyi): Thank you, Mr Speaker.  About 10 years ago, on the eve of taking important decisions like today, I felt a sense of foreboding, and my fear had no shape or size.  It was a result of the heavy preponderance leaning towards decision-making as a result of lessons learnt from our turbulent history.  

Quite a number of decisions were going to be made and were being made in the Constitution making process with hindsight of our history and a projection into what was possible in the future albeit devoid of reality then and the possible situation of our country in the future. 

I was uncomfortable with a few decisions that were made in the Constituent Assembly; one of them the term limits.  I opposed term limits, but I was part of a minority with a few colleagues; and because we were minority, we lost.  When we lost, the dictates of democracy are that you accept majority decision even when you think in your subjective consideration that the majority is wrong.  Then it is the incumbent to try to convince you otherwise. 

Mr Speaker, I pray that those who are opposed to what is going on today in this House learn from that erstwhile experience.  My sentimental feelings notwithstanding, I accepted the position of defeat.  Ten years down the road, I am now being vindicated by the majority, turning round and saying, “Otafiire, hooray, you were right.”  

The sun has not stopped from rising in the East and setting in the West. I kept quiet, and campaigned silently. Today, I am being vindicated.  There is no need for speculating about war and instability; campaign for your minority views; and with time, the wounds will heal, your minority view today will become a majority view tomorrow perhaps; if it does not, too bad.  

The Constitution is a covenant among the governed; it is not like the commandments of God.  People make constitutions, and I am happy to be one of the builders of the Uganda Constitution.  The same heads that made the Constitution, are now arguing about changing it. Even God in his infinite wisdom changed his mind.  

You remember after he created Adam, He retired.  Then he realised that Adam was lonely and went back and created somebody to help him.  If the Almighty can change his mind, omniscient, omnipotent, omnipresent, who are we mortals not to change our mind?  It is only decent; it is human to change when opportunity presents itself.  

MS ALASO: Mr Speaker, in Numbers 23:19 the Bible says, “God is not a man that he should lie, nor a son of man that he should change his mind.”  Mr Speaker, is the honourable minister in order to come here and tell us God changes his mind? 

THE SPEAKER: No, I think he narrated to you the facts of the creation of man; He created Adam and left His clay aside and went away.  Then after some time he said, “I think Adam needs a partner.”  Then he had to wet the clay and make a woman. This is what he said. Did God forget or He changed His mind?

MAJ. GEN. OTAFIIRE: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for that wise ruling and thank you my sister honourable Alice Alaso for that brilliant contribution. I am not here to challenge the ways of God. I am only stating the obvious and I did not write the bible; I was not there –(Laughter)

Mr Speaker, there is a wonderful argument being paraded around that Yoweri Kaguta Museveni promised that this will be his last term, that it is in the manifesto –(Interjections)- yes it is. Yoweri Kaguta Museveni said, “I am going to serve my last term”, but if you look at our history records, when Yoweri Kaguta Museveni was being sworn in as President on the steps of this Parliament, I, Major General Kahinda Otafiire invited him here on the steps of Parliament. I am the one who invited him for swearing. For the last 30 years I have shared with this gentleman my thoughts, my fears, my contradictions, my wishes- we have had our good moments. We have had our contradictions, we have had our happy moments, and he has made decisions of importance. 

Occasionally, we have urged him to do things he would otherwise not do. Therefore, when you say this man made a promise, I Otafiire confess that I am part of change of mind about that promise –(Applause) It is not Yoweri Museveni alone who made that decision; we made the decision for him to say that it was his last term. In like manner, we have made the decision that we should change the term limits because we think we are right to rethink our then considered opinion. Besides, only fools do not change their minds and we are not fools. If he had acted unilaterally, there would be no people here stamping their feet in Parliament and supporting that decision.  The fact that there are people supporting that decision indicates that he is not alone.  

So, when you demonise him you demonise all of us; when you call him a fool it means you belittle all of us; when you think he is a wise man, you are also praising all of us.  He is our spokesman, we all do not speak at the same time like a bundle of – but we are all part of that decision and that is why we are going to make that historical decision today to lift the term limits. 

In spite of your wishes, your intimidation and your agonies, the majority has decided that we should lift the term limits and give our leader another chance to go on leading us. When you are making your choices in your groupings, we do not interfere. We made this constitution because we were in power; we are in power today and the reality is that we are still in power and we are changing our mind –(Applause) 

What was true then is still true today. Ladies and gentlemen, stop ranting about war, and violence. The sun is not going to fall from the sky. Politics is all about discussion making. Let us go ahead discussing; maybe your minority views today will become majority views tomorrow.  You should be complaining about the level of the playfield; you should be saying, “give us a chance to participate, to compete with you, and then when we beat you, you bow. When we beat you, you stay where you are.” –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Please, wind up.

MAJ. GEN. OTAFIIRE: Mr Speaker, if these honourable gentlemen where complaining about the level of the playfield; I would support them. I would be part of them, but when we try to level the playfield; they go behind and incite violence.  When they incite violence and the state moves in to make sure law and order is maintained, they complain about intimidation; why do you start the violence? 

Now, they are ranting about making war just because we are lifting the term limit. Do you expect that Gen. Yoweri Museveni re-elected as President, is going to start war against his own government?  Those predicting war are the ones to initiate the war. But let me give you one warning, never trouble trouble until trouble troubles you. Nobody has monopoly over violence; neither you nor us. In a situation of violence, nobody knows who is to win or lose. Bullets do not choose; I have the experience and my experience is not very pleasant. I would not ask anybody’s son or daughter to go through what I went through in order to be here.  

Listen honourable gentlemen, we can sort out these problems without resorting to violence. It is a question of patience.  I have never seen a democracy where the wishes of the minority are not respected. But they take the fact that they are the minorities; like I told you, I was part of the minority in CA. I did not go to war because people had imposed term limits. Why should you go to war? 

All avenues of expressions had been brought; it was a do or die situation. You do not have to die unnecessarily.  Please, let us hold hands, let us have debate; this is how civilised countries are run.  

Finally, a word for those who think we are not sovereign enough to run our own affairs. People are doing good business with China. I hear of no term limits in China, in Saudi Arabia and in Kuwait. Why does it become plausible when it is those who have got pecuniary might and then improper for us who are struggling to build a nascent, and we must listen to those dictates? Honourable Aggrey Awori knows much, better. 

Finally, I beg those who are our friends in all aspects, to live and let live.  Let Ugandans make their mistakes, learn from their mistakes and grow up on their own without interference in the developing process.  My parents may have looked after me as an accident of their creation, but they are not custodians of my soul. In like manner, those who help us in issues of development need not to be the custodians of the destiny of our country. (Applause) 

11:57
MR KAPKOMU KAPKWOMU NDIWA (Kongasis County, Kapchorwa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have attended part of this debate and some bits of it remind me of the time when we were finishing the campaign to come to Parliament. At the last moment, we tend to instil a bit of lies or sweet language so that you can grab a vote, which is still hanging here and there. That is what is happening with some of our colleagues here. If you can recall, when we were debating the White Paper and relate them to what we are now doing, there is shifting of goal posts by some of us. But however far a village is, there is a radio; our truth or lies are being received.

Mr Speaker, let me thank the Parliamentary Commission, through you, for really listening to the persistent appeal from hon. Aggrey Awori that we should have these sessions broadcasted live on radio and TV. This is where we are judged, whether we are really representing the views of our constituents or not. Hon. Onzima calls it dictatorship or orders from the electorate; but some of us believe that those are the suggestions of our people.

Mr Speaker, I am here to support the Committee on the idea of lifting the term limit –(Applause) It is also in strong support of the majority of the people in Kapchorwa, especially those in Kongasis because they have actually noted with concern what this government has done for them. 
For Kongasis, in particular, they have actually had bad records, from cattle rustling. Cattle rustling is still in place but it is not as rampant as it was before 1986. They no longer go to sleep in the caves or the bush; the situation is somehow contained by the UPDF. 

So, these people say that we should let the term limit be lifted so that Museveni continues ruling them for a bit of time, for the various benefits and peace of mind that they have now. These people are traditionally cattle keepers and they likened His Excellency to a bull in a kraal; the traditional cattle keeper selects the best bull whose offspring will never die, whose offspring will produce a lot of milk; even the neighbours can borrow such a bull. 

So they equate him to a bull because of being the chairman IGAD, being the chairman of COMESA, which means that he has all the talents that attracted the people outside this country. So, it is for such credit that these people believe that the term limit should be lifted. And Mr Speaker I strongly believe in their example of using the bull. 

According to what my people and I believe, Kiswahili and dual citizenship go together. For the case of Kiswahili, they come from the border, so they like it for interaction in Kenya, especially when they go to main hospitals to take their sick ones, when they fail to reach Uganda’s nearest hospital. 

So, they say that Swahili should be the next and the second official language so that when they go to Kenya, they can at least interact with the nationals of that country, knowing that some of the services in Uganda do not reach them.

On the issue of dual citizenship, my people say that some of them have got Kenyan citizenship, but they want it formalised by Uganda accepting dual citizenship. We have acquired some of this citizenship across Kenya because of problems like cattle rustling. Whenever there is massive cattle rustling, people opt to go and live outside the country, not out of their will, but forced by circumstances. So, they now feel that this is the opportunity to make it official so that when they go there, they are free to come back home without any queries. 

We also have a lot of brain drain, which took place in the 70s and early 80s. These people want to come back home with their property. They want to keep the property, which is still across so that they are not tampered with. Many of them have got relatives at the border and if they have to go, they get that experience called makanyagwa, which is “trespass” in English, and by lifting this type of business, they would actually communicate with their dear ones across more easily. 

On the issue of the Chief Administrative Officer, they concur with the committee a 100 percent. They have had nasty experiences where they do not get good services because of the chief administrative officer being far away from their county, Kapchorwa, that is 57 miles away. They feel that they are marginalized. 

Recently, they got a very nasty experience where the district advertised for the post of Chief Administrative Officer. Their son was credited as the best, both in written and oral interviews. Eventually the boy was appointed and sworn in but later, politics interfered and eventually the centre withdrew the appointment. So they are asking, why should politics interfere with administrative matters? They would rather have it through the centre. For that purpose, they are actually praying day and night that Bukwa be given a district status and hon. Minister of State for Local Government is aware of this. He appreciates the problem; it is only Prof. Kabwegyere who does not appreciate those problems but that may be sorted out later. 

So, Mr Speaker, my people are in line with the referendum, to shift to political systems They have had experience from the government in Kenya and they pray that while we go to political systems, we go into some other cases, which the Kenyans are experiencing. My people at the border are much conversant with the Kenyan politics and they say that they can easily avoid it by noting the mistakes they make there. 

For your information, even some of our people are even voters across there because they own identity cards. So, Mr speaker and hon. Members, I beg to support the committee and its entity about the lifting of the term limit, the referendum, Kiswahili and the dual citizenship. They say that the earlier we effect them, the better.  Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much.

MR STEVEN BAMWANGA (Ndorwa County West, Kabale): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for giving me the opportunity to add my voice to those who have spoken before me in support of the Constitution (Amendment) Bill No. 3, 2005. 

Mr Speaker, this Parliament is mandated under Chapter 18 of the Constitution, Article 258 to amend the provisions of the Constitution in accordance with the procedures laid down by the very constitution that awaits amendments. This august House is, therefore, doing exactly what it is supposed to be doing under the Constitution. And this Parliament is having the powers to sign the dotted lines of either accepting the amendments or lifting the amendments. 

My colleagues have been talking about the merits and demerits of lifting the term limit or leaving it; and I want to thank you, Mr Speaker, for your wise guidance, that we should not personalize the debate on these amendments, but rather to talk about the merits and demerits of the term limits. 

I want to agree with the previous speakers who have been talking for no term limits for one reason, that Article 105(2) of the Constitution is not carved out of marble stone that cannot be changed. Yes, it may be true that since the 1995 Constitution was enacted, this Article has not been tested. But this Article is yet to be tested since the very issue of changing political systems and regime change were not simultaneously envisaged in the Constitution. And when we are interpreting the Constitution, we must give it its true meaning and interpretation. 
Article 105 (2) negates the spirit that suggests that it envisages lifting the presidential term limit.  Since Article 104 is entrenched and therefore, it carries more weight than Article 105 (2), I think we must give the people power to choose their leaders, irrespective of the time limits. 

Mr Speaker, the disadvantages of limited terms are many.  A maximum of two terms that is five-year terms is too short for any credible leader to have implemented and consolidated his manifesto and it is long enough for people not to stand a bad leader.  

As I said before, the term limits, get rid of performing leaders who are still very popular, energetic, revolutionary and they are still visionary to serve their people.  His Excellency Museveni, with due respect, still enjoys massive support throughout the country; and internationally; he is regarded as a statesman.  It is not a simple achievement for a head of State in Africa to host two heads of State from United States of America in less than three years.  

Mr Speaker, these term limits incapacitate a president during his term of office.  We have all been serving here as members of Parliament.  Some of our colleagues have been here since the CA, but they are still aspiring to come back in 2006.  Why are we restricting the President?  We have liberalized politics, we have liberalized the economy, and we have opened up political space; why don’t we open up the political space for the President and his term in office?  

It is a well-known fact that long experienced leaders help to build a young nation.  We hear of great revolutionary leaders of China, North Korea, Malaysia, and Singapore.  Some of them have had to stay in power for more than 30 years- long enough to transform their countries from being third world to first world, and yet we are complaining that some of our leaders are staying in power for too long a time.  

As a football fan– I am a supporter of Arsenal.  Our friend Viera is still the Captain of Arsenal despite his old age and he is still doing very well.  Mr Speaker, facts are very stubborn things.  Whatever may be our wishes, our inclinations or dictates of our fashion, they cannot change the state of facts and evidences.   

His Excellency President Museveni is not the only credible leader to be a President, but on the story of the lame ducks, when some of you see ducks flying from Lake Victoria to Khartoum, there is always a duck with a big chest, that can lead the other flock.  So, let us give a chance to His Excellency to rule this country if the people so wish.  

Today, Uganda is at a political crossroad.   I want to quote the biblical example of Moses.  For those of you who are Christians, I want to remind you that the biblical Moses, who led the children of Israel from Egypt, out of slavery and he was taking them across the Red Sea to Mount Sinai. Some of the children of Israel wanted to go back into slavery when they saw the soldiers chasing them.  Imagine how far we have come. 

Some people have talked of the turbulent political history of this country. In my view, it is the NRM government under the wise leadership of His Excellency the President who have tamed the turbulent political history of this country.  So, for people to say that we are going to chaos, we are going to fight each other, we are going to be in trouble; such people should be reminded that in Kenya, which has had presidents – since independence, they have changed presidents only three times; Uganda has changed presidents nine times; Tanzania – but how long did Mzee Kenyatta stay in power without term limits?  What about His Excellency, late Mzee Nyerere?  

Let us not compare President Museveni with General Washington or the first President of America.  George Washington did not enjoy being a president.  He enjoyed being a private sector man and he enjoyed farming.  The late Mzee Nyerere did his part and you see how he left Tanzania - one State, one country, one people. 

His Excellency, Mzee Mandela served 27 years in jail and he had to offer himself only two or one term for one reason that what he went through the for 27 years in prison was achieved.   He liberated South African and his people.

 Mr Speaker, I wish I had a minute to comment on the dual citizenship but in one word, I support dual citizenship; because it will promote investments, it creates opportunities that will create forward and backward linkages in our country.  Thank you.

MR ISAAC MUSUMBA (Buzaaya County, Kamuli):  Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  In this Constitutional Review process, there are two things that I want to address my mind to, and that is, the dispensation of return to multi party politics and Article 105 (2); that is, the removal or lifting of term limits.  

I support these two, because, they are coming together.  Sir, if there was no return to multiparty and I was being asked to support lifting of the term limit without the political dispensation of multiparty, I would probably have had a difficulty.  But now, I have no difficulty.  I have no difficulty because the return to multiparty is going to give Ugandans opportunity to belong where they want.  

I wish I could be left to develop my point. Mr Speaker, I patiently listened to other people; including people I consider to be my friends.  So, I think they too should leave me to develop my points.  My point is that I support the lifting of the term limit, because it is going to give me an opportunity to support the candidature of President Museveni, if he so wishes to stand again. (Applause)

Presently, I have looked at the political landscape in Uganda and I am not persuaded that we have now identified a leader of the quality and the capacity of President Museveni either in the parties that I have heard or elsewhere.  Sir, this is my view- to my satisfaction.  So, I would like to elect President Museveni again and Sir, when I think that President Museveni can no longer fit my bill, I will choose not to elect him, in which case he will no longer be my President or I will choose – (An Hon Member rose_)-no, no (Laughter) Not now. You know, I do not fear information.  

So, I support the lifting of the term limit because I want to ensure that President Museveni, who has demonstrated ability to lead this country gets a chance to lead us again, until such a time when I am either persuaded that he can no longer fit my bill, in which case I will elect somebody else, or until such a time when I believe that the time is ripe for change.  

In any case, the platform for change has already been established.  When you have returned to multiparty politics, we can use multiparty platform to change leadership other than when the Ugandans feel that the time for change of leadership has come.

Mr Speaker, I do not want to give examples of other countries, especially when the countries I want to cite as examples still have seating presidents.  But I invite people to analyse what is happening in Malawi today.  Since they tried a vote, the vote was not carried through because they felt that they still wanted term limits, they elected another president; and Sir, I can assure you that it is an interesting experience that I invite people to study. 

I would also like to invite people to study what is happening in Zambia after the changes that happened in Zambia.  So, it is not always absolutely good to say that we must change for the sake of change.  I have a lot of comments about other provisions in the Amendment Bill, but I have chosen to deliberately limit my contribution to this point and I want to conclude my contribution by saying that I will support the removal of term limits; I support the standing of President Museveni –(Mr Mabikke rose_)

MR MABIKKE:  Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  This House is aware that the family of Mr Musumba has already taken a unanimous position on the issue of the third term.  Is honourable Musumba in order to contradict that family position? (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER:  Since I am not in position to know what happens in individual’s families, I decline to rule on that.

MR MUSUMBA:  Mr Speaker, thank you very much.  Allow me to continue summarising my position, because at times I pity your position when you have to rule on things such as those ones. (Laughter)  

So Sir, I summarise by saying that, I support the lifting of term limits. I also support the candidature of President Museveni.  I am one of those people who strongly think that he should stand and when President Museveni can no longer deliver, I will be one of those who will, either move a motion or not give him my vote.  Thank you Sir.

DR HERBERT  LWANGA  (Bukoto County South, Masaka): Thank you very much Mr Speaker.  I would like to thank the Committee for the tremendous work done on this bill.  Mr Speaker and honourable members, I am going to be very brief and touch on only two issues.  

One concerns the Chief Administrative Officers.  Mr Speaker –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER:  Honourable member, let us stick with five minutes to be able to give each of you an opportunity.

DR LWANGA:  Mr Speaker, the issue of the Chief Administrative Officers is one of the most important issues that must be changed. The appearance and the working environment of the Chief Administrative Officers, their conflict with the district administration, especially in Masaka, has brought a lot of political turbulence and economic loss, which has in turn escalated poverty levels in the communities. It has brought about poor social service deliveries in our society.  

Let me give you an example. Right now, the Ministry of Health has given us Shs 40 million for the construction of a maternity ward in my constituency.  There have been a lot of wrangles between the CAO and the administration as to who is to control it.  The CAO has been overpowered and arm-twisted; instead of constructing the maternity ward, the administration has built a toilet twenty feet deep. Instead of building staff houses, they have constructed what they call a generator house, just two meters away from the examination room.  

Mr Speaker, with all that going on, as if it is not enough, the conflict between the CAOs and the administration has even cost us live; people have died, children have died- collapsed in the toilet and they have been buried.  My people of Bukoto County South and I agree with the report of the committee. The centre should control the office of CAOs. This will improve their conditions.

On the issue of Article 105(2), I support the lifting of Presidential term limits because I remember –(Interjection)- can I be protected, Mr Speaker? There are many meetings going on behind me.

THE SPEAKER: Please listen to him.

DR LWANGA: Mr Speaker, when we came to Parliament during the swearing-in ceremony, the Clerk gave Christians the Holy Bible and Moslems the Koran. We came to this Parliament to deliberate on matters of this country, bearing in mind Uganda’s Motto, “For God and my Country.”  Proverbs 14, 15, 29, “a nation without God’s guidance has no order.” These holy books will guide us and give us an insight into what we are expected to do. Prophet Elijah prophesied to King Ahab in Galilee about the impending drought, God told Prophet Elijah, “Go away from here and go eastwards, where you will be supplied with water and food.”  As we read the seasons, we are also being guided to shift from the position of Presidential term limits to open terms where we shall be led to prosperity. 

 Mr Speaker, 1 Kings 4:17 advises that a good leader who defends the rights of the poor should lead for a long time.  The bible does not talk about any term limits.  

Mr Speaker, as I conclude, yesterday hon. Sebunya listed a number of Presidential material who could come up but that is not true. When Jesus Christ was born, there were so many stars on the sky but not all of them were leading to where the newborn child was. There was only one star in the sky, which was in the Movement moving towards the Kraal where Jesus was. As we talk about so many leaders, not all of them can lead this country. We have only one leader in the Movement who can lead this country to prosperity.  

 Mr Speaker, in conclusion, I support the Committee report; we shift from that position; we open up the presidency for the prosperity of this country.

12.30
CAPT. MICHAEL MUKULA (Soroti Municipality, Soroti): Mr Speaker, I would like to take this opportunity to thank all the honourable colleagues who have contributed to this very important Constitution amendment debate. The African continent has been characterised by political, economic and social instability for many years.  The very first people who entered the African continent in the late 1840’s, the Arabs, brought Islam. The Europeans who came with religion into the African continent led to the partition of the East African continent. This changed the whole continent and in particular, the politics. 

In Buganda, Kabaka Mwanga was captured and excommunicated. In Bunyoro, Kabalega was also captured and excommunicated. Eventually many of our people clashed and internal division in the African continent ensued. Ethnic and religious differences emerged from the time the British Government started controlling Uganda in 1900. From 1962 to 1979 when Idi Amin overthrew the Government, no single elections were held in this country. Lule’s 69 days of office were not because of any elections. During Binaisa and Mwanga’s time, we held elections, which brought in the UPC’s second Government on 12 December 1980.  From that time until 1995, no elections were held.  

The Movement Government is the first in the history of this country to bring political, economic and social changes. This is on the record of this country. The Constitution changes we are going through emerged from a failed state. This failed state had to build the Constitution that would stand the test of time.

Mr Speaker, I want to take this opportunity to persuade my colleagues in the opposition to reconsider their duty to this country. You should not focus on only one side of the coin. I will cite three fundamental amendments that I have clearly followed; the amendment of opening up political space; the regional tier or federo and now the amendment on the opening up of political space.

Mr Speaker, the United States of America has attempted to amend its Constitution 11,000 times and only 28 amendments have been made.  It means therefore, that in America only 44 attempts to amend the Constitution have been made in the last 200 years.  To amend this Constitution is just, right and constitutional. 

Mr Speaker, India which is the largest democracy in the world, has got no term limits, just as France, UK, Australia, Germany, Portugal, Canada and very many other countries. It is important that we get to know that time is not democracy. It is rather people who practice democracy.   

Mr Speaker, the basic principle of multiparty democracy is for each political organisation or party to feel its best. Evangelists, prophets, players, diamonds, Maradonas, Ronaldos, Henry, Movement, FDC, DP, UPC and others should also go ahead and feel their best.  This is how democracy works.  Nobody should rise or tie hands of any political party; nobody should raise red cards as we move to the new political dispensation.

Mr Speaker, at this time when we are preparing for a transition from the Movement System to the Multiparty System, it is important that we retain the best and most experienced hands to handle this county.  We need an open approach and I want to call upon my colleagues to take heart. They are now experiencing the true test of democracy.  You need a leader who is tolerant, tested, calm, patient and effective. We need a leader who will listen to people’s abuses, ridicules without exercising extra judicial functions of Government.

The history of this country has not been good. What the people of Uganda fear is the terrible past they have gone through. As we move towards the new political dispensation, I want to appeal to the opposition and my colleagues to understand that this time we are going through must be the time we shall use to preserve the stability of our country.  We must preserve the stability, the peace and the security that we have enjoyed for the last 19 or 20 years.

Mr Speaker, it is a win-win situation. In the 1830s, when Continental Europe was going through the dark times, depression, and they were dying of all sorts of plagues, a great philosopher, Edmond Bank, said, “The road from obscurity to eminence must not be made easy.”  

Mr Speaker, in order for us to manage the transition from the Movement political system of individual merit, I want my colleagues to understand where we have come from, where we are today and what the future has for us.  It is therefore important that we give an opportunity to the best hands that have the capability of managing this Nation.

I want to call upon those who are threatening violence to understand that nobody has the monopoly of violence in this country. They should know that “mukomba pasi eyokya” (you are licking a hot flat iron).  

We should use the microphone and constitutional means to change leaders in this country.  We should ensure that we remain sober and patriotic so that we maintain the stability of our people. It is only then that we shall foster growth and prosperity of our Nation.  I thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR AWORI: Thank you, Mr Speaker –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: My list has hon. Dorothy Hyuha, the Minister, hon. Cecilia Ogwal and hon. Aggrey Awori in that order.  I am trying to find the districts, which have not had an opportunity to make their contributions. I will follow the list but at the same time –(Interruption) Hon. Mao, I am addressing the House.  

I have a list but I am also noting some districts, which have not contributed. In future, I will consider these so that I cover everybody.

12.50
MRS DOROTHY HYUHA (Woman Representative, Tororo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I wish to extend my gratitude to the committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs chaired by hon. Jacob Oulanyah for their position on the repeal of Article 105(2) to lift the presidential term limits.  During my consultation in Tororo, people asked me two questions, which I wish to quote, “Did the Constitution provide for parliamentary term limits?”  I said, “No”.  They asked, “If they had put limits, would we have identified you as a good leader in Tororo and sent you to Parliament twice?”  “Did your Parliament provide for term limits for the Chairpersons of Committees and membership of Committees?”  I said “No.”  They asked, “If they did not, don’t you think because of that, they have identified you in Parliament as a good leader and given you five years to head the Committee on Social Services?”  

Mr Speaker, the people of Tororo requested me to ask this august House that why we should not give them an opportunity to identify good leaders of their choice. I want to request this august House to take the position of the Parliamentary Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs so that we lift the presidential term limits.

Mr Speaker, many of my colleagues on this debate have argued that when retain presidential term limits we shall have no dictatorship. The question, which is puzzling me, is, “Who is more of a dictator? The one saying, “do not open up”, or the one saying, “open and give chance to Ugandans”?  When we repeal Article 105(2), lift presidential term limits, and adopt multi-party politics, we should not dictate to parties and organisations.  We should allow them to identify leaders of their choice.  As a member of NRM, I am not going to choose a leader for FDC, and I will not expect them to choose one for me. Therefore, during this fundamental position, we need to be sober and clear minded.

 Mr Speaker, and fellow Ugandans, let us allow Parties and organisations to make their choice of leadership. To identify -(Interruption)

MR ATUBO: Mr Speaker, is it in order for the Speaker on the Floor to mislead this House and the whole country that the purpose of amending Article 105(2) is to allow Political Parties to have leaders without term limits, when actually the purpose of 105(2) is to deal with national presidency, not leaders of Political Parties?  The two are very different.  You can have a leader of a political party and yet, have your own wonderful Presidential candidate.  

Is she in order to mislead this House and the country that by amending Article 105(2), we are opening a limited period for Political Parties rather than for national presidency, under the national Constitution and not under the party constitutions?  Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: No, now we are dealing with the national Constitution, which was enacted in 1995.  As I told you, the debate should not be used as a nominating exercise.  I have mentioned this several times. However, I think what she was saying that Party leaders would be flaunted as candidates. Otherwise, we are dealing with a national Constitution, not party constitutions.

MRS HYUHA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for your guidance. I am certainly looking far ahead and considering the importance of this clause. I know that in the near future, since we have already passed the law advising Ugandans in the Referendum, we shall choose Multiparty politics; that is the importance of this clause. I wish to request this august House, to take a wise decision, which will help all Ugandans and give them freedom to identify leaders of their own choice without limitations of the Constitution.

In conclusion, Mr Speaker, I want to say that people of Tororo urged me to support the position of Presidential, Parliamentary, LC V chairman elections on the same day.  It is time saving, cost effective and it will save us voting fatigue.

This weekend, I was in Butaleja and people of Butaleja greatly feel that the leadership of Mr Museveni is looking at moving services near to the people and when time comes after we have lifted presidential term limits, I should support President Museveni to be nominated as a Presidential candidate for NRM. (Applause)

12.53
MRS HOPE MWESIGYE (Woman Representative, Kabale): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I stand here to present the views of the people of Kabale District. I have heard people, including Members of Parliament that Parliament is trying to defile the Constitution. I beg to submit that I was one of the members of the Constituent Assembly, representing Kabale District and this Constitution is our wisdom. We included Chapter 18, the amendment chapter.  We foresaw that all this would happen at one time.  Therefore, nobody is attempting to defile the Constitution as people are alleging.

Hon. Onzima this morning said that the Law Society, church leaders, Civil Society and Organisations have spoken, and we have not listened. Mr Speaker, the Constitution is clear. Article 258 concerns amending the Constitution. Article 261 talks about how Parliament can amend the Constitution. I wish to read these two so that we clear the minds of all the doubting Thomases. We are amending this Constitution in accordance with the Constitution. Article 261 provides as follows:
“A Bill for an Act of Parliament to amend any provision of the Constitution other than those referred to in Articles 259 and 260 of this Constitution, shall not be taken as passed unless it is supported at the Second and Third Readings by the votes of not less than two-thirds of all Members of Parliament.” 

Mr Speaker, that is precisely what we are trying to do, we will pass this Bill by the required majority of two-thirds at the Second and Third Readings.

Mr Speaker, Article 105(2), is not an entrenched provision; it can be amended by Parliament. In the wisdom of the Constituent Assembly - and I hear some people say the spirit of the Constituent Assembly was this and that, for us, we were there and will tell you what we meant; we are not invoking the spirit; we are talking about facts.  Under Article 259, we specifically provided that only Article 105(1), which talks about the tenure of office of the President as five years is the only provision that is entrenched under that Chapter. It is the only one that requires a referendum and two-thirds majority in Parliament.  We left out 105(2) because we knew circumstances would change, we knew it is not a fundamental provision and we knew that when time demands it, we would change it.

Mr Speaker, some people have argued that Article 105(2) has been smuggled into the debate. They say it was not part of the terms of reference of the Sempebwa Commission.  I would like to state that the terms of reference of the Constitutional Commission are set out in paragraph 4 of the Legal Notice No.1 of 2001. Among others it provides as follows:
“To examine the consistency and compatibility of the Constitutional provisions relating to the sovereignty of the people, political systems, democracy and good governance, and make recommendations as to how best to ensure that the country is governed in accordance with the will of the people at all times.”  

Therefore, the will of the people must prevail and this does not defer from the recommendations made by the Sempebwa Commission. This matter has been a subject of debate in almost the whole country. 

The people of Kabale District, including Rukiga County where I am a voter, represented in this House by hon. Jack Sabiiti, are saying, “Repeal Article 105(2) so that a President can serve for more than one term.”  

I disagree with the argument that Article 105(2) has not been tested. We passed the Constitution in 1995 and had elections in 1996 and 2001. Because it has been tested twice, that is how you see people wearing dry banana leaves.  They are simply saying, “Your Article has failed the test of time.” We entrenched 105(1) meaning that we should have regular free and fair elections. Your concern should be; have we had free, fair and regular elections?  Can you have a turnover every five years? The sovereignty and the will of the people must prevail.  

Some honourable colleagues have rightly said that when we do not limit presidential terms, we shall get good Presidents. Why should we go for bad Presidents when we there are good ones?  Weak and developing countries like our own need very strong Presidents. Practically and philosophically, we need a strong President.  

We need to harmonise our Constitution in accordance with the terms of reference of the Sempebwa Commission.  Article 21 of the Constitution talks about non-discrimination in political, social and economic spheres.  Why should we have Articles that contradict each other, yet the terms of reference were to harmonise and look at the consistency and compatibility of Articles?  

Mr Speaker, I end by saying that this issue is debated world over; it is not only in Uganda. American and British Embassies where most of us run for help have been debating presidential term limits. In 1986, Ronald Reagan said, “The term limit on the President is a mistake.  Should the people not have the right to vote for someone as many times as they want to vote for him?” 

Bill Clinton had already served his term limit, but was quoted saying, “We do not need term limits so that whoever is good is voted back into office. This will reaffirm the sovereignty, will and political rights of the people to vote leaders of their choice.

Mr Speaker, I conclude by imploring all members here to support the opening of presidential term limits. We should not intimidate anybody. We should not think that one group has more brains than the other does.  We all are rational people and should respect each other.  I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much.

1.02
MRS CECILIA ATIM OGWAL (Lira Municipality, Lira): I thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me an opportunity to contribute. I will comment on only two issues. One is the rationale of holding a referendum to change the political system and secondly, the third term. 

In the year 2001, the Daily Nation carried a story just before our  general elections, which said, "Ugandans were crying  for a Joshua." They have had a Moses that carried them from political bondage and are now looking for a Joshua leader to plant them in the real democratic culture. Whoever wrote that article had a vision from God. We cannot deny the fact that however good a leader is, God has created every leader with unique qualities. You can be good at moving things but you may not be good at implementing them. I believe that Moses was good at moving the children of Israel from the hands of Pharaoh into freedom but he was not good in planting them into their inheritance.  

Ugandans are looking for an inheritance. We want an inheritance of peace, of fair sharing of the wealth and resources that God has given us, and of democracy. Certainly the man who has helped us to move Uganda from the bondage may not be the right person to plant us in this inheritance. I want to make this preliminary statement so that you understand the seriousness of the exercise in which we are involved. 

The world has made an investment in what we are doing. The donor community invested heavily in the Constitution making exercise and indeed even now, they are watching to see whether we have actually respected the Constitution. Mr Speaker, you and I were involved in the initial exercise, which was very laborious. We debated all these issues amidst bitterness, but along the way we have appreciated many things. I am surprised there are many of us who do not appreciate the interest of Uganda vis-à-vis the interests of individuals. You will be surprised that many of the people who are crying for unlimited term limits have vested interests. If this were to be investigated you would find that people who do not want presidential term limits have vested interests in the incumbency. We should not run away from the truth. I will cry, therefore, that some of us who want to leave good inheritance for our children disengage selfish interests from national interest.

The Movement National Conference had a vision to state on behalf of the people they represent in the year 2003. In that March 2001 conference, it was agreed that Uganda was now ready for political freedom and competition. That was a very important statement and nobody can deny that these people came to represent the multitude of members who represent the Movement in their respective areas. Some of the Members of Parliament also joined the team in the Conference Centre and endorsed that position. The rationale for the decision was clear, namely:  

That the global trend does not encourage dictatorial tendencies of any political system. That any system that does not allow free competition has a tendency to dictatorship and must be discarded. We should congratulate the National Conference of the Movement because they showed that they understood the need for Uganda to change. One of the reasons for the 2003 declaration was conformity with the global trend and that there were people who were opposed to the Movement because of its restrictions and conscription of membership. It also recognised that within the Movement there were people who disagreed with the system’s ideological positions. These are very strong positions and I believe that when the National Conference spoke, the whole country spoke.

I, therefore, do not see any reason why we should now clamor for a referendum - for what? Supposing the result of the referendum is for the Movement to continue, which system shall now be adopted? The court has already declared in its ruling on Article 18 and 19 of the Political Parties Organisations Act (PPOA) that the Movement is a political party and not a system. The Movement leadership has also made it easy for us by registering the Movement as a Political Party. So, which system would we be going for? Should the people be manipulated to vote “yes” for the Movement political system? This is one of the dilemmas we have and recipe for violence, which some of the members were talking about. We are aware of this and do not want to anticipate violence. We should remove any element that is likely to lure us into violence. 

It is because of the above that I want to caution my honourable colleagues not to manipulate Ugandans to adopt a system, which might lead us into trouble.  

One contentious issue in this debate is to remove presidential term limits. We are forgetting that  this Constitution is hardly ten years old.We are forgetting that we are still in the process of testing this Constitution. Those of you insisting on unlimited presidential term limits are blackmailing the President. During the Constituent Assembly we indicated that this Constitution was tailor-made to suit an individual person. One of the reasons was to entrench a monolithic political system to buy time for the Movement to entrench itself. This was to enable the Movement become a party and get majority membership. It was a prophecy that we were making in the Constituent Assembly. 

Dr Nabwiso recently tabled a document here in Parliament and told us that in that document there was a secret agenda, to make some ethnic group rule Uganda for 50 years. This is the strategy that is making the people of Uganda be led into the ditch of the trap of dictatorship. Therefore, Mr Speaker, I condemn everybody who intends to abuse our Constitution. We took decisions after protracted debates and there was a good reason for entrenching presidential term limits. Some of our leaders have a tendency of dictatorship, which must be avoided. Since President Museveni had declared himself a saviour, he has to be exemplary. I am now amazed that Museveni is the first person to manipulate the same Constitution he made to entrench himself. [Ms Namuyangu: “Order.”] Which order? Sit down! (Laughter)

MS NAMUYANGU: Mr Speaker, I had refrained from interrupting my senior sister but she alleges that this government is dictatorial and yet the UPC Party where she is a high-ranking member has never changed leadership. Is she in order?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we are dealing with a national Constitution, not party matters. You have put a valid point, which she may or may not answer to. However, in the making of these amendments there is no question of manipulation. The 304 of us, excluding the ten ex-officio members, will seal whatever we decide in this Bill throughout the stages. If this Bill has to go through to the next stage, you are the ones to give it the two-thirds we need for it to pass. I do not know whether there is anybody manipulating you. You are free to make your decision. You may accept advice but it is your decision, do not shift it to other people. You will have to stand to be counted and that is why we allow you to tell us what you think.

MRS OGWAL: Mr Speaker, thank you for that wise ruling. Political maturity helps a lot in some of these matters. I am grateful that you are impartial. Therefore, whatever you say is very important to us. 

Let me just conclude this by saying that nobody is manipulating anything. You and I are quite experienced in this exercise and we know vote rigging does not take place on the polling day. Therefore, manipulation does not necessarily take place on the final debate on the Constitution amendment –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: I assure you there will be no rigging in voting today under my chairmanship. (Applause) Proceed.

MRS OGWAL: Mr Speaker, can you stop these yellow ladies from clapping for nothing? Stop them –(Laughter) 

THE SPEAKER: I did not follow that. (Laughter) Are they interrupting? You could order those in red to get out so that we have a free, uninterrupted debate. 

MRS OGWAL: I want to conclude by saying that the artificial majority, which has been created over time through a monolithic political system, was done deliberately. They knew very well what it would achieve at the very end. Each one of us should examine ourselves before we vote for the kisanja. Honourable colleagues should understand what kisanja means before they vote. If you do not do this, take my word and mark my lips, you will live to regret it. God bless you.  

1.19
MR AGGREY AWORI (Samia-Bugwe County North, Busia): Thank you, Mr Speaker for allowing me to come to the Floor of this House as we conclude this historical debate. Permit me to make a disclaimer as a preface to my contribution on this important matter. As I speak now I can see that my colleagues are a bit agitated because of tear gas in the precincts of the august House. It has been alleged in this august House, in the media and even by the highest office bearers in the country that members of the opposition are agitating for violence. 

As a prominent person on the opposition side, it is difficult for me to talk while my colleagues are debating the matter of tear gas outside the precincts of Parliament. However, to resume my position in the debate, my biggest concern is when people start making allegations especially during such a debate, there are allegations that some of us have a propositioned agenda of violence. 

We have gone through four different governments in this country, three of which were removed by violence. I have tasted, perpetuated and stopped violence. Therefore, nobody should stand up in this august House and say members of the opposition are saying there shall be violence if we lift the presidential term limits. Nothing could be further from the truth. All we are saying is that there is a possibility of some people using unorthodox methods of standing up on victory and majority. The weatherman can never be blamed for creating the storm. He simply says, “There could be a storm.” However, he is not responsible for creating it.

Coming back to my substantive contribution, I will initially stick to what I will call maiden amendments to the Constitution before I come to the mother of the amendments, Article 105(2). This Constitution was quite big for this country and I am sorry to say I was at that convention that determined it. One, the objectives that are not justifiable need not have been included in this Constitution. They could have come to this Constitution through various statutes or in support of various Articles. 

Two, the only need for this Constitution to be reviewed should be based on those Articles, which were time pegged. I am referring to Article 78 of the Constitution. It is an established fact in the Constitution that after a certain period certain seats shall be up for review. I would like to address myself to that particular Article. 

The special seats that were allocated to various groups and interests in our community should be reviewed. My recommendation is that among others, the UPDF should be the first to go automatically for the following reasons:

The incumbents have for the last ten years performed very poorly in this august House, without exception. They rarely show up, whenever they show up they only come to vote, because maybe it is a command from the Commander-in-Chief. So, their performance has betrayed their representation. 

And as we get into Multi-party politics, the UPDF is supposed to be non-partisan and for us to put it in an arena where there are partisan issues is not fair to these Soldiers at all.

The second group that should also go are the youths who are preparing to take over responsibilities in future. They do not have to be here now, they can learn from the balcony or read the newspapers.

The third group, which must also go are the Workers. They have never really looked after the interests of the workers in this august House. They rarely take care of the people they represent and those who have spoken in this august House such as hon. Martin Wandera –(Interruption)

MRS SSENTONGO: Is the honourable member in order to allege that Workers’ representatives in this august House have not done their work? How can we have not done anything when we struggled for the NSSF and not only that but also for the rights of the workers on this Floor, including AGOA and many others? 

THE SPEAKER: Well, I can confirm this because I know what is in the Hansard. The Workers’ representatives have been very active with their work. (Applause)

MR AWORI: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for your wise ruling and obviously -(Interruption)
 
THE SPEAKER: Therefore, your assertion is not backed up by facts.

MR AWORI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I go with your ruling. I do not want to go against Rules of Procedure and dispute your ruling. However, there are those seats, which I feel should be retained and probably an action should be taken by this august House. I am specifically referring to the matter of the women representation. These people have performed very well, notwithstanding their leaning towards the Movement system of governance. My recommendation for the women representation is that it should be increased considerably. 

Notwithstanding the fact that we are giving every district a seat for a woman, we should now go on a pro rata basis. In other words, you should get your seat, and because of the size of population of your district, you could get one more seat. For instance, for Mbarara to have one seat just like Kalangala is not fair. Mbarara would realistically deserve three or more women seats while Kalangala keeps the one seat or even half a seat. (Laughter)

There are other people who I feel should not be in this august House. The Vice-President does not belong to this august House. He should rather stick to State House, deputising the President. As long as we shall have an Executive and the Prime Minister constitutionalised with functions, and as a Leader of Government Business, there is no need for a redundant position of a Vice-President. I am not talking about the incumbent. I am simply saying that the office of the Vice-President does not belong in the House as long as we have a functional Prime Minister. We have a Leader of Government Business who is three or even two steps in hierarchy lower than the Vice-President. When it comes to debate, the Prime Minister and not the Vice-President leads the House; we should, therefore, spare him by taking him out of this House.

When we go for Multi-party politics, I suggest we introduce some other positions in the august House. I will call these people special because they are specially appointed. I am recommending that at an appropriate time we should have a minimum of 15 people appointed by the President of the ruling party for the following reasons. A number of about ten seats should go to the ruling party to enable it to have a working majority. Five or so should go to the opposition parties so that we have effective opposition in the House. Some opposition parties might be eliminated totally during elections but they deserve representation in this august House. So, at least five should be reserved for the opposition.

I would like to come to the mother of the changes. You can take it from me before I am cut off that I will vote “No” to lifting of the presidential term limits, for the following reasons:

The first reason is, it is unethical. It is politically immoral for a President to introduce a Bill in this august House that will enable him to stay longer in office. If it is going to be the case, it should be the next President and not the incumbent to benefit from such a Bill. As for this august House, if it is the considered opinion of the members that we extend the life of Parliament from five years to seven years, then it should not be this current Parliament to benefit from this arrangement. It should be the next Parliament to benefit from a seven-year term, never the incumbent Parliament. It is a matter of ethics and political morals. 

I am not talking about President Museveni. If President Museveni, wants to be politically gluttonous, to grab power, we shall consider him as such - a political glutton. But I put it to him, “You have introduced a Bill into the august House to lift the term limits, it should not be you to benefit. It should be the next set of rulers.”

Last but not least, I do realise that we have got a problem. There are other issues of citizenship.  People have talked about Ugandans in the Diaspora, but there is a group of people in this country that should be the first to benefit. It is the Ugandan women married to non-Ugandans. When they get married to non-Ugandans they are sometimes compelled to take up the nationality of their spouses. But as a matter of constitutional right, they should retain their mother citizenship. They should keep their citizenship unless they opt to renounce it and take up the citizenship of their spouses. 

We have been talking about people in the Diaspora; wonderful, indeed they are bringing –(Interruption)

MRS OGWAL: Mr Speaker, hon. Awori is advising the House to adopt the proposition that if a Ugandan marries from outside then that foreigner who is married to a Ugandan should retain their citizenship. I think that does not go well with our traditional setting because for us when a male marries from outside, the female acquires the tribe, clan and nationality of the husband. Is hon. Awori, therefore, trying to change our traditional setting? I believe that – I am a woman, yes - that is why I feel that women have a right to acquire the nationality of their husbands without any questioning. Thank you.

MR DOMBO: I wanted to seek clarification from hon. Aggrey Awori because according to Christian and biblical teaching, when spouses get married they form union and become one. When somebody retains her citizenship, won’t that conflict with the biblical and Christian teachings and ethical values?

MR AWORI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. This might look irrelevant but constitutionally I feel that no Ugandan should be deprived of her citizenship by virtue of marriage. The option should be there; it is up to her to give up her mother citizenship and adopt her spouse’s citizenship. As he rightly put it, at the appropriate time this matter shall come in the form of a Bill in the august House. 

There is a group of Ugandan citizens also who are being deprived of their rights; these are the people in my former industry called sports. There are some people who like to make money as professional sportswomen and men in other countries but those countries compel you to either economically or legally adopt their citizenship. Such Ugandans should be allowed to keep Ugandan citizenship and at the same time enjoy the benefits of their adopted citizenship. It is now happening in the neighbouring country in Kenya where a lot of Kenyan athletes have adopted foreign citizenship but are now being compelled by the Kenyan Government to give up their citizenship. It has happened to South African and Nigeria as well. There are such people who are bringing us money and should be allowed to retain their citizenship.

Last but not least, the separation of powers. I take strong objections to the central government appointing a chief administrator of Parliament and putting this independent organ under the state. I am referring to the matter of the Clerk to the House. The Clerk of the House should be appointed by the Parliamentary Commission and not by the Public Service Commission. 

I wish I had more time but at the appropriate time I will come with more points.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. I must thank hon. Aggrey Awori for proceeding inter alia or for opening up the territory because since we started this debate we have been concentrating on just three issues. It is the first time that you have opened up and dealt with other issues that are in the Bill. I must thank you.

1.36
MRS JANAT MUKWAYA (Mukono County South, Mukono): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I want to thank the committee for a very good report but more so to the chairman of the committee for exhibiting mature politics, professionalism and defending his profession with dignity.  

I want also to thank the chairperson and members of the Constitutional Review Commission for a very good report with an appendix so that in future we can go back and read in order find out what the views of the people of Uganda were. Mr Speaker, it is because of time that I will limit my scope to two urgent issues but I must mention that I support the issue of Kampala.

I also support the amendment to deal with emoluments and retirement benefits of the Vice-President.  

I also support the introduction of the office of the Prime Minister.

I also support the introduction of the Deputy Attorney-General, having been a Minister of Justice I know what the Attorney General goes through.  

I also support joint elections.

Let me now concentrate on two issues, the opening up of political space, and the term limits.

On opening up of political space as other members have already –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: But opening up political space, is it still an issue? It is not complete because the process is still going on, you have opened up but it will depend on the results.

MRS MUKWAYA: I did not have the opportunity to speak during the general debate. I will use my three minutes that you have given me to record what the people of Mukono are saying. Those people who have been advocating for opening up of political space since 1996 should not run away from mobilising people for the yes vote. That is what I wanted to state, Mr Speaker.

On the term limits, I want to submit that all of us here and outside Parliament are eligible presidents but the issue is, we are all eligible as long as we have finished A’ Level and we go and seek the mandate of the people. But the issue is that the people must have a preference for a particular candidate. It is not being weak, as it has been stated on the Floor of the House to recognise that among equals there is, at a particular time, a preference for an individual. But preference of that individual is also not a guarantee that the individual will win. 

According to the way people have been submitting it appears as though when we open up and a particular individual is given an opportunity to stand, it is a guarantee that that individual will win. It is no guarantee. Let all those aspiring presidential candidates go and mobilise within their parties and offer themselves to the people to choose. They should not hide under the guise of “do not open up”. Let every Ugandan compete and offer themselves to the masses. Once you gain the majority you would become the President of this country.

Mr Speaker and honourable members, I am convinced, that we are doing the right thing. It is legitimate, constitutional and within our mandate under chapter 18, to amend the Constitution. Nobody should attempt to threaten like I have heard people talking about coups, assassination and the like. I want to submit that through mchaka mchaka everybody is an able soldier. Uganda is no longer what it was in 1986. If you are calling for war, you better not live in a glass house, live in a grass-thatched house so that you can start throwing stones.

I want to thank all those colleagues who have supported the committee for the deletion of Article 105(2). My people in Mukono South, the majority of them have sent me here to vote for “yes”, to delete. That does not mean that there are no people in Mukono South who do not want to delete. They are there but they are the minority. 

Personally, I am more convinced now than ever before that we need to delete. Why? Because the dictators clad in democratic gowns who have exhibited anguish –(Interjection)– you listen, do not clap like hon. Cecelia Ogwal said. People who have been saying that they are democrats, who want to be given space, are clad - mark my words - they are clad in democratic gowns. When debating they have exhibited anguish, hatred and personal vendetta. How can those people be given an opportunity to lead? They cannot.  

Yesterday people who could not allow Ugandans even to use the radios or the newspapers to speak! When you have newspapers and radios and you can come here and abuse the head of state, abuse everybody as if we do not have brains! How can you be the people to demand that you are democrats? It is a shame for one who does not want this, who does not want that, to hide here and not hide there. So, face the lion. The day to face the lion is today. 

I want to appeal to you that democratically, legitimately and constitutionally we are going to vote because we represent our people but even in our individual right we will show you that this debate has been very good. It has exposed our future leaders who are non-democrats, who have been hiding under democracy to tell other people what type of leadership we would expect from them. So on the basis of your submissions, both in the media and in the House, you are not democrats because you cannot mobilise; you have done a disservice to multiparty politics, I can submit.

I want to thank the President of this republic. I want to thank him because in 1982 when I first met Museveni in the village of Kikonta in Luweero –(Interjection)- in the bush, yes, I was a rebel. I do not deny but I am here as MP representing Mukono South. This man has been steady and true to his vision. I want to submit to Ugandans that I have researched the record of other Parliaments. Many members of UPC then, powerful as they were, were not given the opportunity to become Members of Parliament –(Interruption) 

THE SPEAKER: Please, wind up.

MRS MUKWAYA: I am winding up, Mr Speaker and the clarification I want to give hon. Cecelia Ogwal –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: No, please wind up.

MRS MUKWAYA: I am winding up, Mr Speaker.  Because when she was submitting she was talking about people who manipulate but I want to tell my dear sister and friend that NRM will not manipulate the way she has been trying to manipulate the boss in Zambia and the boss has out manipulated her. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, this is a convenient time for us to go for lunch, and when we come back we continue with the debate. It is now 1.45 p.m. Let us come back at 3.00 p.m. The proceedings are suspended.

(The proceedings were suspended
at 1.45 p.m.)

(On resumption at 3.05 p.m._)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, welcome back. Let us proceed with the debate. I request that members just cut down the points they are contributing and use five minutes to enable as many people as possible to make their contributions.

3.10
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (Kasilo County, Soroti): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I do not support third term and unlike some people who have gone to witchdoctors and shrines, I will not lose sleep whether Museveni gets it or not. I will not lose sleep irrespective of the outcome on that today. I am here to affirm that I don’t support the third term.

THE SPEAKER: Order, please! Let us listen to him.

MR OKUPA: Mr Speaker, why do I say so? I say so because lack of term limits stifles potential whether in the current system or in the old parties. What is happening is because of lack of term limits. But if we had limits we would not be seeing all this stifling of potential that is going on. We have seen our colleagues who have shown interest who have shown potential leave this country. I can cite retired Col. Dr Kiiza Besigye. Tumukunde is currently under house arrest because they saw potential in him, which was a threat because we are going to open up term limits. That is why I do not support the lifting of term limits.

In the Constituent Assembly they put term limits.  In the Ssempebwa Commission the percentage –(Interruptions)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, while you are holding the Floor, you would like others to listen to you. Can we listen to him, please?

MR OKUPA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. In the Ssempebwa Report and in the minority report here they did give a percentage of those who supported term limits. It was more than those who did not support the term limits. It is there in the minority report, which is an extract from the Ssempebwa Commission Report. I support term limits because they minimise chances of getting dictators and also work as a taming mechanism to dictatorship.  

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, what has happened to you? In the morning you were listening to each other!  

MR OKUPA: Honourable members, you are as excited as if you have come to vote but please, listen to me. To me the opening up of the term limits is meant for one person, who out of the 26 plus million people is not eligible. Those saying it is not meant for one person are not being honest because it is very clear. He has not even said, “No, I do not want it”. Why has he not said no? It is not because he is a coward; he is not a coward, and I know that. His Excellency is not a coward.  

If it is meant for other Ugandans, we are ready to refer this to the Eighth Parliament. Why are we in a hurry now? The committee has recommended referring other clauses so why can we not refer this one? Why the urgency? We have a proverb in Ateso, I will say in Ateso and translate it to English. “Nedok edokolet kuju nes etakanuna a babai ke,” it means, “The higher the monkey climbs the tree the more it exposes its behind”. And it is a very ugly thing, so it fears to come down. Honourable members, our leaders have climbed so high that their dirt has been exposed and so fear to leave the scene.   

THE SPEAKER: With this kind of noise, we are wasting a lot of time. Why don’t we control ourselves so that we listen?

MR OKUPA: To support the third term, while knowing that it is not good is like a person who is going to commit adultery while knowing that it is an offence. President Museveni has done fairly well but there areas where he has not scored highly, just like the previous governments. I was surprised that my colleagues do not know the bad things that have happened during this regime. Even the people who were in the past regimes were here saying the past regimes killed people, did this and that.  

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the rules allow me to name you but I have restrained myself from doing that. Please, let us listen to the contribution of the honourable member.

MR OKUPA: We should learn to give credit where it is due. I see even those who were involved in committing atrocities in the past governments coming up to say, “The past governments killed people”. I was surprised when hon. Nsaba Buturo castigated the previous governments yet he was the one in charge of security in Kampala when the killings were happening!

DR NSABA BUTURO: Mr Speaker, at this time when we are debating a very tremendous debate with major implications and significance for our country, is it in order for the honourable member to claim that I have been a security risk to this country? Yet as a matter of fact I am very proud of my record, and nobody would come and point out a criminal act I committed as the District Commissioner of Kampala?

THE SPEAKER: No, what he said is that you were in charge of security.

MR OKUPA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for that wise ruling  -(Interruptions)

MR AWORI: Following your ruling, Mr Speaker, I would like to substantiate that I worked very closely with my colleague, hon. James Nsaba Buturo, in maintaining security in this district. (Laughter)

MR OKUPA: Honourable Speaker, there are so many such members here, including those who were in rebel groups. I can cite the Uganda People’s Army (UPA), which was operating in the Teso region, in Eastern Uganda. They deceived people and gave reasons why they were fighting Museveni. Those reasons have not been answered even up to day! They are the very people saying, “This government is good”. Hon. Opange was one of the commanders of UPA. I was abducted by the UPA and suffered but I am surprised that they are the very people, when we are trying to avoid this coming up –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, you don’t need to be over-sensitive about these statements. You are going to overstretch yourselves if you are over-sensitive about whatever they say. Let us finish this business and see how we proceed.

MR OKUPA: Moreover they have not even got amnesty.  (Laughter) Mr Speaker –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: But honourable member, you have run out of time.

MR OKUPA: Mr Speaker, the best way forward is for members to reconcile. We need to reconcile because all governments, past and present have done bad things. It is useless for us as leaders to go ahead castigating and blaming each other, but to move forward and reconcile –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, address the issue of amending the Constitution.

MR OKUPA: Mr Speaker, that is exactly what I am trying to do. All this I am –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Talk about the Articles and the clauses, otherwise you have exhausted your time.

MR OKUPA: Mr Speaker, all this I was saying because there are some things, which touched me from the presentations. I wanted to put the record straight on my part. I beg your indulgence. What we need now is reconciliation because both bad and good things have happened during all governments.  

That was the first time we saw people being roasted in wagons, in Mukura. It had never happened in history; it was the time when people were boiled in pots. The best thing, as the Bible says in Romans 3:23, “For all have sinned and fallen short of the glory of God.” So, it is in our best interests to reconcile, forgive each other and move forward as we are debating these matters, by sticking to issues that pertain to us as a nation but not as individuals. 

Mr Speaker, I would not be a happy man to see my elders go into exile again, but I want us to live harmoniously in this country. When people raise issues that there is potential for chaos, it is like when the Minister for Agriculture warns against a drought. It is not because they are going to cause it but because there are signs that it will occur. That is exactly what we are saying.

On the issue of elections, I totally agree that we should hold elections of the President, Members of Parliament and LC V on the same day because it will reduce on violence. Cases where some ministers, Members of Parliament and other leaders have been harassing members of the opposition will decrease because they will also be campaigning for themselves. They will not have time to crisscross constituencies to disturb other people. So, I really support this because violence would have been curbed.  

At an opportune moment I would also propose that since we are moving to Multi-party politics, we should be able to create positions when we are electing the Speakers. If the Speaker is from the ruling majority, the deputy should come from the minority. In Ghana for example, there are three Speakers. The second comes from the minority, so why can we not introduce it here?  

As I stated earlier, I do not support lifting of term limits. I would rather sink with my objectives other than float with optimism. May God bless this country. Thank you.

3.25
MS JESSICA ERIYO (Woman Representative, Adjumani): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Amending the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda is a landmark in our history. We should do with the utmost feeling for this country, and with a spirit of constitutionalism that is already building up in the country. I am very sure this country is heading for real stability. 

I support the proposal and also the implementation of the popularisation of the Constitution so that Article 17 on the duties of citizens can become a reality. All citizens must be aware of the Constitution; they should know their rights, understand what they are supposed to do and, everything else will be very easy for us to do.

Mr Speaker, I support Swahili becoming the official language of Uganda so that we can interact very freely throughout the whole country. It will also facilitate easier integration into the East African Community.  

My people are very happy that Kampala will be accorded a special status because it is the capital city of all of Uganda.

They also think that other people of Uganda should feel free to associate whether in a regional tier or not.

I also support the Equal Opportunities Commission, which should be set up to deal with issues of marginalised groups. It will deal with issues of marginalised political parties, districts or people. The Equal Opportunities Commission will also deal with the Domestic Relations Bill, which now and then is being thrown out of this House. And this is one thing that would empower families, especially the women of Uganda.

I also support the lifting of Article 105(2) in the Constitution. Once we popularise the Constitution and empower the people and we have all other institutions in place, the people of Uganda should be allowed to choose for themselves who should be their President, Members of Parliament, district councilors or local councilors at the administrative unit levels. The people of Uganda are empowered enough to make wise decisions and, therefore, need not be limited.

I think we would not do any good to this country if we are always intimidating people. I want to put it on record that the Forum for Democratic change is intimidating people in Adjumani District. They are telling them that rebels will kill people and burn houses of those without FDC cards. After all, some of these leaders for the Forum for Democratic Change were given responsibility to deal with insecurity in the North and when our people were dying none of them could say sorry. The people of Adjumani are saying they are going to make their decision. Whether to support NRM or any other party they should not be intimidated. Intimidation is not good for this country. 

MR OCULA: Mr Speaker, we are dealing with a sensitive matter; amending the Constitution. The debate right now in this House is about the Constitution and nowhere in the Bill before us is the Forum for Democratic Change mentioned. Not even in the report of the committee is it mention. I am asking, is it procedurally correct for my sister from Adjumani to start dwelling on matters of FDC when we are talking about the Constitution?

THE SPEAKER: Precisely this is what I have said over 100 times. While dealing with this Bill, do not personalise it. But you have gone on to personalise the debate. So, please concentrate on the Articles and we proceed.

MS ERIYO: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for your wise ruling. I was mentioning it because my people have been intimidated on the question of Article 105(2) -(Interruption)

MRS MUSUMBA: Mr Speaker, I rise on a point of order on the matter of wild allegations from my sister. Very wild is the allegation that a minority, as we have been called in Adjumani, can intimidate a gigantic majority of their size. Without the speaker on the floor, hon. Jessica Eriyo substantiating what she is talking about, is it in order for us to continue listening to her making such wild allegations about a very good party that only believes in democratic change? 

THE SPEAKER: Well, with the first issue of minority dealing with majority, you can find one thief entering a house with ten people and threatening them. But turning to the other issue, why are you saying what you are saying? Can you substantiate? 

MS ERIYO: Mr Speaker, I would like to request hon. Salaam Musumba and any other person who doubts what I am saying to go to Adjumani in Jayipi sub-county where LRA are terrorising people day and night. They have taken advantage of the insecurity in the area to intimidate people.

THE SPEAKER: Anyway, the issue is, do you have specific incidences, which you can mention to us?

MS ERIYO: Yes, I just came back from registering people in Adjumani –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Order!

MS ERIYO: We are registering members of the NRM. Some people fear to come to register because they fear keeping NRM cards in their houses. They are those who have even registered and kept their cards in the NRM office because FDC people have terrorised them. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, what I advise is, concentrate on the subject matter and we go on.

MS ERIYO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. We should not manipulate the people by telling them lies because Article 105(2) does not aim at manipulation. People are trying to tie this to one person, which is very unfortunate. Lifting term limits is a principle for all of us here. For example my brother hon. Mao has been identified as our future president in Adjumani in ten or 20 year to come. When he becomes a President, we would not like to see him serve for only two terms We need to actualise people –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: But it is time.

MS ERIYO: I am winding up, Mr Speaker. We need to actualise people’s freedom and rights. Development practice requires that people’s capabilities should be built, their capacities enhanced and choices granted so that they can choose wisely but not by intimidating them. The stability that we have gained in this country should be maintained. Unlike after Idi Amin, right from 1980 to date we have had six presidents, within such a short time. There was a lot of fear, destruction and so many unpleasant things that happened to this country. I, therefore, support the lifting of the presidential term limits.

I, “hon. Nakisanjja” as baptised by hon. Mao, invite you all to the yellow bus where there is gold so that we can mine the gold together. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

3.36
MR SIMON D’UJANGA (Okoro County, Nebbi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for giving me the opportunity. I would like to appeal to all those authors of the threatening e-mails to stop it forthwith and concentrate on something meaningful for the development of the country. 

We are moving from a Movement system of Government, which is characterised by individual merit and moving into a Multi-party system, which is not characterised by individual merit. Therefore, it is logical to change the rules of the game and one of the ways of changing the rules of the game is by amending the existing rules in order to administer the political system. Therefore, it is quite in order to amend the Constitution. Article 105(2) is one of the Articles that need to be amended in order to shift from individual merit to what I would call collective merit in pluralism. I, therefore, support the lifting of restriction on the presidential terms. (Applause)

I would like to comment on the issue of dual citizenship. In this regard I would like to support the idea of dual citizenship because if you look around us you find that countries with dual citizenship have advanced much more than the rest. So, I would strongly support the implementation of dual citizenship in this country. 

Swahili as an official language is more than welcome. (Applause) We are at the moment considering integration of the East African countries and if you look around us you find that Uganda is the only country, which does not speak Swahili. I, therefore, strongly commend that Swahili be made a second official language since it is already being spoken by our neighbours like Rwanda and Congo.

On the issue of CAOs, they control a lot funds mostly from the central government. It is, therefore, imperative more so when we are shifting to political pluralism, to have CAOs controlled from the center. I support the recommendation of the CAO being appointed and fired by the center. 

Finally, I would like to appeal to my honourable colleagues to support the lifting of term limits for the presidency. Thank you.

3.41
MRS JUSTINE LUMUMBA (Woman Representative, Bugiri): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to thank you for this opportunity to make a contribution to what I think is going to be the yardstick of our performance in the Seventh Parliament. 

I want to begin with the issue of dual citizenship. I support it but I want to suggest that we need to amend Article 102(b) to suit dual citizenship.  Article 102 talks of a person not qualifying for election as President unless they are citizens of Uganda by birth. This means that if a person becomes a Ugandan and was not born in Uganda they cannot stand for President. If we are talking of dual citizenship then we have to amend it so that once one becomes a Ugandan citizen, one is free to contest. (Interruptions)

HON. MEMBERS:  No, no!

MRS LUMUMBA: Mr Speaker, I am entitled to my view and I think members also should have respect and listen to my view. It is mine and you have no power to change my personal view.

Members have been arguing that we should change term limits of the presidency, reason being that it is only one Ugandan who is restricted. In the Constitution the restrictions are so many. Why do we handle this one only? Can we handle all? That will mean leaving the Constitution so open without rules of the game. According to Article 102(b) a person is not qualified for election as President unless they are not less than 35 years and not more than 75 years of age. Why do we restrict? Culturally in Uganda we know that men of 75 are still very active and can lead the country. (Laughter) So, why do we restrict them? 

In this –(Interruption)

MS NAMAGGWA: Thank you my sister for giving way. Article 102(b) is very important to give an age limit because if we open it we are going to have a life President and this is what we are trying to avoid. So, let us keep it.

MRS LUMUMBA: Thank you for the information hon. Member for Masaka. But if we are about to change the term limits today, what will stop those who will be there by that time also to change when they get to the age of 75?  The majority of the Ugandans we have are below 30 years. So, all those cannot stand for president because there is a restriction on age. Why don’t we put off that restriction so that we can have even younger people who are in this Parliament who are below 35 years but have performed better than those above 35 become president? So, if we are pegging it to the issue of performance, it has no relation to age.

I want to talk about the issue of CAOs. The chief administrative officers being appointed from Kampala beats the understanding of decentralisation. You are giving the power to the districts and then withdrawing some power. Why do you give some and leave some? Give with one hand and remove with another hand? What is the essence? My personal view as somebody from Bugiri, as far as appointees from Kampala are concerned, Bugiri has stood loose in this Movement Government. As we talk we do not have any minister from Bugiri, not any cabinet minister, minister of state, presidential adviser, RDC, name it! We only have one commissioner from Bugiri, on the District Land Board. So, I do not support it. I support Bugiri choosing its own CAO provided they are from Bugiri. 

On the issue of term limits, Rani Guani writes that, “The fact that a majority support a policy is no evidence of its wisdom, might and right.” Mr Speaker, James Mudson who was the President of the United States of America explored the relationship between majority rule and democracy. Mr Speaker, through you can I request hon. Mondo Kagonyera to listen to me? (Laughter) 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, wind up. You have really run out of time. Please.

MRS LUMUMBA: As I wind up, “The tyranny of the majority requires safeguards and protection of one part of the society against the injustice of the other part.” In conclusion Mudson warned, “The accumulation of all powers in the same hands whether of one, a few or many and whether hereditary, self-appointed or elective, may justly be pronounced the very definition of tyranny.” 

Some of the constitutional amendments that have been proposed in the Bill are good and others are bad. We are going to vote, and it is like eating food. If there is a lot of food but with some little poison, you just say no to the food. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

3.49
MR OMWONY OJWOK (Labwor County, Kotido): Mr Speaker, I wish to thank you for giving me this golden opportunity to say something about both the White Paper and at this particular stage of the Constitution Amendment Bill. Beginning January up to now I have made an extensive tour of my constituency and the people of Labwor County have directed me, I stress the word “directed”, to report to you the following:

One, since 1958 - that is before independence - they have not known stable and secure peace. There have been many problems involved. Arms were looted from various barracks during the changes that occurred in Uganda and these arms were used to terrorise the people of Labwor County. In addition, war-lordism has grown in that part of the country.  I would like to say that as a result of this, the following are my specific directives.

As a delegate, and I say so because as a lecturer in co-operative and institutional law I know that we are more than Members of Parliament, we are actually delegates of our people. For that reason the people have told me that it is under the NRM Government that they have seen semblance of peace and security in this country. The women have told me, and I want to quote them, “It is only under the Movement led by President Yoweri Kaguta Museveni that we have started to give birth again. Before that we and our husbands and children were separated in hiding, in bushes and in the hills of Labwor”.  

The youths and the elders, together with people with disabilities told me to tell those who are now drunk with peace and security, those who have forgotten what we Ugandans have suffered, “We remain grateful to President Museveni and the Movement Government. We are a peaceful people who tolerate no trouble, and have no ambition to take power in Kampala. We want security and peace. Tell them that we now remain an island of peace and security, whereas our brothers and sisters in Acholi, Lango, Teso and to a very large extent West Nile, have been systematically killed or forced into camps. This has been done quite significantly by our own or their own sons and daughters.” And they have urged other people in these areas to remain steadfast, totally isolate the troublemakers and to work with government in order to bring about total peace and security in this zone as well as in Uganda as a whole.

My people have said that I must work, support and strengthen the National Resistance Movement as a liberation movement. They have directed me to work for democracy in all political organs to promote the principle of collective leadership and transparency in decision-making. These are the guidelines they have given me.  

They have told me that I should work for the opening up of political space, but they are hesitant and worried about the possible consequences. They are urging that we work together to make Multi-partism a genuine success and not to go back to the dark old days of the past.  

My constituents have said that during elections, which will be coming, they will vote massively for the Movement. (Applause) They strongly wish that President Yoweri Museveni could stand so that they would vote for him massively. 

My people are not as yet clear about the regional tier but they understand the craving of sections of our population and have, therefore, directed me to support it for those people who want it. They have also said we should not force anybody who does not support the regional tier.

Finally, my people are also directing me that we should avoid intimidation and threats of war because Ugandans have had enough experience of that. At 58 years old I want to say that having been involved in the struggle from my teens, we cannot sit back and see threats of war coming back to this country and we just lie down and keep quiet. I thank you very much.

3.58
MR FRED BADDA (Bujumba County, Kalangala): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity to express my views on this Bill. In the interest of time I am going to address only two points. 

I am going to start with the issue, which I am not fully convinced about. This is the issue of centralizing the chief administrative officers. I am not fully convinced that centralizing chief administrative officers are going to be a solution to the corruption in the districts. The chief administrative officers are the custodians of the district resources. If we decide that the CAO be hired, fired, supervised, promoted and disciplined by the centre that means there are going to be untouchables in the district. Therefore, even the district council and the chairperson will not have much power over them and the essence of decentralization will loose meaning. So, honourable members of this House, I feel we should look more into this issue.

The issue of Article 105(2), I visited my constituency, Bujumba in Kalangala. I have also listened to the debate in this House. I have also listened to other people outside this House and I have analysed the debates and I have made a decision. I have decided to support lifting of term limits on the presidency. I have supported the lifting of the term limits because I remembered that at the time when our wise delegates in the Constituent Assembly made a decision and put limits, we had just gone through a period characterized by lack of rule of law, lack of credible institutions in this country and lack of regular elections. But this time round after ten years, things have changed. We have developed a culture of regular elections, strong institutions have been built and, therefore, there is no cause for fear. 

We should, therefore, not limit the terms and give chance to the people of this country to vote in a leader of their choice for as long as they wish, and to vote out a leader when they feel they are tired of him. So, what we have to do is to strengthen the institutions that will keep stability in this country and ensure rule of law in this country. When all that is done, I am sure people will be able to exercise their role in electing leaders of their choice and retaining them and vote them out when they wish. So I support the lifting of term limits. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

4.09
MR WADRI KASSIANO (Terego County, Arua): Mr Speaker, for the whole of last week and yesterday we have been meeting in this Chamber from morning to afternoon and we have listened to quite a number of speakers and the message that we have been hearing is not so different from what we also deliberated on during the discussion on the White Paper. I do not think there is going to be any new ingredient added to make a change at the time of decision-making. I, therefore, move that the matter be put to vote so that we can go to Committee Stage. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Well, I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR WACHA:  Mr Speaker, I am one of those who was listed but never got a chance to speak. I want my constituency to know three things. One, that I do not support the term limit lifting.

THE SPEAKER: No, honourable members, as I told you in the morning, this is not the end of the process of dealing with this law. The most important stage will be the Committee Stage because that is when we shall assemble the bricks to make the house. Unfortunately, many members want to contribute on the same subject. So far I have had 148 members who have contributed. I think that is a substantial number but we shall accord you opportunity to comment on the clauses themselves when we come to the Committee Stage. I have already made a decision and now we are going to put the question.

MR ATUBO: I wish to inform those who have just come that I am one of those who was listed to speak this afternoon. I want to make a very serious point on this. I am asking you for guidance -(Interjections)- please, do not shut me down. 

I know that you have ruled that the question be put. I want you to guide me for future purposes. When you list people and you say this is the time frame for the debate and there are those who come as a matter of quantity just to vote and do not want to listen to others, why should they interfere with our right to contribute? Mr Speaker, it is wrong. They must be able to listen to other people.  

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I have already decided on this. Now we shall start voting on the motion. The motion is that the Bill entitled the Constitution (Amendment No.3) Bill, 2005 be read a Second Time. According to our procedure we will vote by roll call. Therefore, when your name is called you either say, “aye”, “no” or “abstaining”.

MRS MUSUMBA: Point of clarification –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Please, I am speaking. I have been advised that one of us, hon. Zziwa Margaret, is travelling out of the country. So, although we follow the alphabetical order we shall start with her so that she can go to the airport. 

MRS MUSUMBA: Point of clarification –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Later, please sit down –(Interruption)

MRS MUSUMBA: Mr Speaker, the clarification I am seeking is important to where we are going –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, you are trying to make news for nothing –(Interruption)

MRS MUSUMBA: It is not so –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: But really let us follow the order. Please, resume your seat; you are just trying to create news for yourself.

(Question put.)

AYES:
1.	AACHILLA JOHN REX 	 
2.	AANIMU ANGUPALE 	
3.	ABURA PIRIR SAMUEL 	
4.	AEL ARK LODOU 		
5.	AGARD DIDI 		
6.	AHABWE GODFREY PEREZA 
7.	AKAKI AYUMU JOVINO 	
8.	AKECH OKULLO BETTY 	
9.	AKELLO DINAH GRACE 	
10.	AKWERO ODWONG JANE 	
11.	ALI MOSES 		
12.	ALINTUMA NSAMBU JOHN 
13.	ALISEMERA BABIHA JANE 
14.	ALONGA OTHMAN HARUNA 
15.	AMAJO MARY 		
16.	AMAMA MBABAZI 		
17.	AMONGIN APORU CHRISTINE 
18.	ANDRUALE AWUZU
19.	ANYOLO SAMUEL
20.	APUUN PATRICK 		
21.	ARAPKISSA YEKKO 	
22.	ARONDA NYAKAIRIMA 	
23.	ASUPASA ISIKO WILSON
24.	AWONGO AHMED 			
25.	BABA DIRI MARGARET 
26.	BABU EDWARD 		
27.	BADDA FRED 		
28.	BAGALANA TOM 		
29.	BAGUMA ISOKE 		
30.	BAKKABULINDI CHARLES 
31.	BAKOKO BAKORU 		
32.	BALEMEZI LYDIA 	
33.	BAMWANGA STEVEN
34.	BANYENZAKI HENRY
35.	BASAJJABALABA NASSER
36.	BASALIZA ARAALI HENRY
37.	BASALIZA STEVEN			
38.	BAZAALE BYARUHANGA PHILIP
39.	BAZANA KABWEGYERE TARSIS
40.	BBUMBA SYDA NAMIREMBE
41.	BESISIRA IGNATIUS	
42.	BIIRA BWAMBALE LOYCE
43.	BIKWASIZEHI DEUSDEDIT K
44.	BINTU ABWOOLI JALIA	
45.	BIRIMUMAASO MULINDWA
46.	BITAMAZIRE NAMIREMBE
47.	BITANGARO SAM
48.	BUKENYA GILBERT		
49.	BULAMU JONNY RICHARD
50.	BUTIME RWAKAIKARA TOM	
51.	BWERERE KASOLE EDWARD
52.	BYABAGAMBI JOHN	
53.	BYAMUKAMA DORA	
54.	BYAMUKAMA NULU	
55.	BYANYIMA NATHAN	
56.	BYENKYA NYAKAISIKI BEATRICE		
57.	CHEBROT CHEMOIKO STEVEN
58.	CHELANGAT KULANY GERTRUDE	
59.	D’UJANGA GIW SIMON		
60.	DOMBO EMMANUEL LUMALA
61.	ERESU ELYANU JOHN	
62.	ERIYO JESSICA		
63.	ESELE JOHN PETER	
64.	ETONU BENEDICT			
65.	GABOI KIBAALE WAMBI DAVID
66.	GOLE NICHOLAS DAVIS		
67.	GUMA GUMISIRIZA
68.	GUTTI ANDREW
69.	HYUHA SAMALI DOROTHY
70.	IMUMET ISAIAH			
71.	ISANGA NAKADAMA LUKIA
72.	KABAKUMBA LABWONI MASIKO	
73.	KABAREEBE AMON-REEVES 
74.	KADDUNABBI LUBEGA IBRAHIM
75.	KAFABUSA WERIKHE MICHAEL
76.	KAGABA HARRIET			
77.	KAGIMU KIWANUKA MAURICE
78.	KAGONYERA MONDO	
79.	KAJURA MUGANWA HENRY 
80.	KAKOKO SEBAGEREKA VICTORIA
81.	KAKOOZA JAMES 
82.	KALULE SSENGO EMMANUEL 
83.	KAMANA WESONGA EDWARD 
84.	KAMANDA BATARINGAYA COS 
85.	KAMUNTU EPHRAIM 
86.	KAPKWOMU NDIWA KAPKOMU 
87.	KASAMBA MATHIAS 
88.	KASIRIVU ATWOOKI BALTAZAR 
89.	KATIRIMA PHENHAS 
90.	KATONGOLE BADRU 
91.	KATURAMU HOOD KIRIBEDDA 
92.	KAWOYA BANGIRANA ANIFA 
93.	KAYANJA ELLY 
94.	KAYIZZI ASANASIO 
95.	KAYONGO TOM 
96.	KEZIMBIRA MIYINGO LAWRENCE 
97.	KIBIRIGE SEBUNYA ISRAEL 
98.	KIDEGA DANIEL FRED 
99.	KIGYAGI ARIMPA JOHN 
100.	KINOBE JIMMY WILLIAM REUBEN 
101.	KIRASO BIRUNGI BEATRICE
102.	KITHENDE KALIBOGHA APOLINARIS 
103.	KITYO HENRY MUTEBI 
104.	KIWAGAMA WILLIAM WILBERFORCE 
105.	KIWALABYE MUSOKE DANIEL 
106.	KIWANDA GODFREY 
107.	KIYONGA CHRISPUS WALTER 
108.	KIZIGE MOSES 
109.	KOLUO CHARLES PETER 
110.	KUBEKETERYA JAMES 
111.	KULE MURANGA JOSEPH 
112.	KUTESA SAM 
113.	KYAHURWENDA ABWOOLI TOMSON 
114.	KYATUHEIRE JACQUELINE 
115.	LOCHIAM MILIGAN ROSE 
116.	LOKERIS APARITE PAUL 
117.	LOKERIS PETER AIMAT 
118.	LOLEM MICAH 
119.	LUBOWA MOSES PAUL 
120.	LULE MAWIYA UMAR 
121.	LWANGA HERBERT WILSON 
122.	LWANGA MUTEKANGA TIMOTHY 
123.	LYOMOKI SAM 
124.	MAATE ROGERS 
125.	MADADA KYEBAKOZE SULAIMAN 
126.	MAGOOLA ZIRABAMUZALE BEATRICE 
127.	MAKUBUYA KHIDDU EDWARD 
128.	MALINGA JOHNSON 
129.	MALLINGA STEVEN OSCAR 
130.	MASIKO KOMUHANGI WINFRED 
131.	MATOVU BYATIKE 
132.	MATOVU DAVID			  
133.	MAYENDE SIMON			  
134.	MAYOMBO NOBLE			  
135.	MBABAZI KABUSHENGA HALMET   
136.	MEHANGYE IDAH			  
137.	MIGEREKO DAUDI			  
138.	MINDRA JOYO EUGENIA
139.	MUGAMBE KIFOMUSANA JOSEPH  
140.	MUGERWA NAMAGGWA SAUDA
141.	MUHWEZI JIM		       
142.	MUJUZI PIUS			  
143.	MUKABERA ANNETTE		  
144.	MUKAMA FRANCIS JOSEPH	  
145.	MUKASA ANTHONY HARRIS	  
146.	MUKASA MURULI WILSON	  
147.	MUKIIBI BENIGNA	       	
148.	MUKULA GEORGE MICHAEL	  
149.	MUKULA RICHARD		       
150.	MUKWAYA JANAT		       
151.	MULENGANI BERNARD		  
152.	MUNYIRA WABWIRE ROSE	  
153.	MUSUMBA ISAAC			  
154.	MUTULUUZA PETER		 
155.	MWAKA VICTORIA	
156.	MWESIGE ADOLF		       
157.	MWESIGYE RUHINDI HOPE	  
158.	NABETA NASANI	            
159.	NACHA LORIKA ROSE	       
160.	NAMAYANJA ROSE	
161.	NAMUYANGU JENIPHER
162.	NANKABIRWA RUTH	
163.	NANSUBUGA SARAH NYOMBI     
164.	NANTUME JANET		       
165.	NASASIRA JOHN			  
166.	NAYIGA FLORENCE SEKABIRA  
167.	NDAWULA ALI SEKYANZI
168.	NDAWULA KAWEESI		      
169.	NDEEZI ALEX			 
170.	NDUHUURA RICHARD		   
171.	NSABA BUTURO JAMES		  
172.	NSHIMYE SEBUTULO AUGUSTINE  
173.	NSUBUGA WILLIAM		 
174.	NTACYOTUGIRA PHILIP		 
175.	NUWAGABA HERBERT MUNTUYERA 
176.	NVUMETTA KAVUMA RUTH
177.	NYANZI VINCENT		
178.	NYENDWOHA MUTITI		
179.	OBBO HENRY JOSEPH 		 
180.	OCHIENG PETER			 
181.	ODONGO JEJE			 
182.	OGOLA MICHAEL 			 
183.	OGWEL LOOTE SAMMY
184.	OKELLO FRANCIS			 
185.	OKOT OGONG FELIX 
186.	OKOT SANTA 
187.	OKUMU-RINGA ALOYSIUS 
188.	OKURUT KAROORO MARY 
189.	OMACH FRED 
190.	OMWONY OJOK 
191.	ONEK HILLARY 
192.	OPANGE LOUIS 
193.	ORECH DAVID MARTIN 
194.	ORYEM HENRY OKELLO 
195.	OTAFIIRE KAHINDA 
196.	OULANYAH JACOB 
197.	OWORI AMOOTI OTADA 
198.	PAJOBO BRUNO 
199.	PATAKI AMASI 
200.	RUHINDI FRED 
201.	RUKUNDO SERAPIO 
202.	RUKUTANA MWESIGWA 
203.	RUTAMWEBWA MUGYENYI MARY 
204.	RWAKIMARI BEATRICE 
205.	RWAMIRAMA KANYONTOLE 
206.	SAIDI OKUTI NASUR 
207.	SEBALU MIKE  
208.	SEKITOLEKO JULIET 
209.	SENINDE ROSEMARY 
210.	SINABULYA SYLVIA 
211.	SITENDA SEBALU WILLIAM 
212.	SSEKIKUBO THEODORE 
213.	SSENTONGO TEOPISTA 
214.	NYOMBI THEMBO 
215.	TIBARIMBASA AVITUS 
216.	TINYEFUZA DAVID 
217.	TIPERU NUSURA 
218.	TUBBO CHRISTINE 
219.	TUBWITA BAGAYA GRACE 
220.	TUMA RUTH 
221.	TUMWESIGYE ELIODA 
222.	TUMWINE ALLY 
223.	WABUDEYA BEATRICE 
224.	WAKIKONA DAVID 
225.	WAMBUZI GAGAWALA 
226.	WANANZOFU SIMON PETER 
227.	WANJUSI WASIEBA 
228.	WONEKA OLIVE 
229.	YERI OFWONO APOLLO 
230.	WOPUWA GEORGE WILLIAM 
231.	YIGA ANTHONY 
232.	ZZIWA MARGARET

NOES:                                                                                                                                                                                        
1.	AADROA ONZIMA ALEX
2.	AMONGI BETTY ONGOM
3.	AMURIAT OBOI PATRICK
4.	ANGIRO GUTOMOI CHARLES
5.	ARUMADRI JOHN DRAZU
6.	ATENG OTIM MARGARET
7.	ATIM OGWAL CECILIA
8.	ATUBO OMARA DANIEL
9.	AWORI SIRYOYI AGGREY
10.	BASHAIJA KAZOORA JOHN
11.	BYARUHANGA CHARLES
12.	EKANYA GEOFFREY
13.	EPETAIT FRANCIS
14.	KAJEKE WILFRED
15.	KASIGWA HARRY
16.	KASULE LUMUMBA JUSTINE
17.	KATUNTU ABDU
18.	KAWANGA JOHN BAPTIST
19.	KIKUNGWE ISSA
20.	LUKYAMUZI JOHN KEN
21.	MABIKKE MICHAEL
22.	MAO NORBERT
23.	MBALIBULHA TABAN CHRISTOPHER
24.	MWANDHA JAMES ELIEZER
25.	MWONDHA PATRICK JOHN
26.	NABWISO BULIMA WILBERFORCE
27.	NAMUSOKE SARAH KIYINGI 
28.	NKUUHE JOHNSON 
29.	NSUBUGA NSAMBU YUSUF  
30.	NYEKO OCULA MICHAEL 
31.	ODIT JOHN  
32.	ODONGA OTTO JR.   
33.	OGENGA LATIGO MORRIS 
34.	OJOK B’LEO 
35.	OKOT ALEX 
36.	OKULO EPAK YEFUSA 
37.	OKUMU RONALD REGAN 
38.	OKUPA ELIJAH
39.	OLUM ZACHARY  
40.	OMODI OKOT 
41.	RAINER KAFIRE JULIET 
42.	SABIITI JACK 
43.	SALAAMU MUSUMBA PROSCOVIA
44.	SEBULIBA MUTUMBA RICHARD  
45.	SEBAGGALA LATIF
46.	TWAREBIREHO TUNGWAKO 
47.	WACHA BEN  
48.	WADRI KASSIANO EZATI
49.	WAGONDA MUGULI JOHN WILSON 
50.	WANDERA ODWORI MARTIN                      

ABSTENTIONS:
1.	BOGERE FRED

MR MABIKKE: Mr Speaker, I have been on phone with hon. Kazibwe. Can I be allowed to vote for her? (Laughter)

MR WACHA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. As a matter of procedure, are you not going to appoint tellers?

THE SPEAKER: To do what?

MR WACHA: Yes, just to satisfy us.

THE SPEAKER: They are just doing it now and we will inform you.

MRS MUSUMBA: Mr Speaker, the clarification, which I want to seek at this point is a commitment made to this House by the hon. Minister of Transport that during this voting we would have a tally board following the debate that we had on the voting method. I would like to know from you whether that board would ever be available and whether that commitment he made to this House will ever be made? Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much.  What I can say is that he might have made a personal offer but I think as a Commission, because the Commission controls this House, we shall look into this and see how quickly we can bring it up. I will not rely on an individual, but it will be an institution to deal with the issue.

MR MAO: Mr Speaker, I seek your guidance on procedure because unlike other reports that we have had on the Floor, this one had a minority report to which I was a signatory. I do not know at what point we intend to pronounce ourselves because in the minority report three members objected to a particular decision of the committee and they appealed to this House. I seek your guidance because my mind is not at rest that our position as a minority that oppose the lifting of term limits has not been dealt with here.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think you have to distinguish cases. There are cases we received in the reports from committees, for instance a committee of inquiry, assignment to the committee to make an inquiry, will make a report and we adopt it. This report of the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs, there were two, as we said, the majority and minority report. We used these reports to deal with the motion. What we have been dealing with here were not the reports. We were dealing with the motion but backed up by these reports and members were free to use whatever report, minority or majority. Otherwise, if it was a report wholly by the committee on its own assignment, not being combined with the motion, then that would have been – we are not pronouncing ourselves that we adopt the report. We only decided on a motion moved by the minister. The business was that of a minister but it was not of the committee. (Applause) So, we cannot say we adopt the report. 

Normally we adopt the report when we deal, for instance with the Budget because they go and deal with specific votes. But this one is to help us when the motion for second reading comes, how we proceed or use the information given to us by the report.

MR AWORI: Mr Speaker, I am seeking your guidance on what has happened on behalf of the general public. Most of us here may be familiar with the procedure of voting at the Committee Stage but the general public does not seem to be quite familiar with it. I am saying this for the following reasons. One, these proceedings are being carried live nationwide or in most parts of the country they are following the debate. But when it comes to voting, I know I have been receiving questions for instance from the media about the importance of taking this vote, which you are going to announce. Some people seem to think it is the final. I am saying this –(Interruption)- as I said, I might be familiar with it but the general public is not.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, honourable member, as you remember when we started today I explained that although we may pronounce ourselves on a motion today, this will not be final. I said so. There are two other stages we have to go through before we finally pronounce ourselves on this Bill.  

Depending on the results, if the results are for “Aye” it means now it will be open for us to commit the Bill to the Committee Stage. As I told you, the most important stage is the Committee Stage, because that is where we are going to approve various clauses and reject even those for instance those who will have said no to this particular motion will be able to contribute positively on some of the clauses and negatively on others.  

Then after the Committee Stage, we shall have to adopt the report because that committee will be a Committee Stage, the House itself will have to adopt the report, that is, to accept what we have done in the committee. It will be on that basis that we shall pronounce ourselves when there is a motion for the Third Reading. This Bill will be finally dealt with when the motion for Third Reading is carried. So, there are two other stages.  

In the same way, in the first Bill we deal with regional tier. On the first and second stage we shall come here for the Committee Stage and finally for the Third Reading. So, anybody who is interested to see what Parliament has done should come on that day when we pronounce ourselves on the motion for Third Reading.

MR MWONDHA: Mr Speaker, then in that case, would it be in order for the minority report to be considered substantively in the Committee Stage when we come to deal with this article?

THE SPEAKER: Yes, you are free. In fact you will again perhaps use the recommendations of the committee. That is what I said. If we went to the committee with a proposal to amend the Bill and your proposal was not accepted by the committee, you will bring it here. After we have decided on this motion today I will appeal to those members whose amendments the committee did not accept, if they want to pursue these amendments they will forward them to the Clerk because when we start the Committee Stage, we shall have a list of amendments on each of the clauses that are to be considered. 

MR LUKYAMUZI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I seek your guidance on two points of public concern. In the recent past the committee was constituted on the political roadmap and good enough you chaired that committee. At this point in time it would be prudent for us to know the conclusions you have reached in regard to the prospects of the committee.

I also recently got worried when I saw on our Order Paper the order of business to follow, it was indicated that the Committee Stage of the Constitution (Amendment No. 2) Bill, 2005 would be beginning very soon. For the good of the people we represent, it would be very advisable for us to know in advance the details of the procedure so that we keep our people informed of the process of a constitutional nature, which they value so greatly.

THE SPEAKER: The committee I set up, which you are referring to, is a functional committee for the Committee of the whole House. Therefore, what transpires in that particular small committee will report to assist the Business Committee to decide the arrangement of business in this House, so we report to them and it is the other committee, which reports to you.

On the issue of the regional tier, you should familiarise yourself with the Constitution. The regional tier had fell under a certain category of amendments. We had to deal with the first reading and what we dealt with recently was the second reading. According to the provisions under that committee, you have to separate the second reading from third reading with 14 Parliamentary sittings.  Therefore, we are still counting. As soon as we make those 14 Sittings, we shall revisit this Bill for further action.

LT GEN. ODONGO JEJE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to seek your guidance. A short while ago hon. Mike Mabikke requested you to allow him to vote for a member of this House. He claimed that he got a telephone call from that member. Unless he proves that he actually received such a call, it may tantamount to a lie, in which case it would be a very serious offence. I would like to seek your guidance how we proceed with such a case.

THE SPEAKER: You appreciate that when hon. Mabikke made the request I did not respond. It had no basis and I have no time to waste on such matters. I realised that maybe because he was tired, he intended to make a joke.

CAPT. MATOVU: I want to seek further clarification arising from the question hon. Aggrey Awori raised to you about what we are doing today. We are taking a vote to allow the second reading of a Bill. Sometime in the morning there were some Ugandans gathered around the Parliamentary building. From your explanation, are you saying that those people and their mobilisers wasted their time and energy?

THE SPEAKER: I do not plan for their time. They know what to do with their time.

MR ERESU: Mr Speaker, you have just said that when a Bill goes for the second reading you expect members to deposit their amendments with the Office of the Clerk before we go to the Committee Stage?

THE SPEAKER: I referred to only the amendments the committee may reject or never act on. Our rules say that during the Committee Stage we should accept amendments from both the committee and from members, if their amendments were never taken up. The reason I want them to submit those amendments is to enable the Clerk to compile a list so that we are better organised at the Committee Stage. I also need to have these amendments in time so that when we are dealing with these clauses I know the kind of amendments members have proposed. This will help us to make progress.

MR ERESU: Mr Speaker, while that will be done at the Committee Stage, will members on the Floor be given an opportunity to make suggestions arising from the amendments tabled here? 

THE SPEAKER: The rules are very clear as to what kind of amendments you may submit during the Committee Stage. It is only the amendments you suggested and the committee never accepted. If they were accepted, they will be treated as amendments coming from the committee.

MR OCULA: Mr Speaker, I voted no on the whole Bill because there was something very dangerous in the Bill. Our Rules of Procedure state that where certain things are not very clear, you can use your Chair to advise members. The one dangerous thing is Article 105(2) -(Interjections)- for Ugandans, not only Nyeko. That is their opinion but what I am saying is, as we go to the Committee Stage - so that I do not suffer the same thing I am suffering - that at the third reading again I am going to lump up the whole Bill and say no. Can we say that for the purpose of 105(2), which is the most contentious item, we vote separately for different clauses?

THE SPEAKER: Yes. Honourable members, this is exactly what I told you. Those people who would have lost this motion because they said “Nay”, will sometime have a smile when some of the provisions they want are taken. Maybe you may succeed in throwing away this 105(2) amendment during the Committee Stage. Therefore, you should not lose hope. You should continue to persuade the members because during the Committee Stage we shall consider each clause separately. It may or may not succeed. That is why I told you that when the house is in the building process, we bring various bricks and construct the house. We may throw away a particular brick without necessarily affecting the nature of the structure. I hope it is now clear.

MR MUGAMBE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want guidance because I am one of those people who proposed an amendment to some parts of the Constitution, which is an entrenched Article 105(1) –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: You see, when conducting this, I would accept if you had taken that amendment and it was entrenched in the provision. I would know how to deal with an entrenched provision. Should you have wanted to introduce it here, I would not reject it but did you submit it to the committee? If you did not, bring your amendments, we shall look at them and see what to do with them.

Honourable members, I have now to announce, let us deal with the motion, this came in because we have not finished the exercise.  

The motion is that the Bill entitled the Constitution (Amendment No.3) Bill of 2005 be read for the Second Time. That is the motion and because of our changed rules we have to get the answer by the exercise we went through. This Bill, according to what I have here, falls under Article 261 and for the second reading of the motion to pass it requires two thirds of members. 

The members who are entitled to vote are less than 310 since ex-officios do not vote. Therefore, the two-thirds would have been about 196 but the position is as follows: those abstaining, one; the noes are 50; and the ayes are 232. The motion is carried, the ayes have it. (Applause)

(Question agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: Honorable Members, again I thank you for the manner in which you have conducted yourselves. Let this kind of behaviour or conduct continue through the remaining two stages.  

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) (NO. 3) BILL, 2005

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we shall not move to the Committee Stage today. I want you to have a break. 

There is an important Bill, the Local Government Rating Bill, which is required for purposes of funding the local governments and we have to pass it within a certain period of time. I understand the report from the committee is out so we shall deal with it for the rest of the week. You will be told when to have the Committee Stage on this. Tomorrow being a Wednesday we shall sit in the afternoon so that the Cabinet can also transact its business. 

With this we come to the end of today’s business. The House is adjourned until tomorrow at 2.00 p.m.

(The House rose at 5.15 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 29 June 2005 at 2.00 p.m.)








