Thursday, 4 June 2015

Parliament met at 2.58 p.m. at Serena Hotel Conference Centre, Kampala.

The National Anthem

The East African Community Anthem

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

OPENING OF THE FIFTH SESSION OF THE NINTH PARLIAMENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF UGANDA

PROCLAMATION 

THE SPEAKER: WHEREAS under Article 95(2) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, a session of Parliament shall be held at such a place within Uganda and shall commence at such a time as the Speaker may, by proclamation appoint;

WHEREAS the Fifth Session of the Ninth Parliament will commence on the 4th day of June 2015 and further;

WHEREAS the President of the Republic of Uganda is required under Article 101 of the Constitution to deliver to Parliament an address on the state of the nation at the beginning of each session;

AWARE THAT it is expedient that Parliament receives the State of the Nation address from the President at the Kampala Serena Conference Centre;

NOW, THEREFORE, in exercise of the powers conferred upon the Speaker by clause 2 of Article 95 of the Constitution, I hereby proclaim that Parliament shall sit at the Kampala Serena Conference Centre on the 4th day of June 2015 at 14:00 hours to receive the State of the Nation address from the President and;

FURTHER in exercise of the powers conferred upon the Speaker by the Constitution, the Parliament Powers and Privileges Act Cap 258 and the Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of Uganda, it is hereby proclaimed and declared that the said Kampala Serena Conference Centre, including its forecourt, the yard and the gardens be the precincts of Parliament for the above mentioned purposes.

Given under my hand at Parliament House, Kampala on 2nd day June 2015.

Signed by Rebecca Kadaga, Speaker of Parliament.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Your Excellency the President, Gen. Yoweri Kaguta Museveni; Your Excellency the Vice-President, Mr Edward K. Ssekandi; My Lord the Chief Justice, Bart Katureebe; Colleague Speakers from the region: Rt. Hon. Donatille Mukabalisa, Speaker of the Chamber of Deputies of Rwanda, Rt. Hon. Mohamed Osman Sheikh Jawari, Speaker of the People’s House of Parliament of the Federal Republic of Somalia and Rt. Hon. Dan Kidega, Speaker of the East African Legislative Assembly; Rt. Hon. Jacob Oulanyah, the Deputy Speaker; Rt. Hon. Prime Minister and Leader of Government Business, Dr Rugunda; the deputy prime ministers; honourable Leader of the Opposition in Parliament; ministers and ministers of state; justices of the Supreme Court and the Courts of Appeal; judges of the High Court; honourable members of Parliament; members of the Diplomatic Corps; the Chief of Defence Forces; Inspector General of Police; Commissioner General of Prisons; leaders of political parties; religious leaders; Miss Uganda, Leah Kalanguka, Goodwill Ambassador for agriculture, tourism and the eradication of trachoma; distinguished invited guests, ladies and gentlemen.

Your Excellency, it is a great honour and pleasure to welcome you today at Parliament to perform your constitutional duty of delivering the State of the Nation Address as directed by Article 101(1) of the Constitution.

I also note, Your Excellency, that this is the final State of the Nation Address to the Ninth Parliament. The next State of the Nation Address will be to the Tenth Parliament.

This session, unlike previous ones, has ended well because we have not lost any Member of Parliament. However, I do now report that we have 386 Members of Parliament. However, some are not able to attend today because they are indisposed and could not attend this function. Let us continue to pray for them for a quick recovery. We register the appreciation to Government for the financial and material support that Government has extended to these ailing Members of the House for medical treatment.

Your Excellency, the Fourth Session, which has just been concluded, registered a better performance compared to the previous one. Twenty two Bills were enacted as against 19 in the Ninth Session.

Your Excellency, during this session, we ratified three international protocols relating to mutual peace and security:
 
A pact on cooperation in security and peace for the Partner States of Kenya, Rwanda and Uganda.
The Mutual Defence Pact on Cooperation in defence among the three countries: Kenya, Rwanda and Uganda.
Establishment of the East African Community Monetary Union. 

We are mandated to ratify treaties and protocols entered into by the government. I wish to report that this is the first time, after many years, that we have, as Parliament, exercised this right.

We have approved 13 loans for external borrowing. I wish to report that these approvals given by Parliament have been in those priority areas identified by Government as necessary for spurring sustainable growth in this country. These cover loans for construction of roads in various parts of the country, loans for development of the energy sector for construction of hydropower dams, construction of transmission and distribution lines. 

Other loans relate to financing of agricultural projects in the country and programmes for restoration of livelihoods in Northern Uganda. One loan was approved for the infrastructure development for Kampala Capital City Authority. We also approved the recapitalisation of the Bank of Uganda. 

We adopted eight motions to pay tribute to distinguished Ugandans. We also adopted four motions seeking leave of Parliament to introduce Private Members’ Bills as follows: 

The Medical Society Bill, 2014
The Children (Amendment) Bill, 2014
The Patients’ Rights and Responsibilities Bill, 2015
Parliament Human Rights (Enforcement) Bill, 2015

We adopted 17 items of miscellaneous business. We considered and adopted 43 committee reports. We presented and debated 48 ministerial statements. Ten statements were made by Members. We handled and disposed of five petitions. We handled eight questions for oral answer. We approved the National Development Plan last week.

You will recall, Your Excellency, that I reported last year that under Rule 34 of our Rules of Procedure (2012), we have Prime Minister’s Question Time. This has been actualised. This item of business has attracted a lot of interest from Members because the questions are asked and answered instantly, thereby providing an effective mechanism of exercising oversight over the Executive. During this session, 350 questions have been responded to by the Rt hon. Prime Minister. 

Your Excellency, I wish to report that during the same session, some Bills, which were responsible for propelling the economy have also been handled including those for raising revenue. The famous Public Finance Management Act, 2015 has now been implemented. We were also required to carry out legislation in many reform areas and this has been handled.

These laws notwithstanding, Your Excellency, there have been a number of reports by the Auditor-General and other international assessments such as Public Expenditure and Financial Accountability Assessment. The Public Finance Management Act is therefore updated, under the legal framework, to address the challenges that have been identified. 

Due to recent developments and reforms to the Public Finance Management Act, including discovery of oil and the East African Integration, it was necessary that the Public Finance Management Act be enacted to address those concerns. 

We have handled the Income Tax laws, Tax Procedure Code, Value Added (Amendment) Bill, the Trade Licensing (Amendment) Bill, Hotel and Tourism Training Institute Bill, Business Licensing (Miscellaneous Repeal) Bill, East African Development Bank (Amendment) Bill, 2015 and of course the Financial Bill, 2015.

At the time Parliament was prorogued on 30th May 2015, the following were the Bills not yet completed:

The Public Private Partnership Bill was referred back for further consideration to the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development.

Uganda Wildlife Research and Training Institute Bill was partially handled but not yet concluded.

There are 18 other Bills at various stages of processing before our committees. As soon as they are concluded, the plenary will handle them. 

Another matter of concern, Your Excellency, which we want to raise, is the late submission of Bills from the Executive. For instance, the Constitutional (Amendment) Bill, 2015 was presented on 30 April 2015. This was way beyond the time expected for its presentation. This proposed law, currently being processed by Parliament, remains a great challenge.

I would like to urge Government to submit electoral bills, if there are any, for consideration by Parliament so that we are not stampeded. Many times, we may require to lobby or have additional consultations. All these should be done in good time.

I also now want to urge the chairpersons of the sectoral committees to expedite the processing of the Bills in their committees. Those of the standing committees are equally urged to handle work, which is before their committees.

Your Excellency, at the Fourth Session, a number of important Bills had been included as being those proposed for presentation to the Parliament for the first reading. However, many of these have not been brought. For instance, at the beginning of the Fourth Session, I reported that the Anti-Counterfeit Bill was still awaited. This would be assisting us in checking the dumping of goods and facilities in this country, but as I speak now, Your Excellency, it has still not come.

Other Bills, which had been indicated as in the pipeline, are the National Food and Medicine Bill, the Uganda Health Institute Bill, the Micro Finance Bill, Universities and other Tertiary Institutions (Amendment) Bill, Public Health Bill and the Uganda Land Commission Bill.

Parliament has exercised its legislative role as highlighted above. It has also done a commendable job in regard to oversight, for example on the Auditor-General’s report, reports of the Public Accounts Committee, and committee reports on Commissions, Statutory Authorities and State Enterprises, which were presented. 

However, due to time constraints, we have not been able to handle any of the Local Government Accounts reports but we shall do so as soon as we commence.

I would like to also report that for the first time, Government has presented Treasury Memorandum in response to the recommendations of the Auditor-General. We hope that this will be a regular practice so that we are able to follow up on what has been done on our recommendations.

However, all has not been completed, Your Excellency, especially on issues of absenteeism and lack of quorum. At times, this has blocked the progress of our work. This is caused, among others, by insatiable demands from the public for Members of Parliament who are expected to attend funerals, weddings and other social events and generally to be available. 

Your Excellency, I think that most of our population have not understood that when they elect us, the Parliament sits in Kampala and the work is in Kampala. It is not that Members should avoid their constituencies but I think we should help each other to explain to the population the roles of a Member of Parliament. 

Therefore, Your Excellency, we are looking to you and other members of the Executive to help us pass on the message about the actual roles of the Members of Parliament.

I would like to urge the Whips on both sides of the House to play their role to ensure that the honourable members attend committees and plenary sittings. I know that attendance of Members may decline - it is going to decline in the very near future as Members go out in search for votes - but I implore the Members to carry out their duties because they are on duty until May 2016. 

However, Your Excellency, our experience has shown that the Fifth Session may not be as productive as the other sessions. Therefore, I would like to urge that in the Tenth Parliament and in future Parliaments, the target should be to conclude critical enactment of legislation before the end of the Fourth Session. That would greatly help in the administration of this country.

I wish to report that on the international scene, Parliament has effectively participated in fora such as the Commonwealth Parliamentary Association, the Inter-Parliamentary Union, the African Parliamentary Union, the ACP/EU Joint Assembly and also other fora to which we are members. Equally, they have sponsored members’ motions and debates in areas covered under our regional fora.

We have continued to support the work of the East African Community as well as the African Union and the Pan African Parliament. 

Through the parliamentary outreach programme, Your Excellency, Parliament continues to engage leaders from districts through programmes aimed at taking Parliament closer to the people. During such visits, concerns of the local leaders are received by Parliament and brought to the attention of the Executive and the House. 

We also hold, at their disposal, the Parliamentary Training Centre, which is accessible to the local governments and other Parliaments in the region.

Your Excellency, the additional construction of the floors of the North, West and East Wings of Parliament have provided some additional space to us. Renovations on the newly acquired Development House have been completed and Members of Parliament have begun moving to the new premises. I would like to report that the premises at Bauman House, which had been hired for use of Members and staff of Parliament, have been vacated and handed over to the owners. 

I would also like to take the opportunity to thank the government for the resources, which have been provided to accomplish these capital intensive undertakings. These have enabled Parliament to acquire premises for its operations and also resulted in saving money for the Treasury from rent. 

Your Excellency, the next phase of modernisation of Parliament will entail the construction of a new Chamber, offices and attendant facilities in the current parking yard in the North Wing of the National Assembly. We pray that resources be available from the Treasury so that the next phase can be handled. 

I register, on behalf of Parliament, our appreciation that due to the bold economic decisions you personally initiated since the NRM came to power, it is now possible for us to have huge revenue collections for Government to fund our own capital projects within the country. This achievement is being replicated in other areas as well such as the roads sector, energy sector and the railways sector. 

We would like to thank the international organisations and bodies, which have supported the work of Parliament. We are grateful to the authorities for the collaborations and wish to affirm our commitment to the continued good working relationship and partnership with those international bodies, civil society organisations, the academia and the general citizenry on all issues pertaining to the mandate of Parliament.  

Your Excellency, it is my greatest honour to introduce the dignitaries who are here from our parliamentary fraternity. As a region, we have agreed to enhance our collaboration and partnership more than ever before so that we can be more cohesive in how we work. 

I had already introduced the Rt Hon. Mukabalisa but she could stand up for recognition. I do not know where she is seated. She is the Rt Hon. Speaker of Rwanda. You are welcome. (Applause) She has come with her delegation from Rwanda. I would like to ask them to stand up. 

I would also like to introduce the delegation of Somalia led by their Speaker, and the delegation of EALA also led by their Speaker. You are all welcome. (Applause) Once again, we welcome you and we want to thank you for attending our function. 

We have apologies from Rt Hon. Muturi, the Speaker of the National Assembly of Kenya and Rt Hon. Anna Makinda, the Speaker of the National Assembly of Tanzania who are caught up in their own Parliaments with other duties. 

Your Excellency and honourable members, when we prorogued the House on 30 May 2015, some business was saved. The Whips should fish out their Members to ensure that the various committees are filled as required by the Rules of Procedure and that those who need to get new assignments are also handled. 

As usual, the Independent Members are requested to report to the Clerk so that they can be handled by my office.

Honourable members, we adjourn today until 11 June 2015, which has been set aside for the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to present the National Budget and the second National Development Plan. You are, therefore, required to be here on 11 June for that purpose. 

Honourable members, I have received communication that the President of the Republic of Kenya, His Excellency Uhuru Kenyatta, will pay a state visit to Uganda from 22 to 25 June, 2015. Part of that programme involves addressing the Parliament of Uganda. 

In accordance with standard arrangements for that, we request you to be available and listen to President Kenyatta who is one of our leaders in this region. It is important that we give him a befitting and traditional Ugandan hospitable welcome in our Chambers. 

Your Excellency the President, distinguished guests, honourable members, ladies and gentlemen, I thank you very much for coming to this final State of the Nation Address of the Ninth Parliament. 

Your Excellency, it is now my honour and great pleasure to invite you to perform the constitutional duty of opening of the Fifth Session of the Ninth Parliament and delivering, for Parliament, the State of the Nation Address. Thank you very much, Your Excellency. (Applause)

ADDRESS ON THE STATE OF THE NATION

3.25
THE PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF UGANDA (Gen. (Rtd) Yoweri Kaguta Museveni): His Excellency the Vice-President of Uganda, the Rt. Hon. Speaker of Parliament, His Lordship the Chief Justice, the Rt. hon. Speaker of EALA, the Rt. Hon. Speaker of the Parliament of Rwanda, the Rt. Hon. Speaker of the Parliament of Somalia, the Rt. Hon. Prime Minister, the Rt. Hon. Leader of the Opposition, honourable ministers, honourable members of Parliament, honourable members of EALA, members of the diplomatic corps, distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen. 

Madam Speaker, in fulfilment of the constitutional requirement under Article 101(1) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, I am here to deliver the State of the Nation Address, 2015 mainly to give accountability on particular Government commitments and to appraise you of the plans and strategies for the next 12 months. 

Madam Speaker and honourable members of Parliament, on 11 June 2015, the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development will present to this august House and the entire nation, the Budget for the financial year 2015/2016. He will also detail what has been achieved and what we intend to achieve in the coming financial year. 

On this occasion, I will begin with the saying, which is in the Church of Uganda’s Prayer Book but which is also in the Bible. In Luganda it says, “Baleka bye basanidde okukola nebakola bye batasanidde okukola n’amazima tegaali mubbo.” The translated meaning is, “They left undone what they ought to have done and did that which they ought not to have done and there is no truth in them.” 

It is a very dangerous quotation that is found on page 10 of the Church of Uganda’s Prayer Book and also in the Book of Matthew Chapter 23:23. 

It says in full, “Woe to you scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! For you pay tithe of mint and anise and cumin and have neglected the weightier matters of the law, justice, mercy and faith. These you ought to have done without leaving the others undone.” Verse 24 says, “Blind guides who strain out a nut and swallow a camel.” 

All this means that you concentrate on the peripheral issues but neglect the much more fundamental issues. This is the greatest challenge leaders over the ages have faced, to distinguish the core issues from the peripheral ones or even to prioritise among priorities. This is the problem of leadership. If you cannot do that, you just stay in your house; you do not have to bother people that you want to be a leader when you cannot do this.

In the last 50 years, the NRM and its precursors - those groups that came before it - such as University Students African Revolutionary Front (USARF), FRONASA, UPM, the Anti-Vietnam War Solidarity Committee, Popular Resistance Army (PRA), NRA among others, have been fighting against this disorientation. We succeeded in all those phases because we were able to handle this issue of what comes first and what should come next. Where we have successfully resisted such disorientation of trying to be everywhere and you end up being nowhere, we have made good progress.

Since 2006, we started resisting the mistakes of spending on consumption before we spend on development and wealth creation. By doing so, just relying on Uganda Government money, even if you put aside projects supported by outsiders, the following has been achieved by you people agreeing with my views or doing certain things first and then others later, just in these years from 2006: 

One, we have added 1,627 kilometres of electricity transmission lines to the 1,427 kilometres of transmission we had before 2006. (Applause) You can go with your foot ruler and measure the new electricity lines since 2006. This was just by having that wisdom of saying, “No, I cannot do everything at the same time, but let me start with electricity because it is the most important”. So, you get your foot ruler and you go and measure. If you survive and come back-

Two, US$ 338,000,000 of the energy fund that we put down as our contribution to Karuma hydropower dam and to Isimba hydropower station- The Chinese who are helping us to construct the two dams had initially not got their money from their system, but we had ours ready, so we put it in and the work started. They have now got the money from their bank and they are going to add it, but we had our money ready and we put it in.

Three, we have boosted the budget of the Ministry of Works from Shs 374 billion in 2006 to now Shs 3,328 billion. This is now the money for the Ministry of Works. (Applause) When you see all those roads being worked on, it is because of the money we put in by denying ourselves expenditure elsewhere and concentrating here. That is where our Baganda people say, “amanyi gava mukulya”. When you feed somebody, then he gains weight. By concentrating on the Ministry of Works, you can see the results. 

I am really enjoying driving around Uganda now. (Applause) The other day I came from Arua at about 7.30 and by 1.00 I was in Kampala here. Most of the way, I was just driving comfortably, sleeping; I was only disturbed a bit between Nebbi and Pakwach, where I am going to establish a judicial commission of inquiry to find out who did that section of the road. (Applause) It has already gone bad and yet it was just finished the other day. So the cham, the eating, which has been going on there - I have now put a young lady there who is a no nonsense person. (Applause) Anybody who has eaten any of that money has to regurgitate it. The other section where I had to wake up was between Karuma and Kafu, slightly before Kafu. They have already done some part but beyond Kigumba that section is still being worked on. It disturbed my sleep in the car. Otherwise, the road is smooth all the way. 

The road between Tororo, Mbale and Soroti had become a problem. When you would drive on that road, you would feel it was better to get out of the car and walk. However, the other day I was there and just slept all the way. You know, when there are no potholes I just sleep in the car. The other day we went to Kisoro for the Labour Day function and you saw how smooth it was.  That is all because of the decision we took in 2006 when we said, “let us not spend on consumption; let us prioritise even among priorities”. You are now seeing the benefits.

We have also been able to put Shs 170 billion in the Science Innovation Fund as well as funding Uganda Industrial Research Institute (UIRI). This prioritisation has completely changed the image of Uganda.

On the side of electricity transmission, we have now connected or are in the process of connecting all the district towns except for Kaabong, Nwoya, Buvuma and Kotido. Out of the 112 district towns, only four are remaining. All the others are now connected or are being connected. If you go back to 1986 as the base year, 33 towns which constituted quarters of the current 112 districts had no electricity. Big towns like Kabale, Rukungiri, Kisoro and Kitgum had no electricity. The remaining district towns like Nwoya will be connected in December 2016 while Buvuma will be connected in June 2017. This is on the side of electricity transmission.

On the side of electricity generation, by the time Karuma and Isimba as well as the mini hydro stations of Kikagati, 16 MW; Mitaano, 2.9 MW; Lubilia, 5.4 MW; Nyagak III, 4.5 MW; Sipi – these people of mine who do not know Uganda well have spelt it as Siti but there is no Siti in Uganda; it is Sipi - 21.5 MW; Waki, 5.4 MW; Rwimi, 10.5 MW; Ndugutu – is there Ndugutu? Let me hope it is there but I have never heard of Ndugutu - 0.5 MW; Nkusi, 4.8 MW; Nyamwamba, 9.2 MW; Nengo, 6.5 MW; Esia, 0.1 MW; Muzizi, 44.5 MW; Nshungyezi, 38 MW; Ntono, 2.5 MW; Sindoro, 5.6 MW; Achwa-Agago, 88 MW; Kakaka, 7.2 MW; Muvumbe, 4.5 MW; Muyembe, 3.2 MW; Kyambura, 8.3 MW; Maziba, 1.1 MW; solar power, 20 MW; and additional electricity from bagasse to Kinyara, 25 MW, that are in the pipeline of being constructed - all these are in the pipeline. As I speak, all these are being worked on - our generation capacity will be at 1,974 MW. 

Of course, this is still very small. If you compare this with UK, they are generating 55,000 MW. However, I am very happy to be near 2000 MW because I know where I came from. The one who knows where he came from is a wise man. This is as compared to 1986 when the generation stood at only 60 MW. In 1986, the generation capacity of Uganda stood at 60 MW.

When our oil starts flowing in the year 2018, or if we can get funding that is not from borrowing, we are going to build the additional electricity generation capacity of Ayago, 840 MW - Ayago has got more electricity than all the Jinja’s combined and Karuma - Oriang, 392 MW; Uhuru, 350 MW; Kiba, 300 MW and then there is a thermal plant using heavy fuel oil called Albatross Thermal Plant, 50 MW and Murchison Falls, 700 MW. This will give Uganda a capacity of 4,356 MW. 

We have also agreed with an American Company known as AAE Systems Incorporated to explore and develop another 300 MW of electricity from the geothermal potential of Uganda – ebitagata; when you hear these places being called “Kitagata”, that means there is electricity underground, which is not being used - in the Katwe area of the Rwenzori Region.

The only little mistakes in the electricity sector today are two. One is in connection with Bujagali. Like in the case of AES - those who have been here for long remember the young man called Mr Wright – where they had agreed to develop Bujagali at US 4.9 cents, in the subsequent agreement with Bujagali Energy Limited our people agreed to the electricity generation cost of US 10.1 cents. They said this was on account of the expensive money the developers used and the high cost of construction materials at the time of building the dam. 

This distorts the price of electricity. We are going to engage the developers to find ways of refinancing this project. With our oil money, this should be no problem. However, even before our oil money, we may be able to get cheaper money to pay off this expensive money borrowed by the developers. This mistake should never be repeated.  For some reason, I was not consulted on this; I just heard about it when it was already finished. We had agreed with AES – the earlier group - to US 4.9 cents, I do not know how our people came to agree to this high cost. They said it was because we had a big shortage that time. Lubanga tye - God is there - so this is not the end of the world.

The cost of generation for Karuma is going to be US 5 cents per unit; so, that is in order. The one for Isimba is US 4.8 cents per unit. That is how things should be. The price for electricity from the geothermal is going to be US 8 cents per unit; that is the one of the ebitagata, Lake Katwe. 

We have taken the decision that for manufacturing, the price of electricity should not exceed US 5 cents per unit. (Applause) Other electricity users such as those in the services sector like the people who dance the whole night, those who catch grasshoppers using electricity, or those who use electricity for merely lighting can pay slightly higher prices. Factories need to pay low prices because manufacturing is very competitive globally and yet it creates more jobs, adds value to our raw materials and therefore earns more money for our country, consumes utilities, creates employment, widens the tax base, et cetera. 

Low cost electricity, which is reliable, only competes with transport in facilitating industrialisation. Factories in South Korea, China and Ethiopia buy electricity at US 7 cents per unit. The factories in South Korea buy at US 7 cents; in China, US 8 cents per unit; and in Ethiopia it is at US 4.5 cents per unit respectively. Selling electricity to factories at US 11 cents per unit is not serious. 

On the issue of the roads, as you all can see and as you are aware from communication availed earlier, by using our own funds and some funds from outside, plans are either in execution or in the pipeline for all the major roads. Even for the Rwenkunyu-Masindi Port-Apac-Lira-Kitgum Road that we still had not got money for, now we have got the Islamic Development Bank, which has accepted to fund the road and upgrading works and construction is expected to commence at the end of 2016. 

That is the only road for which I was still struggling to get money. For those who do not know our country, there is a place called Rwenkunyu. You know, some of the MPs may not know some of these places that I am talking about. They are not like me who had to walk through some of these places on foot. There is a road supposed to go from Rwenkunyu to Masindi Port to Apac, Lira, Puranga up to Acholi-Bur. It will not have to go up to Kitgum because there is already a road now coming from Gulu, which does that. This road will now link us through that little town from where we used to fight with Lakwena rebels, north of Lira; what is it called? It is called Ogur, south of Puranga. We have also got money for that road. 

The list of the roads to be upgraded from murrum to bitumen has been published. It is attached to this speech as an appendix. It is a long list: Vurra-Oraba; Buteraniro-Ntungamo-Rwentobo - those are already finished, actually. There is Hoima-Kaiso-Tonya; Gulu-Atiak-Nimule; Kampala-Mukono-Jinja - that one is being worked on again; Ntungamo-Kabale-Katuna; Kampala-Entebbe Express Highway – that one is being worked on; Moroto-Nakapiripirit; Kafu-Kiryandongo; Luuku-Kalangala - I have never been there so I do not know where it is. I have been to Kalangala but I do not know where that road is exactly.

There is also Kamwenge-Fort Portal; Mbarara Bypass; Mukono-Katosi/Kisoga - after the cham cham, things are now –(Laughter) There is Mpigi-Kanoni-Ssembabule-Villa Maria; Kiryandongo-Kamdini; Kamdini-Gulu; Pakwach-Nebbi - that one will have to be worked on again but we shall have to hang those who were involved in the first place. We have Ntungamo-Mirama Hills; Kampala Northern Bypass - they are now widening it; -(Applause)- Masaka-Bukakata; Kigumba-Masindi; Bulima-Kabwoya; Olwiyo-Gulu- Acholibur-Kitgum-Musingo; Villa Maria-Ssembabule; Mubende-Kibale-Kagadi-Ndaiga – Abanyoro, enguto rwanyu mwikarire  mukikaguza? (Laughter) 

We also have Musita-Mayuge-Lumino-Busia; Mukono-Kayunga-Njeru - this is to be designed. It is a design and build project and engineering design is on-going. The other roads are: Kabwoya-Kyenjojo; Tirinyi-Palisa-Kumi-Kamonkoli; Kapchorwa-Suam. (Applause) On that, I know there are doubting Thomases who did not believe that Jesus had been crucified, like my daughter there, the hon. Chelengat. The road will be worked on. The money is there. We only had a delay because the ADB was trying to co-ordinate it with the road in Kenya - Kitale. 

You know, I had to use my akili; when I could not get money, I presented it as a regional road, and it is a regional road, -(Laughter) since there was money for regional roads in ADB. It is indeed a regional road and so is the road from Mbale to Magale–Bumbo-Lwakhakha. That road will also be tarmacked through that window of the regional roads. Even the road to Kanungu-Ishasha will be tarmacked under that window of the regional roads. 

There is Rukungiri-Kihihi-Ishasha; Kihihi–Kanungu-Kambuga - when the road gets to Kambuga and to Kanungu, I promised my people in Nyakishenyi, so I will look for some magezi on how to solve that part. There is the Mbale-Bubulo-Lwakhakha road - I have already talked about it; Ishaka-Katungulu road; Fort Portal-Kyenjojo road - it needs to be done again. It is an already tarmacked road but they need to repair it. We also have the Namunsi–Sironko-Muyembe; Nansana-Busunju; Mbale-Nkokonjeru Road - that one that goes to the hills – the Idi Amin road. Idi Amin used to like to go there; Cido Bridge in Nebbi; Nyalit and Seretiyo bridges in Kapchorwa; Maliba and Ruboni bridges in Kasese; Leresi Bridge. 

The other roads are: Namanve Industrial Park access roads; Jinja–Kamuli Road, which is complete; Mbale–Soroti Road, completed; overlay for Kisoro–Kyanika/Bunagana and Mutolere; Nyamitanga-Katete Road, completed. There are also those small roads going to the Cathedral- My Bishop’s friends are happy. Kikagati Road is completed; Nvara-Ediofe Cathedral Road; Seeta-Namugongo Road is under construction; we were there yesterday. 

Other roads are Naalya-Kyaliwajala; Iganga–Kaliro, which has grown old; Lira-Akia - these are small roads within Lira Town; Nakalama–Tirinyi–Mbale; Fort Portal–Hima; Hima–Katungulu; Soroti-Arapai. I do not want my throat to dry up because of these roads because they are so many. (Laughter)  What is interesting is that many of these are funded by your Government, –(Applause)– the Government of the Republic of Uganda.

I am also grateful to our partners from outside who have come in and taken over some of the roads. The Japanese are handling the Atiak–Bibia; the World Bank is handling Arua-Oraba; the European Union are handling the Buteraniro Road in Ntungamo up to Kabale; the British group is handling Ntungamo-Mirama Hills. The Banyankole say, “Omwana mukuru omusiga neyahamiriza.” When you are oiling the body of a child who is grown up, put the oil on him and then he rubs it on himself; you do not have to put the oil and rub it on him as if he is a baby. The child is already grown up; you help him and he helps himself.

On the side of scientific innovation, we have supported the banana project with Shs 78 billion – (Interjections) - Yes, I know; it is because you do not ask. If you want to go to heaven, be humble. Blessed are the humble for the kingdom of heaven is theirs. I follow this project more than you people. If you have got any questions about it, instead of disturbing the other scientist who does not know how to answer your questions, ask me because I am here. God has kept me here so why are you - 

I am glad you gave the money because I was about to donate that project to other African countries. I had an understanding with the scientists. The foreigners wanted to take the patent rights but I stopped them. (Applause) Now, when I bring them to you, you mistreat them in your committees when you are in the chairs, that you are a parliamentary committee. (Laughter) You ask the scientist, “What is the economics?” The scientist is not an economist! That scientist is not an economist; she has already done her work of finding out the scientific formula, you do the rest. Why do you ask her, when your legs are hanging in the air? (Laughter) She has already done her part, you do the rest! If she does not know how to do project calculation, you do it. What are you there for? She has already found out that this can be like this, you work on the economics. Why are we here? 

You are lucky because I was going to donate that project to other African countries which are interested. Madam Speaker, I am glad that in the last Parliament you gave the project money; apoyo Lubanga, Apoyo matek. I was going to donate that project to African countries because there are African countries which would take it up. The rude way you talk to people in those committees of yours - People talk of abuse of power, there must be abuse of power of parliamentary committees. You see, the civil servants are clapping. (Laughter) 

You are now breaching the Constitution because you are saying “be aware”. In Runyankore, when I say you should be aware, that is a very serious case – Okuhaira. It is a very serious offence – to threaten me. Please, these scientists are not economists but scientists. She has found a formula, it is scientifically proven, she has not given the patent to the outsiders who are eager to take it. If there are other issues to be done we should all do them together - the civil servants, political leaders should all be involved. That is how I am involved because I know that by supporting them, our country will benefit. 

Also, you are unfair because you are not able to unbundle research, incubation, reassignment of the incubation and then operationalisation. These are different activities - to do research, incubation and reassignment. Therefore, please, there are a number of informed people around, always consult them. However, I am glad because I was going to give that project away. Actually, there were some governments which I was going to ring and tell come and take this project, the powers in Uganda do not want it, so you take it –(Interjections)- yes, but I am glad you avoided that embarrassment.

There is the vehicle of Prof. Togboa Tickodri, our car, up to now I have given it Shs 27.7 billion - the URI – (Interjections) - yes, you go and find out - since you like travelling – you go to the American man who makes vehicles like Ford. How much money do they spend on research and in developing a formula for a car; go and find out from them. Do not depend on Prof. Togboa Tickodri; forget about him.  Go to Ford and ask them the amount of money they spend before they develop a car; ask the South Koreans and Japanese; they are here. This Shs 27.7 billion is just like $10 million; be serious and stop joking. This world is not for joking; it is a serious world.

Uganda Research Institute is Shs 14.24 billion - there are very many innovations on transferred technology by our scientists. The only limitations are these funds; after we have dealt with the roads and electricity, we shall decisively support this effort. Our scientists can do anything. There is nothing they cannot do; they just need funding which will come in due course.
 
Although we are tackling the priorities of the roads and electricity for now, we have at least made that modest start with this scientific innovation.

The other cost pusher for producers and manufacturers is transport. From the time the British built the railway in 1902, no other effort has ever been made in that direction yet the cost of transport adds 25 per cent to the cost of a good while electricity at current prices adds 14 per cent. The two account for 39 per cent of the cost of a good. 

In countries like China, transporting a container of goods from Shanghai to Beijing is $1,500 while in Uganda transporting the same container of goods by roads from Mombasa to Kampala costs $2,100. Therefore, in order to make our economy competitive, we have decided together with Kenya, to build a modern standard gauge railway. (Applause) Government of China agreed to help us. That will reduce the cost of transporting goods to $1,650 per container. My staff should add what it costs by road so that we contrast.

Another damage to the economy and people would have been insecurity. However, the UPDF has ensured total peace in the whole country –(Applause)– by defeating the LRA, the ADF and disarming the Karimojong warriors. There is now peace total peace - in the whole length and breadth of Uganda. The only residual nuisance is ordinary crimes such as murder, corruption, tax evasion, money laundering, etcetera. 

Apart from the normal Police methods, we need to build modest infrastructure to cope with this problem. Such infrastructure would, for instance, include CCTV cameras in the major towns starting with Kampala. These criminals are easy to get only that the police still use old methods: Ani yamulabyeko –(Laughter)– who has seen him? And they keep going around looking for the one who saw him and the one who saw the other one; that is how the police are working. Of course I am conscious of this - I delayed spending money in that area because we have to complete the roads. But we now have all the data on how we can make it very difficult for the criminals to operate, especially in the towns; and one method will be the installation of CCTV cameras in all the major towns. And there are other things, which I wouldn’t like to talk about here because there could be some people who are linked to Al-Shabaab. One of them has been worked on, and I thank you, the computerised identity card, which is also part of the anti-crime infrastructure - with the finger prints in the computer. That is part of it but it is not all. If we add the cameras and some other things, which I do not want to talk about here, it will be very easy to track these criminals and expedite - not to depend on the old methods - who saw him? And you start investigating. Actually, the Police are good in a way although sometimes I blame them because they do not interrogate sufficiently. Like the murders, which took place in Namayingo, when I went there I was able to quickly find out what was happening though I also used the old method: where were you standing? I was standing here. It was night and how did you see his face? All that consumes a lot of man-hours, but if you have got technical means like the cameras, it is much quicker. So, that is what we are going to work on so that we expedite the process.

Such infrastructure would make the Police work in detecting and apprehending criminals much easier. We are in the process of solving that problem. Otherwise, Uganda is one of the most peaceful countries anywhere on the globe. (Applause) 

Managing successfully the huge numbers of people at Namugongo yesterday –(Applause)– you don’t know how many hours I spend awake in the night following up issues when you people are sleeping. There were over one million people at Namugongo. To make sure nobody went to their midst with a bomb and blows himself up and other people, is not as simple as for people who sit in air conditioned rooms. That is why we should assist the Police with modern equipment so that things are done much easier. Handling those events of Namugongo successfully and without any problems proved a point, if any proving is necessary.

The other cost pusher for products is the cost of capital - borrowed money. We privatised our Government bank, the Uganda Commercial Bank in order to bring down these interest rates. The interest rates are still high at 20.1 per cent per annum. If the parliamentary committees were not full of themselves, swinging in those chairs; they would ask my civil servants, why we privatised UCB because that was the main argument. The argument was that when we privatise UCB we would have more efficient management. The argument was that interest rates were high because loans were being given carelessly and they were not being paid back, people defaulted and, therefore, those who paid their loans paid for the ones who didn’t pay and that is how people ended up paying high interest rates; that was the argument.  But I am also curious to know why the new managers have not done this. If the parliamentary committees could ask them - I have already asked them but I am waiting for the answer why these efficient new managers have not brought the interest rates down, because that was the argument?

I want to compare the interest rates in South Africa and USA - they have got them for me. But they got for me the ones of South Korea - 3.4 per cent. Here we are talking about 20 per cent; so there is a problem here.

Now that the route of privatising UCB did not solve this problem we are going to take another route - the route of capitalising Uganda Development Bank. (Applause) Some people suggested to me that we privatise UDB and I said, no, thank you very much because I had already privatised UCB and got no reward”. So, privatisation ends here. (Applause) UDB will not be privatised instead we are going to capitalise it –(Applause)– so that we have got a Government-controlled instrument of dealing with these problems of borrowing for development.

We have already put some money in the UDB but we shall put more. After the coming elections, in the following financial years, we plan to invest additional Shs 500 billion so that the bank can lend to manufacturing business and agriculture at lower interest rates, if one assumed inflation to be 5 per cent per annum.

Emphasising these 5 areas: the roads, electricity, the railway, defence and security and the cost of capital, does not mean that we forgot other areas. 

Scientific innovation is a stand-alone element of capacity building. In the area of ICT for instance, when I visited China some years ago, I agreed with Huawei Company to build the ICT backbone. I linked them to the concerned authorities inside Uganda and as we speak the following towns have already been linked by ICT backbone: Kampala, Entebbe, Bombo, Nakasongora, Gulu, Masindi, Nimule, Lira, Soroti, Kumi, Mbale, Tororo, Busia, Jinja, Mukono, Mbarara, Bushenyi, Fort Portal and Hoima.

The other towns such as Masaka, Mutukula, Kabale and Katuna will be linked in financial year 2015/2016. Our neighbours in Kenya and Tanzania are doing the same and the extending of the undersea cable to Dar-es-Salam from Cape Town and Mombasa from Eden; it means that the cost of making telephone calls will go down. I don’t have the figures here - these people have not got them for me yet.

We shall shift from using satellite-linked telephones to the ICT backbone and undersea cable linked-telephones that are much cheaper. This brings the cost reduced elements to namely, roads, electricity, the railway, defence and security to ensure peace, the cost of capital and the cost of ICT transmission.

As pointed out above, supporting scientific innovation is not necessarily a cost reducer but it is an element of capacity building so as to take advantage of our educated people; the result of human resource development to build the industrial and research base of our country. They have the capacity to modernise our economy by themselves. These scientists, if we support them, there is nothing they cannot do. That is why I recently created a new Department of Science and Technology in the Ministry of Education and Sports. (Applause) They should coordinate all that effort of giving support to our scientific innovators who have hitherto been handled by the Ministry of Finance, which understandably has got a lot of work. There is nothing they cannot do if they are supported. They have the knowledge but they lack the money. 

The Soviet Union had used this approach between 1917 and 1950, when the Korean War broke out. In that short period of 33 years, by supporting their scientists, the oppressive atmosphere of Stalin notwithstanding, the Soviet Union was able to transit from a pre-industrial feudal country to a modern industrial one that was almost solely responsible for the defeat of fascist Germany, relying on its just acquired industrial and technological capacity; thanks to its scientists.

Up to today, the names of those scientists are engraved in the designations of the products they pioneered.  When you hear designations like the MIG series of Jet planes – those stand for the names of their designers – Mikoyan-Greivich (MiG). That is why you hear about MiG. One scientist was called Mikoyan and another was called Gurevich. They are the ones who designed that plane, which is world famous. Pavel Sukhoi and Ilyushin, is the name of Sergey Ilyushin, Tupolev is the name of Andrei Nikolayevich Tupolev - these are scientists. Those planes are named after people who designed them first. Kalashnikovo - this gun AK-47 - Kalashnikov is for Mikhail Kalashanikov, the designer of the famous rifle in the year 1949. 

So, these scientists - we are lucky to have this capacity - I really want to appeal to you people, honourable Members - when you are handling my scientists, please be a bit humble also; do not sit there and impute improper motives. That is not correct. These are very serious and treasured people. I treasure them myself. If any of these scientists called me at night, I wake up and go and talk to them - (Applause) - because I know their value. If you do not know then we shall have a little quarrel.

With infrastructure, we are building; with the peace we have achieved; and with our scientists, we are on a steady match to modernisation. At this pace, Uganda will become a lower middle income country in the next few years. By 2040, Uganda will be an upper middle income country. I was expecting that by 2017 we would be in the lower middle income category, but I will check the figures. 

To help us along, fortunately, we have attracted recently, very useful investors after a long and arduous struggle. Sometime ago we had achieved a breakthrough when we attracted a capable milk processor - Sameer company - to help us cope with our huge potential in that sector of milk. Sameer Company, by leasing the underutilised Government little facility of 15,000 litres per day, has been able, in the last 11 years, to push that production to 150, 000 litres per day; in other words 10 times. 

The artificial glut of milk that had been created has now been converted into more demand for milk from the increased number of factories. 

Apart from the factories that merely pasteurised the milk, preserved it and separated the traditional products of ghee, butter, yoghurt, fresh milk and cheese, we now have factories such as Amos Dairies that crack the whole milk and get separate proteins such as casein or something like that. This is a protein which they get from milk, which is used in making human medicine and exported to the USA. 

Milk production has jumped from 200 million litres per annum, in 1986, to almost 2 billion litres today. We should push this to 20 billion litres per annum by ensuring, through operation wealth creation, that each of the six million Ugandan rural families has eventually, slowly by slowly, six high yield milk cows, able to give 20 litres per day. If only two are milking at a time that will mean 87 billion litres per annum, which Uganda will produce. The global demand for milk is 625 million metric tonnes per annum - this should have been put in litres so that we can compare. 

The cattle population would go to 36 million compared to our present population of 13 million, itself being a big advance from the 3 million cattle of 1986. In 1986, we had only 3 million cows. We now have 13 million, but I am targeting 36 million where every homestead will have at least six cows in the shade. I mean the rural households not the urban ones. 

This commercialisation of the ancient domestic products of milk in 1989, gave opportunity to my late father, Mzee Amos Kaguta, at that time 73 years of age, to fully join the money economy and, therefore, graduate from subsistence traditional farming to commercial farming. By that fact and by the volumes of the money his colleagues and himself were earning on a daily basis, they had metamorphosed into the middle class. Our people must graduate from traditional to middle class through commercial agriculture. Their huge but underutilised wealth, in terms of land and cattle, had at last joined the modern age of wealth through money. 

Some Ugandan families had joined commercial coffee growing in the colonial era, different from the traditional coffee chewing. Indeed Uganda has been producing 4 million bags of 60 kg per annum for a long time. Out of this Uganda earns $400 million per year. The NRM is, however, upscaling the coffee industry to new heights.

First, we want all the old 420 million coffee trees to be replaced by the new ones that produce four times more coffee than the old ones. By simply doing this, coffee production in Uganda will go from, the present 4 million bags per annum, to 20 million bags, overtaking all the other coffee producing countries except Brazil. At present prices, that will bring $2 billion instead of the present $400 million. 

However, it is not just the replanting that we are doing. New areas that never grew Coffee before such as the North are now joining in growing coffee. The yields will therefore exceed my target of 20 million bags. 

There is something much more we are doing for coffee. After endless trials and disappointments of trying to help our country break out of the modern slavery of producing raw materials, where the coffee growing country earns less than $1 per kilogram, but the countries processing coffee earn $10 per kilogram, ten times more than we the coffee growers earn. That has been the same for cotton and other minerals and this is where the under development has been coming from.

We export money ten times more than we get; we export jobs, taxes and of course we export the nutrients of our soils - nitrogen, phosphorus, potassium and do so for peanuts. When you export coffee, that coffee has sucked nitrogen, phosphorus and potassium from the soil but you export it; that is bad enough. But when you get very little in return, year after year, that is where there is a bigger problem and that has been the basis of colonialism and neo-colonialism. This is a situation we had to get out of. I was even beginning to think of bringing back the parastatals to do the job of value addition- (Applause)-Fortunately, however, we are beginning to get big successes. In coffee, we have at last got a serious investor – Vinci – who will add value to 60,000 tonnes of our coffee. That 60,000 tonnes will bring in $600 million per annum. This company, which is going to process the coffee and the product just goes to the supermarket, will use only one-third of the coffee we are producing now. But the money we shall get out of the value-added coffee will be $600 million more than the whole coffee. So, if we succeed in adding value to all the coffee, our current production level of coffee will be earning something like $1.8 billion instead of $400 million and creating jobs.

As if by coincidence, we also got a serious investor for adding value to cotton – the Fine Spinners Company. That company will process 10,000 bales of cotton into finished garment and will bring in $23 million per annum. We have also got a big meat processor in Bombo. It is the first modern meat packers after the collapse of the meat packers in Soroti. In this way, commodity by commodity, we shall end the slavery of exporting raw materials. (Applause)

There are now 28 tea factories in Uganda processing 60 million kilogrammes of tea per annum, up from the 23 million kilogrammes of 1971 and the 3 million kilogrammes of 1986. 

Kilembe Mines is being repaired to add value to the old blister copper, which is 94 per cent pure. It is being repaired not to produce the old blister copper, which is 94 per cent pure but to produce the cathodes that are 99 per cent pure and can be used straight in making electric cables and other applications. 

You can imagine we were producing copper at Kilembe in the past, but they would process it to 94 per cent purity. They call that blister copper. At that level, you cannot use it to make cables for electricity. We have got a cables company at Lugazi, but they could not use the copper from Kilembe because it was not pure enough. So, the copper from Kilembe would be exported, purified more from outside and then brought back to be used in the cables industry. This is the sort of slavery I cannot accept. Now the copper will go straight from Kilembe to Lugazi to make the cables, which we will then use. This is the struggle for economic emancipation.

We are sourcing for people to build a steel industry using the Kanungu-Kabale Iron Ore and the gas from Mwitanzigye – Lake Albert. The traditional name of Lake Albert is Mwitanzigye. The Banyoro call it Omwitanzige.

With the building of these dams and the railway, we need steel. Therefore, we must develop the Kanungu-Kabale iron ore into steel; we are struggling to get investors. However, I got pressure from some people that I should authorise the export of unprocessed iron ore. But I asked them how much I would get per tonne? They said we would get $37 per tonne. That iron ore is 70 per cent pure. So, it is almost 100 per cent. 

A tonne of steel is now at $700. But I was being pressurised to authorise our iron ore which we call obutare - you know English is inefficient; our languages are more efficient. Obutare is iron ore. I was being pressurised to authorise the export of iron ore at $37 instead of looking for a processor who would turn that to $700. I said sorry, please I will not allow this. They went around and lobbied people, but I said I would not allow it.

Later, I was told that if they export then they will get money and build the steel processor. Why should I welcome poor investors? If they do not have the money, let them not come. (Applause)

When I went to Turkey, I asked them, what do you call a rich person in Turkish? They said “Zengin.” I said what do you call poor? They said “fakir.” (Laughter) So, I told the President of Turkey that I did not want fakir Turkish in Uganda –(Laughter)– because I already have enough poor people here. I did not have to import additional ones.

We commissioned the start of construction of the fertiliser, steel and sulphuric acid plants at the Sukuru Hills near Tororo. I hope those people will start because that is a big project. 

We are handling the requests of those who are interested in the Moroto Cement using 300 million metric tonnes of ore, much bigger than the 23 million of Hima. The lime in Karamoja is much more than the lime in Hima. The lime in Karamoja is 300 million tonnes and the one of Hima is 23 million tonnes; that is very big potential. Very soon we shall be getting somebody to build a cement factory there.

The North of Uganda is going to be the industrial heart of Uganda. At the beginning of my speech, I enumerated the numerous power projects that are either being planned or are already being implemented. These are: Karuma, Ayago, Kiba, Uhuru, Oryang, Murchison Falls, Agago Falls and others. All these are either in the North or on the boundary between Bunyoro and the North.

Grain milling factories have come up in Nwoya, as has large scale farming. If you drove on the road to Arua now, through that part of Lango-Acholi, you will no longer see just grass only but factories are coming up including silos. It is changing. The sugar factory, although delayed, is coming up in Amuru. The sugar factory in Amuru has been delayed by people, some of whom are sitting in this august House –(Laughter)

On the abuse of power, I think we need to streamline our regulations. If you do not behave like a leader, there must be a way of how to not make you a leader. You cannot sit here and abuse your position yet you do not miss any allowances of Parliament while blocking development projects with impunity. 

However, that is not the problem. The NRM Caucus, supported by some few friends there and some reasonable people from this side –(Laughter)– We should make the necessary amendments to really punish these type of leaders. I do not have monopoly of brain; we should all think about it. There are ways you can punish them and one of them is by removing them from Parliament - [HON. MEMBERS: “HOW?”] - Let us discuss it; “how” is not a problem. You cannot abuse the people’s mandate. Therefore, this project has delayed, but finally the people have rebelled against this group in Amuru. 

Another sugar factory, without any controversy, is coming up in Atiak. There is a big factory coming up there; that one has no problem. The people of Atiak are very welcoming and mature. This is a very big project. Who is the MP for Atiak? Is it the same Olanya –(Laughter)– Of course, this is not Jacob; this is Olanya. The people of Atiak are very cooperative.

You have seen clusters of factories in Mukono, Luweero, Kapeeka, Semuto, Sanga. All these are factories based on agro-processing. I have referred to Kilembe, Kanungu, Sukuru and Karamoja above in respect of copper cathodes, steel, fertilisers and cement respectively. Those are not all the minerals; there is gold and at some point we shall need a gold refinery so that we have gold ready for the jewellery industry. Why should we export unprocessed gold and then our daughters buy back the jewellery at many times the value we got for our gold?

There is coltan, wolfram, tin, aluminium clays and others. These clusters of industries growing around our natural products - agricultural and minerals - are the medicines to unemployment, low forex earnings and high import bill to a narrow tax base. All these are on the assumption of low cost of electricity that is reliable, low cost of transport and capital. We also need entrepreneurs if we are to avoid the route of the parastatals.

Therefore, developing a consensus for prioritising infrastructure has been crucial for our future or contemporary prosperity. I want to salute the NRM Caucus and all the other reasonable Members of Parliament and the Opposition friendly forces that helped us on generating this consensus on the prioritisation of expenditure on infrastructure, which is beginning to make a big impact in the economy.

All I have said above does not include petroleum and gas. Our petroleum plan is to build a 60,000-barrels per day refinery expandable to 120,000 barrels per day. Apart from getting our own petroleum, diesel and kerosene for aviation fuel, the residuals will feed the petro-chemical industries so as to produce plastics, fertilisers and pharmaceuticals. Some of the oil will be exported through the pipelines. 

If we are to sell 120 barrels per day, according to the price of $60 per barrel because the price of petroleum has now gone down, that will give Uganda an additional income of $3 billion dollars per annum. This money will be dedicated to infrastructure, science innovations and some of the higher level science educational institutions. It is a considerable amount of money. We have been doing so much in so little. What will happen now that we are getting quite a bit of additional money? 

This time, I will not talk so much about the story of the commercialisation of agriculture. I have in the past talked a lot on that. A lot of products can be made from wood, given our soft and hard wood. Apart from timber, there are many traditional products made out of wood that should be made and promoted.

I have been attending exhibitions with the wood products made by our young people who should be supported. I have told my staff to record all of them and when the money becomes available, we shall support them. You find they make wooden plates (entaatika), milk pots, wooden spoons, combs, flour mingling clubs and others. All these can be made and they last long and I appeal to you to support them by buying those products. The youth who are making them should be encouraged. 

I am confident to promote all these production efforts because I am sure of the national, regional and international market. Through negotiating with our neighbours such as Kenya, Tanzania, Rwanda, Burundi, Sudan and Congo, we have got a regional market. We have got the international market through negotiations with our external partners such as AGOA, the European Union, Japan, India and others. All these can take our products at no tax and without limitation to the amount.

Therefore, when promoting this production, I am not worried that we shall produce and there will be nobody to buy. This is because I know that the demand for many of these products is big. I have checked it out. The demand for coffee, textile, milk products, as well as fish is going up. I am pushing for all these things well knowing that however much we produce, we shall not be short of market. 

Some of the products like tea, you need to be a bit careful because its price has now gone down due to the chaos in the Arab world. We need to know the total global demand of tea even in ordinary times when there is no upheaval as there is in the Arab world today.  

On the side of politics, there is no problem because everything is provided for in the Constitution. I am not going to talk about it; I will just concentrate on the economy. (Applause) Let the leaders show you the way on what you need to do. 

When the Speaker was beginning her introduction - there are two words in Acholi: There is “lutela” which means to lead. I think the other word is “yeyo” which means to carry. This is where the problem is. Instead of being lutela - to lead - you try to yeyo. The Rt Hon. Speaker was talking about that; that you are trying to carry people in a constituency. Why do you carry them? They should carry you rather than you carrying them. 

Listen to what my sister, hon. Cecilia Ogwal, is saying. She is saying that I am the one who is bringing bad culture by giving envelopes –(Applause)– but I am the President; you are not the President, how can you compete –(Laughter).  I really find it difficult; this President lives in Kampala. He comes once in a rural area and you have these bwola dancers; they will not see the President again for another five years. 

According to the culture of these tribes, this Madwong - big person - is it Madwong? It is Madi; Madwong is many - to go back without - it is called okurongora in Runyankore. This is the President; you are not the President. Why don’t you tell them that you cannot manage? You are also president in your small areas –(Laughter). We shall have to sit down but then there must be a limit. Okay, we shall discuss it.

Our democracy is growing. We can discuss more on how to handle those pressures on the leaders but my experience in Kisozi - the other day I told the Committee on Presidential Affairs to visit Kisozi, which is my area where I had a contract with the local people. There are 1,700 homes around me. I agreed with them that I will no longer allow to be stopped on the way because they would stop me all the time. We agreed that we would support each family to do something. I experimented with it; so, I wanted these parliamentary people to go there and see what is happening there. Indeed these days, I do not stop. When they stop me, I just wave to them and continue because I told them before that I would not stop because this is not a good way of working. You cannot manage one person; they should be handled as groups or categories. 

I even told the bodyguards not to send away my people. Let them stand on the road. When I come, I will simply wave to them because I had already told them in a meeting. They cannot resent it because we talked about it. I called them in a meeting and told them that it is the way to go since this way is not sustainable, it is not correct and it is not efficient. You cannot go to just individuals; there must be a common formula. Many listened and some insist but I do not stop; I wave to them and eventually they stopped waylaying me on the way.

These are the challenges of a young democracy. Let us sit down and see how we manage those popular pressures but without straining yourselves by diverting from your role of leadership - Lutela to yeyo - when you cannot manage. You will just break your neck. How can you yeyo? Hon. Janet Museveni’s constituency, Ruhama, has about 3,000 people. How will you yeyo those people? It is therefore not correct. 

With these few words, it is my pleasure to declare this session open. I thank you very much. (Applause)  

THE SPEAKER: Your Excellency, the President, and distinguished guests, my vision was obstructed by the paparazzi. I therefore would like to apologise to the Rt Hon. Al Hajj Kigongo, Vice-Chairperson of the NRM, who is here. I welcome you. (Applause)

I also apologise to the Deputy Chief Justice, hon. Justice Kavuma, who is also here. We welcome you. (Applause)

I also would like to acknowledge the presence of the Mufti of Uganda, Sheik Mubajje. I also would like to recognise the presence of hon. Nusura Tiperu and hon. Mulengani, Ugandan members of EALA. 

We also would like to welcome hon. Mariam Awa Jama and hon. Sarida Mohammed Abdulla from the Somali National Assembly. There are also a number of senior citizens.

Your Excellency, on behalf of the Ninth Parliament and our guests, we thank you for fulfilling the constitutional requirement to deliver the State of Nation Address. We have noted the programmes, the achievements of the preceding year, the plans for the government and work during the Fifth Session. 

Your Excellency, I think this House will be very excited; among the many assurances you have given is the one to establish a factory in Karamoja where they will process raw materials. (Applause) There has been a long-standing complaint that materials are driven from Karamoja to other parts of the country, alongside exporting jobs. Therefore, this is a very important assurance and I would like to call upon the Chairperson of the Committee on Government Assurances to capture that as the first commitment of the First Sitting of the First Meeting of the Fifth Session of the Ninth Parliament of Uganda.

Your Excellency, we do not normally have time to be with you to interact with Members but we would like to welcome you now to the next stage of the function, which is also part of the Order Paper that will take place in the Parliamentary Gardens. We, therefore, invite you, Your Excellency, and all our guests to proceed to the gardens.

However, prior to that, there will be a group photograph. I, therefore, would like to invite the Members to proceed in the reverse order of arrivals so that we have an orderly management of the photographic session. Thank you very much.

House is adjourned to Thursday, 11th June. 

(The House rose at 5.10 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 11 June 2015 at 2.00 p.m.)

