
THE REPUBLIC OF UGANDA

IN THE PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA

Official Report of The Proceedings of Parliament

FIFTH SESSION - 11TH SITTING - FIRST MEETING

________________________

Monday, 27 June 2005

Parliament met at 2.30 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I just wish to welcome you back from the weekend. I hope you had a peaceful and eventful weekend. I wish you a very good debate this week.

2.32
MR MARTIN WANDERA (Workers’ Representative): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. This Bill is one that marks an epoch in the history of Uganda. It also poses a serious challenge to the Seventh Parliament because the Seventh Parliament, through the manner in which it deals with this Bill, will have to define its intellectual depth and political maturity. It is my hope, therefore, that at the end we shall take decisions that will make us feel proud and walk with our heads high; decisions that will make our children and grandchildren be proud to associate with our names and our entire history as people who have served in the Seventh Parliament. (Applause)

My submission on this Bill draws heavily from my long acquaintance with contemporary political affairs and continuous study of political history, both classical and modern. I have listened attentively to several speakers and many of them have appeared to submit positions that seem to have been predetermined for them by their constituents.  

I wish to respond to this category of friends with a quotation from Edmund Burke’s famous speech to the electors of Bristol. Edmund Burke, for those of you who may not know him, is a renowned British statesman, parliamentary orator, philosopher, and still maintains a prominent status in the history of political thought. Faced with the question as to whether the views of a Member of Parliament should be subservient all the time to those of the constituents, this is what Edmund Burke had to say: “My worthy colleague says his will ought to be subservient to yours. If that be all, the thing is innocent. If Government were a matter of will upon any side, yours, without question, ought to be superior. But Government and legislation are matters of reason and judgment, and not inclination; and what sort of reason is that, in which the determination precedes the discussion; in which one set of men deliberate, and another decide; and where those who form the conclusion are perhaps 300 miles distant from those who hear the argument?”  

We must, therefore, come to this Parliament with open minds. If we come here with predetermined positions then this debate is of no value. We shall then turn into Members of Parliament of our constituents and not Members of Parliament of Uganda. I come to this debate with an open mind and if I hear compelling reasons I will shift, and no electorate of mine is going to determine for me the way I decide to the extent that I do not listen to reasonable arguments.  

When hon. Kasigwa Harry cautioned this House about the abuse of numbers and the dignity of Parliament, some members took it that he was being mean with courtesy and parliamentary decorum. His fears are valid and draw heavily from the history of this House. To drive this point home I beg to recount some of the events of 15 April 1966, which as you know is one of Uganda’s darkest days. On the said day, Dr Apolo Milton Obote, the Prime Minister as he was then, introduced a new Constitution, which is famously known as the pigeonhole constitution, which Constitution Members of Parliament had not been given a chance to see or read.  

The Hansard report of the day quotes him in part as follows: “As from this moment the Constitution, which we had from 9th October 1962, is hereby abrogated. (Applause).” That is, when the Constitution was abrogated members in this Chamber applauded. He continued, “We are also not Members of Parliament. (Applause)” - members applauded when they were told that there were no longer Members of Parliament. He went on and on and concluded with the adoption of the 1966 Constitution. So, when hon. Kasigwa Harry warns this House, he has a history to draw from. Numbers have been abused in this House and it is just our prayer that on this particular occasion numbers are not abused.

In 1966 there were no compelling reasons to abrogate the Constitution. I have listened attentively to the debate in this House and I have not heard any compelling reasons to amend Article 105(2). But as I have said, I am open; I hope at the end I will hear something. All I have heard is that His Excellency, President Yoweri Kaguta Museveni, has performed and, therefore, a good leader like him should not be stopped from leading the country because of term limits.  

I want to submit, as I have done before, that President Museveni is the best President this country has had. But I cannot do better in responding to those who are saying that we amend because President Museveni has performed well than quoting Teddy Aina, who prefaced in Justice Benjamin Odoki’s book, The Search for a National Consensus: The Making of the 1995 Constitution. This is what she says, “Enduring democratic institutions cannot be built around individuals and personalities.”  President Museveni can be dropped today. For us to try and shape the future of a country on an individual is to ignore the very serious things that make a country stable. 

The fulcrum of Uganda’s problems has always been the presidency, some have been wild and it necessitated that they should be tamed or domesticated. Justice Benjamin Odoki, Chief Justice of Uganda, in his book that I have just quoted above had this to say, on page 318: “How has the Executive been tamed in the new Constitution? The President for the first time is now directly elected by the entire population. The election can be challenged in the Supreme Court. The term of Office is five years limited to two terms of office only, under Article 105(2).” 

It is this taming mechanism that this House seeks to do away with as if we have guarantees that a wild president may not resurface, because those who have resurfaced like Obote came through a democratic process in 1962. Justice Benjamin Odoki spent five years thinking about nothing but the stability of this country and he is the one telling us that term limits are part of the taming mechanism. Now it is up to us to ignore his wisdom. 

I would like to say that a lot of vituperation, vitriol, fulmination, you may name it, has been poured on the Uganda People’s Congress. Unfortunately, the same people who have poured vitriol on UPC have adopted its famous 101 tricks even with more perfection. Several speakers have argued that the amendment of Article 105(2) has got nothing to do with His Excellency President Yoweri Museveni. The attempt to do so reminds me of another occasion when the Penal Code (Amendment) Bill, 1966 was introduced to this same Chambers, the import of which was to outlaw Kabaka Yekka party.  

Prof. Karugire in his book, Roots of Instability In Uganda, writes as follows: “But KY was not even to stay on the opposition because soon a law, the Penal Code (Amendment) Bill, was enacted, which made it an offence, among others, for any political party to use the names and symbols associated with rulers of federo states or constitutional heads. Although it was clear in the course of the debate that the Bill was aimed at KY, Minister after Minister denied that this was the intention.” 

Grace Ibingira in a lengthy statement tried to persuade Parliament that the purpose of the Bill was to protect all political parties against excesses of their opponents. He continues and concludes by saying that, “At that time cynicism had thus acquired the status of an art in the management of public affairs”. I invite honourable members of this House to be sincere to themselves and to others.  

I listened to my sister and senior colleague, the hon. Bwambale, Member for Kasese. She said that elections, among others, are for getting rid of bad leaders. I request her to respond whether President Yoweri Museveni was a bad leader and for that matter that is why the people of Mbarara North in 1980 roundly rejected him in favour of the hon. Sam Kutesa? (Applause).

On violence, I wish to state that I have not heard anyone threatening violence in this House. But he who tells you not to build your house on a volcano is not the one who tells the volcano to erupt. We have observed the events in our history, events that have led to instability and I invite every member in this House to read Prof. Karugire’s book. If you read it, the conclusion says that if we continue the way we are we shall end up in chaos. As a happy man I am writing my own history and, therefore, history will not be harsh to me.  

Finally, I invite members of this House to listen to others and think about the decisions that we are going to take. Thank you, Mr Speaker. (Applause)

2.45
DR OKULO EPAK (Oyam County South, Apac): I thank you, Mr speaker. Those of us who were in the Constituent Assembly can still recall very vividly the cry that we should make a Constitution, which can last the test of time. It was a big cry that we should try at that time to make a Constitution that would live beyond us. This was not listened to. It is a very sad situation, although there are some people who are really happy that you should be able to change any second you want and that you should use a Constitution as a working paper which when you reach a mile and you feel it is no longer useful you can amend it the way you want. 

It is also paradoxical now that we make fun of Obote’s pigeonhole Constitution but that Constitution lasted 29 years. This Constitution upon which we said we had carried out consultations on a large scale, and very expensively, has hardly lasted ten years. We started amending it before even five years had lapsed. Now it looks like we are also in the course of preparing another working document for the next stage, which will be subjected to another wide scale review. What we are doing really now is not amending a Constitution. We are rewriting a Constitution, patching it up with the old pieces and adding new ones. 

Be that as it may, I am puzzled about the memorandum on the front page in the Constitution (Amendment No.3) Bill, 2005. Maybe it is because I am not a legal person, but clause 1, paragraph (d) which reads, “the object of this Bill is to make various amendments to the Constitution arising out of (d), the Government White Paper on the Report of the Commission of Inquiry and Constitutional Review issued in September 2004”. We spent a long time on this White Paper and you will recall people even questioned whether Parliament should have wasted time debating it here. We debated that White Paper here; the committee suggested many amendments and many amendments were also suggested on the Floor. 

The only thing that the Government seem to have conceded to was the issue of land. If you look at this Bill, first of all, I would even think it should have been appropriate to mention that apart from the White Paper, mention should have been made of the fact that it was presented and debated by Parliament. Because it was not only the Government White Paper on the basis of which we should be now making this constitutional amendment. It should have taken into consideration the views expressed by the committee, the public and the House. So, I wonder whether it is practice that you do not take into account the input by Parliament in a process like this one. 

Mr Speaker, regrettably it is a very sad day for me. It is a sad day in the sense that I have been following the debate in the House and it looks like the entire object of amending the Constitution and particularly Article 105(2) of the Constitution (Amendment No.3) Bill, 2005 is the personality of President Museveni.

Considering also that we had said this is an omnibus Bill, which is going to be very difficult to deal with and we are not sure how we are going to vote at the Second Reading. If we have to vote on it as a whole, Mr Speaker, I am afraid. I will be obliged and forced to vote against the Second Reading and that is very sad. It has never happened but that is going to be the situation. I will vote against this motion.

The second sad situation is that this is the first time I go against my own principle. In the Constituent Assembly I was one of the few people who opposed limitation on terms. I opposed it very vigorously. I opposed limitation on terms, I opposed limitation on age –(Interjection)- you keep quiet. I opposed limitation on age; I opposed limitation on academic qualifications because I thought these were not constitutional matters. These are matters, which are supposed to be decided by parties and which are supposed to be decided by the voters as provided for in Article 1 of the Constitution. But the very people who were very vigorous, including the President himself in supporting term limits, are the ones now who are saying, “Remove it”.  It is very unfortunate. I am afraid. I would rather appreciate those whose principles are consistent. 

Can I be protected from this young lady here, hon. Tiperu, who seems to be debating with me? I think I am much older than her; she should be a little more respectful. Well, she is a very enthusiastic supporter of the Movement. She wants to come and close my mouth.

At this time I find myself supporting those who were in the Constituent Assembly and are still consistently supporting term limitations and oppose those unprincipled characters who feel they must change at any time they feel like. So, I am now opposing the motion to open up term limits, which I had supported in the Constituent Assembly. The following are the reasons I have:

One, I would like to support and appreciate those principled ladies and gentlemen who in the Constituent Assembly supported the term limitation.

The second reason, I had begun to appreciate the value of term limits as was then argued in the Constituent Assembly and by our new experts on history of Uganda who seem to think that history of Uganda only rests in their own mentality. I now disagree with them on that point and oppose opening of term limits. 

The third point on which –(Interruption)

MR LUBOWA: Mr Speaker, is it in order for hon. Okulo Epak to give the impression that he is the only one given the powers to change his mind and others should not change? Right now he is changing his mind by going against his conscience. The other time he said, “No to term limits”, but he is now agitating for term limits. If he can change, why can’t others change? Is he really in order?

THE SPEAKER: I think it is in order for a person to change but he has given a reason. He said although in the Constituent Assembly he was in favour of open term, he regrets it. He is going to give you the reasons why he is changing from that position and opposing Article 105(2). This is how he explained it. It is okay. Please, continue, but you only have two minutes.

DR OKULO EPAK: The honourable member should know that points of orders are moved basing on our Rules of Procedure, not on his opinion. I am opposing the opening of term limits like I opposed it in the Constituent Assembly because it was all related to personalities. Even at that time when we had this debate, this restriction was being put in order to safeguard against some imaginary personalities. At that time I said this Article was going to catch up with you sooner than later, and it has happened. Today we are opening up also in the interest of an individual. As a principle legislator I cannot make a law against an individual or a mortal personality. This is completely unprincipled that you should legislate in favour of an individual who is mortal. 

Fourthly, I oppose this because at that time I said you could only support open terms in the presence of Multi-party pluralism so that parties are able to present their candidates, present their manifestos and we compete competently. But as we speak now political space is not yet open and, therefore, I see no reason to support the opening up of term limits until political space is opened. 

I know the Rt hon. Prime Minister tried to say that this was going to happen but I am afraid that until it has happened, I am not going to take him at his word because I know next time he will say, “No, I never even said it”.

PROF. NSIBAMBI: Is the honourable member in order to insinuate that I deny what I say? 

THE SPEAKER: That you do what?

PROF. NSIBAMBI: That I deny what I say? He has said that next time the Rt hon. Prime Minister is going to deny that he said what he said. So the insinuation is terrible. Is he in order?

THE SPEAKER: Can you explain what you meant?

DR OKULO: Unfortunately, Mr Speaker, I never asserted that he would change his mind. I said he may change his mind. I thought that is very simple English. I have a lot of respect for my friend, the Rt hon. Prime Minister to make such a statement of that nature.

THE SPEAKER:  Conclude, please, time is over.

DR OKULO: Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Before you proceed, there is need to correct the record. From the contribution of hon. Dr Okulo Epak he said the pigeonhole Constitution lasted for 27 years. That is not correct. The 1967 Constitution did not last that long un-amended because in 1971 the 1967 Constitution was amended by the proclamation. Subsequently in 1979 the same Constitution, which had been amended by proclamation, was amended by another proclamation and also when there was a change, there was another proclamation. So these were amended by proclamations, without debate. I thought the record should be corrected to that effect.

3.00
MR HENRY OBBO (West Budama County North, Tororo): Mr Speaker, I thank you for this opportunity. I have about six points that I will cover but I will not take long on them given my arguments.

Let me begin with the regional tier. The principle of regional tier in this country is going to usher in law and order in a magnitude that we have never witnessed in this country before and we need law and order for development -(Interjections)- Mr Speaker, the microphone is on. I am not a technician to repair it. If the honourable member cannot hear, I do not repair microphones.

I was saying that I have six points and I am beginning with the regional tier. I had said the regional tier principle is a very good idea because it is going to usher in law and order. It will promote tranquility and we need this element for development. Where there is no peace we cannot develop and tranquility will not be promoted –(Interruption) 

MS ALASO: Mr Speaker, I am just wondering whether the honourable minister is not taking us back to our previous discussion on the regional tier. We are now looking at – I thought you could guide us on whether we are going back to the other Bill or not.

THE SPEAKER: Mr Minister, the issue of regional tier is in the Constitution (Amendment No.2) Bill, 2005 -(Laughter)- and the general debate on that one ended. We are about to start the Committee Stage on this is Constitution (Amendment No.3) Bill, 2005. 

MR OBBO: I thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Being a nationalist of this country and the regional tier being one of the interesting developments for the benefit of our people; I was carried into that matter so that I elucidate my point.  

Let me move on to the matter of opening up political space. Yes, it is a good idea, we need to do it, but when we do so we need to take a lot of care and this government had started this process long before and meetings with those interested in Multi-parties in this country had taken place. In the new era of opening up we believe that all those people who will be ascribing to different political philosophies will follow the principle of democracy. I am saying this because in earlier times when we had Multi-parties in this country, in some areas lives were lost and we have no accountability at all from those who were in power then.  

Let me move on now to citizenship. It is a very good idea that we provide facilities to those who are investing in this country if they so wish to acquire our citizenship. Just in the same way as our people who are abroad doing different types of work for the benefit of humanities in those areas are being facilitated by those countries where they are living now to acquire citizenship. In this particular regard, if some of our people are living in countries where they do not permit dual citizenship, then maybe we could authorize this country to start some kind of negotiations with them because the whole issue should be on a reciprocal basis.  

Some people have talked about the city of Kampala and they have got some ideas, which I want to supplement. It is said that the boundaries of Kampala will be demarcated at some appropriate time. My view is this: we should allow Kampala not to have fixed but flexible boundaries. Because if we thwart the growth of Kampala as a natural phenomenon of development, it may not expand in the distant future. Therefore, the idea of flexible boundaries would permit Kampala to expand as fast as the population –(Interruption) 

THE SPEAKER: Mr Minister, don’t you think they are talking about the political capital? There could be a political capital and a commercial capital.

MR OBBO: That is acceptable but we are talking about Kampala, politics and economics will come later.

THE SPEAKER: Order, order! 

MR OBBO: Another thing I want to say about Kampala is the need to redesign our streets. The streets of Kampala are not streets of international nomenclature. In regard to capital cities we need to address the matter of widening the streets of Kampala very urgently. We need to have double-carriageway in the middle of Kampala. We need to have road bridges, not the type of flyovers which you find at Nakawa, but flyovers which run parallel to existing roads constructed on the ground floor like the one designed in Cairo, Tokyo and other developed cities. In this way the congestion of our roads even the very early hours of mornings will be addressed.  

Heavy traffic in Kampala is worsened by the fact that we allow lorries, trailers and mini-buses to pass in the middle of Kampala city. I think once we accept the principle that Kampala be developed in the manner that I have suggested, heavy lorries should be debarred in the future from passing through the centre of Kampala. 

We need to standardize the heights of buildings, for example, Serena hotel has acquired the former Nile Hotel. Serena Hotel is expanding on the facilities that Nile Hotel was offering and buildings are going up. But to my surprise the buildings that are being finished are very low in height yet the place where Serena Hotel is putting up these structures is called a prime area within the city of this country. We need, therefore, to come out with the law that gives standardization of heights of buildings within the city area rather than allowing heights to be determined by individual proprietors. We need also to have greater involvement in the planning and in the running of this city. 

Let me suggest something about industries. We are talking of a pollution free city but when you move a few yards away from this building you will come by what is called First Street, Second Street through the Seventh Street and all these streets are covered with buildings that emit smoke into the air and we breathe carbon monoxide and all types of fumes into our lungs and that do inhibit the prospects of our good health. I suggest that Kampala city should be devoid of all industries and the existing industries should be relocated somewhere else.

Let me come to the question of term limits. It is unfortunate that an impression has been created that when we are debating term limits we have an individual in mind. I do not. I debate here on a matter of principle. Right from the beginning in 1995, unfortunately I was not in the Constituent Assembly, otherwise I would have told them that they were making mistakes in the way they discussing the principle of term limits -(Interruption)- yes, now I can tell you those of you who were in the Constituent Assembly that you made a mistake because. It looked like you were aiming at an individual and if now we are debating this issue around an individual; it is you who introduced the principle, those of you who were in the Constituent Assembly. 

The law of natural justice dictates like this: if you are making any new law, which might impeach on the interest of an individual, you make a proviso accepting that individual to be subjected to the new law that you are putting in place. This also happens when the Minister of Finance comes every year to announce his Budget proposals and where he touches on the improvement or the deterioration of the terms of service of a civil servant, then it is allowed to those existing civil servants to choose whether they will accept the new terms that are otherwise derogating their rights, interests or not.  

The same thing should have been applied when you were making this Article 105(2) to exempt the incumbent or those who would follow thereafter. That is what was done in the United States of America. This is why I say you made a mistake. Therefore, if you are arguing that the debate has been centred on an individual, I am saying that you are missing the point. I, therefore, support the idea of lifting the term limits and in any case since we are going into Multi-party politics, political parties will forward a candidate of its own choice so long as they believe that the candidate is going to be a hot character and will provide the best that this country needs of a leader.

Finally, Article 4 of the Constitution is talking about the promotion of public awareness of the Constitution. Yes, that is a good principle in this Article but I will add this. We have got the national anthem, other than the Constitution, we have got our national colours; we also have the coat of arms, how much has been done to bring these three important matters of the nation to public awareness? I would like to urge particularly since every Thursday there is a forum for giving public awareness to the public by various ministers, that we embrace these four issues to propagate and explain to our population their importance and the impact they have upon our citizenship as Ugandan nationals. I thank you.

3.15
MRS WINNIE MASIKO (Woman Representative, Rukungiri): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity to contribute to this important debate; a debate which I think is very crucial to our country and to the welfare of all the people of Uganda. I would like to thank the committee for the work they have done and the report they have produced. 

I will commence by defending the reasons we are amending this Constitution. On this Floor of Parliament I have listened to some members who have expressed their disappointment. They are saying that the amendment of the Constitution was not necessary. However, I would like to defend this Constitution and put it on record that it is very important that we amend this Constitution.  

Bearing in mind that there is globalisation taking place, the issue of dual citizenship is very pertinent. Bearing in mind the East African integration, the issue of talking about Swahili as another official language is very crucial at this time. 

There have been people clamouring for the return of the creation of the regional tier and still many of us want to go into a Multi-party system. These issues were not considered as we would have loved them to be in the Constituent Assembly. Therefore, when one is amending the Constitution, it is proper and fitting at this point in time. I think really that reason that we should not amend the Constitution should not be taken seriously.  

I would like to defend the Article, which provides that Swahili should become the second official language. It is very important now that as we go to the East African federation we use a language that can be used across the board, which everybody can easily pick and understand regardless of whether you have gone to school or not. I would like to support that.

I have consulted widely in my constituency and I want it clearly put on record that I am a believer of representing the people and consulting the people. However, many members here feel that when you are elected to a position of a Member of Parliament then you can as well go ahead and put up issues that are not necessarily a reflection of what the people of the constituency want. I depart from that reasoning and I would like to say that it is very important that we consult the people and indeed I have consulted them. It is clear that if you are a democrat and you believe in democracy, you should be a person who will respect the rule by the people. That is the rule of the majority. Democracy in Government is where the supreme authority is vested in the people so that they use it directly or indirectly. If you believe in democracy, it should be the people who should change the rules and structures of government.  

Therefore, there should be every reason for every Member of Parliament who respects democracy to follow what it entails. Fortunately, that is how it is and that is why it is very important when issues are discussed and maybe the majority win. That should be respected because that is what democracy is all about. Therefore, I would like to ask my colleagues, Members of Parliament, that when we come here and we vote on an issue, if you are on the losing end please accept as a democrat and respect that decision. That is the way we should live.  

I would to link this to an example where we have boxers in a ring. When they are boxing each other, they punch each other, sometimes hurt each other, but the moment a team wins, the losing team will come, shake hands and congratulate the winning team and they go ahead and continue to do other things thereafter. I would request the House that today as we debate, as we have different sides, let us agree that even at the end of the day, even if we do not take the same positions –(Interruption)

MR LUKYAMUZI: I am sorry to have to interrupt my colleague, but I am standing on a point of order with reference to our Constitution, Article 36. In accordance with the submission of the speaker holding the Floor, we have got an impression that everything depends on majorities. That is not so in accordance with Article 36 of the Constitution. Even the minority have a say in this decision-making and that say must be respected and it is respected constitutionally as I will read.

Article 36, states: “Minorities have a right to participate in decision making processes and their views and interests shall be taken into account in the making of national plans and programmes’ including plans of this kind we are discussing now.  So, is the honourable member holding the Floor in order to let us believe that everything must be based on majorities when minorities are constitutionally protected? What is she talking about?

THE SPEAKER: I do not know whether you are interpreting this Article or you are saying that decisions should be taken by minority? What this one is saying is that in reaching a decision, you take into account the views of the minority. In fact you may find that the views of the minority may succeed, but they have to be approved by the majority decision. So, she is in order. Proceed.

MRS MASIKO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for your wise ruling. I am not surprised that was from hon. Lukyamuzi –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Proceed.

MRS MASIKO: It is very important that as legislators we should actually refrain from making careless statements when we are on the Floor of Parliament because many times members stand up and say people are manipulated, people cannot think, people have limited brains. I would like to assure you that by the time a member comes here and the people elect him, you should know that he or she has the capacity to articulate issues and has the brains. So, let us respect each other. If you want me to take your line, convince me with issues that I can understand but the moment I am not convinced, respect my position.

I went to Church yesterday and many people were praying for the Tuesday when we shall take a decision on this matter. It is important that we know that. But one of the issues they are praying for is peace. That is from those who are wishing the country doom; those who think there is going to be war after Tuesday. I hope if they are here they have repented and know that everybody is against that. It is very important that we respect our country, it is very important that we take our country forward. However different we might be, Uganda belongs to all of us.

Mr Speaker, allow me to talk about the issue of life presidency. On this Floor of Parliament and in some documents that I have read, there is this notion that has been created, the life presidency notion. The life presidency notion to me is divisionary. The Articles are very clear, there is the age limit for any President. Apart from that, we are opening up to different parties to make sure that they bring members on board and that when these members have been brought on board; they also struggle to take up the leadership of this country. So it defeats my understanding when somebody says that somebody wants life presidency. How should we help our people in our constituencies to understand this? If parties have already given up hope and are already saying that they cannot rule the country because there is somebody who is going to be a life president, then what does that mean? Does that show that they have already given up? Does that show that we should tell our people not to waste time acquiring membership in parties? If you are going to use the life presidency notion to fight the lifting of term limits then you have already given up and there is no hope.  

Let us not confuse these issues. You might think that using the life presidency notion will help you, but then at the end of the day it will show people that you are not ready and that you are playing around. You are not being serious with the recruitment process. Therefore, on that issue let us not confuses the population, let us bring out the issues as they really are.  

Unlike what the newspapers said, I think it was yesterday, that some people are shunning away from debate, I would like to be on record that I have consulted my constituency and they have told me that they would like this clause changed. And, it should be lifted during this time when I am still here on the Floor of Parliament to articulate all the issues that concern it. Therefore, let nobody be deceived that anybody can manipulate us or that I can be manipulated or forced into doing something that I do not like. I have the full mandate of my constituency and I will use it. It is only after I am defeated that I will join those who will have defeated me and whatever position they take I am willing to take it because I am a democrat. So I would like to call upon members of this House to practice democracy as they talk about it. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER:  Thank you very much.  

3.29
DR JAMES NSABA BUTURO (Bufumbira County East, Kisoro): Mr Speaker, I want to thank you for giving me the opportunity to participate in this debate, which is of historical significance and has implications for this country. But first allow me to appreciate the work of the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs, particularly hon. Oulanyah and his colleagues for the wonderful work they have done that is actually guiding our debate this afternoon and in the previous days.

Sir, I would like to restrict my contribution to two issues. One is the lifting of the presidential term limits, and also UPDF representation in Parliament. I want to speak in support of lifting the presidential term limits. I have listened with great interest to arguments against that proposal, and I want to say that I am deeply appalled that given the changes this country has witnessed we still have people who talk like that yet some of them have been direct beneficiaries of the new democratic climate in the country. 

They are going around the country acting as politicians of doom and gloom in relation to what will happen come Tuesday and thereafter. They have perfected the art of threatening, talking about civil strife, military coups and so on. Should Parliament debate in its own wisdom to lift the presidential term limits? They have even dragged us to court. I do not know how many times government has been to court and this is part of the relentless effort on their part to slow down the tremendous changes the country is witnessing. They have even gone to the extent of urging development partners to cut aid. They are going around manufacturing stories that could harm investment opportunities as well as deter tourists to Uganda.  

I do not believe that this august House should accept that. Rather it should condemn this behaviour in the strongest terms possible. I urge honourable members to stand out and make it very clear that Uganda has changed, the language of force is no longer relevant, we are determined to move on and build on the achievements we have had so far -(Interruptions)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, when you raise clarification or information, it is up to the member holding the Floor to allow you. If he does not resume his seat that means he has rejected your information or clarification.  

MS ALASO: Mr Speaker, I am rising on a point of order.

THE SPEAKER: But you stood on something different now you changed it to order. You can now give the information you wanted to give.

MS ALASO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Initially I thought I would ask for it in a clarification. The minister is calling for the House to condemn “them” - without really mentioning names. If I have to be party to this condemnation, may I know the names of the people the honourable minister is calling the House to condemn?

DR NSABA BUTURO: Mr Speaker, I do not know whether the honourable member has been in this House since the debate started. If she had, in the last few days she would have known who the politicians of doom and gloom are.  

I would like to move on by encouraging and appealing to the House to reject in the strongest means possible those who want to take this country back to war. I believe that people who are beating the drums of war are speaking for no one else except themselves. But I should also add, as the English saying goes, that forewarned is forearmed. They have provided us with valuable information and I am sure that will be useful and handy when their threats do materialise.

It is not correct for some members to believe strongly in the opposite view and assume that even when they are fewer in number they are right and the rest of us are wrong. They will have to provide a definition of what democracy is. If democracy is about minority, then that is a new meaning that they will have to persuade us to adopt. I want to appeal to the honourable members that at the end of the day, whatever we do here we must know that we do it in the interest of our country. Yes, we must listen to you; we must listen to others who have different views from what we have but in the end it is a question of what the majority have decided and it will be honourable for members who are in the opposite camp to come along.  

What have been the arguments so far concerning this particular subject? I must say, as I briefly outline these arguments, that I respect their point of view but I should say that the reasons they have given are not particularly genuine or even attractive. One of the reasons they are giving is that the Constitution is too young; it is too early to be amended. Article 256 does not talk about when the Constitution should be amended. I would like to be helped by those who have this view to tell us when it is appropriate for this House to consider amending the Constitution?

They also say that His Excellency the President is going around the country drumming for support.  This is absolutely amazing; that some honourable members passionately believe that the reason the President is going around the country is to mobilise for support for the proposal to lift the presidential term limits. They go further to say that Members of Parliament are being bribed to support the proposal. Mr Speaker, I want to remind those who share this view that Members of Parliament who are promoters of the NRM cannot be bribed to support their own position. This must be understood correctly. I would rather, if I were to bribe, to bribe the hon. Member for Samia-Bugwe North, who is not here, and others who think like him. You do not bribe your own members, and I think this is simply a diversionary tactic designed to derail our focus.

The other point which I have seen coming through, is the consistent line that our own Parliament cannot be trusted. That the wisdom with which we handle this subject must be questioned by the very members of this House is something I find equally amazing. That the people of Uganda cannot be trusted; who should be trusted then, if it is not the Ugandans to decide the future that they want?

The other issue that came through is that the President said this would be his last term and so he should mean it. They also make reference to what is happening in Tanzania and other African countries that do have two terms. As I conclude I want to address specifically but briefly the position of those who are against this proposal. Article 1 of the Constitution clearly says that all power belongs to the people and that is power to do what? Among other things, to decide who should govern them and how they shall be governed. Those opposed hare said that the people of Uganda could not be trusted because they are easily manipulated, they do not understand. This is the greatest travesty of the wisdom that I know our people have that some of our colleagues have to demonstrate in this House.

It is common knowledge that Members of Parliament are among the highest paid in this country. That is made possible by the people whom they are denigrating; the people they are saying cannot decide and do not know what they want for their country. Mr Speaker, this is regrettable and a sad comment on the ability of this new breed of democrats to correctly appreciate the astuteness of the Ugandan taxpayers.  

I have mentioned, Article 258, which talks about amending the Constitution and the fact that it does not say after ten years or five years or whatever years before you should review the Constitution. My view is that Ugandans say that it is high time we amended certain parts of the Constitution and that is what we are doing this afternoon and the coming week.

Finally, the idea that the President is going around asking people to support this proposal or that Members of Parliament who belong to NRM/O have been bribed, is totally preposterous and I want to urge this House to reject this kind of thinking. I want to urge the honourable members to support the proposal to lift the presidential term limits. I also want to encourage the honourable members to support the representation in Parliament of the UPDF as a unique brand of governance that we want to see for our country. Thank you, Mr Speaker.  

THE SPEAKER: I had earlier recognised hon. Patrick Mwondha, and the engineer, but for special reasons please give preference to hon. Kibirige Sebunya first. He has a problem –(Interjections)- there is a problem, which I cannot reveal to you.

3.40
DR KIBIRIGE SEBUNYA (Kyadondo County North, Wakiso): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for this special consideration. I am aware of a number of persons that have expressed interest in becoming Presidents of this country and these are the persons who would benefit if we lifted the term limits. The persons that I have on my list are: hon. Odonga Otto, hon. Bagalana, hon. Aggrey Awori, hon. Mao, hon. Cecilia Ogwal, hon. Nsubuga Nsambu, hon. Lukyamuzi Ken, hon. Musumba, and so on. So if we lift the term limits, all these potential presidents of Uganda would definitely benefit. For some reason many of us have twisted the argument to say that it is only the incumbent President –(Interruption)

MR ATUBO: Thank you for giving way for your information. May I inform you that there are other people like his holiness Kony, who are fighting to become a president under the Ten Commandments? He is chopping people’s heads. So he will also benefit beyond the ten years. There is a leader of ADF who is also expressing interest; there are many rebels in the bush who want to be Presidents of this country, and they are also going to benefit from these ten years. Thank you.

DR KIBIRIGE: I thank you for that elaboration. So, there are many persons who will actually benefit if we extend the term limits from two to three, four or five. However, for some reason many of us have twisted this argument to refer only to President Museveni, I do not know why.  

MR KIKUNGWE: Thank you for giving way. I would like to inform you that every Ugandan, including yourself, is eligible to be elected President of this country today. It is only one person who does not qualify and that is President Museveni –(Applause)- and we are doing all we are doing for none other than President Museveni. 

DR KIBIRIGE: That is exactly what I said. Honourable members have twisted this argument to refer only to President Museveni because he is the incumbent. I support the motion of lifting term limits to benefit all those that have been mentioned. You claim that President Museveni will use the power of incumbency to manipulate the voters. Incumbency does not only refer to President Museveni; incumbency refers to all of us. I have not heard anybody saying in this House that they will not stand for the next election. I believe all of us are interested in standing for the next elections and shall use the power of incumbency to beat our opponents in the upcoming elections. Therefore, it is not only Museveni that will benefit from incumbency. Hon. Onzima will benefit from incumbency and I hope he will not –(Interruption)

DR NKUUHE: Thank you for giving way. Could you clarify as to whether you would use the power of incumbency to call the UPDF and the Police to order? Are you in position as an ordinary Member of Parliament to do so? 

Secondly, is it in the Constitution that the Member of Parliament should not stand for more than two terms?

DR KIBIRIGE: That exactly is the point. If Members of Parliament and local councils are not going to accept two term limits, why should we subject the President to only two term limits? If all of us would rather come back, and there are people in this House who have been ministers since the bush days –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: You have two minutes, please.

DR KIBIRIGE: Since the bush days and they are still ministers to date, I have reason to believe that hon. Otafiire must have been a minister in the bush and he is still a minister up to today.  He must, therefore, have been a minister for about almost 30 years and he is not about to say he is tired of being a minister. Why should anybody say, “Because President Museveni has been a President since 1986, he is possibly tired and unable to articulate issues, and he has lost a vision?” I do not see any logic in any argument by a Member of Parliament who will himself use incumbency to come back to this House, to deny the President another term. 

Finally, the CAOs get so much money from the central government and yet they are only subjected to local councils for disciplinary action. There is such a conflict of interest. Here is a CAO with all the money and a council of members who are always broke and easy to manipulate. The CAOs should be appointed, controlled and disciplined by the central government. With those very few words, may I go back to Mulago Hospital? (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: You can go.

3.50
MR PATRICK MWONDHA (Bukooli County North, Bugiri): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Before hon. Sebunya goes back to Mulago Hospital I would like to remind him that we are here precisely because the Constitution says that a person shall be President for only two terms. Nobody is saying it. It is the Constitution, and that is why we are here. He does not know that we are here because the Constitution says so. 

In 2001, while I was campaigning to come to this House I told the people of Bukooli North that they should give me their votes for one important reason: I knew as I know now that when the two term limits catch up with President Museveni he would want to have the Constitution amended. The only logical way for him to have it amended would be to open up political space for the Multi-party system. There was no better placed person to be in this House when we open up political space other than Patrick Mwondha, a veteran in political party politics. My people agreed with me. They are not surprised that this drama is ensuing, for they already knew it. 

While hon. Tumukunde the predecessor of hon. Oguti was going around saying, “Give Museveni this vote because it is his last term”, the people of Bukooli North had already been told that it would not be his last term. Some of you people do not know how to read people’s minds. I told those of you who were in the Constituent Assembly that if anybody needed the freedom of association and inter-play, there was no other in the country than President Museveni. He had belonged FRONASA, belonged to DP, and belonged to UPC. He was in –(Interruption)

MR BAKKABULINDI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am standing on a point of order. We are discussing an important issue on opening up of presidential term limits but hon. Mwondha is capitalising on the person of Mr Museveni. Is he in order to continue with this kind of debate? The person he is talking about is not in this House and is not part of us.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, for more than a hundred times I have told you about this issue. You should deal with the merits and demerits of the amendment. 

MR MWONDHA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. We have just received information on the Floor of this House that of all the 26 million Ugandans the only person prohibited by this Constitution from standing for President is President Museveni. Therefore, if we are talking about lifting the term limits, we are talking about him. (Laughter)

Mr Speaker –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Opening up the term limits does not force President Museveni to take up another term. The consequence of the amendment is to permit somebody who has been a President to stand as many times as he wishes. 

MR MWONDHA: I agree with you, Mr Speaker. The consequence of this amendment is to allow somebody who has been President to be able to stand.

THE SPEAKER: But it is not compelling.

MR MWONDHA: Yes. The other day, in fact I think the person who put it right was hon. Kutesa, who is unfortunately not in the House. The staff of the Observer newspaper interviewed him and asked him, “Do you think the President would stand again if the term limit was lifted?” He said, “Yes, the writing is on the wall. It is all over.” (Laughter) What hon. Kutesa forgot is that when you say the writing is on the wall, it is biblical. It is biblical to mean the end is near. (Laughter) I think that when he said that the writing was on the wall – Hon. Sam Kutesa thereupon entered the Chamber – somehow I knew he would surface. (Laughter). When you say the writing is on the wall especially in a biblical sense of Nabuchadnezer, you are saying the end is near. I hope he was truly saying that the end is near. (Laughter)

MR KIKUNGWE: There is a common saying that a woman who is about to quit marriage can never go for long term projects like planting a coffee plantation. (Laughter) This clearly paints the picture, which hon. Kutesa said that the writing is on the wall. There is no way President Museveni could be quitting and he goes ahead to undertake such long-term projects. (Laughter)

MR MWONDHA: Thank you very much for that information. The same hon. Kutesa just returned recently from a trip abroad ostensibly to clean the image of this government and that of President Museveni. We paid very expensively for this. What hon. Kutesa did not tell us is how they arrived at the price. Is it dependent on the dirt that exists or on the detergent that was to be used to clean the image? Why would we be cleaning image anyway, unless –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, let us discuss issues relevant to the debate. Ensure that you talk about Article 105(2). 

MR MWONDHA: Mr Speaker all these matters –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Our rules entreat us to discuss issues relevant to the debate. Please.

MR MWONDHA: Mr Speaker all these matters are inter-related. Politics is such a functional thing. It is difficult to discuss them in isolation. However, I would like to warn my colleagues in this House and they should take it seriously –(Laughter)- the Basoga have a saying “kyesungile ti kyile” meaning that what you expect may never happen. The chicken celebrated that the ants would come so that they get food. By the time the ants came out the chicken had already retired to their houses for the night and they never ate the ants. 

The casualty rate in this House is going to be so high if you do not stand up as leaders of this country. The people are watching endorsing the building of a monarchy. You should not think that we shall be happy to have a monarchy in Uganda when we are not happy to have one in Ankole. 

Let me talk about dual citizenship. I have received a number of messages from abroad from Ugandans in the Diaspora and they are saying we should go slow on dual citizenship. They are not very excited about it because they think it will dilute their citizenship. They wonder why we should want to turn them into another series of Myindi-Mzungu. Myindi- Mzungu are the people who were dismissed from here by Amin because they had two citizenships. They are saying, “If it is for the sake of the children who are being born in those countries, when they are 21 they can decide where they want to belong.” I support the committee’s suggestion of putting off this thing of dual citizenship.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member let us understand this. When the amendment is done, will anybody be forced to take up dual citizenship? It is optional.

MR MWONDHA: But once the amendment is made and there is that option, they think it reflects directly on their original citizenship. These are messages –[Hon. Members: “Where are the messages?”]- I can bring them to the Table. I have received several of these messages. My own uncle has lived in the United States for the last 40 years, he is still adamant about having citizenship of America. Protect me from hon. Kutesa.

THE SPEAKER: You are protected but you have run out of time. I give you one minute to wind up.

MR MWONDHA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Let me wind up on the issue of the chief administrative officers. I agree with the committee that they should be given a prospective service. This will give them prospects of getting promotions, because right now they are doomed to holding only one office. They have no promotion and no possibility of transfer. They should belong to the civil service. With these few words, I urge my colleagues to vote wisely tomorrow. 

4.05
MR PATRICK AMURIAT (Kumi County, Kumi): Mr Speaker, I thank you. This country has had a short post-independent history but this history has been eventful. Constitutions have been written, abrogated, suspended and overthrown. Today we deliberate on the amendment of the Constitution only written in 1995. I hope the process we are going through does not leave us a divided country. I also hope that the Constitution we are amending today will not have a name tagged to it. I would like to remind my honourable colleagues that the 304 of us who sit in this House constitute a minor percentage. In fact in relation to the 26 million people of this country, we are only 0.012 percent. 

I want to register my disappointment at the manner in which this Constitution Amendment Bill has been handled. Whereas we came to this House as individuals, today I see political groups sitting for endless hours deliberating on Constitution amendment with the hope of voting as a group. As a result, colleagues, Members of Parliament, have confronted many of us. They say, “You are just merely wasting time, we have already taken a decision.” We should not debate this amendment with a selfish attitude. I will limit my contribution to just a few clauses of this Bill.

The amendment of Article 105(2) proposes the lifting of presidential term limits. I oppose this proposal and would like to make the following observations:

The Members of the Constitution Assembly had their inherent fears at the back of their minds when they proposed limiting presidential terms. This is on the Hansard and can be referred to. They had their strong reasons. 

Articles of the Constitution require the test of time. This particular Article, as I have ever said on the Floor of this House, has not been tested. I feel that we are in a hurry to amend an Article that has not been tried. This Article is still in the cooking pot and yet we are about to begin serving and eating the dish, which has not been served for us.

I also want to observe that the Office of the President is a very powerful one. A president is the head of state, head of government and the fountain of honour. A President has the prerogative of mercy, actually if you were sentenced to death it is only the President who could save you from the gallows. We need to take this matter seriously. 

I have heard arguments on the Floor of this House to the effect that the President can be equated to a Member of Parliament. I would like to dismiss such arguments in the strongest possible terms. The proponents of term limits have stood on the Floor of the House to say that there is a possibility that a leader may still be good and wanted by the majority of Ugandans. They have also argued that the exercise of the running of government can be checked by regular and fair elections. Others have also argued that age limits are a reality in the Constitution as enshrined under Article 105 and that there is a clear separation of power between the Judiciary, the Legislature and the Executive. I have this to say to those arguments.

As far as strong leaders are concerned, I have heard people talking about only one person having a vision for this country. I am glad that the Vice-President as reported in the Saturday Monitor newspaper now makes us believe that we after all could have more than one person in this country with a vision to run this country. So, leaders will come and go. It is wrong for us to rely on specific leaders to run this country; we shall be holding the country at ransom. I am sure there are many capable ladies and gentlemen in this House, including you, who could easily become presidents and run this country effectively. 

On regular and fair elections, I am yet to know of elections that have been absolutely free. Yes, it is possible to have regular elections like is the case in our country we have elections every five years, but for us to have fair elections, I think for a country like Uganda is beyond the ordinary.  This I am saying with all the confidence because as all of us are aware election rigging does not take place on the same day of elections alone.  Election rigging is a process and I would like to be challenged on this –(Interruption)

MR ERESU: My brother hon. Amuriat is putting a case that the question of free and fair elections in Uganda is not possible. Hon. Amuriat has been elected to this House and it was through an electoral process, which was conducted by the Electoral Commission. Can he clarify to us, given that he was elected to this House, whether he unfairly came to this House since the elections are not free and fair?

MR AMURIAT: Mr Speaker, in mathematics there is what we call confidence limits –(Interjection)- statistics is a branch of mathematics for your information, in mathematics as well there are elements of errors and failures. Therefore, I would like to stand by what I said that there are no elections that can be 100 percent fair anywhere in the world. I want hon. John Eresu to educate me on where on this planet earth fair elections have ever been held.

In 1980 President Museveni while addressing an electoral rally in Soroti Town told the people of Soroti that he would not accept the outcome of a rigged election, and that if it did occur that the elections were rigged he would actually go to the bush. He was dismissed as a joker; he was told he did not have the capacity to do that. Today I hear people talking of threats; there are members in this House who are threatening the others. I am telling you we draw this from our history. Indeed President Museveni went to the bush with a few others – (Interruption)

MR MAFABI: In 1980 when the President stood he lost all the elections, including Member of Parliament, to hon. Sam Kutesa.

MR AMURIAT: Well, it is a known fact that hon. Kutesa Sam trounced the President. 

Before we talk about constitutional amendments and elections and while we think about amending this particular Article of the Constitution, we need to be mindful of the standing of our Electoral Commission. We cannot have a fair Electoral Commission unless we have all the ingredients necessary to make this body a fair body, including having Multi-party representation on the Commission. We cannot think about limiting the terms through elections unless it is possible for us to create tribunals to fight electoral malpractices, and unless it is also possible for us to regulate spending during campaigns.  

There has been an argument about the age being between 35 and 75 for Presidents. This is not written in stone, it is not an entrenched provision of the Constitution. At least I have consulted and I know it is not entrenched; it could be changed. Somebody might shift goalposts once she or he sees he or she is getting to the age of 75. This happened in Malawi where the late Kamuzu Banda even while senile and declared almost clinically dead had the peasants drumming around saying, “Yes, this is engwasi, our powerful man, the lion of Malawi”. This is not what we want in our country.

Clear separation of powers between the Executive and the legislature; once we have a powerful president it is possible to do anything with the legislature. It is possible to corrupt the legislature, give them a few dollars; it is possible to intimidate the legislature by changing the Rules of Procedure of the House. It is possible to intimidate them by having the deputy chairman of the ruling party sitting right up there watching what the legislature is doing and who is voting how. Mr Speaker, I would like to make a passionate appeal. There is beauty in a president leaving the stage while he or she is still liked. This beauty is evident in South Africa. Nelson Mandela, the father of the nation, having spent 27 years in prison walked out to freedom and got elected for a four-year term after which he said, “I am done, let the next generation take over”.  Today he is highly respected. 

I want to say each of us can be able to serve our country not in the capacities that we hold today. President Museveni could be out of power but continue to be a man of influence in the decisions that are taken in this country. It is happening in South Africa. I took a ride a few years ago in Johannesburg and I engaged the chauffeur in a discussion. He told me something significant. He said in South African Nelson Mandela still remains an icon; he still remains a very powerful person. I would like to pray that President Museveni today declares it, and I have said this before, whether he intends to take another term in office. I am sure that if he did that all the arguments peddled in this House would be nullified.  

It is my conviction that we are setting out to amend this Constitution looking at only Article 105(2) and as has already been said, the only beneficiary is none other than President Museveni. President Museveni should spare this nation. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

4.20
MAJ. BRIGHT RWAMIRAMA (Isingiro County North, Mbarara): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The current debate should be done considering the regionally volatile environment and the history of this country. We should consider and promote national interests whenever we debate the Constitution Amendment. It goes beyond particular parties, religions and tribes because we are not making a Constitution for parties, religions or even tribes. 

When we were debating the White Paper something intrigued me. I wish to share it with members by quoting one of the few good pieces the committee came up with, on page 3 of the White Paper report. The committee said that, “In one’s lifetime, one could change his party affiliation or even leadership. However, it is unusual and unlikely that one would change his nationality or citizenship. We, therefore, resolved that our supreme guiding star, which is like the true North of a magnet, would be the enduring interest of Ugandans.”  

Three important things are in the process of happening and they need us to build consensus, to be mature leaders so that we lay a good foundation for this country. Regional integration is at hand. We have political transition and we have pending change of presidency because of Article 105(2) of the Constitution.

In the interest of time let me restrict my debate to political transition and Article 105(2). For purposes of my presentation I will not isolate the character of Yoweri Kaguta Museveni from the political transition. His role in the revolution and his dominant character in the democratisation process of this country cannot be ignored. It has been so dominant that even those who are in the queue are not in a hurry to get there. The situation we are in needs a lot of careful and mature internalisation of the situation. Any mistake could create more shock than the country can absorb.

Article 105(2) of the Constitution puts restrictions on the services of a character that has the capacity to put people together, as he has done. I would compare leadership with playing football or any other game where injuring each other is inevitable. However, people always have the spirit of the game and they let these injuries pass. In the same way, we should have the spirit of Uganda. It is because of all the above that, I Rwamirama, will vote against a restrictive Article. 

It is also very important that we build consensus. We should also listen to the voices of those who want to retain the term limits because they are afraid of a likely bad scenario happening. In proposing how we should take care of their interests, I want to use the analogy of our roads here in Uganda. There are now 22 humps from here to Mbarara and these are intended to reduce the speed. This is not to say that there are no road signs for speed limit. They exist but people have been driving very fast and this is because we have not recruited policemen to man our roads. Therefore, if we are to build consensus, let us put in a clause for a revisit on this Article in future, may be after ten years.

I would also like to comment on the elections. I support holding Presidential and Members of Parliament’s elections. I am, however, not comfortable with the election of LC V officials on the same day. One, we shall have a crowded and confusing membership. Secondly, once the Chairman, LC V has been elected he will most likely influence the elections of his council. So, let him be voted for at the same time as his council, the Members of Parliament and the President.

I will also comment on the issue of national language. It is very shameful that sometimes when we go for fundraisings or any other functions in our honourable colleagues’ constituencies in different parts of the country we need interpreters in our own country. We shall soon go for regional integration; we should go by what is happening around us. Therefore, I suggest that we take on Swahili.

Finally, I want to urge colleagues that we approach the Constitution amendment with one spirit. We must provide for our entry just as our exit. It is against this background that I support the lifting of term limits. Thank you very much.  

4.29
MS ALICE ALASO (Woman Representative, Soroti): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I want to start by conveying to you the greetings from the AMANI Chapter of the Parliament of the Democratic Republic of Congo, who asked us to support them in their quest for peace and security. We were there to launch the DRC AMANI Chapter; that is why I was not in the House. I hope that helps my colleague, hon. Nsaba Buturo, to know the reason for the gaps I have in this debate.

I want to start by commenting on the intention to lift the term limits. To me the intention looks like an admission of so many things, which all along we said we were working to resolve. My understanding of the Constitution is that it is an institutional framework, which should guide us. I, therefore, think that by coming up with such a massive intention, particularly on Article 105, we are undoing the intention the Constitution had when they created a framework under which the presidency would be regulated.

I find it difficult to support the proposal to lift the term limits. My earlier understanding should have been that all these 20 years the Movement has been in charge of this country, the Government should have worked hard to ensure that institutions and the constitutional framework are strengthened, rather than wait for a time like this and have individuals emphasised rather than institutions emphasised. It is an admission that we have failed to develop the framework for the institution of the presidency to the extent that we still think it should just revolve around one person.

The other thing that I find as a very bad admission by intending to lift the term limits is that the country has admitted loss of memory. Way back in 1979, as a little child I asked my mother, “What is that sound I hear?” She said, “There is a team of liberators that has come to fight a dictator.” The preamble of this Constitution talks about our history. We are behaving as if we do not have a history to refer to, a history that was marred by bloodshed, coups and all sorts of uncertainty to the extent that all of a sudden as legislators we are in a situation where we are pretending that all is well. We are admitting loss of our memory.

I have heard it emphasised here that a party could choose leader from amongst themselves. Mr Speaker, that is not what it is for a nation. We cannot subject the whole nation to a party decision. I find it difficult to buy that line of thinking. A nation is not a supermarket. I would rather that we subject the parties to the interests of the nation, than the way round. Therefore, we should keep the term limits than simply amend because parties say they will be the ones to decide whom they want to have as their party presidents or party candidates.

I want to appeal - because this is probably towards the last minute of this whole debate - to our conscience because I know that in this House there is still some kind of conscience. We should vote for a conscience that looks towards the future of this country. There is a generation of people like me who only know that life is about bloodshed, about fighting, about strife in as far as the presidency is concerned. I am appealing to those who lived through this and have been part of this process to help the younger generation see peace and a predictable future. Where we are heading with this amendment is not very predictable. 

I do not buy hon. Nsaba Buturo’s idea of condemning people who are cautioning us about the possible consequences of this amendment. We should listen to caution. If people tell you, “These are the likely outcomes”, do not just condemn them. I have heard the way they have referred to politicians. That is a voice of caution. That is a voice of conscience and I hope that in this House we still have conscience and sensitivity to the future. We should learn from what has happened in our history.

The second thing I want to comment on derives from a procedural concern that I raised some time back. These issues, including one that concerned the Office of the Speaker, were not considered by the committee. I went to the committee meeting and unfortunately that day I was not able to get audience, yet the following morning I left for a Parliamentary assignment to Gulu. I have an intention to move an amendment to do with the Office of the Speaker, Article 82(3). I will introduce an amendment to the effect that in a Multi-party arrangement, to enhance impartiality, the Speaker should be required to forfeit his or her Office as a Member of Parliament. 

This is because it is a practice for most of the Commonwealth countries; and I also know it is a practice in the East African region. All this is mainly because it enhances impartiality in a Multi-party kind of Parliament. In the setting where we have been operating, Mr Speaker, it is very easy because all of us have been in the all-inclusive broad-based Movement system. However, in a Multi-party arrangement, I propose that we consider my suggestion. 

Finally, because of the fears some of us expressed to the omnibus Bill, we still find this present Bill omnibus in a way. There are good things that we would like to support. Yet I would not like to be associated with many of the issues. I want it to be clear so that it is on record. I will get up tomorrow to oppose this mainly because when I prioritise the proposals, my opposition is going to be towards the lifting of term limits –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: When you say omnibus, is it when two Articles are wrapped together, is it when they are three, is it when they are ten or you think that each Article should attract a separate Bill? In any case, the court has ruled on that. You should expound on this omnibus. When does a Bill become an omnibus one?

MS ALASO: I am just trying to bring out my feelings on this so that when I get up tomorrow after you put the question, I will definitely oppose it. I would like it to be known that I am not opposing the Article to do with CAOs or even dual citizenship but because it is put together with an Article that does not attract my support I will be able to oppose it. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Therefore, you are saying each Article should attract a separate Bill so that when you consent to it you are consenting to that Article? So, do you suggest that if we have 20 Articles we bring 20 Bills to amend the Constitution?

MR OULANYAH: Mr Speaker, I understand the concern of the honourable member differently. The point she is raising is, if the vote is taken tomorrow, will it restrict her if she wanted to separate her vote for example against the third term? May I inform her that the vote that is going to be taken tomorrow is a vote on the principles of the Bill, which applies to all Bills that come to this House. The specific vote that you are talking about is the vote that will come at the Committee Stage when clause 37 is called to stand part of the Bill and you will be casting your vote against it.

MS ALASO: I had actually wound up but owing to clarification from the chairman I forced to ask, what if I really do not want the whole principle of Article 105 –(Interjection)- Mr Speaker protect me from hon. Kabakumba. She is really giving me a hard time here. I am trying to get direction from the chairperson –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: What you need to do if you are against Article 105(2) is to market your principle basing on why you are for it or against it. When you market it, you must get necessary support from the majority during the Committee Stage. When you get the majority at the Committee Stage and it is rejected, it will never receive a seat in the Bill and, therefore, you succeed. What you need is a majority, not two-thirds. Although, you will agree that administratively we would try to have two-thirds, but it is not a requirement. However, once you succeed that is okay. When we go to Committee Stage and get majority of the people, I tell them that this is not good. You vote and when I put the question for it to stand part of the Bill, you get the majority then you have succeeded. That is the only way you can have it done. Have you finished your submission?

MS ALASO: Yes, Mr Speaker.

4.43
MS BEATRICE RWAKIMARI (Woman Representative, Ntugamo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for a well thought and balanced report. I would like to appreciate and support all the proposed Constitution amendments of dual citizenship, acquisition of special status for Kampala City and most important, the removal of the presidential term limits on Article 105(2). 

I have been listening carefully to the arguments advanced by the proponents of the retention of the presidential term limits. I would like to say that they are lacking and not convincing at all. I have found their arguments very speculative and loaded with pessimism. For example, they associate the removal of presidential term limits with dictatorship, war, chaos and all sorts of things. I would like to quote from Sir Winston Churchill who said, “A pessimist sees difficulty in every opportunity.” while we the supporters of the removal of the presidential term limits are regarded as optimists. Optimists, according to Sir Winston Churchill, see opportunity in every difficulty.  

I will not buy the idea of the proponents of the removal of term limits. For example, we all know that during Amin and Obote’s time this country passed through the worst dictatorship. When Ugandans could not longer stand this dictatorship they were removed them. Therefore, if the term limits are open and there are dictators, I am sure Ugandans will be in position to use all available means, especially the ballot, to remove them. The people of Uganda should be given an opportunity to choose their leaders. If a leader has been very good, like our President has been, I do not see any reason why Ugandans should be denied an opportunity of supporting such leaders for the good of the country. 

Secondly, they have been arguing that if we remove term limits this country will go to war. I find this argument myopic and pessimistic as I have already mentioned. If anything, the removal of presidential term limits is one way of maintaining and ensuring a good leader who will be committed to serving this country. We all know that the Southeast Asia Tiger countries were able to develop and transform their backward economies to modern economies because their leaders were able to rule uninterrupted by term limits. That is why these countries have been able to develop. 

In Uganda we all know that of all the leaders who have ruled this country Mr Museveni has been President longest and still popular with the people. That is why I am still wondering why some people do not want to give him a chance, to give Ugandans an opportunity to maintain such a good leader of their choice who has brought this country from the ruins and pitfalls of the 1980s to the present prosperity the country is enjoying.

Finally, I would like my colleagues to respect the principle of lifting residential term limits without donning it on the incumbent President. We should look at the merits of opening presidential term limits. Let us look at the merits of the principle, appreciate them and support it so that we can maintain good leaders for sustainable political stability and social economic development of our country. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

4.50 
MR JOHN NASASIRA (Kazo County, Mbarara): Thank you very much, Mr speaker. Let me join my colleagues in thanking the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs for their report on this Constitutional (Amendment No.3) Bill, 2005.

I was honoured by the people of Kazo who elected me to be their delegate to the Constituent Assembly to debate on all these Articles in the Constitution. This took over a year. I am, therefore, happy that I am participating in the amendment exercise. I am, therefore, one of those members who proudly brought the Constitution into existence. In their wisdom these included chapter No.18 and specifically Article 258, which is very important. I wish to quote this Article for emphasis; “Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, Parliament may amend by addition, variation or repeal any provisions of this Constitution in accordance with the procedure laid down in this Chapter.”

The second clause of Article 258 is, “This Constitution shall not be amended except by an Act of Parliament -
(a)	The sole purpose of which is to amend this Constitution; and
(b)	The Act has been passed in accordance with this Chapter.”

The duty to amend the Constitution is assigned to this Parliament. Moreover, by rising with your permission to contribute I am reporting for that duty aware of the history of this country especially post-independence Uganda. I am reporting for that duty remembering what we went through in the Constituent Assembly. I am reporting for that duty fully aware of the stage that the country has reached and the struggle to develop into a strong state and forge a nation in this modern world. I am reporting for this duty with full knowledge of the people of Kazo whom I represent. 

Finally, I am reporting for that duty without fear or favour to anyone because as we stated in 1995, we declared that this Constitution we have will be our shield and guide. Because of limited time, I would like to talk about only four issues - three of them very fast - and perhaps I will spend a bit of time on one issue. 

I support that we grant Kampala City a special status of the capital of Uganda. I support this strongly because we need a national capital at an arms-length from petty, local politicking. We need a city that is well organized and managed. We need a city that will be a beacon of our pride and honour for whoever comes to our country. I am, therefore, looking forward to the passing of this amendment to establish its capital. In future we need a law to determine the structure and the way the city will be managed. 

I support giving the IGG all the powers required to deal with corruption and abuse of office. I, therefore, support the powers as described in this Bill and the Leadership Code Tribunal. I want to appeal to colleagues to put the Leadership Code Tribunal in our Constitution so that we can move expeditiously and deal with any abuse of office in future.

I would now like to address myself to Article 105(2). The object of this Bill and the committee as described in their report is to seek to replace Article 105 in order to provide for indefinite eligibility for persons vying to hold the Office of the President. I support this Bill.

One day I visited a friend of mine and in his sitting room was a framed writing, which said, “In this house, I am the boss and I have my wife’s permission to say so”.  I support this object of the Bill as an individual and I have the permission of the peoples of Kazo to say so. Let me repeat once again, that the object of this Bill is to seek to replace Article 105 in order to provide an indefinite eligibility for persons vying to hold the office of the President.  

As you recall, Article 2 of our Constitution gives the qualification of a President.  Apart from being a citizen and having the qualifications to be a Member of Parliament, it says you are eligible to stand for presidency from the age of 35 to the age of 75.  That actually gives 40 years of eligibility to vie for the post.  You can vie for the post at 35, and you fail; you vie for it at 40, at 45, and 50. Maybe after vying for it for about four times or five times, you might eventually be elected, when you are 60.  This amendment is giving you that range of chances to vie. 

The amendment is not about staying in power, it is about vying and people have mixed the two.  This amendment is giving people the right to vie for that post any time within the restriction of Article 102.  But unfortunately, the anti-indefinite eligibility of vying for the office, which the so-called anti-third term are arguing for, in my assessment, is a narrow and personalised platform.  Let me look at the arguments. 

 The first argument is that in Africa, there should be a limited term according to the new order of African democracy. They quote countries like Kenya, Tanzania, Zambia, and Malawi. Once in a while, they also quote South Africa because of President Mandela.  But why talk about the current?  Why do we not look at the past, so that we can match ourselves together:  Uganda, Kenya, and Tanzania?  

In Kenya, from 1963, at Independence to 2001, a period of 39 years there were Presidents; President Kenyatta was there for 15 years. He passed away peacefully in his sleep while he was President. His twelve-year Vice President, President Moi took over and led the country for 24 years.  And that is the example you are quoting.  

In Tanzania, President Julius Nyerere was in charge of that country from 1961 to 1985 a period of 24 years.  President Kaunda of Zambia ruled from 1964 to 1992, which add to 28 years. President Banda of Malawi, the recent country you are quoting as limited to two terms, ruled from 1963 to 2002- 30 years in power.  

Anyway, it would be wrong and unfair to bring in our old African Statesman, Mandela.  President Mandela served his term of 27 years in prison. He got out at the age of 74 and the South Africans, in his honour, elected him as their President and at 79, four years past the limit in our Constitution, he handed over power. (Mr Lukyamuzi rose_) Let me build my case, hon. Lukyamuzi.

So, I think we better leave President Mandela alone, he has served his country and he is still serving Africa, but let us not use him as an example.  If we might go further to the countries you admire; in Singapore, Prince Lee Kwan Yu, was elected Prime Minister in 1959 and handed over power in 1990, after 31 years, and became a minister. And in Malaysia, the country you go to and come back here full of admiration; you want to be like Mahatir who handed over recently; he was a Prime Minister of that country for 23 years.  How does Uganda compare between 1962 and 1985?  23 years, eight Presidents. If it were a question of changing Presidents in order to be stable, Uganda would be a South Korea in the world now. (Applause)  

What is the other argument of the anti eligibility to vie for office?  That the current President has been in power for 20 years and if this amendment is made, it may give him an opportunity to stand.  But let me ask: Why should he not have eligibility to stand, to vie for the office?   It is not an automatic case that as long as we amend, it is automatic that the current President becomes a President.  He has to vie for that office and vying does not mean winning. 

I enjoy it when some people stand here and say; that this Article, qualifies all Ugandans to stand as President, but disqualifies only Museveni.  Surely, is that fair?  Why should there be one individual in the whole of Uganda to be constitutionally discriminated against?  One individual, out of the millions who qualify- Why?   You give me a good reason.  And that is why, when it is removed and he has –(Interruption) 

MR ONZIMA:  I thank the hon. Minister for giving way.  He is asking why the Constitution should discriminate against one person in the name of President Yoweri Museveni.  Fortunately enough, he told this House that he was in the CA.  So, he was part of the decision to discriminate against Museveni.  So, could he tell us why he actually stood on the Floor of wherever they were to decide that that Article should stand as it is?  So, the question goes back to him.  Tell us now.

THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Minister, you have exhausted your time; you would rather wind up now.

MR NASASIRA:  Sorry, Mr. Speaker.  I will answer my colleague from Maracha by only one answer.  I started by quoting Article 258; how the Constitution is amended and when it is amended.  They did not say, amend this Article on such a day, and amend the other Article the other year.  You go back and read Article 258.
 
Mr. Speaker, there was also arguments that there are many people who can be Presidents.  That is okay.  But what amazes me is that those who argue for many people, call for a Press Conference one month after campaigning and declare that the G6- the six Parties are going to front one presidential candidate. Where then are all these viable presidential candidates going?

Finally, there are some anti eligibility people, the so called “anti third-term”, preaching and predicting chaos and turmoil.  If I ask, who is going to cause this chaos and turmoil? We are here debating; and voting in a peaceful environment. After, we shall go to the field and hold elections. Who then is planning chaos and turmoil?  

Mr Speaker, I am worried about those who are preaching doom, because recently, people have started threatening Members of Parliament, after failing to convince them. I have here an email, which I would like to read. I ask for an extra minute to read it. It was written to one Member of Parliament, and because of time I will only read a few sections. It says: “Since you are the first one on the list of all MP’s who are supporting this madness of ripping our dear Constitution, you are going to be our first target. We have resolved to hit you first as soon as you have accomplished the treasonable action of Parliament and no amount of protection will save you.  We shall make sure that your elimination is as painful, slow as possible. Tell all your friends who support this crazy project to expect the same treatment.

The only way you can save your neck from this execution is to call a press conference within one week of this note to denounce the efforts that “M” is making to amend the Constitution, to make himself life President.” 

Mr Speaker, the culture of the Movement since 1986 has been to debate, consult, hold conferences, vote and select its leaders.  I take this e-mail seriously; it is from “Yet-to-care@ yet care.yahoo.com”; and I know “.com” e-mails are difficult to trace although it is possible. We should not introduce terrorism in our politics and I wish to lay this paper on the Table.

As I conclude, Mr Speaker, we are going into a pluralistic arrangement and people must switch their thinking from political organisations to competitive political organisations. And I support my colleague, hon. Okulo Epak, who said that if he was sure that we were going to open up, he would seen no problem of lifting presidential term limits.  

I appeal to those who believe in pluralism, to go and build their political organisation and compete for political power in this country without pointing at individuals.  Mr Speaker, I will vote and support the campaign for a “yes” vote to open up the political space.

MR HOOD KATURAMU (Representative of Persons with Disability): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity to contribute to this important debate. In the same vein, I thank the committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs for bringing out these important issues for us to debate. I have listened carefully to many of my colleagues who have made their submissions both for and against and what I have concluded is that this debate requires sobriety in order to give our nation a promising future as far as governance is concerned.  

Ugandans have experienced governance through ordinances, constitutions, decrees, etc, but what Ugandans require is to have a peaceful country whereby they can do their duties without being intimidated or harassed.  Mr Speaker, because of time, I am going to give my comments on four issues: 

(1) I support the position of the Committee that Presidential, Parliamentary and Local Council V elections be held on the same day.  One of the reasons, is that Uganda as a poor developing country, could save a lot of money by holding these elections on one day.  Therefore, the position of the committee is cost effective.

(ii) I support the holding of these elections on the same day because there has been voter fatigue in this country.  We have spent a lot of time in elections and campaigns at the expense of spending other productive activities to better our economic status as a nation.

(iii) I believe that holding these elections on the same day would eliminate some candidates’ mentality that they should be helped by the authority, particularly by the President-elect after he has been voted in, then they think that he will come and beat drums for them to pass elections. This is one of the fairest grounds that this Bill is going to bring.  

Mr Speaker, I want to comment also about the appointment of Chief Administrative Officers. Decentralisation has been a new creation in this country and the results that it has brought this nation are undoubted.  What puzzles me is that we Ugandans and Africans in general are not normally proud of what we initiate ourselves; we are always praising systems nurtured by others and particularly by foreigners.  

I want honourable members in this House to go and look where accountability and transparency have been practiced and see the achievements of decentralisation in those districts. Some of them are like Wakiso district, Kyenjojo District, Ntungamo District, Bushenyi District - the list is endless.  

Therefore, the question of the appointment of the CAO as the accounting officer- this is the view in which we support the committee because our past experience has shown that the Chief Administrative Officers could not work independently; they have been working under fear, favouritism, and intimidation because the appointing authority have been the districts. Therefore, I support this amendment.  

Mr Speaker, I support giving Kampala City a special status.  I believe that hon. Members of Parliament in this House have had the opportunity to visit many capitals, those surrounding us and beyond.  When you return to our city, you wonder what happened to us.  Kampala, with the increased population, which is above one million and inadequate drainage and sewerage system, with chronic traffic congestions from morning to evening; I think this amendment has been long overdue.  

Mr Speaker, any urban authority must plan for its residents, but it must also have a hand in the ownership of the land for which it plans.  I wish to report to this House that the present land tenure system that is prevalent in this City is not conducive for City development.  I therefore support the Government to give Kampala City Council a special status, first by empowering it to have a workable land tenure system on which it will base its plan.

Secondly, Kampala City Council has not had a wide range of taxation systems, which is also relevant to the country; KCC should not be the exception.  The graduated tax, which has been one of the revenues that Kampala City Council has been generating, is already scrapped. What Government has to do, therefore, is to ensure that avenues to generate revenue to improve our city are created and guaranteed; service delivery will remain inadequate so long as there is no empowerment.  I am talking about finance. Therefore, I believe that Kampala City Council with, the support of Government, will go a long way to improve services and become a place worth our pride, as capital cities in other countries.

Mr Speaker, my last contribution is on Article 105(2).  I am entirely bent because I have heard some contributions from this House that are inimical to the development and promotion of constitutional governance.  

I read in the Papers that one of the members of this Parliament, who opposes the lifting of presidential term limits declared to go to all European capitals to present a list of Members of Parliament of Uganda who are in support of opening up. I asked a question that should I conclude that in this House there is no longer a dichotomy between Members of Parliament who want to go to the people of Uganda and seek their mandate to elect a President and those who want to go to the European capitals to seek the mandate to come and elect the President of Uganda?  

This is the question; is it really prudent that today after 40 years of independence we are still having a myth of masterful complacency that people of Uganda cannot elect a President of their own and of their wish? I call that a myth of masterful complacency.  

Mr Speaker, let me give a leaf of advice to my colleague members of Parliament who are opposing: First, it is their right to oppose the presidential term limits.  

Secondly, Members who support the removal of presidential term limits have a right and in fact we have constituencies we represent; and if we report wrongly, those constituencies will push us out of Parliament. But my constituency has told me, that looking at the history of Uganda, go and support the removal of term limits and I will vote for that tomorrow.

What I urge my colleagues, who oppose, is that they should use a persuasive language.  If they want to achieve anything they should use a persuasive language so that Members of Parliament can support their position.  But a language of intimidation and war mongering may bring diminishing returns to their political adventures.

I also urge Members of this august House, that you can never hide dictatorship; dictatorship is judged by actions and deeds.  You do not need a lot of time to explain what a dictator is; that is why it has become very difficult for you to say that President Museveni, who has allowed you freedom of speech in this country, is a dictator. 

That President Museveni who has controlled the Army for the first time in Uganda. Yet previous leaders used the Army to molest Ugandans. He is the first President who has disciplined the Army and made it civilian friendly. How then can you say that he is a dictator?  You cannot say that a dictator has liberalised the communication system, which even those who intend to overthrow the Government by force of arms if Museveni comes back after the 2006 elections, rely on.  They rely on two things; control the radio in Nakasero and also have mobile phones.  All these have been liberalised; it is not an avenue for overthrowing Government.  

I am speaking this from the bottom of my heart because we are not learning from our history.  We must learn from our history and know that the prerequisite for national programmes all over the world is peace and stability.  19 years down the road, Mr Speaker and hon. members, there has never been any attempted coup in Uganda and it is not by accident.  It has been a systematic way of good governance by this Government. I therefore, urge all members to have a unity of purpose for the good of our country. 

One of the scholars in India said, “While we want to have permanence and rigidity in a constitution, there should be some form of flexibility.   There should be some form of flexibility in order to accommodate the changing needs and aspirations of that particular society.”  Ugandans need this flexibility in order to amend this Constitution for the good of our country.   I support the amendment, Mr Speaker, urge my colleagues, Members of Parliament, to support the lifting of presidential term limits. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I had asked hon. Grace Akello to start, but because of an emergency, a personal problem, hon. Tiperu will start, and then we shall follow that order.  

5.26
MS NUSURA TIPERU (Woman Representative, Yumbe): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for giving me the opportunity to be among those to be counted so that when time comes for you to call my name, the whole country will know as to why I will have voted “no” or “yes” on a particular article.  

Mr Speaker, I would like to join my colleagues in thanking the committee and particularly the Chairman for the job well done.  I also thank the media for the efforts they have put in enlightening our people, who today are aware of each of the articles that we are going to amend.
Mr Speaker, I would like to begin by supporting dual citizenship and having Swahili as our national language. In that regard, I would like to thank the Presidents of the three East African Countries, for their commitment and Uganda in particular for showing the political will by ensuring that Swahili is adopted as our national language. 

Mr Speaker, the people of Uganda are happy about that development. The population of Uganda, Kenya and Tanzania is around 100 million people, given a common language, benefits in the economic and social sectors will accrue faster than ever before.

I would like to add more onto what my colleagues have said on Article 105(2) and on that regard, allow me to read a few quotations, Mr Speaker.  Alexander Hamilton had this to say, “Nothing appears more plausible at first sight, nor more ill founded upon close inspection than term limits.  One ill effect of exclusion would be a diminution of the inducements to good behaviour”. 

John Adams says, “There is no right clearer and more important than that people should be at liberty to choose the ablest and best men and that men of the greatest merit should exercise the most important employments.”  Yet upon the present term limits, supposition, the people voluntarily resign their right and shackle their own choice, Mr Speaker.

My last quotation is from Governor Morris who says, “The inability proposed by term limitation clause as it stood, tends to destroy the great motive to good behaviour”.  In that regard, Mr Speaker, allow me to note that political power is tamed by the ultimate power of the people and regulated by the constitutional norms of fair play.  For the Constitution to be seen to be fair, just and reasonable, it must attempt to accommodate as many views, desires, expectations and demands as much as possible.  

In an nutshell, a constitution in a democracy is dependent upon the will of the people and Mr Speaker, the democratic position is that in a democracy the constitution cannot prevent the people from having what they want provided the public is determined to get it.  

Mr Speaker, what is the problem with the request to revisit the presidential term limits as stipulated in Article 105?  Is it in the interest of the people of Uganda?  Mr Speaker, is the process to revisit the article illegitimate and democratic? Does it benefit everybody?  I am asking hon. Sebunya because he clearly stated it that it benefits everybody.

Mr Speaker, I was present last week.  I was disturbed, perturbed and I felt sorry.  I saw members losing temper.  I saw hon. colleagues developing pressure.  Pressure over what! Honourable colleagues, let us learn to be calm.  There is nothing to fear.  There is nothing to quake about.   We shall be diagnosed; we are having pressure over things that would not have really caused us to be sick.  

Mr Speaker, I heard the colleague tagging the presidential term limit so much on the President.  It is not fair for a colleague to insist that the President wants indefinite term limits because he is interested in oil.  When a hon. colleague made that allegation that the President wants an indefinite term limit because he is interested in oil, I was shocked. I am very aware that that hon. colleague is in the oil business.  For each of us to begin diverting our own interests to the President, really calls for a lot of concern.

Mr Speaker, one of the colleagues even had this to say, “The President and NRM supporters are now forcing people to put on kisanja.”  Can you imagine that!  The issue of Ugandans putting on kisanja is voluntary; it is one of the mechanisms the peasants are trying to demonstrate to you, hon. Colleagues, to open up term limits. I do not know whether this hon. colleague has been in Uganda! I want to inform him that last weekend we were at a ceremony in one of our constituencies and people sprinkled rice; there were no bisanja that day.  They told us, “Give him more term limits, as many as the seeds.”  Mr Speaker, I am being disturbed by my hon. colleague here, I seek your protection.

Mr Speaker, members come here with texts. Sometimes I am forced to think that they are either written in Kigali or South Africa.  A member even said that the UPDF colleagues should not vote.  If we are going to talk about democracy and we are trying to be undemocratic to our own colleagues; denying them their right to vote just because you have seen that the supporters of those who are in favour of the lifting of Article 105 are the majority.  

Next they will say, the youth should not vote because they are young; and then the women should not vote, which is really a shame and a surprise!  I was more shocked because if we have all been cooking this food and time has come to eat, and then you have the audacity to say that the people who have been part of putting Uganda to what it is today, the Army should not vote! The people whom everybody is seeing which direction they are going to vote because people will feel safe. It is unfair, undemocratic and an abuse of human rights; it should not be entertained by our own colleagues.

Mr Speaker, we are the representatives of the people of Uganda and therefore the custodians of their interests.  We know what they want and it is our responsibility to give them what they want.  We have heard the genuine and legitimate demands that political space should be opened and we have in solidarity agreed that this is a fundamental human right, which we must give them.  It is my opinion that as Members of Parliament we will be accused of double standards if we do not lift the presidential term limits.  

There is an assumption that the playing field will not be levelled because of the power of the incumbent. My colleagues had already said much about this, I will not comment much.  But, Mr Speaker, the power of the incumbent is not a fighter jet, it is not the guns; it is the responsiveness that a government has; it is the efficiency and effectiveness in the provision of services to the people.  The people will determine who they want to lead them depending on how you have been performing.  

Why do we fear; don’t we have trust; are we not confident of the Ugandans who voted us to be in this august House?  The people who voted us did not care about how much money we had; now people are talking that the incumbent will have a lot of money.  Why are we playing double standards, Mr Speaker?  The fear of lifting presidential term limits is an unwarranted attack on the capacity of the ordinary citizen; it is even simplified in the assumptions that have been put.

Mr Speaker, it is the citizen who knows better than any other person what he desires.  I therefore want to conclude by saying that I do not see any problem in principle, with the removal of the presidential term limits. I also do not see the process itself as illegitimate and undemocratic.  I do not see a moral or legal problem in it.  I therefore request you to support the lifting so that we open the political space for every Ugandan.  What is more democratic than to do just that?  

I would like to conclude by saying, the people I represent, the proud people of Yumbe, have told me, “If you are tired of President Museveni, leave him for those who want him; in any case if you are digging and then you feel tired, it does not mean that you should do away with the land because you know what the land can provide you with.”  Thank you very much.

5.39
MS AKELLO GRACE (Woman Representative, Katakwi): Mr Speaker, I would like to thank you for giving me this opportunity to contribute to this very important debate.  Mr Speaker, When we were in the CA we made Article 1(1) that says, “All power belongs to the people who shall exercise their sovereignty according to this Constitution.”  Mr Speaker, the power therefore to amend this Constitution is one of the powers that are in the Constitution, and we are actually carrying out the mandate of the CA.  

The people of Uganda have so far amended some articles in the Constitution.  I would like to refer you to the Constitution Amendment Act of 2000, which is attached at the back of our Constitutions.  Therefore we are here on a legitimate exercise; it is not at the behest of one person who wants to grab political power by amending the Constitution in his favour.  Mr Speaker, I cannot emphasise this so much because people here have been expressing the view that the sole purpose for amending this Constitution is to keep one Ugandan in power.  I want to remind my colleagues that the Constitution mandates us to amend it and indeed there have been some amendments before.

Mr Speaker, to say that amending the Constitution is a wish of one person is to ridicule the collective conscience of Ugandans.  No constitution is cast in stone; but even that constitution, which was cast in stone, was broken by Moses. After that, it was again amended and since then, not only the Jews but also billions of other people now live by it.  So, Mr Speaker, we are on the right path to amend the Constitution.  

I also want to emphasise that it is not only Uganda, which has amended its Constitution, many other countries, which are constitutional democracies, have amended their Constitutions.  So we should be very clear and have no bad feelings whatsoever, that we are doing this to please an individual.

Mr Speaker, a number of references have been made to the North. The North is on mend, the people are beginning to participate; indeed they have been participating, but much more fully in the mainstream developments of this country. The Government of Uganda encourages this; and as you know, Mr Speaker, the Members of Parliament from Northern Uganda, like any other Members of Parliament, have been free to express their views as much as they have wanted.  The people from Northern Uganda most vociferously pronounced indeed some of the earlier calls for political pluralism in this country, which have led us towards this process of revising the Constitution.  So we are at this stage where we are reviewing the Constitution.  

Mr Speaker, I was shocked when I listened here to colleagues saying that the Government of Uganda is saying that unless you have an NRM card you do not get food in Internally Displaced People’s camps (IDPs) in Northern Uganda.  

Mr Speaker, political parties, especially FDC, UPC and DP have been going to Northern Uganda much earlier than the NRM.  They have been trying to recruit and mobilise members both openly and clandestinely.  Some of their meetings are during daytime, but mostly in the evenings and at night; they move around in the night mobilising people to join them. 

As Government we have said since they are mobilising support for themselves we have no problem, there is also an NRM party.  Mr Speaker, NRM went there two to three weeks ago to register its members in broad daylight.  The NRM people who register call the people, explain to them and give them a chance to choose whether to become members of NRM or not.

No registrar of the NRM has demanded for an NRM card while distributing food in IDPs.  Therefore, I do not understand where the accusations of demanding for cards in return for food come from. This is an indication of the warped thinking of some of our leaders who when they fail to get support and see the NRM gaining ground in Northern Uganda come up with all kinds of lies and stories meant to discredit the government. 

You know it very well that the Government of Uganda has been feeding our people in Northern Uganda. If it had not, the Members of Parliament here would have raised a lot of dust and we would have had massive cases of starvation. We do not have starvation in IDPs.

Mr Speaker, my constituents of Katakwi District and I as their Member of Parliament support the lifting of the presidential term limits. 

We the people of Katakwi have a neighbour who has been terrorising not only us but also other neighbouring districts. It is true some of our people have been in camps but when political leaders go there and try to “rub salt in their wounds”, we resent it.  We will reject any attempts to use our suffering to get votes because we know how this problem has come. We also know what the Government has done and we shall continue to look to it to for a solution to our problems.  Some of the people who are going there campaigning for FDC or whatever failed in protecting them.  

So, why are we in support of lifting the presidential term limits?  It is because of four reasons: First Mr Speaker, is that our Constitution gives the people of Uganda the power to determine how they are governed and who shall govern them now that is Article 11 of the Constitution.  But if you go to Article 105(2) of the Constitution it takes away the same power.  So, this contradiction has to be resolved and we believe that if we open up the contradiction –(Mr Wacha rose_)- no, no, I do not have the time.  If we open up, the contradiction will be –

MR WACHA: Mr Speaker, last week I stood in this House and raised a fundamental matter, which is happening in my constituency.  Subsequently I wrote a letter to you copied to the Prime Minister, copied to the Minister of Defence and Army Commander. You advised me Sir, to hold on to the matter. Honourable Akello has made a statement, which I heard as I was watching from my office and I ran down. She accused me of two things; one of having a warped mind, and two of lying to this House.  

What I stated was this and I repeat. The other Sunday, I was in my constituency. I went to a sub-county called Ngai where there are 6 camps and I was informed by not one, not two, but by a group of people I was addressing. That there were registrars - whatever you call them - of cards, of a party called NRMO who are going in the camps and telling people that, “If you do not have that card of that party called NRMO, you will not be entitled to food in the camps.” 

I came and reported this matter here.  Is hon. Akello in order to use abusive words on my person that; I have a warped mind, I am a liar, when the matter is being investigated by President’s office and that of the Prime Minister? 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, I think first of all, you stood to give information and after the information was desisted, it turned into a point of order.  But what I can say matters which you raised on this issue, as I told you, I communicated the same to the appropriate authority and I have got a note here where a full response to matters raised will be given. 

I can read you this note:  “I had a meeting this morning and I am soon sending you a response towards the relevant Members of Parliament that is relevant affected by – I was instructed by my colleague, hon. Amama, to respond to hon. Odonga Otto that there was also a statement by him.  I am writing copies for Members of Parliament. I request you to reschedule my response to Wednesday this week.”  Therefore, for her to raise it or not, we better leave it to be dealt with by the appropriate Minister who will make that response. 

MS AKELLO: Mr Speaker, I thank you, for your wise ruling.  Mr Speaker, I was saying that the people of Katakwi believe that the most important and appropriate thing is to open up presidential term limits because that gives people real power to decide how they should be governed, who should govern them and for how long. 

Mr Speaker, it also gives time for the presidential programmes, which may have been put in place to be carried out and the impact to be felt on the ground. 

Mr Speaker, the third reason we are opening up this presidential limit is because of having a president who is steadily in power to enhance economic growth and social economic transformation.  

Fourthly, Mr Speaker, it ensures security and stability for the country.  If we want stability, economic growth and transformation, we must let the people of Uganda choose who should lead them at the highest level and for how long.  I am a woman and I would like to keep up with the times; so I change my dresses so often, I change my shoes, I change my hair style even the way I do my nails.  I change all this and often, but leading a country is not like changing a ladies wardrobe, it is a much more difficult exercise than that. 

Sir, our country has to meet millennium development goals. We must provide jobs for millions of our youth who have no prospects of employment.  Sir, we must pay a living wage for all our working people. Sir there are a thousand and one things that demand a strong economy.  The way to get a strong economy is to have strong stable leadership over a period of time.  

Mr Speaker, I know that many Ugandans are admirers of the Asian Tigers. Hon. Nasasira has already referred to Singapore; we also know about Malaysia and as hon. Nasasira has already pointed out, Singapore in the 1960s was no better than Uganda. Today it is one of the most industrialised countries in Asia. It is indeed a first world economy. The people of Singapore were the ones who made the difference, because when Lee Kwan Yu stood, they elected him again and again. So, he governed the country for 30 years and provided the stability that was required to attract investment, that was required to ensure there was confidence in money, which was being put in the country; that was required to create jobs for the youth, and so Singapore grew. The same thing with Malaysia. Today Malaysia is one of the most developed countries in Asia and in the world. 

The issue of infant mortality rates and illiteracy rates in Malaysia, which were comparable to Uganda, are now comparable to the first world. 

Mr Speaker, elsewhere in the developed economies in the Western democracies, Roosevelt, the American President, during the 1930s depression, led his people through a very difficult economic time through what he called the Martial Plan. Today when we talk about the Martial Plan, everybody knows what we are talking about. After this, his people elected him 4 times President of the United States of America.

Mr Speaker, Bob Hock was an Australian Prime Minister who won elections 4 times from 1983 to 1991 because his people saw good leadership in him. He had a good grip on the economy and led Australia to broad prosperity. There are many other such leaders whose people have put them back in office because of their ability to provide a sense of direction in attaining social economic development in their countries. 

Now, I want to end with a very good example of Baroness Thatcher who was the British Prime Minister from 1979 to 1990. Thatcher contributed towards popularising capitalism to the working class in Britain. She became so popular, especially with her privatisation, which gave housing to the poor, shares in British railway, British telecom, some of the things, which some people had treasured and said belonged to the State. So she won elections 3 times. She was so popular that she herself got to know about it and used to say it in her cabinet, which was dominated by men, and had her as the only lady. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable, it is time.

MS AKELLO: So, Mr Speaker, what is good for the goose is good for the gander. I, therefore, want to appeal to all hon. members in this House to join me with the people of Katakwi in lifting the presidential term limits so that the people can decide for themselves who should govern them and for how long. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Yes, it is now hon. Mafabi.

5.56
MR NANDALA MAFABI (Budadiri County West, Sironko): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker for this rare opportunity. I am a Christian and I will quote from the Bible under Proverbs 30(8). It says, ”Speak up for people who cannot speak for themselves, protect the rights of all who are helpless, speak for them and be a righteous judge, protect the rights of the poor and the needy.” I am here to protect the rights of the poor and the needy, not the rich. 

Mr Speaker, having said that, I have never seen a fraud star group of people like NRM-O. In life we have been here for 20 years and we have never had a national identity card but we are now having NRM cards, which have been made within a month. They are telling people that unless they have those cards, they will not be exempted from graduated tax, that they will not get cards for voting which is wrong for the people of Bugisu. I talk on behalf of the people of Budadiri West and –(Interruption) 

MR MUTULUUZA: Thank you. Mr Speaker I have been forced to stand on a point of order on the statement made by hon. Nandala Mafabi. He said that without NRM cards people would not be exempted from graduated tax. Yet, Mr Speaker, we are aware that graduated tax was abolished officially beginning next financial year. Mr speaker, is he in order to say that without NRM-O cards they will not be exempted from graduated tax? Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Well for that one, hon. Member, for the graduated tax I can certainly say that in the budget speech on the Floor here we were told as from 1st there will be no graduated tax. So, it cannot be a reason. But at the same time, hon. Member, do not draw me into activities of parties, be it NRM-O, UPC and whatever. I am here presiding over Parliament –(Applause)- I am dealing with Members of Parliament; so the affairs of parties should be discussed somewhere else or should be dealt with a registrar of parties. But my comment is that he was just neutral, suggesting to any party, that it is necessary to have a code of conduct. That is your work to legislate about that and that will – but do not draw me as a Speaker to say this has happened because I have no way in any case to verify whether your allegations are true or not. And therefore how can I handle this? Please concentrate on the business we have today, that is Constitution (Amendment No. 3) Bill.

MR MAFABI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Why I brought it, is quite logical that to recruit for NRM-O that is what they are doing, which is not right; you can see how they are making noise, they know what I am saying.  Mr Speaker, having said that –(Interruption)

MR ATUBO: Mr Speaker you know as Members of Parliament, we have a number of functions for which you are very much aware of. Oversight function, legislative function and you are also a spokesperson for your people. I have been in my constituency for two weeks and I was privileged to be there with the Vice President. I was also privileged to host the Minister for the North during Otuke Education Day. I have a lot of reports from Otuke by the way.

 I do not know whether it is not the practice of this House as if it is a court where you have to produce evidence on one side, somebody needs witnesses and to be heard. I just want guidance from this House whether if somebody says, “I have been to my constituency this is what is happening. This is what I have found on the ground.” It may be that what those people are doing is actually wrong but you are reporting to the wider audience of the country. 

I am just really beginning to wonder whether a Member of Parliament coming to this House and reporting that there is a situation of rebel attack in my constituency; this is a situation of starvation, certain political activities are taking place, in my constituency. It is now not possible to say it in this House and if you are to say it, you must produce a series of witnesses to swear evidence before Parliament. I do not know because it will make my work next to impossible as a spokesperson for the people of Otuke and also to brief this House on what is going on. 

So, I need guidance because when I heard the way hon. Mafabi was talking, it was as if he was reporting what is going on in his constituency, what is being misused.

THE SPEAKER: No, honorable member there is a difference, because what was happening was about categorising NRM-O as a … and something like that and that would have required me to make an investigation, but I quite well know the rules of a Member of Parliament; you are supposed to report whatever complaints are given to you so that appropriate action is taken.  

I read a note a few minutes ago. It was about a general comment which was not categorising this and the other and a reply is going to be given, but to draw me into “UPC is doing this, DP is doing that” is quite inconveniencing and I cannot rule on this or that. That is what I was saying.  These issues of parties, how they function can be addressed somewhere else. But you can make a genuine complaint, “my people have no food or the Ministry officials have refused to give food,” that I can listen to because the Ministers are here, but for the parties! They are not headquartered here; they are somewhere else. 

MR MAFABI:  Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  Mr Speaker, you have to protect me from hon. Sam Kutesa. According to Karl Marx, “the moment the civil society is weak; the ideology, which will be in the Government or the state would be the ideology of the ruler.”  In Uganda, what has happened is that the civil society has been made weak. I can assure you that it is not strong; the Members of Parliament are no longer strong -(Interruption)

MR ERESU: The quotation you have just given is not Karl Marx’s but Engel’s. 

MR MAFABI: I think you do not know Karl Marx and Engels are together and they move together and I want to tell you that it –anyway he does not know.  Mr Speaker, I am quoting from my books, which I read, and the civil society, the moment it is weak, then the ideology, which will rule will be for the leader who is ruling.  

Currently, the regime has made the civil society weak in the form:
(i) That people depend on small materials and to get something - you have to beg. For a road to be made, the President has to say, “ The road will be there.” If he does not say, nothing can be done. This has made Members of Parliament who should have been thinking using their ‘hearts’ to fear and be subjective, which is the reason why we are going to amend Article 105(2) to –

MRS MUKWAYA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  You know the beauty about being young is also the beauty about being reckless.  Yes, because you do not know what will come.  I am standing on a point of order, Mr Speaker. Is hon. Mafabi in order to say that all the roads that were made in the last financial year were begged for from the President when he stood here at Committee Stage as the House was passing the Ministry of Works, Housing and Communication Budget and we were voting money for individual roads which we agreed on as presented by Government?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think we are being bogged down with some of these trifle issues.  First of all, if an area has got a bad road there is nothing wrong for that area to present its case to Government, that we need our road to be mended and that cannot be an issue to raise here, that roads were begged. You are a Member of Parliament; you are free to tell the Ministry of Works that your road needs to be fixed. It should not be blamed on you that you came to beg; you will be representing your people.  

So, hon. members, I rather ask you because we have to conclude this debate tomorrow, that you deal with the subject matter. The subject matter is the amendment. Policy matters of Government will come when you deal with policy statements from ministries, otherwise when you mix what you say with the Budget then you bring it here, then you are wasting your time; please concentrate on the business at hand.

MR MAFABI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  What I was trying to derive from the ideology and the rulers in place.  In fact - I want to advise my colleagues here that for us who came from the bush in 1986, when our President was swearing in on 26th January, in front here - I know some of you were not around or just pretend not to remember - he said, “This is a fundamental change, it is not a mere change of guards.” He further said, “The problem with African leaders is wanting to over stay in power.” Is 20 years a week; is 20 years one year? 

 I want to plead with you colleagues that we are going to amend Article 105 for wrong motives.  The purpose why that article was put in the Constitution in 1995 - I was not in the Constituent Assembly, but I happened to attend - this was not either a contentious issue and the motive behind I could guess: That if you are good leader, you will lead for ten years. If you are a bad leader, a thief, a dictator whatever, you will do it for a maximum of ten years. But the moment you open up and the person in power has resources at his disposal, Bank of Uganda and the Ministry of Finance are opened to him, he will use them to stay in power forever.  

You can see now, you can say no, it has happened. As I said, the civil society is weak, which includes the Members of Parliament; they were just given a few things; they have been made weak; you can see for yourself.

CAPT. BASALIZA: All of you here, Mr Speaker and members, recall that hon. Mafabi, Chairperson of the Committee on National Economy, went to Mukwano to solicit bribes and a Commission of Inquiry was brought here. Is it in order for the hon. member to talk about being bribed when he had gone for a bribe? I am aware; Mr Mukwano told me because he comes from my constituency and I can lay the information down-

THE SPEAKER: Did that happen, hon. Mafabi?

MR MAFABI: Mr Speaker, I recall I was sent to the Rules and Privileges Committee; I took my case, I rested my case and the report was submitted to the House.  I am sorry for hon. Basaliza who was a PRC; these were the thieves we had of the day and now they are here telling us what happened but I, I am never a thief -

CAPT. BASALIZA: Is it in order for hon. Mafabi who was a Junior Officer in the Uganda Revenue Authority (URA), who we were getting making false declarations, to come here and say I was a thief? Is it in order for him to protest His Excellency the President, who promoted me from the rank of Lieutenant to Captain for my good work and subsequently being elected Member of Parliament for a very big constituency of Burahya and maybe to be a Minister tomorrow? Is it in order?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Members, I think you should familiarise yourself with Rule 53. It seems you overlook the contents of speeches and you start saying all sorts of disgusting things, which will cause problems in this House.  Please read and study this Rule every morning until it enters your head, so that you can follow it.

MR MAFABI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  I am a professional accountant and I belong to the professional body which can discipline me when I do something wrong. For all the period I have worked, I want to assure you, I have never stolen. I have never taken a bribe.  Anybody who has it should come and take it because for somebody to say that I grew up in the ranks in U.R.A (Uganda Revenue Authority), everybody knows about it, I am retired, I went and worked in many places and I am still working. 

And as for Mukwano’s issue, I defended myself –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, you have got two minutes within which to wind up.

MR MAFABI: Mr Speaker, I want to assure you that I am a clean man. What am I trying to talk about is, in 1980 our President stood and lost all the elections, even hon. Sam Kutesa who was a DP beat him. You cannot say that elections were rigged in 1980. They were good elections. That time, our President was not a recognised person as far as leadership is concerned. Now he has come into power, we are all saying he is a good leader.  If he was not a leader in 1980, are there no leaders in 2006? 

Why are there Ministers on the Front Bench whom we regard as responsible leaders? Why don’t you retire?  If you are leaders, it is wrong not to train somebody to take over. If a leader has not trained anybody, then he is a poor leader. That is in Management and all good leaders know it.  It is unfortunate that our President has not trained anybody to take over from him. He should better do it now and if he fails, we shall give him textbooks to read so that he is able to hand over power next year.

I am worried that some of us are doing this for selfish ends.  Recently, the Vice President talked about mafias. They could be there - our President has lived on our goodwill and we all loved him and still love him. That is why we want him to retire so that we continue loving him and he becomes our Consultant. I will give an example of how we love him. 
In 1987, he came and took 99.3 percent of every shilling. That means if you took a million you got 7,000 shillings and we kept quiet.  That meant that if he had told us to carry stones on our heads we would have done it.  If he came now and said that we should do the same, nobody would accept. Only a few Front Benchers would do it because their goodwill has been declared.  Why do you want our President to leave when everybody hates him?

In Tanzania, one Member of Parliament got up and said, “We must amend the Constitution so that His President Benjamin Mkapa should stand.” That member was suspended from the House and President Mkapa told him, “You are the most terrible person in Tanzania.” 

Here recently, hon. Nyombi Thembo got up to amend the Rules and everybody clapped. He was promoted and made Minister.  You can imagine! If this President was not interested, he would have sacked this man by now but he did not do that.  Nobody should lie to us that our President is not interested in the term limits.  

Recently – I must give you stories – our President was walking and he was given a coat made of dry bananas. He was very happy with it and here you are saying he is not interested. In Bugisu, dry bananas are used for two things; when you are dead, or when you are going for circumcision. I do not know which of these you are going to do to him. Are you going to circumcise him or is he dead?  We educate children –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Member, you have run out of time.  I give you 60 seconds to wind up.

MR MAFABI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  You can only lie to a baby. You cannot tell us that the President is not interested; we educate our children to be future leaders, why should we take them to school? Why are you saying that the future belongs to the youth?  If one person is not willing to hand over power, if I say I will be a Member of Parliament until I die then what is the use of the young ones? It is unfortunate. This is wrong and leaders should be mindful of leaving when their time expires.  

I appeal to you that we are all going to East African Community; the rules of East African Community are clear: Tanzania 2 terms and Kenya 2 terms. I wonder how many terms Uganda will have, will it be compatible?  What is the purpose?
I want to tell you that our President is mortal. One day he will definitely die. That is why I must tell you that if somebody dies, Uganda will not die, and we shall continue.  

I agree with the non-partisan position of the Army. The Army under Article 205(8) should not be partisan. 

Mr Speaker, as I conclude, I would rather that our President becomes a consultant for us. He should retire in 2006 so that we start consulting him for ideas.  You cannot lie to us that he is not interested because what is the purpose of  –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, you are prolonging this debate and yet I want him to finish now.

MR MAFABI: Mr Speaker, you are right.  I consulted the people of Budadiri West and 8,917 of them said we should not lift Presidential term limits. 

In conclusion, I ask God to remember Uganda now that we have all lost the sense of direction. Now you are voting with your stomachs instead of insight.

6.18
MS. MARGARET ATENG OTIM (Woman Representative, Lira): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the Committee of Legal and Parliamentary Affairs for the report. Knowing that the Constitution is a system of laws –(Interjection)– can I be protected Mr Speaker?

THE SPEAKER: Very much so; do not worry I am protecting you.

MS. ATENG: Mr Speaker, knowing very well that the Constitution is a system of laws and principles on which a State is governed, it is very important to know what we are going through now. The committee has elaborated the reasons for which we should be doing a constitution amendment.

It is true that a new constitution was enacted in 1995 and because of that, there are some issues that could be enforced and those that could not be enforced.  It is also true that because of the newness of the Constitution, there are likely to be contradictions as has been envisaged. We also know that because of the new Constitution, we have to heed to international conventions and take into consideration, the issue of globalisation. 

Lastly, Mr Speaker, it is true that we have had several constitutional court rulings, which have had to be embedded in the new constitution or in the constitutional amendment.

Looking at the framework in which the constitution amendment was done, we have been informed that the issue of looking at the amendment of the Constitution was given to the Constitution Review Commission and they were given terms of reference. However, Article 105(2) was never a term of reference. This was brought about by the cabinet.  It was a proposal by the cabinet to the Constitutional Review Commission and it is on this fact that I would like to make my presentation, Mr Speaker.

The Constitution of Uganda says, and I would like to refer to 105(2) that, “A person shall not be elected under this Constitution to hold office as president for more than two terms, as prescribed by this article”. It is for this reason that I would like to make reference to His Excellency Yoweri Kaguta Museveni, because ever since 1995 when this Constitution was put in place, he is the only person, so far, who cannot stand again unless the Constitution is amended the way they want to.  

I know very well that there was a reason for putting this article in the Constitution. Many people have said that it is our bad history of leaders sticking to power that led to putting up term limits. I was not there, but this is what I heard. I have also heard from the President himself that these things had to be done to guard against bad leaders.   Thank God, the NRM status quo of bad history has changed, and thus the need for only His Excellency Museveni, to be accorded a constitution amendment. Looking at Article 105(2), this is actually what we are trying to do.

I would like to make reference, Mr Speaker, to our past.  In the year 1986, when His Excellency came to power through the barrel of the gun, he said that he was going to rule for four years and that period would be referred to as a transition period. However, after the four years lapsed, we engaged in a session of making a new constitution and that time dragged on until 1995 when a new constitution was enacted. Since then, he has been ruling. 

In 1996, his first term begun and in the year 2001, His Excellency had his second term. Mr Speaker, I would have been happy if we were amending 105(2) before His Excellency went for his second term. Because then, we would not be referring to any persons, knowing well that if he went for elections after that amendment in 2001, he would either win or lose and therefore, not be an issue. But today, having surpassed that time, he is the only person and that raises several questions in my mind.

The transition has been to keep people waiting and hopeful, then in came the term limits. The term limits also made people very hopeful. But now, that hope has faded. That is the reason we are listening to many issues being raised by different people about where this will all lead. I would not want to talk about this but the statement I would like to make is that, hope has faded for several Ugandans. I am not only referring to the majority, it may be a minority.  But hope has faded and so we should be mindful of what to expect.

Mr Speaker, my understanding is that we are amending because the purpose for which the article was set has been achieved. Term limits were put there because of a bad history. Those are the very words of the proponents. Therefore, the fact that we are now lifting term limits means that this article has actually served its purpose.  What then was that purpose? Since this article has not eliminated any leader who has ruled twice, it means that it has tried to do so and unfortunately under the new constitution, the only candidate is Museveni. 

I would like to say that we have lived through tricks and hope has faded so let us do things rightly. The proponents of the Constitution have been caught up in their own web. They put this term limit to deter others, but now the only person to deter is His Excellency Museveni. Now that Museveni has outlived his time, these people have been caught up in their own web and they are trying to unwind the web. I look at this with pity.

In the year 2001, retired Col. Kiiza Besigye came up as a presidential candidate. When he did this, there was an outcry that he had jumped the queue. Today I stand here wondering what has happened to that queue because I know that, that queue still exists. People in this country have always referred to opposition, but there is a bigger problem inside the House. That is why that statement of jumping the queue arose. So, how are these people in the queue to be tamed internally?  I wonder!  Time will tell.  

MR PATAKI AMASI: Actually the queue you are talking about is like the equator. It is just an imaginary queue.  

MS ATENG: Owing to the time factor, I will not go on to other issues, but I want to say that looking at the reasons that have been advanced, let us be mindful of the way we do things and the way we shall proceed into the year 2006, because hope has faded for the people.

Mr Speaker, I would like to end by saying that because of the nature in which the bill has been brought, I am forced to say I am against Article 105(2), but not opposed to everything in this bill. I thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: I think what we will do is to take hon. Pataki Amasi, then hon. Kamanda Bataringaya, hon. Sam Kutesa and hon. Christine Amongin Aporu. I have already listed all of you here and the debate is not ending today. When we adjourn, we shall resume tomorrow at 10.00 a.m. So far, I have covered 20 members this afternoon, so tomorrow we shall proceed with – I will read you the list and I beg honourable members to come on time so that we can continue with the debate in the morning and afternoon. Later is when we shall pronounce ourselves on the motion. I have recorded all of you here, so let us hear those I have mentioned and then we can continue with others.

6.31
MR PATAKI AMASI (Obongi County, Moyo): Thank you, Mr Speaker.  I am going to confine my contribution to two main points, that is, dual citizenship and Article 105(2). When this ovement government came to power, it embarked on two fundamental things, which were constitutionalism and economic recovery. The ovement government took it upon itself to recover Uganda’s economy that was in tatters. It mended Uganda’s road towards economic recovery. Uganda used to be the biggest market for products from other countries but today it is not the case.  

Mr Speaker, let me go to constitutionalism, which is my main topic. The movement government set in constitutionalism and Ugandans were allowed to elect their own leaders freely and fairly. Democracy was ushered in and Ugandans were allowed to write their own constitution, through their delegates. They enacted the 1995 Odoki celebrated constitution. Today it is this constitution that Ugandans are asking -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, they are trying to adjust the microphone downwards so that we are able to follow.

MR PATAKI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. It is Ugandans who enacted this 1995 Constitution. Through the Sempebwa Report, they recommended several articles to be amended, and today, like them, we are asking for Article 105(2) to be amended. It is a popular demand and a popular choice. The constitution they made is a flexible, not rigid constitution and therefore, it is amendable. They thought it wise to include this article but now, time has come for this article to be amended.  

Why are we asking for amendment of this very article when some are refusing? Because of Uganda’s history. We have seen that when leaders stay a bit longer, in time they complete their development programmes. The development is not distorted. Rather, there is continuity and even development as opposed to when a leader rules for five or ten years and then another comes. 

For instance, if somebody comes after 2005, he might say Universal Primary Education (UPE) is not his priority and neither is professionalising the army. Those programmes are abandoned, and he starts his own.  Five or ten years later, another person comes and those other programmes are also abandoned. For example when Amin was disposed, the programme of putting an Islamic University in Arua was abandoned. The leader who came after said that was not a priority, and many other leaders left power without completing their programmes. There are others who came and started their new programmes. Now Ugandans are saying we want -(Interruption)

MR AMURIAT: Mr Speaker, as far as I am concerned hon. Pataki Amasi is a member of the committee that presented this report to us. I do not know whether it is procedurally correct for him to debate a report that he was part of, in terms of preparation.

THE SPEAKER: I did not know that and he has already contributed a lot. In view of the deliberation, I give you just two minutes.

MR PATAKI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Although I was a member of the committee, I thought I should make my point here -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Give the opportunity to others.

MR PATAKI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. What I was saying is that the demand for amendment of this Article 105(2) is a popular demand and nobody can refute that. It is the people’s choice, we must respect it and it should be done.  There are people, who are giving examples of our neighbours. They are talking of the United States of America, Kenya, Tanzania, where there are term limits. That is their own country and this is Uganda. We are dealing with our country, our society and our environment. I have a neighbour who is a Chinese and -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, since your views are reflected in the report -(Interruption)

MR PATAKI: My neighbour is a Chinese and snakes and frogs are his delicacy. Should I also eat snakes and frogs because my neighbour is doing the same? Examples of our neighbours should not arise in the Ugandan situation. 

Lastly, Mr Speaker, my point of dual citizenship –(Interjection)- dual citizenship is good. We have said that we need investors, and Ugandans in the Diaspora to come and invest here. Recently, we lost an opportunity. One of our Ugandan players by the name, Kitamirike was playing in Europe for a club called Chelsea. When he came to Uganda to play for the Ugandan Cranes, he could not do so because he was supposed to denounce the other citizenship first. Because there was no opportunity to do so, we lost that opportunity. 

However, while we commend dual citizenship, we should be cautious because this implies divided loyalty. If someone has dual citizenship, where does he pay his loyalty, to which state? This may be harmful and risky to the state in the event of hostilities or conflicts, where (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Please, you are just repeating the report you presented to us.

MR PATAKI: Okay. Lastly, Mr Speaker -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: No.

MR PATAKI: Just one point. In the event that investors who are citizens come, and there are other investors with superior capacities, we should consider our citizens and not allow people who will come and dominate us in Uganda, otherwise we shall not have anything to invest and keep for our children in future.

THE SPEAKER: Let us take seven minutes only so that we can cover more people.

6.39
MR KAMANDA BATALINGAYA (Bwamba County, Bundibugyo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  I want to thank the committee for a job well done. I will just dwell on three issues.  One is on holding of presidential, parliamentary and local council elections on the same day. The second one is the appointment of the Chief Administrative Officer by the centre; and the third one will be on Article 105(2), which is opening up of the term limits. 

Mr Speaker, I had a wide consultation with my people in Bwamba County, Bundibugyo District and this is what they had to say. On the question of Chief Administrative Officers, they feel the - (Interruption)

MR MAO: Mr Speaker, I saw a member of this House being interrupted on the grounds that he is a member of the Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Committee. Now, holding the Floor is a member of the cabinet, and under Article 117, they have collective responsibility, and a position, which is the cabinet position. If you are denying committee members the opportunity to contribute on the Floor of this House on the grounds that their position has been presented, then I think the same principle should be extended to members of the cabinet. 

Otherwise, it is only fair to open up the debate to everyone to contribute, because there are many of us who would like to talk despite belonging to the committee. If you refuse committee members, it is only fair that you should also stop members of cabinet under Article 117.  What is good for the goose is also good for the gander. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Well, I appreciate your position and I see it. I am not saying you are not objective, but you are not subjective either. I will think about it. 

MR KAMANDA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for your wise ruling and guidance to my colleague, hon. Mao. He has not been here in this House and just appeared today. He does not know that other cabinet ministers have already contributed and that I happen to be a member of Parliament representing my constituency.  

Mr Speaker, on the issue of Chief Administrative Officer, our people in Bwamba County support the appointment of a CAO by the centre and at the same time a control by the centre. This will help fight some of the corruption, which is rampant in districts. 

Secondly, some of these CAOs have been compromised by the local leaders hence poor accountability.  

Thirdly, accountability was incomplete. If you look at the centre, it offers accountability to the people and even to Parliament. However, I wonder who the local government accounts to; because, most resources actually come from the centre and not from the district. This is where there is a problem. However, If CAO’s are appointed by the centre, there will be a back to back accountability where the CAO accounts to the centre and the centre accounts to the people through Parliament. 

On the issue of holding presidential, parliamentary and local council v elections on the same day, our people strongly support it and believe that it is a cost effective method and it will, at the same time, deter people who have make it a habit to stand at every level of election. That is to say if they lose the presidential election, they try the parliamentary ones, and if they fail, then they try local council v and so on. Holding all elections on the same day will reduce that syndrome such that one decides once where to stand. 

On Article 105(2), that is presidential term limits, my people of Bwamba County in Bundibugyo District strongly support the removal or lifting of presidential terms. They say -(Interjection)- of course, I have said my people of Bwamba not the people of Gulu Municipality, my brother Hon.Mao. My people of Bwamba say that first of all, two presidential term limits are undemocratic; and secondly, they have damaging effects in that they deny Ugandans, even people of Bundibugyo, the right to choose a president of their choice. 

Thirdly, term limits have the lame duck effect where a president becomes less and less able to enforce his legislative agenda - that is the manifesto. This tends to tie the president down. Opening up or lifting term limits has advantages. One of them is that it gives the presidency leverage to get things done. At the same time, if terms are removed, an elected president has the potential to remain in office and able to opt for long term policies rather than fix short terms ones. 

Therefore, with these two advantages and the others, I strongly support the lifting up of presidential term limits. Mr Speaker – [Mr. Mao: “Clarification”] - Mao, I am not giving you way because you have not been following what the House has been debating.  So, Mr Speaker, in summary I would like to -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Please, wind up. Time is over.

MR KAMANDA: Mr Speaker, I would like to wind up by saying the only effective - (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Time is up; wind up.

MR KAMANDA: The only effective method of term limit is a vote, not these two terms. In other words, terms should be open and the only limit be the vote. If I do not want a president, I will remove him through the vote. If he is bad, I will vote him out; if he is good I will continue voting for him. Thank you very much, Mr speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Please take seven minutes, honourable member.

6.48
MR SAM KUTESA (Mawogola County, Sembabule): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I will be very brief and restrict myself to canvassing only one issue and this is amendment of Article 105(2). I was honoured by the people of Mawogola to represent them as their delegate in the CA and I participated in framing this constitution.

Maybe, it would help us to better to appreciate why some of these amendments are being made now, if we went into their history. There were quite a number of contentious issues, some of which, at one time, were able to attract a majority, and others which remained with a minority and that is why they were never in this Constitution or they were put in differently. 

One such issue, that was contentious and that did not gather sufficient numbers was opening up of political space. It was roundly defeated; some 50 people walked out and in fact some of them never signed that constitution. Over time, this issue has been gaining momentum. As we speak now, almost everybody in the country agrees that we should open up political space. As for me, I think this is the most fundamental amendment that has been made in this country and nobody is talking about it. In fact, the ones who earlier on, were for it are now the ones saying do not even go to the referendum or boycott it. 

The Banyankole talk of a man who was so disgusted with life that he hoped a buffalo could come and kill him. Out of the blue, a buffalo came, and when he saw it, he climbed a tree to save his life. It is the same thing I see with people who were canvassing for opening political space. When it comes, they say no, boycott it. “Oketeenga embogo, embogo yeija watemba omuti.” This is what it amounts too. But the point I am making is, this idea of opening up -(Interruption) 

MR ATUBO: I am sure hon. Sam Kutesa is above these simplicities. The argument being forwarded by those who were against the referendum, is simply not to be scared by opening up. This climbing a tree, is in a way, to dramatize it. The issue is whether you should vote on a fundamental human rights freedom, and that is why some of us, right from the CA in 1994/95 opposed this issue of the referendum on fundamental issues. 

Is he in order to simplify arguments and very fundamental basic intelligent arguments advanced by members who are opposed to the referendum not that they are opposed to parties opening space, but opposed to the methods being used? The method being used is what we are opposed to hon. Sam Kutesa, not the opening up. Is he in order to mislead this House and the country on the basic arguments being forwarded by those who are opposed to the referendum on this fundamental rights freedom?

THE SPEAKER: I am now being invited to be a constitutional court for interpretation, but I think I am competent in that and can interpret the Constitution. Whether this issue of referendum on peoples rights is good or not, what is the Constitution saying? I think this should have been the opportunity for us to revisit the Constitution and for somebody to bring an amendment so that we delete this particular provision from our Constitution. 

But as it is, that provision under Article 74 is an entrenched provision. We cannot simply wish it away. What we can do is use this opportunity to debate it because as things stand, it is binding on us. I do not think even a court would advise us to ignore it. I am not prejudicing what is in court because the court cannot be prejudiced since it is a law, not a fact. 

My thinking may not really be prejudice, but I think we should use this opportunity, if you think it is necessary, to deal with that provision. Otherwise, his argument is that the Constitution is here, let us address it and change it. We can do this because, with our mandate, we are capable of changing any part of the Constitution so long as we follow procedure.

MR KUTESA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I hope that with your educative ruling, my good friend hon. Daniel Omara Atubo will climb down the tree and participate in the referendum. Because, the only other way is to bring a petition from councils, petitioning Parliament so that we can then amend that article -(Interruption) 

THE SPEAKER: All the same, that is voting. The referendum is on a wide scale while the voting in Parliament is on a narrow scale so that would be voting on somebody’s right. 

MR KUTESA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. As I said, I hope hon. Daniel Omara Atubo will get out of the tree and join us in the referendum. The point I was making was that the idea of opening political space has gained popularity over time and what was a minority position then is now a majority position. Therefore we are going on, together as a country, to open political space. 

The other issue that was a minority position was the regional tier otherwise described as federo. Over time, as we have worked together, this issue has changed from a minority position to a majority position. And we are amending the Constitution to reflect the position of the majority. 

During the CA, there was a group of people who were opposed to fixing term limits. They were in a minority position and they have been arguing their case over time. That position, like the one of opening political space and establishing a third term has now gained from a minority position to a majority one. May I add, Mr Speaker, that all the major amendments we are making except about the third term and opening of political space, were entrenched articles. 

If the people of Uganda or the framers of this Constitution had thought that term limits are such an important consideration, they would have entrenched that clause. You only need two thirds of Parliament, and that is the simplest vote you can have in amending a constitution. Otherwise they would have said, let us go for a referendum or have district councils support it. This shows that it was not as important as people are thinking and therefore the framers of our Constitution never found it necessary to entrench it in the Constitution. 

Mr. Speaker, I personally believe that this matter was not intended to be a taboo. It is true it did not pass through in 1995, because it was supported by a minority. But like many other issues which we are now introducing, they have changed positions from minority to majority. 

I do not believe for a second that the statements made here about the power of incumbency are so important that they will limit others from making their way to Presidency. I ask myself what we mean by incumbency. Are you saying that it is impossible for a president to serve only one term and then be defeated? Even if you had a limit of two terms, is this impossible in our country? Do we really think that because someone is an incumbent, he cannot be defeated after the first term? If he can be defeated after the first term, even as an incumbent, then in my opinion, it is only logical to assume that he can be defeated any time, including when he has been here for a long time.  

The issue therefore, is not how long you have been there, but whether the people of Uganda have the means and capacity, through fair elections, to get rid of an incumbent president. That is the issue. It is my opinion, Mr. Speaker, that the people of Uganda can get rid of an incumbent. If we do not believe that, then we should limit to just one term, because that is the only way you can ensure that a president serves for one term and that will also get rid of the argument of incumbency. But, as long as you accept two terms, then certainly you are admitting that incumbency is not the only ground on which one can continue to win.  

I have heard hon. Mabikke and hon. Patrick Mwondha speak on how I defeated Museveni in the 1980 elections while I was in DP; and why not? I did indeed, but the question that seems to be in people’s minds, is why I support him now or why I think he should be president. Let me tell you that I am a lot wiser now than I was in 1980. I know him better than I knew him then and I will give you evidence. I am sorry, my friend Wadri Kassiano has gone out. I did not stand against Museveni. Rather, I supported Ssemogerere then as my president. Can you imagine, if I had to choose now between the two men?  Who would I choose?  (Laughter)  

I admit that I am a lot wiser now. I supported Ssemogerere then as President of DP. I am going to ask you honourable members, hon. Mao, my friend hon. Mabikke, in your heart of hearts, if these two guys came forward, whom would you choose? (Laughter) I know that in his heart of hearts, Mr. Mabikke would not choose Ssemogerere and there is evidence as to that. In fact, his case is a bit worrying because, it seems he would go for Sebaggala instead! (Laughter) 
I think someone stated here, and it is true, that Museveni was unknown in 1980 and his party was unknown. He had been a member of my party when we were youth wingers and I thought he had abandoned the party. Little did I know that he was wiser, had seen through my leader Ssemogerere and decided to take a different path. So, there is nothing wrong with being wiser and admitting this. I have learnt and I think that, if I had a choice between the two men again- any way, I do not have that kind of choice. I have made up my mind; I will support President Museveni as opposed to Ssemogerere and certainly Sebaggala and much more certainly Obote.  

I am not ashamed of having stood then and I am not ashamed of supporting him now, but those are my reasons. He has proved himself and led this country in a way that my friend, whom I supported in 1980, could not have. 

Mr. Speaker, I thought I should respond to these people who have been peddling this issue. Kutesa, in 1980 you stood against Museveni. Yes I did. I was in my party, but I am telling you now that I am a lot wiser and I am not alone in this. There are many other people who opposed him then but are a lot wiser and support him now, and the record speaks for itself.  

Should we carry out this amendment, I will support him as leader of my party NRM/O, and if he offers to stand, and I hope he does so, I shall support him. I thank you, Mr. Speaker.

7.03
MRS HELLEN CHRISTINE APORU AMONGIN (Woman Representative, Kumi):  Mr. Speaker, let me start by appreciating the work of the committee. In my contribution, I am going to dwell on the amendment proposal to lift limits on the presidential term and on dual citizenship.

Mr. Speaker, lifting of limits on the presidential term is the only prudent way for Uganda to strengthen its institutions, created by the Constitution. In the spirit of the Constituent Assembly, term limits were meant to provide checks and balances for the running of affairs of this country. My father-in-law was in the parliament and he was a member of the DP in the LEGCO. 

When I came to Parliament, I came as a Movement person. But when I went back to my constituency, I spent a lot of time talking to the people in my district, who are the minority voices.  They are not for lifting of limits on the presidential term. I tried to persuade them to understand that politics is not static and that they should go with the politics of the time.  

Mr. Speaker, as we propose the amendment of the lifting of the term limits, let me say this. There are some people who want to cause only distortions in the debate on lifting presidential term limits and because of this, they fail to distinguish between the person of the president, Mr. Museveni, and the legitimacy of the principle that we are talking about. 

Honourable colleagues, Mr Yoweri Kaguta Museveni is not the principle that we should be talking about. Rather, we should be talking about legislation for good governance and development of this country. The merits of this principle should be reflected in the continuity of effective leadership for this country, bearing in mind the institutions created by the Constitution. 

The continuity of leadership, to propel this country socially and economically, is what we should be agitating for. That is, a leadership that can propel this country to development that cuts across, not just the youth or elderly, but everybody equally. Mr Speaker, the onus is on this August House, to ensure that checks and balances are established through the legislation and that laws established are enforced. This can be done by Parliament, acting as a body responsible for checking on the executive and through litigation, by taking up matters of breach of law or disruption of peace and order with the courts of law.  

Mr Speaker, the mandatory duties of the executive are checked by Parliament and therefore, the more effectively Parliament executes these duties, the more democratic the principles which shall be enhanced and entrenched. As a culture, this will defeat some parliamentarians and the society in general who, in the FM stations, are carrying on many debates about the referendum. Some people, for example, have expressed fear because of the apparent excessive powers that are vested in the president by the Constitution. However, it is this August House, in the Constituent Assembly, that gave these powers to the president and now, we are saying that this same House should restructure these powers through legislation.  

We should not negate the lifting of term limits basing on factors, which can be regulated or dealt with through other provisions of the Constitution. Permit to say, that as legislators, the credibility of this House will emanate from its show of nationalism, the will to work towards guiding this state without fear or favour, and the ability to check on omissions, commissions and excesses of the executive independently.

Mr Speaker, Parliament has to ensure that good laws are put in place, which laws shall be applied in courts of law to promote justice, peace, and social stability, which in turn will create an environment that is not conducive to erosion, fraud of any form, and the dictatorial tendencies that members have talked about. Institutions established by the Constitution must be permitted and be seen to work towards nurturing the democracy, which Uganda cherishes whether under the Movement system or pluralism. It is the professional and full capacity functioning of these institutions, which will guide this country and bring about peace and stability as we go for the referendum.

Examining this matter critically, I discovered that the democracies we admire today such as India, Britain, USA, do not have term limits especially on heads of state.

About Article 15, which is on dual citizenship, in Uganda, it is a foregone reality that we are living in a global village. Time has caught with us and it has surpassed our citizenship law yet we appear to be living in the stone age under the citizenship law. In his comment, after the reading of the National Budget for the financial year 2005/2006 by the minister, His Excellency the President, reminded the Minister of Finance of a major significant omission of $ 600 million that is remitted to Uganda annually by Ugandans in the Diaspora. This money is remitted to the country to construct good houses, engage in boda boda business, buy second hand vehicles, gifts, and is also sent to families.  

Mr Speaker, the significance of this alone, is a sign that Uganda can reap, from wherever its citizens are, by providing labour. These remittances and earnings sent by Ugandans abroad are the basis of my argument. The issue of Ugandans getting dual citizenship can be accommodated, in for a beginning, in one country then two and so on. One may argue that this does not hold water, but the fact is that even non-citizens are investing in Uganda. As it is today, the law of citizenship under Article 15 of the Constitution has contributed negatively to investment and development.  Remember the Ugandan Asians who were expelled in 1973? They are now real estate owners. If they had stayed in Uganda, all these earnings would have benefited this country.

Finally, Mr Speaker, I want to urge my colleagues to join the people of Kumi district in support of the lifting of presidential term limits. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, I wish to thank you for your contributions. Since we started this debate, 122 members have been able to make their contributions and 21 have been able to make their contribution this afternoon. We intend to continue with the debates up to tomorrow. We shall start at 10.00 a.m. prompt and because of that, I want to read the list of members who wished to contribute today and those who had requisitioned for tomorrow. 

We shall start in this order: hon. Lule Mawiya, hon. Omara Atubo, hon. Alex Onzima, hon. Namirembe Bitamazire, hon. Steven Bamwanga, hon. Aggrey Awori, hon. Otafiire Kahinda, hon. Capt. Mike Mukula, hon. Ben Wacha, hon. Aanimu Angupale, hon. Okot Ogong, hon. Twarebireho, hon. Mulindwa Birimumaaso, hon. Katuntu, hon. Dr. Lwanga, hon. Okot, hon. Kapkwomu, hon. Badda, hon. William Nsubuga, hon. Yekko Arapkissa, hon. Akaki Ayumu, hon. Dr. Steven Chebrot, hon. Hope Mwesigye, hon. Mukwaya, hon. Basaliza Araali, hon. Mugambe, hon. Kajeke, hon. Okwir, hon. Dorothy Hyuha, hon. Dr. Bulamu, hon. Tumwesigye, hon. Rukutana, hon. Nyanzi, hon. Sebagereka, hon. Balemezi and hon. Kiwagama .  

I appeal to you, if possible, to come in the order I have read so that we start promptly.  Since we have been able to cover 21 people this afternoon, tomorrow morning we can cover, say 25 people if we start on time. If you do not come on time, I will not be able to say to those present, “You are not on the list”. This is what really interrupts the lists but since the first contributors are here and they have heard, better come on time so that we can proceed. We will be able to cover 40 or more people by the time we vote on the motion. Again, honourable members, I thank you very much for your contributions today. The House is adjourned until tomorrow 10.00 a.m.

(The House rose at 7.20 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 28 June 2005 at 10.00 a.m.)

