Tuesday, 23 June 2015

Parliament met at 2.51 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, presiding.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this afternoon’s sitting. I would like to report that the Business Committee of this Parliament sat yesterday to consider the legislative programme for the Fifth Session of the Ninth Parliament. As we are all aware, the Fifth Session is the last in this Parliament and it also comes at a time when there are national activities like national elections, including elections in the parties to which members belong.

In light of the above, we came up with a legislative programme reflecting what we consider would be critical business to be handled during this session. We have prioritised 12 Bills that should be passed by September 2015. We expect to handle six accountability committee reports, eight loan requests, four petitions, three select committee reports and two motions.

Later in the year, in December, we shall have to handle the National Budget Framework Paper for the financial year 2016/2017. We also agreed that in order to expedite business before the House, especially when considering the Constitutional (Amendment) Bill, the plenary will be required to sit both mornings and afternoons for six sittings, which we consider will be sufficient to handle that business.

We hope that we shall have two recesses; one from September to the end of November, taking into account nominations for parliamentary seats and nominations for the presidential elections. We will also have another recess between 2 February and 14 March 2016 and then proceed to complete our term in May 2016. We have attached the text of the prioritised business as part of our calendar. It will be distributed to all the honourable members.

Honourable members, I am mindful of the pressures in the country but we are still on duty until May 2016. So, there is a price you have to pay for being here. We have responsibilities that we cannot overlook. We therefore, still have to come here and do our work.

Secondly, honourable members, before we closed the last sitting, we had requested all voting members of this House to register for the e-voting system. Since that announcement was made, only 20 members have registered. Up to now, there are 88 members who are still not registered. If you are not registered, you cannot use that system and failure to register means that we cannot use it because we will be short by 88 members. Therefore, I would like to urge members to register between today and tomorrow so that we can use that electronic system. I am going to read the names again and you should be ashamed of yourselves: 
    1. Hon. Alex Onzima;
    2. Hon. Sarah Opendi;
    3. Hon. Fred Ruhindi;
    4. Hon. Sam Kutesa;
    5. Hon. Kasule Lumumba;
    6. Hon. Odonga Otto;
    7. Hon. Sezi Mbaguta;
    8. Hon. Rukutana Mwesigwa;
    9. Hon. Elioda Tumwesigye;
    10. Hon. Frank Tumwebaze;
    11. Hon. James Akena;
    12. Hon. Christopher Acire;
    13. Hon. Maxwell Ebong Patrick Akora;
    14. Hon. Amama Mbabazi;
    15. Hon. Monica Amoding; 
    16. Hon. Judith Mary Amoit; 
    17. Hon. Jacqueline Amongin; 
    18. Hon. Rebecca Otengo Amuge; 
    19. Hon. Aronda Nyakairima;
    20. Hon. Atim Joy Ongom;
    21. Hon. Ahmed Awongo; 
    22. Hon. Crispus Ayena; 
    23. Hon. Stephen Baka Mugabi;
    24. Hon. Betty Bakireke Nambooze;
    25. Hon. Julius Junjura Bigirwa; 
    26. Hon. Tress Bucanayandi; 
    27. Hon. Yowasi Bihande Bwambale; 
    28. Hon. Stephen Chebrot; 
    29. Hon. Musa Ecweru; 
    30. Hon. Sam Engola;
    31. Hon. Francis Epetiat; 
    32. Hon. Fred Omach Jacan; 
    33. Hon. Evelyn Kabuule; 
    34. Hon. Kaahwa Tophace Byagira;
    35. Hon. Kabakumba Matsiko;
    36. Hon. Kaddu Mukasa Ssozi;
    37. Hon. Aston Kajara;
    38. Hon. Cos Kamanda Bataringaya;
    39. Hon. Elizabeth Karungi; 
    40. Hon. Stephen Kasaija Kagwera; 
    41. Hon. Sarah Kataike Ndoboli;
    42. Hon. Muhamed Kawuma; 
    43. Hon. Justine Khainza; 
    44. Hon. Khiddu Makubuya;
    45. Hon. Ernest Kiiza Mande; 
    46. Hon. Isa Kikungwe;
    47. Hon. William Kwemara Ngabu; 
    48. Hon. Hussein Kyanjo; 
    49. Hon. Sarah Lanyero Ochieng;
    50. Hon. Lokeris Aimat;
    51. Hon. Godfrey Lubega; 
    52. Hon. Amos Lugoloobi;
    53. Hon. Joseph Matte; 
    54. Hon. Fred Mbagadhi; 
    55. Hon. Daudi Migereko;
    56. Hon. Beatrice Mpairwe; 
    57. Hon. Mpiima Dorothy Christine;
    58. Hon. Martin Mugabi Muzaale; 
    59. Hon. Mukasa Muruli;
    60. Hon. Adolf Mwesige; 
    61. Hon. Robinah Nabbanja; 
    62. Hon. Nabilah Naggayi Ssempala;
    63. Hon. Mariam Nalubega;
    64. Hon. Susan Namaganda; 
    65. Hon. Rose Nsereko Namayanja; 
    66. Hon. Aida Nantaba;
    67. Hon. Nebanda Andiru;
    68. Hon. Oundo Nekesa; 
    69. Hon. Vincent Nyanzi; 
    70. Hon. Peter Nyombi;
    71. Hon. Julius Oketta; 
    72. Hon. Reagan Okumu; 
    73. Hon. Peter Omolo;
    74. Hon. Hillary Onek;
    75. Hon. Oryem Okello;
    76. Hon. Jack Sabiiti; 
    77. Hon. Latif Sebaggala; 
    78. Hon. Ibrahim Semujju Nganda
    79. Hon. Kevina Taaka; 
    80. Hon. Sanjay Tanna;
    81. Hon. Tete Chelangat;
    82. Hon. Elly Tumwiine; and
    83. Hon. Winfred Kiiza.

The others are nominated members so they should not be on this list. So, honourable members, please assist us so that we do our work more efficiently. It is a very simple thing to register. Please, do it so that we can do our work well. The registers were here throughout. Clerk, bring back the registration table starting this afternoon so that members can register.

This is for the Independents: You were requested to indicate were you would like to serve during this final session. However, the following have not yet indicated where they would like to serve:
    1. Hon. Jessica Ababiku; 
    2. Hon. Cyrus Amodoi; 
    3. Hon. Atim Joy Ongom;
    4. Hon. Martin Bahinduka; 
    5. Hon. Phyllis Chemutai;
    6. Hon. Rose Iriama;
    7. Hon. Kaddu Mukasa Ssozi;
    8. Hon. Gerald Karuhanga Kafureka; 
    9. Hon. Moses Kasibante;
    10. Hon. Kenneth Bbosa Kiyingi; 
    11. Hon. Kezekiah Mbogo; 
    12. Hon. Mathias Mpuuga; 
    13. Hon. Mariam Nalubega; 
    14. Hon. Gilbert Olanya; and
    15. Hon. Sanjay Tanna.

I would like to indicate to you the vacancies; I think there are some committees which are not quite complete. I understand hon. Mariam Nalubega has indicated. I would like to indicate to you the committees which still have some vacancies. This is the composition of the committees: 
    a) Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development has 19 members; so some can go there. 
    b) Committee on Public Service and Local Government has 15 members; there are vacancies there. 
    c) Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry has nine members; I think they really need help. 
    d) Committee on Information and Communication Technology has 15 members; there are vacancies. 
    e) Committee on Physical Infrastructure is in trouble because only eight members have registered; so let us see whether we can have more members there.
    f) The Committee on Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries has 13 members. 
    g) Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs has nine members. 
    h) Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development has three vacancies; 
    i) Committee on Presidential Affairs has only 13. 
    j) Committee on Foreign Affairs has eight members. 
    k) Committee on East African Community Affairs has 16; there are still vacancies there. 
    l) Committee on Education and Sports has 17; you can still make a choice there. 
    m) Committee on Health has 15; you can still make a choice there. 
    n) Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Committee - I think we have to agree on how we are going to move on this one. I am told it is oversubscribed but I think we still have to agree on it. 

That is basically what I have to communicate for today.

3.02
MS HELLEN ASAMO (NRM, PWD Representative, Eastern): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand on an issue of national concern. 

There is an issue I got from my constituents and also from the newspapers about persons with disabilities that did an interview with the Ministry of Internal Affairs. The Ministry of Public Service advertised the jobs, these persons applied and they were shortlisted. They went ahead and did the aptitude test and they passed and they even appeared for the oral interviews. Unfortunately, when they were told to come back for the third round of interviews, they looked at and tested the women and said they were pregnant and hence they would not be able to run the marathons. The disabled were, as usual, automatically disqualified there and then because they would not be able to take on the marathon. 

Madam Speaker, this is very unfortunate. Our Constitution provides for affirmative action. The job that was advertised was for a desk officer for immigration. (Applause) I am wondering if we begin taking marathons as part of the requirements for employment, then I not sure that even most of us in this House can run even two kilometres - (Interjection) – Yes, not even one kilometre. So, how do you expect - Are we going to deny the women their biological right of having children? (Applause)

It is very unfortunate that the Ministry of Internal Affairs, through the Public Service Commission, has brought this requirement of running. We are not doing military training; that is a discriminative approach. These Ugandans are now out there wondering why they were shortlisted in the first case. When you are shortlisted, you are already qualified and you only need to fulfil the other requirements. 

I humbly request that the minister comes here with a report to explain to this august House this situation before they declare those who have passed the interviews, so that he can give us information as to why this was part of the requirements. I beg to move. Thank you.

3.04
MR MILTON MUWUMA (NRM, Kigulu County South, Iganga): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise on an issue of national importance. 

Madam Speaker and honourable members, last Thursday, 18 June 2015, one of the schools in Iganga called St Mathias Muwagala Secondary School was struck by lightning and 49 students who were in class got hurt. When we rushed these students to Iganga Hospital in a bid to save their lives, there was hardly any health worker on duty; there was just one nurse managing the entire Iganga Hospital. This is because the health workers had laid down their tools because of non-payment.

Madam Speaker, there are two concerns from the people of Iganga; one is that the Ministry of Education and Sports comes to the rescue of this school because the entire building is in shatters.  This is a threat to the students who are using this building that was struck, and even the solar panel that was on that building also got shattered.

We are calling upon the Ministry of Education and Sports to take interest in this matter. We also need to hear from the Ministry of Finance on why civil servants, especially the teachers and health workers, have not been paid their May salaries and yet June is about to end. I thank you.

3.06
MR FRANCIS EPETAIT (FDC, Ngora County, Ngora): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Before Parliament supplied for the Financial Year 2015/16, as per the legal requirements Ministry of Finance submitted a list of accounting officers to Parliament. Surprisingly, after the budget was considered and read, Ministry of Finance sent another list of about 50 accounting officers whom they said must be dropped from that responsibility. 

We would like to understand from Ministry of Finance what the exact problem is.  I have been trying to inquire about this and it appears to me that it is an internal communication gap within the ministry. The Daily Monitor newspaper of 18 June 2015 even published all the names of the dropped accounting officers. It is rather painful for an accounting officer’s name to appear in a newspaper insinuating incompetence on their part and yet there is just a problem internally. If that is the case, I would therefore, demand that the Ministry of Finance gives a thorough explanation on the names of these people. 

It is very difficult to make a name over time and then later, it is tarnished within a second. Ministry of Finance ought to give us an explanation on the wrongs the accounting officers have done to warrant this kind of action after the budget had been passed.

3.08
MS BEATRICE ANYWAR (FDC, Women Representative, Kitgum): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise on an issue of national importance and with a heavy heart. 

I stand here to reiterate what has appeared in the newspapers concerning the ban of polythene bags commonly known as kaveera. Madam Speaker, Parliament of Uganda, over which you preside, made a pronouncement and we passed a law that as a country, we do not need polythene bags. We only gave exceptions to those which must be used. It was also pronounced during the budget reading by hon. Syda Bbumba in 2009 as a position of Government that the ban is on. Shortly after, there were contradictions. It was again pledged that we should have an extension to have the manufacturers prepare themselves. Six months were given, unfortunately this has become indefinite.

Recently, again we went back to the issue of the ban of the kaveera. The Committee on Natural Resources, where I sit, and as the shadow minister, we agreed and made a statement to this House that we do not need these polythene bags. However, it is surprising that as we speak, an institution of government called the National Environmental Management Authority (NEMA), the implementing arm of Government, is in a dilemma because of the contradictions from Government. 

The Prime Minister came up with a letter insinuating that they were still negotiating; environmentalists and all Ugandan loving people said, no. Somehow, we thought Government had listened to the voice of Ugandans. However, shortly we heard my brother, hon. Jim Muhwezi, with due respect – he is still new in office - announcing a position of Government saying that the ban had been lifted.

Madam Speaker, as we speak the effect of polythene bags on our land and our animals is terrible. Uganda is an agricultural country. Cancer is on increase because people are using these kaveera for cooking and covering hot things. The cost of purifying our water has risen. Flooding has come up because of this misuse. 

When we banned Kaveera, I would like to take this opportunity to show Ugandans and particularly my brother, hon. Jim Muhwezi before me, that Ugandans had taken on alternative carrier bags - (Applause) – and this is offering job opportunities to Ugandans right from the grassroots. We have baskets made out of straws. We have this one, made out of natural things. We also have this basket from the northern connection - (Laughter) – made out of sisal. We have all these alternatives, which have just come up as the ban was lifted. This one is from Luuka and they have provided it as one of the alternatives, which are used by people in the supermarkets, and the paper bags are also still being use.

My question is: in whose interest are the honourable minister and Government lifting the ban on kaveera when Ugandans have said “no”? Why should the Executive overlook what the Parliament of Uganda has already pronounced itself on? Wouldn’t it be prudent - I implore - that the ban be reinstated to help NEMA, an institution of Government, to implement its work as pronounced by Parliament? Should Government have any alternative to that, they should come back to this House. I beg. (Applause) 

THE SPEAKER: I think the best way would be to ask the Government to bring a statement so that we understand what they are doing. Are they moving back or forth, or not moving at all?

3.13
MR REAGAN	OKUMU (FDC, Aswa County, Gulu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance -

THE SPEAKER: I know the issue of kaveera is exciting but please, let us have order.

MR OKUMU: Madam Speaker, as I was saying, I rise on a matter of national impotence in regard to two schools in northern Uganda that were built by donors to cater for war victims. One of the schools is Laroo Boarding Primary School, which was built with Belgian funds to the tune of € 8,000. Government of Uganda under the Ministry of Education and Sports agreed to facilitate that school over the years.  

Some of the children who are in that school were born in captivity and they do not know where to go; they do not have relatives and they do not have parents. As I speak, the Ministry of Education and Sports has failed in its responsibility. Suppliers who have been supplying various items to that school have taken the school to court and it is up for auction. I got to know about this when the auctioneers approached me to buy the school so that they can get back their money. 

Madam Speaker, I would like to know from the Minister of Education and Sports what has happened. Where are we going to take these children? Why do we waste donors’ money to build such infrastructure when we cannot take over?

Similarly, during CHOGM in Uganda, the Commonwealth contributed money for the construction of the Northern Uganda Youth Centre to cater for all the youth in northern Uganda who did not get education during the conflict of over 20 years. They constructed that centre so that they get some basic vocational training for a livelihood. However, as I speak, despite all the money that has been dumped there by donors, the Prime Minister’s office has completely failed to run that school, which is under them. The area is now bushy, activities are not going on, students cannot be admitted and the whole thing is a quagmire.

Again, I would like to know from the Prime Minister’s office what the fate of this school is going to be and whether it is just going to be a white elephant in the bush built with CHOGM funds. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

3.16
MS WINIFRED KIIZA (FDC, Woman Representative, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Today we join the rest of the African countries to celebrate the Africa Public Service Day. However, as we celebrate this day the country is in a quagmire with different ministries and leaders giving the country different statements. It is a known fact that His Excellency the President of the Republic of Uganda has encouraged the Ugandan women to give birth; that is a known fact. I would like to thank the Minister of Public Service for the statement and the theme of today’s celebrations. 

Hon. Hellen Asamo alluded to the fact that pregnant ladies were stopped from going ahead with the interviews for the internal affairs jobs. That is quite unfortunate. That ministry is headed by a man and women cannot become pregnant without men. It is the same man who is saying women cannot access jobs because they are pregnant. You will recall that the hon. Aronda’s department is the same one that said they cannot deploy pregnant policewomen at Parliament. We would like to know, if hon. Aronda’s mother had not become pregnant, would he exist? Hon. Aronda is a father like the majority of us are mothers; if his wife or daughter is denied a job because she is pregnant, would he really feel happy? 

The status and the dignity of women should be respected. We have roles that are naturally given to us by the Creator. We should be allowed to exercise our roles and rights. We should not be discriminated against because of our gender roles. The Minister of Internal Affairs, Madam Speaker, should have a clear statement to the women of Uganda and the women of the world. What is he –(Member timed out_)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. We do expect a statement on the issues raised by hon. Hellen Asamo. This means that a disabled person cannot join the Police Force as a cadet or the immigration. That means they are left out.  I do not think that we should do that as a country. About pregnant women, in the Seventh Parliament we had a big battle over the UPDF Act because they were stopping women from getting pregnant. We had to sit here, work on it and at least that was cleared. 

We shall want a statement from the Minister of Internal Affairs about the parameters for recruitment. We shall also want a statement from the Ministry of Education and Sports on the issues raised by hon. Milton Muwuma and hon. Reagan Okumu. Prime Minister, your office has also been mentioned concerning the youth centre in northern Uganda. So, we shall expect a statement on that too. The Minister of Finance should also inform us about the accounting officers; are they there or not? Have they been sacked or not? On the issue of kaveera, we shall also expect a statement from the responsible minister about what exactly is happening.

3.20
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Thank you, Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues. During the budgeting process, we submitted a tentative list of the accounting officers. We did that because of the situation we were going through. The Public Finance Management Act requires that if you are an accounting officer and you have an audit query, you should not be reappointed and we are implementing that.

During that process, one or two accounting officers could have been mistakenly relieved of their duties and we offer an apology to them. However, the bigger picture is that if you are an accounting officer with an audit query, you are not going to be appointed as an accounting officer. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I think you should look at that list carefully. There is a young lady I met when I went to Malaysia; we have just opened the Malaysian mission and she is on that list and yet I do not think that she has even been there for a year. It is a new mission and yet I saw her name on that list. I do not know how she could have had an audit query when they have just opened the embassy. I think you need to look at it more carefully.

3.22
THE MINISTER OF INFORMATION AND NATIONAL GUIDANCE (Maj. Gen. (Rtd) Jim Muhwezi): Madam Speaker and colleagues, I would like to clarify to this august House and the country that there has been no lifting of the ban on kaveera. It is true that there was a misunderstanding that the ban was lifted but we corrected that impression by issuing a statement, which was also carried in the media stating that there was no lifting of the ban. The plastic bags of 30 microns and below are still banned and the enforcement officers are enforcing that position of Government – (Interruption)

MS ANYWAR: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. This House received a report from the Committee on Natural Resources and it was passed. We have members of that committee here. Colleagues agreed that the microns that we are banning are from 100 downwards; that is on record. So, is the honourable minister in order to mislead this House that Government has banned kaveera of only 30 microns and below? 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think we shall have to look at the Hansard to see what we passed before I can rule on that. Honourable Government Chief Whip, I think other ministers can respond tomorrow.

MR EKANYA: Thank you very much. Madam Speaker, I had stood up on the issue of accounting officers but then the Minister of Information came up. The issue is that today is 23 June 2015 and next month, maybe by 5th July, civil servants should have their salaries being processed. However, the minister has said that the list that was tabled here was tentative, which means they do not have a conclusive one. 

What we see is that the Minister of Finance is just touching soft spots - the accounting officers of the districts and missions abroad. However, those in ministries and bigger agencies are not being touched. I have analysed the reports of the Auditor-General and noticed that these guys have serious queries. Why is the Minister of Finance playing double standards? The report of the Auditor-General is available and the internal audit report is available too. Why don’t you table all the names of the clean accounting officers to this House before the end of the month? 

DR EPETAIT: Madam Speaker, while the minister was responding, he downplayed this issue by saying that maybe one or two accounting officers may have had their names put there erroneously. However, the problem is big because the number indicated so far is 50. 

What is going on now is that Ministry of Finance is quietly apologising, one-on-one, to these accounting officers whose names appeared in the newspapers. We would like to appeal to the Minister of Finance; first of all, these people have not slept well since their names appeared in the newspapers. I would like to suggest that Ministry of Finance uses the same medium they used before to clarify to the nation that on so and so, there are no issues.

Secondly, if there are any officers who may not have submitted -The financial year ends on 30th June, couldn’t the Ministry of Finance reconsider having maybe a one week extension, just in case there is anyone who may not have filed verified internal audit reports? I think there has been a bit of unfairness like the Shadow Minister for Finance has stated.

MR KWIZERA: Madam Speaker and honourable members, if what the Minister of Finance is telling the House is the truth, he should know that the majority of the accounting officers have queried audit accounts. Therefore, we should see all those with queried accounts being relieved of their accounting function.

Secondly, the Government has been acting illegally when they appoint a Permanent Secretary, who is acting as an accounting officer, even when they know that under the Public Service Standing Orders, you are not supposed to have someone act for over six months. Therefore, if you have a Permanent Secretary who has acted beyond six months, that is illegal. When you now appoint that person in a permanent accounting function, you are committing more illegality and it will still be a query. 

We know that there are some permanent secretaries who did interviews, they were confirmed and given appointment letters and even posted but later on their appointments were reversed. For over six months now they are idle; they are not placed. Government should come up and tell us why they appointed permanent secretaries but failed to post them? Why are you using people who are in an illegal capacity?  I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Minister of Finance, I think you have to bring a statement. It is better for you to bring a statement after clear thinking and research.

DESIGNATION OF MEMBERS TO SECTORAL COMMITTEES IN ACCORDANCE WITH RULE 175 OF THE RULES OF PROCEDURE

3.28
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Madam Speaker and colleagues, rules 175(1) and 176(2) of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament mandate the whips to designate Members of Parliament to sectoral committees on the basis of party or organisational representation.

Madam Speaker, as I wrote to you, I indicated that I would not make big changes due to the fact that this the last session and we do not have enough time. Secondly, we have much business, which is pending in committees, and if we change we shall require time to handle the transition, which time we do not have.

I beg to request that as of now, I do designate only members who were affected by the Cabinet reshuffle. When the new Cabinet was announced, some Members became ministers and therefore created gaps in the committees. I also beg that in case we really need to change the leadership, I be allowed to come back tomorrow to handle the leadership part; otherwise, as of now I would like to request that I designate only Members of Parliament, as I requested, who were affected by the Cabinet reshuffle.

Madam Speaker, rule 176(6) of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament, 2012, enjoins party whips the authority to designate sectoral committees of Parliament. I have, therefore, designated the following Members of Parliament to the following committees: 

On the Committee of Legal and Parliamentary Affairs, I beg to designate hon. Richard Todwong, hon. John Ssimbwa, hon. Harriet Ntabazi, hon. Lowila Oketayot and hon. James Kakooza. Hon. Todwong was appointed the Deputy Secretary General of the NRM Party while others requested that they should be shifted. 

On the Committee of Tourism, Trade and Industry, I beg to designate hon. Kasule Justine Lumumba and hon. Rose Namayanja Nsereko. They are still Members of Parliament, Madam Speaker. On the Committee of East African Community Affairs, I beg to designate hon. Amama Mbabazi and Peter Nyombi –(Laughter)– as new members of that committee. I beg to submit, Madam Speaker. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, as you are aware those members were unallocated. Their movement occurred because of other appointments. I put the question that those members be approved as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

3.33
THE OPPOSITION DEPUTY CHIEF WHIP (Mr Roland Mugume): Thank you. Madam Speaker. The Opposition has not changed the designation of members to the committees. We have only three members whom I would like to present to this august House. We have hon. Beatrice Anywar Atim who has been moved from the Committee of Natural Resources to the Committee of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. Hon. Hussein Kyanjo has moved from the Committee on Presidential Affairs to the Committee on Foreign Affairs. Hon. Winfred Kiiza has moved from the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development to the Committee on Foreign Affairs. 

Madam Speaker, the rest of the members have not expressed interest to transfer hence they have to continue to serve in the committees where they were last stationed. I beg to move, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that those members be distributed as requested by the Leader of the Opposition. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: The issue of leadership will be handled separately. We are waiting for the independents to give us their preference; 23 of them had not given us their preferences. They will either remain in their committees or we shall give them time, maybe tomorrow? Okay. Thank you very much.
 
CAPT. LAKOT: Thank you, Madam Speaker. In the same vein of designating members to different committees, I have not heard of the designation of members of the Uganda People’s Defence Forces yet I submitted my request.

THE SPEAKER: I think you have not indicated whether you are moving from your old committees or remaining there. We are dealing with the ones who had no committees and those who have been reallocated. If you are making changes, you write to me and we shall announce it tomorrow.

CAPT. LAKOT: We are not making changes.

THE SPEAKER: Still write to us and say you are not making any changes.

CAPT. LAKOT: Okay, Madam Speaker. 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON ANALOGUE TO DIGITAL MIGRATION FOR TELEVISION BROADCASTING IN UGANDA

3.37
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ICT AND COMMUNICATIONS (Mr Nyombi Thembo): Thank you, Madam Speaker and honourable members. In 2006, the Radio-communications Conference (RRC06) of the International Telecommunication Union (ITU) and the subsequent Geneva Agreement (GE06) resolved that the use of analogue broadcasting technologies should cease by June 17 2015 for ITU member countries. The digital migration process is expected to bring about socio-economic benefits including digital dividend, new business opportunities, better picture and video quality, and local content development, among others.

To reap the anticipated benefits, Uganda must migrate within the set timelines. It is important to note that the key requirements for successful migration include the following: 
a) 	Separation of the industry into two market segments of content and infrastructure services provision; 
b) 	Rollout of national signal distribution infrastructure; 
c) 	Digitization of content production and aggregation; 
d) 	Ensuring availability and affordability of Set Top Boxes (STBs) which enable the existing analogue TV sets to receive the digital TV signals; 
e) 	Capacity building and awareness creation for value chain players in the digital migration process; and 
f) 	Establishment of a supporting institutional, legal and regulatory framework.
 
Arising out of the RRC06 and the GE06, as indicated in the introduction, the Uganda Government developed the Analogue to Digital Migration Policy of 2011, which among other things spells out the roles of different stakeholders and operational framework of the migration process. The salient features of the Analogue to Digital Migration Policy include the following: 
a) 	Role differentiation among the key stakeholders, that is, Government (Ministry of ICT), UCC, broadcasters, UBC and consumers of TV broadcasting services; 

b) 	Uganda Broadcasting Corporation (UBC) was designated the sole signal distributor for the five first years and as such to unbundle itself into content and signal distribution services entity;

c) 	Consumers of TV broadcasting services (the general public that own TVs) to be responsible for the purchase of STBs to enable them receive digital signal over the analogue TV sets; 

d) 	Uganda Communications Commission (UCC) to regulate the sector inclusive of implementing the switch off dates, putting in place a new licence framework, separating content and signal distribution licences and public awareness campaigns; 

e) 	Government to handle the necessary legislations, policy formulation, budgetary support to the process, and public awareness; 

f) 	Broadcasters to adhere to the deadlines, public awareness campaigns to encourage consumers to convert to digital television, upgrading of their studios to comply with digital broadcasting and enhance content production; and 

g) 	The signal distributor to carry and distribute broadcasters’ television signals from studios to designated transmission sites.

Madam Speaker and honourable members, you may note that the success of the migration process is underpinned by each stakeholder playing their role as stipulated in the policy. 

Madam Speaker, I am pleased to inform the House that a phased approach in the implementation of digital television infrastructure was adopted whereupon:

Phase 1

Phase I included the set-up of Digital Terrestrial Television (DTT) transmission system at Kololo covering the Greater Kampala area, which is approximately 60 kilometres average radius. This was completed and commissioned. It is functional with a capacity to carry 48 programme streams over four frequency channels of 8 MHz bandwidth. Each frequency channel is capable of carrying 12 standard programme streams. The signals can be received and viewed by any person within its coverage who has a Free to Air (FTA) set top box or a television set with a digital TV tuner. Kololo DTT transmission covers areas of Kampala, Entebbe, Wakiso, parts of Mityana, Lugazi, Mpigi and Bombo.  The digital signal has been on air in the Greater Kampala area for the last 18 months. 

Phase 2

The second phase involving the acquisition and set-up of equipment for 17 DTT transmission sites, satellite signal distribution network and network operation centre is under implementation. Each site shall have a single broadcast transmitter capable of transmitting 12 programmes. These sites cover the current analogue footprint in the country. Among these sites, seven sites of Arua, Mbarara, Masaka, Masindi, Mbale, Hoima and Kisoro shall be ready by 15 July 2015. The remaining 10 sites, that is, Jinja, Lira, Kiboga, Kabale, Soroti, Gulu, Fort Portal, Rukungiri, Ntungamo and Rubirizi shall be completed by end of August 2015.

Compliance with the International Deadline

Article 52 of the ITU Constitution provides that from the end of two years from the date of entry into force, a signatory member that has not deposited an instrument of ratification, acceptance, or approval loses its voting rights in the ITU. Uganda complied with this deadline. Recently, Uganda was elected to the ITU Council and has continued as a voting member of the ITU. Uganda is therefore obligated as a signatory to comply with the international deadline which is mandatory and has been centrally coordinated by the ITU. 

As a signatory member state, Uganda has undertaken the necessary steps under the ITU in implementation of digital broadcasting with the neighbouring countries. Uganda has undertaken a national planning process and coordinated it with her neighbours for the seamless co-existence of broadcasting services around border areas. It should be noted that according to Article 12(8) (b) of the RRC06, countries that have not migrated will not be protected and cases of interferences can potentially lead to international disputes between member states. 

Compliance is critical to avoid interference between the two services due to the fact that broadcast services are being migrated from their existing bands (470 to 862 MHz) to another band (470 to 694 MHz). The regional plans which are agreed to and signed off have been notified to the ITU and constitute the Master International Frequency Register (MIFR).

Uganda has therefore negotiated with her neighbours to allow final migration by 31 August 2015, which means that introduction of services within the digital dividend such as LTE, the so called 4G, within the East African region will only be possible after Uganda migrates to avoid interference by the analogue signal. It should be emphasized that analogue signals are no longer protected internationally following the 17 June 2015 deadline. Therefore, UCC, the regulator, has coordinated and agreed with Kenya, Tanzania and Rwanda (who have attained the migration completely), Sudan and the DRC and made undertakings to migrate its analogue signal at the borders by 31 August 2015. This is in order to avoid any international disputes due to interference from analogue signals. 

This position is reflected in Uganda’s regional obligations under the EAC/African countries contained in frameworks and standards for achieving timely migration; for example, parameters for migration and standards have been set jointly under the East African Communications Organisation (EACO), which had set the deadline for migration for the East African Region as 31 December 2013 which unfortunately we could not attain. Similar commitments have been made by Uganda under the Northern Corridor States and at the heads of states Summit which set June 15 2015 as the analogue switch off date for member countries.

Accordingly, Uganda is following a phased approach where the Analogue Switch-off (ASO) is planned in accordance with the rollout of infrastructure and availability of the digital signals. On 15 June 2015, Uganda switched off the analogue television signal in Greater Kampala, meeting the northern corridor switch-off target date, while achieving partial digital migration in accordance with the international deadline of 17 June 2015. 

The international deadline of 17 June 2015 has therefore been implemented for the Greater Kampala under phase 1, which is a radius of 60 kilometres offsite from Kololo, and the rest of the country will be achieved by 31 August 2015. Uganda has achieved the migration deadline for about 60 per cent of the current viewership. Statistics estimate approximately 3.2 million TV sets in Uganda of which about two million are within the Greater Kampala area. The signal is therefore available and steps have been taken to ensure reception by the viewers.  The second phase of the DTT involving 17 transmission sites, network operation centre and satellite distribution network is under implementation to be completed by 31 August 2015.

Issues of concern and interim measures 

Madam Speaker and honourable members, three issues of great concern are: capacity of Signet to handle signal distribution functions; availability and accessibility of affordable set top boxes; and awareness creation and coordination with key stakeholders.

Availability and Accessibility of Set Top Boxes 

Madam Speaker, we note that there have been some challenges on availability and accessibility of affordable STBs in the country. It was envisaged, for instance, that Government would put into place fiscal measures to ensure the availability of affordable STBs but this has not been the case due to budgetary pressure which this august House is aware of. 

Analogue TV owners are required to buy a set-top box, a device that adapts the current analogue TV set to enable it receive and show the digital TV signal. We are aware that there are people who already have televisions with digital tuners and therefore will not require STBs. 

In order to reduce on the possibilities of having counterfeit STBs supplied by vendors, Government adopted technical standards upon which STBs are type approved for sale in Uganda. The supply of these set-top boxes in Uganda is currently left to the market forces of demand and supply. 

Madam Speaker, we estimate the total TV viewership in the country to be 3.2 million, as I had indicated earlier, of which about 60 per cent are in Kampala and surrounding areas. Out of these, about 50 per cent are hooked onto the pay TV services, which are already digital. We, therefore, estimate the urgent need to provide for the remaining 50 per cent analogue TV sets.  We have assurance from the currently 14 type approved set-top boxes vendors and the two major pay TV operators that they have FTA set-top boxes in excess of 0.8 million currently in the country. 

Government is taking additional measures to ensure availability of cheaper set-top boxes without compromising quality, and these include reviewing the specification and proposing zero tax rating. Further, the subscription providers have been prevailed upon to open up set-top boxes to receive free-to-air signals and these set-top boxes will not be used for subscription services. In total, the subscription providers are able to provide up to 1.5 million set-top boxes within Kampala. This is in addition to the 14 vendors who have been type approved by the UCC. 

Capacity of Signet to Handle Signal Distribution

Madam Speaker, on capacity of Signet to handle signal distribution functions, we may note that the Digital Migration Policy of 2011 designates the Uganda Broadcasting Corporation as the sole signal distributor. In accordance with the Digital Migration Policy provision, UBC has incorporated Signet Uganda Ltd, whose sole responsibility is signal distribution, to avoid conflict of interest between UBC, the content service provider and other TV broadcasters. Eventually, Signet Uganda Ltd shall be licensed as a separate company completely divorced from the governance structure of UBC. 

The Uganda Communications Commission, under the Rural Communications Development Fund (RCDF), has provided funding for the initial rollout of infrastructure for Signet Uganda Ltd following UBC’s current analogue infrastructure footprint nationwide. Overall, Signet Uganda Ltd has a robust DTT infrastructure facility at Kololo with the capacity to carry 48 programme streams and is currently carrying all existing broadcasters that have been hooked onto their system. Signet Uganda Ltd will have a national signal distribution platform by 31 August 2015.

Madam Speaker, to achieve the transition from analogue to digital broadcasting, the regulator has waived any other additional fees until the next licence year. Existing broadcasters have also been exempted from the initial entry fees and licence application fees. Further, Signet Uganda Ltd has also waived any carriage fees until the digital links to the studio of the current broadcasters have been established. In addition, the broadcasters have been permitted to continue using the analogue links to the Signet studio within Kampala in order to avoid disruption of services until they are replaced by Signet.

Awareness Creation and Coordination with Key Stakeholders

The Ministry of Information and Communication Technology, the Ministry of Information and National Guidance, UCC, UBC and other stakeholders have sensitised the general public about the importance of digital migration. Consultative meetings have been held with broadcasters, Members of Parliament and the public. Existing print and electronic media campaigns have been conducted over a period of three years in English and the four major local languages. The stakeholder consultations have continued to be conducted countrywide. 

In addition, on 20 June 2015 His Excellency the President of the Republic of Uganda met with the key stakeholders in the digital migration process. Prior to that meeting, on 16 June 2015 I held a consultative meeting with the same stakeholders in the digital migration process. Therefore, stakeholder engagement has been a cornerstone of the digital migration process and will continue in order to ensure a smooth transition. 

We are aware of the challenges, some of which were addressed in the last one week while others continue to be addressed as they emerge. It should be noted that much as analogue to digital migration has been related to TV broadcasting only, the migration process does relate to the whole telecommunication sector especially with regard to digital dividend and spectrum planning. We also have to be aware of interference signals from our neighbours and non-protection if we are interfered with, which would cause serious risks at both sovereign and corporate levels. I thank you, Madam Speaker and honourable members.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable minister, for updating us on the situation. Let us just have a few clarifications.

3.55
MR WAIRA MAJEGERE (NRM, Bunya County East, Mayuge): Thank you, Madam Speaker, and I thank my friend, the minister, hon. Nyombi Thembo, for the statement. 

My main issue of concern is on internal measures and accessibility of affordable set-top boxes. The minister should have done this in the first place. What he should have done first is being done at the end. There are millions of people in Uganda with television sets; I do not even think the data here is correct, that it is 3 million. It should be beyond that. These people are voiceless and it is this Parliament to talk for them. 

Madam Speaker, it is your seat to protect these people. It is us to speak for them. Before I presented this issue, a set-top box was going for Shs 200,000. I have read in the papers that they now intend to bring it to Shs 30,000 but it was at Shs 200,000 and the minister has not committed himself on the prices of the set-top boxes.

This country has got a President and a Constitution. Article 41 of the Constitution is clear about the right of access to information. Even the Access to Information Act, 2005 is also clear that the Government is supposed to provide timely and accurate information to the public. The moment you bring in the element of paying then you are denying the people the other right.

We have education, where Government provides free education and there is also private education. There are government medical services and private medical services. Therefore, the ministry should bring in that element. Ugandans have got a right of access to information; you do not have to make them pay very expensively to get this public information. Let those who cannot afford the luxurious TVs go for UBC, Bukedde and so on so that they have free access to information. Those who can afford the luxurious TVs can pay monthly subscription. We should be able to protect Ugandans so that they are able to get access to information as cheaply as possible. I thank you, Madam Speaker. 

5.58
MS OLIVIA KABALE (NRM, Woman Representative, Iganga): I thank you, Madam Speaker, and I would like to thank the minister. 

I would like to seek clarification from where hon. Majegere has stopped. He has said that Government has a responsibility of communicating to the people. Therefore as a ministry, should all the people that want to get information from Government first pay for the information? I feel that there should be a common place or channel where information from Government can be relayed. When I travelled to the UK, I had the benefit of reading free newspapers. I am not saying we should do the same but at least we should have a communication channel through which Government relays information. 

I have been watching television and people usually go on strike because of the places where the masts are installed. I do not know whether you do consider the environmental issues and if consultation of the people because those masts, which are environmentally dangerous, are placed where people stay. We would like you to clarify and we would like you to explain to people how they will be getting information especially information that is vital. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

4.00
MR MOSES BALYEKU (NRM, Jinja Municipality West, Jinja): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to differ from my colleagues but also to thank the minister for making a very good presentation on the issue of digital and analogue transformation.

Uganda and the world are moving ahead. We have to be considerate that we have to move forward. We have been advertising this issue for the last three years - that we are going to transform from analogue to digital. We were on AM and we moved onto FM and we now have so many radio stations. Right now, we cannot get any more stations. Even the equipment for analogue transmission is no longer on market. We have to move forward and comply with international standards. What hon. Majegere is saying is that we should have Government on analogue and then have the rich on digital - (Interruption)

MR MAJEGERE WAIRA: Madam Speaker, I was very clear and I used basic English. (Laughter) I am not trying to block the move from analogue to digital but there are basic measures that we have to put in place. We are on FM but are we paying to listen to FM? We are not paying. These are the issues we must look into. Do you have to stampede Ugandans just because the International Telecommunication Union has given you a deadline? We have to put some necessary measures in place. Therefore, is he in order to insinuate that I was trying to encourage Government to lag behind?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, you are both asking for the same thing and supporting the programme but from different directions. (Laughter)

MR BALYEKU: I thank you, Madam Speaker, for helping hon. Majegere with the simple English. Even here in Parliament, we moved from paper and went to iPads and there was a crisis here because people did not even know how to use them, but now everybody uses an iPad in this Parliament. Therefore, when it comes to issues of digital and analogue, some televisions already have inbuilt decoders; if you can afford a television, you can afford a decoder. 

For hon. Majegere to dispute that there are not 3.9 million televisions in Uganda - The only information we depend on is from UCC and we cannot dispute. If they say 60 per cent already are on pay television and yet even the prices - The honourable member here was telling me that a decoder has gone as low as Shs 90,0000. 

I think we should accept the minister’s statement and the country moves forward; we close this debate and go to the next item because the country has already moved on. (Applause)  We cannot continue like this. Therefore, Madam Speaker, I would like to move a motion that we adopt the minister’s statement and we move on. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I appreciate that we need to move but I think hon. Majegere’s issue was about whether the facility is affordable and accessible to the population.
 
4.03
MR NELSON SABILA (NRM, Kongasis County, Bukwo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have two issues to raise. I would like to start from where hon. Majegere stopped, that there is need for affordability and accessibility of these decoders; that is obvious. 

Secondly, I have taken with concern the statement by the honourable minister that the digital transmission will follow the current analogue footprint. We have areas which were not covered under the current analogue footprint. On 2 September 2014, the honourable minister for ICT informed this House that they had acquired a frequency for Bukwo UBC radio, which has never worked up to today. Now that we are going from analogue to digital following that footprint where Bukwo is not catered for, what plans does the honourable minister have to ensure that areas like Bukwo are covered under the current digital migration so that those people are not denied access to information, which is a right? I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Actually, hon. Sabila’s point is really critical. These people listen to Kenyan radio and television stations. They are cut off from Uganda’s communication.

4.05
MR AMOS LUGOLOOBI (NRM, Ntenjeru County North, Kayunga): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I support the presentation by the honourable minister. I always believe that in such paradigm migrations, we have challenges but challenges are always expected. I recall in those days when we had fixed telephones and we were beginning the mobile telephone network, a telephone set used to cost about Shs1 million but we allowed the process to continue gradually. Today, you can get a set at as low as Shs 30,000. 

The important thing in this migration process is that we have allowed a free market to operate in the provision of these facilities - the STBs. Therefore, we have been witnessing a decline in the prices of these devices. Within a very short period, the prices have been going down. I think we need to continue supporting this liberalisation in the acquisition of these devices but also manage the quality of what is coming in. As long as we deal with those, it is important that we continue complying with the international requirements as provided under the ITU.

However, I have one small challenge; Kayunga is located beyond a radius of 60 kilometres. Unfortunately, we were switched off. Could the minister explain why –(Interjection)– No, I am not within the 60-kilometre radius which he said is provided for under the Kololo transmitter but we were switched off. Could he explain those areas that were switched off that are beyond the 60 kilometres?

4.07
DR MEDARD BITEKYEREZO (NRM, Mbarara Municipality, Mbarara): Thank you, Madam Speaker. As I sat here, I consulted with the Rt Hon. Prime Minister because he was in ICT and I asked what he did. He has advised me that if I do not buy a decoder, I can have a digital television and I still can pick the signal but a decoder might be relatively cheap. 

However, I do not want to run from hon. Majegere’s view. He is talking about how we can cater for the provision of signals to those people who vote for us and who also want to see what is happening in this country. I am not against technology but what I believe in is giving the people of Uganda subsidised decoders, which can be bought by the villagers. Recently, I installed a television set for my mother in the village but if the decoder becomes too complicated or if I die, this woman cannot manage. My view is that we provide a subsidy for the decoders for the poor people in the village because we have a village background that we must not run away from.

Secondly, Kayunga is already disconnected as hon. Lugoloobi said and in some places like Bukwo, they watch Kenyan TV. Does the minister want to tell us that Bukwo will now be able to watch TV? If digital migration will enable television viewers in Bukwo to watch television, then I support the Minister of Information but if it does not, then let the villagers remain on analogue. I thank you very much.

4.09
MR BENSON OBUA-OGWAL (UPC, Moroto County, Alebtong): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I stand not to speak as the Shadow Minister for ICT because I am not; I am the Shadow Minister for East Africa Community Affairs but I have been in the committee for ICT for very long and I can speak here with some authority.

The issue of digital migration has been very thorny and for a very long time. When we stand here to debate today about the fact that analogue television has already been switched off and many of us can still have signals, we should be proud of that. There was a time we were not even sure that the infrastructure was going to be in place because UBC, which is supposed to be the sole signal distributor, was not ready. Thanks to UCC, they provided money through the RCDF and the infrastructure has been put in place. 

Now this is not a Ugandan issue. This is an international issue and the whole world is going to switch very soon; in fact, they have switched already. Therefore, we cannot afford, as a country, to be caught off-guard and just keep oscillating and vacillating over this simple matter. (Applause)

The other issue of availability of set-top boxes is something that can be handled through massive importation of the same. I am told through this report and other reports that I have read that set-top boxes are already either available within the country and are ready for distribution or they are on the way shortly. Therefore, this is not something that should really divide us. If we are talking of subsidising for those who cannot afford, that is also another matter which we can consider on its own merit. However, to say that we should postpone - It is the same thing that we have being doing with the kaveera. It is the same thing we have always done with the IDs. It is the same thing and this country should change from oscillation and vacillation.

On that note, Madam Speaker, I would like to support the minister in his statement and say that probably we also should consider the issue of taxation - if we can waive it so that these set-top boxes become more affordable. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

4.12
MS FRANCA AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Agago): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister also for that statement, which was actually required before the switching-off of Ugandans.

The issue here is not about whether digital migration is good or not. It is very clear that all of us need to go digital. However, the problem is whether it is manageable and affordable to all Ugandans. This is because as we speak, over 70 per cent of Ugandans living within that radius are not watching TV. I live in Seeta and as I drove back home the day it was switched off – I would like to declare here that I do not know Luganda but I have a little knowledge of it – these boda boda guys along the way stopped me and said “honourable, please mugambe hon. Thembo atuyambe”. (Laughter) 

I did not understand what they were saying. However, all I could pick was “tuyambe” because “tuyambe” to me sounds like “to help”. I stopped over to ask what they were saying and some of them who could speak some bit of English were able to tell me, “Tell hon. Thembo to help switch us back on because we cannot watch. At least let them switch us back on NTV and UBC. Those are the best TVs that we can watch without having to pay a coin because even if we are supposed to buy at Shs 70,000 very many of us cannot pay school fees of Shs 30,000.” 

These are the kinds of questions, Madam Speaker, that are being asked. Moreover all of us have the freedom to access information. The question is whether Ugandans were prepared to go digital; that is the biggest question. Therefore, we have got to make sure we manage it. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

4.15
MR JACK WAMANGA-WAMAI (FDC, Mbale Municipality, Mbale): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I kept wondering why the minister laboured with this long statement. The issue at hand is whether Ugandans can afford a central box. It should be in the interest of Government to disseminate information to the people. The other time I was watching Mr John Enanga, the police publicist, warning the public about the imminent attack on Uganda so people should be careful. Therefore, it is important for the Government to make this as cheap as possible.

Hon. Majegere struggled to explain the issue. The issue is not that Uganda has got to sign international obligations; nobody opposes that we are members of ITU or that we are members of the East African Community. There is no question about that. When we signed those agreements, we must honour them. However, what we are saying is: can Ugandans afford this equipment to watch the news, to get information, to watch government programmes? That is the issue at hand. 

Our people cannot afford this equipment. We would like the people to follow what is happening in Parliament. Madam Speaker, as I speak, people are not following what is going on in Parliament. For quite some time, we were switched off – (Interruption)

MR BALYEKU: I would like to inform hon. Wamai-

THE SPEAKER: Is it a point of information?

MR BALYEKU: No, it is a point of order. Madam Speaker, in the minister’s statement he said we have 3.6 million television sets in Uganda. They have only switched off those in a radius of 60 kilometres and they have established that 60 per cent of the televisions that were switched off are already on air. Is it in order for hon. Wamanga-Wamai to say that people now cannot even afford to be informed about issues threatening the security of the country, and that the country is not at peace because the police have to inform us about terrorists? 

The issue is not to scare the public. The issue is that most TVs in the areas that have been switched off are still on air. Let us be considerate to this country. We do not just have to speak because we have to speak about certain matters. This matter of TVs has already been rectified. 

Therefore, is hon. Wamanga-Wamai in order to assert that most of the TVs are now switched off? No, they have not been switched off; he is not in order for that. (Laughter) Madam Speaker, I know I rose on a point of order but I had to first inform hon. Wamanga-Wamai before I bring him to order. He is not in order to inform the House that most of the televisions are switched off. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think members are looking at this matter from different perspectives. Therefore, I think let us allow all the views to come out so that the minister can take the right decision.

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. We would like Ugandans to follow what is taking place in the country. Many of these Ugandans who have got these TV sets cannot afford these DStv and so on. What we are saying is that let Government provide these central boxes or make it cheaper even for the people to afford information. Otherwise, nobody is opposing going digital. 

What we want is for our people to access information. We want all Ugandans to follow what is happening in the country. However, if you make it very expensive, people cannot afford and people are already switched off. Hon. Nyombi Thembo, if you went round and asked the people in your area who watch Bukedde TV and follow the Agataliko Nfuufu news bulletin, people would be very bitter with you. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

4.19
MR ODO TAYEBWA (FDC, Bushenyi-Ishaka Municipality, Bushenyi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I support the statement of the minister. We have to measure to the standards of this world. This was a Geneva agreement and we were actually right to switch off by 17th June. 

However, I would like to tell you that you should notice that on most of the TV channels, there are some advertisements and announcements by some people who sell set-top boxes. They are telling people that if they bought this set-top box – some are selling them at Shs 40,000, Shs 50,000, Shs 100,000 – they would be free-to-air. However, after one month you start paying subscription of about Shs 40,000. There should be better clarification to communicate to the people that the set-top box that they are buying is free-to-air forever and not that they will start paying subscription after a month. I met a customer who had bought a set box from Go-TV and he thought he would be on air all the time. He did not know that after one month, he would start subscribing. 

Therefore, you should now clarify this information to members and tell people whether they are to buy the free-to-air set-top boxes instead of the ones like DStv that they will have to subscribe to. It is confusion on most of the advertisements on these channels. Otherwise, we shall not wait for – of course, I feel that people who can buy TVs are able to buy set-top boxes even if some of the TVs do not have inward digital. Thank you.

4.22
MR LATIF SSEBAGALA (DP, Kawempe Division North, Kampala): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Allow me as the Parliamentary Imam, on behalf of the Muslim Parliamentary Caucus, to wish you and your Deputy, the members of Parliament and the staff the best of the holy month of Ramadan. 

Madam Speaker, I have heard many members including, hon. Moses Balyeku, say that we should move forward as a country. Indeed we are a little bit behind schedule. The issue is not about people not moving forward in as far as digital migration is concerned. I represent part of the city and so, I represent people whom we feel many would be moving in that direction. However, the statistics that have been given by the minister, to best of my knowledge especially here in Kampala are not true. 

Over the weekend, I moved around my constituency and the issue wherever I passed was: “What happened to our TVs? They are not on.” Here in Kampala people are wondering what is going on. There was lack of sensitisation.

This morning, I had a consultative meeting and among the very many questions was digital migration. They told me that if that was the case that you were going to switch off, you would have informed us in time not only through advertisement. They also believe that the timing - some of them have reached an extent of saying that maybe the timing was simply because hon. Amama Mbabazi had come up and therefore, nobody wanted to see what was going on. That is their interpretation.

Madam Speaker, I request that as we move, I believe that everybody is in support but given the fact that even here in Parliament, we have not yet even moved to the fullest into that direction - we still record our names in writing right there. Are we together? Therefore, we are moving slowly to other – (Interruption)

MR LUGOLOOBI: Madam Speaker, I should have expected the honourable member holding the Floor to have been adequately informed about this digital migration which process has been on for the last three years. He should have been informed enough to inform his electorate - (Laughter). I am very surprised that at this stage, he has not informed them and they are not aware of a process that has been going on for the last three years. There were announcements on radios everywhere and on television. Is he therefore in order to continue insinuating that his population is not aware when actually he is the one who did not inform them adequately? (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I know that the adverts have been on for some time but all they said was that we shall switch from analogue to digital. What was not explained was the implication of that switch. It was not done and that was the problem.  Honourable members, as we proceed -

MR SSEBAGALA: Thank you, Madam Speaker for that wise ruling. I was still holding the Floor - (Member timed out.) 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, please join me in welcoming the Rt Hon. Jacob Francis Mudenda, the Speaker of the National Assembly of Zimbabwe. He is up there in the gallery. You are welcome. He is also an advocate of the High Court of Zimbabwe. (Applause)

Please join me in welcoming hon. Auxilia Mnangagwa, Member of Parliament who is also the wife of the Vice President, Mr Mnangagwa. You are welcome. (Applause)

Join me in welcoming Paurina Mparirwa, MP of the National Assembly of Zimbabwe. (Applause)

We welcome Mr Kennedy Chokuda. He is the new Clerk of the National Assembly of Zimbabwe. (Applause)

We also have Mr Godfrey Chipare, the staff of the Speaker’s Office; Mr Frank Nyamahowa, Mr Ndamuka Marimo, Mr Pangani Mukombwe, Mrs Pfungwa Nyika and Mr Sly Mganzu. You are all welcome to the Uganda National Assembly. (Applause)

4.28
DR FRANCIS EPETAIT (FDC, Ngora County, Ngora): Madam Speaker, it was in 2006 that a resolution was taken to migrate from analogue to digital. What Government did was to go into a period of a siesta and lull. Until 2011 is when they came up with a policy. It is a pity that we lost a whole five years sleeping. Now we have had a stampede, according to the minister’s statement. Consultation - everything is lumped up - June, on such a date, His Excellency the President had to meet the stakeholders. What were we doing from 2006? Government ought to do the honourable thing and say we are sorry, we are in this stampede; we forgot that the deadline was 17 June 2015. I think there was big laxity on the part of Government. 

Nobody denies that the quality of pictures and transmission is better when we go digital. However, we ought to have prepared ourselves enough to beat the deadline on time rather than stampeding everybody. That is why this question is being asked: “Why the stampede?”

Madam Speaker, on page 7, the minister came up with certain proposal that Government is taking additional measures to ensure availability of cheaper set-top boxes without compromising quality. May we be told in the easiest terms so that the Government Assurances committee can capture it? When do we expect this zero rating for the set-top boxes? When do we hope that the cheaper set-top boxes will then be available because everybody is crying about the cost?

However on the issue of quality, I think everybody knows that there is better transmission and quality but the blackout and rush is blamed on the laxity and long siesta that Government decided to take after this resolution was made way back in 2006. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

4.30
MR IBRAHIM SSEMUJJU NGANDA (FDC, Kyadondo County East, Wakiso): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Issues of transition are very difficult. At the beginning of this sitting, you briefed us about electronic voting in this Parliament and eight of us have not registered, including me. Transitions are not simple things and it is not limited to power –(Laughter)

However, the point I would like to make is that I have seen the pay TV people and that is Star Times and DStv and they are very aggressive. It is as if when the switch off happened, they took over the process from that stage. On every TV station that you watch, they are advertising and calling out people to go and buy decoders. However, the information is not clear whether the decoders they are selling are also free; that you just buy it once and you do not have to pay subscription monthly. That is where the minister needs to help us to explain to the public but also to speak to these providers. They should not advertise as if this is a one-off that you will buy and never have to pay subscription. 

Otherwise, I do not buy the idea that Government should go and distribute free set-top boxes. A TV is optional; you can even listen to news on a radio station. If you cannot buy a TV, you cannot say that you are not listening to Government programmes unless you want to see the ministers themselves. You can afford to listen to radio stations –(Interruption)

MR KASIBANTE: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. We all know there are people who have different defects. There are those with sight and hearing defects. In the world of communication therefore, a TV cannot be optional. This is because it can help those who cannot hear to see and follow what is going on world over. Therefore, is it in order for my good friend, hon. Ssemujju, to say that TV is optional when it helps those who have hearing defects to also see what is going on world over? 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, it is not in order to create an environment which discriminates against parts of our society. As we plan, we should consider all these people. (Applause)

MR SSEMUJJU: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Of course hon. Kasibante knows that TV is both audio and visual and I do not want to belabour that point. (Laughter)

Madam Speaker, it is just an appeal that the next time we have such a big project, we need to prepare more than we did this time so that the boxes are imported before the switch off happens. When you switch off and then you import boxes later, people will have problems with that. I thank you.

4.35
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Serere): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for the information and to also support him. 

I am one of those people who were and still are so happy with the migration from analogue to digital. The people of Kasilo have been crying for those signals to be extended to their county. People kept quiet. The only people who watch TV in Kasilo are people with decoders. If you did not have a decoder previously, then you could not watch TV. I am now happy that everyone is at the same footing with the people of Kasilo. Since we have reached the same level, I do not want exemptions to be applied to others by saying that some people should be exempted from paying taxes. We are now equal under the law of digital migration. 

The problem with Ugandans or Africans is attitude. When we were still in the Parliamentary Commission and started the electronic voting, we announced, advertised and informed members. Surprisingly, just as hon. Ssemujju has stated, up to today there are still 80 members of Parliament who have not registered for it and when the day for the constitutional amendment comes and we ask to use the electronic voting, I hope some members are not going to claim that they have not registered and need the time adjusted. It all comes down to the attitude of Ugandans and if the members of Parliament who are educated and enlightened can behave like that, how do you expect the people of Kasilo to behave? 

This is an international matter and it has happened. When the Kenyans switched off, I remember raising this matter here and I asked how prepared we were in regard to advertisement and information but people were not listening; they thought the transition would not catch up with them. It has now caught up with us. I think it is a lesson to us to proceed. 

The only problem the government made was delaying to import enough boxes or decoders to this country. The government is faulted in that area and Ugandans will hold them responsible. They have now run out of stock and you have switched from analogue to digital. How do you expect them to behave? That justifies Ugandans’ demand for an apology from the government. You must move faster and handle those matters. 

I support the statement by the minister. We should just ask the government to react faster. We cannot move backwards. However much we talk here, the deadline was set internationally in 2006 and it has happened. The best is for Government to speed up and provide enough decoders and set-top boxes for the country. I know in this country people are talking about the cost of the decoders. It is just Shs 90,000. There is no TV less than Shs 90,000. If you can afford a TV, how can you fail to afford a decoder?  

4.38
MR WILLIAM NZOGHU (FDC, Busongora County North, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker. My concern from the statement of the minister is in regard to the infrastructure for the digital migration programme. When you move around the country especially around Kampala, you will realise that every single moment, cables are being laid to support the digital migration. The challenge is that we are not sure about the security of the cables being laid especially those being laid in the road reserves -

THE SPEAKER: Do you want to take this information?

MR NZOGHU: No, I will take it later. With the trend today, I know that the monies that we are spending on this digital migration are taxpayers’ money. I do not know how the minister for example looks at it to imagine that of the 35 million Ugandans, it is only less than one million that can have this programme fully implemented. 

I do not know how we are going to have the 34 million also brought on board so that we have Government doing its role to move from analogue to digital and also have the population realize that we are moving as a country and not moving for the sake of moving.  

Government is even likely not to realise revenue. For as long as there are no subsidies to the packages that go with digital migration, Government is going to lose money. How many people in the villages watch NTV or other programmes?  Why therefore should we have these people taxed? Why should we have them taxed for example when they are watching football? The monies that they pay is to the effect that the various taxes that we collect should be utilised in the interest and for the interest of the people of Uganda and not a few Ugandans.

4.41
MR JACOB OBOTH (Independent, West Budama County South, Tororo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to support the statement by the minister and I would like to associate myself with other similar sentiments and submissions by several other colleagues in this direction.

It has been stated earlier that transiting from analogue to digital or to anything else is not a simple thing, at least according to evidence provided by hon. Ibrahim Ssemujju. In East Africa alone, Tanzania concluded this matter in December last year; Kenya in February and Uganda here, we are making a case.

Hon. Okupa talked about Kasilo, of course even my constituents in Tororo struggle to access the TV signal. Let us stop this stone-age mentality. Whoever is able to afford a TV set, the presumption is that you should be able to afford this other Set Top Box.

The benefits are - Government had to incur costs to effect the migration. Therefore, it will be also on our side to do that. It is possible that probably the information did not go out early enough and yet there are implications. However, we are now doing a post-mortem and we do not have any regrets, let us push on. This is how we can embrace technology. 

Last year, we moved from analogue to digital; I see many people with iPads, we have email addresses, among others -[Mr Olanya: “Information.”]- These are not land-related matters but – (Interruption.)

MR OLANYA: I would like to thank my honourable colleague – this is not related to land. The information I would like to give you is that the companies that are selling decoders as we talk such as Star Times, Zuku, Go-Tv, among others, are misleading the public because the information they are giving the people is that the government has changed and is informing people to buy their products. Therefore, people are getting discouraged because of the monthly subscription and the cost they have to pay to buy the decoder and a monthly fee of either Shs 25,000 or Shs 35,000. Therefore, the information is misleading the population.

MR OBOTH: Madam Speaker, I was worried that it was going to be about land in Amuru but I am glad it is helpful. 

The case therefore is to invite ourselves to embrace this process as it comes to a conclusion. Of course, we cannot do it perfectly. There is no way that you can have migration from analogue to digital without the challenges. Expecting that is expecting too much from a human being or from Government. It is a lesson we are taking as we migrate and move. I am sure that as the Luo move from Bahr el Ghazal to Tororo and Kenya, there were several lessons just like you are doing this. Without migration, we do not make any progress. 

4.44
MS ROSEMARY NYAKIKONGORO (Independent, Woman Representative, Sheema): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for the information. There was a lot of misinformation going on in our community and one of them was that Government has failed to raise money through taxation to support NRM elections and that is why they are bringing in that kind of thing; to pay for those boxes. I believe it goes back to sensitisation. You said that you have been sensitising for the last three months but people do not know what analogue and digital mean. 

On the TV stations, they have been talking about migrating from analogue to digital but what do you expect a person who lives in Sheema to understand? I think you need to simplify it for them so that they understand exactly what Government is undertaking. 

Two, I would like to find out; from the statement, you said that you are doing it in phases. That means that the infrastructure is within Kampala. From my reliable source of information, UBC does not have enough funding to extend the infrastructure countrywide. Within this short period of time you are talking about, are you sure that you have enough budget to roll out this exercise throughout the country so that all the parts of the country are covered? We should not just give expectations that we are phasing out analogue for digital in July and in August we shall be wherever such that people do not put pressure on Government.

Another thing as my colleague said, why do we always wait to do things at the last hour? Last week we passed here a Bill - Madam Speaker, you know it very well. You have been saying that Government is actually delaying the Anti-Terrorism (Amendment) Act and we were aware that for all these years, we needed to get into total migration from analogue to digital.
Therefore, how are we going to handle this given the fact that we have spent all these years and we want to do the phasing within two months – are they two months or less than that? Thank you.

4.48
MR MOSES KASIBANTE (Independent, Rubaga Division North, Kampala): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am going to speak like a victim. This so-called digital migration, I can confess that it caught me unaware. As a Member of Parliament representing part of Kampala, which has been the first to be switched off, I am another victim in that category. Our fear is well embedded in the minister’s statement. The radio conference – (Interruption)

MR ODONGA OTTO: Madam Speaker, I rise on a point of order because all that we say here as Members of Parliament will have a direct bearing on the people out there. We should not conduct ourselves in such a manner that makes governing the ordinary populace impossible. Is it in order for a Member of Parliament who has an A ‘Level equivalent or above not to have information and be caught unaware about the digital migration? Are we in order to continue listening to such a category of Member of Parliament? (Laughter)

Can I therefore move a motion that he no longer be heard on this subject matter? The Germans did this in 1944; is he in order to be like a stone-aged person? (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the honourable member has the qualifications but he represents those who do not have the qualifications and they need that information.

MR KASIBANTE: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for that wise ruling. Mine was a confession and I represent people who were caught much unaware. 

This Radio Communication Conference and the subsequent Geneva resolution was way back in 2006. Between then and 2015, no particular effort on the side of Government was made to help Ugandans go digital. It is only a few months that advertisements were run and eventually Kampala and the nearby parts were switched off.

Madam Speaker, people may not know the effect of this. When other countries heard of this especially the member states of the International Telecommunication Union (ITU) and Uganda was not taking any steps especially aiming at sensitising citizens of this country, Uganda became a dumping place for the analogue equipment.

As Kenya, Rwanda and other member states of ITU were buying self-contained television sets with inbuilt Set Top Box (STBs), Ugandans were buying analogue equipment. This is a major problem. Today, we became a dumping place and all of a sudden Government wakes up to say you must go digital. We are serving with the analogue equipment which means we are going into double taxation. You bought a TV set and paid the tax and now you have to buy an STB and pay another tax - (Member timed out.)

4. 42
MR HASSAN FUNGAROO (FDC, Obongi County, Moyo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for this information. However, I see some gaps in his statement in the area of holistically handling the matter of technology transfer and not just migration. 

How do you connect the issue of digital migration in terms of TV to the aspect of technical transfer of knowledge and skills for the sake of maintenance, spares and tools? The Minister of Education is seated near you; how have you prepared our technical schools - our technical arm of knowledge - to understand and to handle the equipment that is coming to replace the analogue? Is there any way the minister can help the Ugandans easily to think about upgrading the analogue equipment to digital?

We onetime visited the defence industry of Ethiopia; there we saw the military of Ethiopia upgrading obsolete equipment to modern level. Therefore, is there any way you can advise the Ugandans in this matter that do not throw away your analogue equipment but there is something you can do a little at a low cost to transform that TV to digital?

We have a problem even here in Parliament. We are happy with the new security system especially the CCTV cameras that have been installed but the people who installed them are still here. Are you going to keep them here for life? These are people from China. What about the Ugandans? How do you make sure that we do not provide market for foreigners to manufacture their things and sell to us? How do you prepare the Ugandans in their minds and hands to handle the new technologies such that we also ground them here in our country? Your statement should provide room for this so that you tickle the Minister of Education. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, on the issue of Parliament, we have provided training for Ugandans who are working here at Parliament to understudy the management of those systems. Therefore, it is not that we are waiting for them to stay here forever. We have taken those steps for Parliament. I do not want you to insinuate that we are keeping the Chinese here. (Laughter)

MR ATIKU: Thank you, Madam Speaker and thank you, hon. Fungaroo, for giving way. The information that I would like to give is in regard to the digital migration process. The analogue system was initially controlled by one unit at one location but the new technology now requires that each individual having a TV set must have the set-top box and that is where the aspect of maintenance that you are raising – where we need to retool or we need to educate our people in the aspect of repairs and maintenance. 

While the analogue system did not require one to maintain or to have an input in terms of cost, this very new technology now requires each individual who acquires the set-top box to have a package for maintenance in case the system breaks down. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Your time is up, hon. Fungaroo. You donated your time.
 
4.57
MR BARNABAS TINKASIIMIRE (Buyaga County West, Kibaale): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the honourable minister for this statement and to also thank the Uganda Communications Commission for switching us off. They have been advertising in print and electronic media that they were going to switch us off. I was amazed by one of the honourable members from Kampala and I am glad one of my colleagues had to put him to order - claiming ignorance that he did not know that we were going digital. 

My mother in Kibaale who does not know how to write and read asked me what this thing called digital migration - (Laughter). I was able to explain what digital is. She asked me whether radios are also going digital; I told her that the government will start with TVs and this is going to be in mid-June 2015. Subsequently, they will tell us when the radios will also go digital. She only asked me to provide for her a digital radio. “I do not want to miss news when you are speaking in Parliament,” she said. 

My good friend, I will ask you to be proactive. Time has changed and all of us should accept that we must migrate and we who deal in selling information using digital equipment, your reach is bigger and – (Interruption) 

MR KASIBANTE: Madam Speaker, some reference has been made and I believe it is intended for me. When I stood up to speak, I was very clear. The minister’s statement says that a resolution was made in Geneva in 2006. I must confess that I was not in Geneva then and I must confess that I did not know it was out of that Geneva resolution of 2006. 

I am very well informed, more than somebody’s mother. I know there was migration from analogue to digital but I was not part of the Geneva conference. That is why I confessed that I was not aware of that part. Is it in order therefore for somebody to come and compare the ignorance of his mother to an honourable Member of Parliament? Thank you very much. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think we should stop wasting time. Those mothers cannot come here to speak so let us not talk about them. Please, conclude.

MR TINKASIIMIRE: For the record, my mother is not ignorant. That is why she demanded to have a digital radio. The question that I would like to ask the honourable minister is, how is he going to deal with disposal of the antennas since we are going to move away from climbing trees and houses to raise our antennas to using Set Top Boxes.

I would also like to appeal to UBC to prevail over the broadcasters to stop charging subscription fees in dollars. This is because we deal –(Member timed out.)

5.02
CAPT. MICHAEL MUKULA (NRM, Soroti Municipality, Soroti): Madam Speaker and honourable members, I rise to support the minister’s statement and the policy statement on digital migration.

Madam Speaker, when I was in Harvard, studies showed very clearly that the world has gone through five major revolutions. The first revolution was civilisation, the second was the agrarian revolution, the third was the industrial revolution, the fourth was the scientific revolution and the fifth is the ICT or the Information Technology revolution and that is what we are going through now.

Madam Speaker, the world is changing every day. Technology is changing every day. We need to understand very clearly that this digital migration is part of global change. Many countries have evolved globally and it is therefore important for us to note that even as we sit here, we used to have analogue telephones, which were non-functional. We have now moved to smart telephones. The big old telephones, which were as big as small bricks are no longer in use and this is only a few years back. 

If you look at the technology of vehicles, in the past the world used to have vehicles where you would change gears manually. Now we have moved to automatic vehicles. All vehicles averagely use automatic transmission, including trailers.

Therefore, as the country evolves from 7 per cent electricity coverage in the rural areas, we need to embrace digital migration so that as we continue to grow and increase rural electricity coverage, we also note that more people will now need to buy these boxes. I would like to urge colleagues in Parliament and those outside to embrace digital migration because it is clearer, more effective and global.

In any case, if we had not moved in this direction, the International Telecommunications Union would have switched Uganda off. This is the way to go. Uganda is becoming more technologically advanced and the country needs to embrace this. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, we have spent the mandatory one hour under Rule 44 of our Rules of Procedure in this statement. I will give the minister only two minutes to wind up. In doing so, I would like an assurance for the people of Sebei, which has been off air since Independence. The people of West Nile and Greater Acholi – I want an assurance on those issues.

5.05
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY (Mr Nyombi Thembo): Thank you, Madam Speaker and Members. I should say that I am pleasantly overwhelmed by the amount of support that you have given to us. I would like to assure you that the resolve we have shown regarding this matter is going to solve a lot of the problems we have been having in the market. This is because the market has not been sure as to whether we have such a resolve as Government. 

What is happening now is going to cause a lot of dynamics in the market as you will see prices going down and people importing more of these Set Top Boxes because they know that Government is resolved to go on with implementation. Thank you very much, honourable colleagues and Madam Speaker for the guidance you have given the House on this matter.

There are a few issues, which you have raised and which I would like to respond to. On the issue of affordability, I would like to reassure you that on top of the measures, which we have taken in the last one week or so where the price has decreased from around Shs 190,000 to around Shs 125,000, I am sure that with this resolve, you will see the prices going below that.

We are using our regulatory measures to ensure that prices reduce even further. We are considering allowing a basic Set Top Box that can be accessed by our poorest of the poor and that should be on the market anytime from now. Thank you very much for highlighting this issue. As Government, we are concerned about the issue of affordability.

Regarding accessibility, these set-top boxes are everywhere but affordability has been an issue, which we are going to handle. Thank you for the support.

On misleading advertisements, we know that pay TVs have sometimes been misleading the public but we are handling that. Through our regulatory arm, we are going to ensure that their adverts do not mislead the public. We are also going to enhance our awareness programmes to tell the people the difference between a pay TV set-top box and a free-to-air set- top box.

Madam Speaker, you have asked me to assure the people regarding areas where there is no analogue TV signal. After handling all areas where we have an analogue foot print now, we should be able to move to those areas where there is no TV signal. I would like to assure you that the revolution that is taking place now is going to change TV broadcasting for the better using the market forces - (Interruption)

MR EKANYA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Because of lack of clarity in the market and in the public, the minister might have taken action, which in future might violate the Public Finance Management Act. He was trying to be good and on page 8, you have attempted to waive taxes. If you proceed this way, you will have audit queries.

Now that there is resolve, please reconsider this position because it violates section 77 of the Public Finance and Management Act. The power to waive tax and vary it is with Parliament. Kindly implement the law unless you are authorised by Parliament.

MR NYOMBI THEMBO: Thank you very much for the clarification. Obviously, there is no way we can waive tax without involving Parliament. 

Some colleagues doubted the statistics but this is the best that is available. The good thing is that whoever doubted our statistics could not tell us the alternative. This is the best that is available. We estimate that we have 3.2 million TVs in the country. A research firm called Ipo Source has made this study and we trust the outcome of their research.

Regarding politics, there is no politics in this. Tempers are very high and one can only imagine the sort of wrong things that the populace is saying about you, colleagues, in the constituencies during this time. Nonetheless, Government will continue to do its work irrespective of whether there is an election or not.

On disposal of antennas, in some places you will still need antennas even with digital broadcasting. We have already put up an E-waste Management Policy and Strategy, which we are still promoting to see how to dispose of e-wastes.

Madam Speaker, I would like to thank colleagues once again for the support. I would like to assure you that as Government, we shall continue to make sure that we do what we are supposed to do to ensure that the issue of affordability is handled so that digital migration is not only for the well-off but it percolates even to our poorest of the poor. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, minister.

LAYING OF PAPERS

VALUE FOR MONEY AUDIT REPORTS – MARCH, 2015

5.12
MR WILLIAM NOKRACH (PWD Representative, Northern): Madam Speaker and Members, I beg to lay on the Table Value for Money audit reports, March 2015.
1. 	Management of investment land in industrial parks by Uganda Investment Authority.
2. 	Implementation of national content in the Oil and Gas sector by Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development.
3. 	Management of public debt by Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development.
4. 	Acquisition and utilisation of medical equipment under Uganda Health Systems Strengthening Project, Ministry of Health.
5. 	Efficiency of operations of regional referral hospitals in Uganda.
6. 	Gender mainstreaming in Wakiso District Local Government.
7. 	Efficiency of the system of road maintenance in Uganda; a case study of municipal councils.
8. 	Management of sewage in urban areas by National Water and Sewerage Corporation.
9. 	Implementation of Transmission Line Infrastructure Projects – Uganda Electricity Transmission Company Limited.
10. 	Implementation of physical development plans in municipalities. Madam Speaker and Members, I beg to lay.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. All these are sent to the relevant committee for perusal and report back.

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE UGANDA WILDLIFE RESEARCH AND TRAINING INSTITUTE BILL, 2013

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the Bill was read for the second time during the Fourth Session. The report of the committee was presented and what was waiting was the debate on the report. Are there any Members willing to speak on the issue?

5.14
MR GEOFREY EKANYA (FDC, Tororo County, Tororo): Madam Speaker, I know we have to speak but as you read in your communication, the faster we clear Bills and business, the better for this country. We have debated digital television and during committee stage, we can seek clarification and move on because we have two Bills on the Order Paper. I beg to seek your indulgence. 

THE SPEAKER: Can we propose that those who have issues can raise them in Committee Stage? Will that be okay? Honourable members, I put the question that the Uganda Wildlife Research and Training Institute Bill, 2013 be read for the second time.

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE UGANDA WILDLIFE RESEARCH AND TRAINING INSTITUTE BILL, 2013

5.17
Clause 1

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 1 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 2

THE CHAIRPERSON: Are there going to be changes under clause 2? Why don’t we do clause 2 last in case there are changes?

Clause 3

MS FLAVIA KABAHENDA: Madam Chairperson, the committee proposed to amend clause 3 in sub clause (a) by deleting the phrase “and dispose of” appearing on line one. The justification is to align the mandate of the institute with the provisions of the Public Finance Management Act, 2015.

MR EKANYA: Madam Chairperson, the report of the committee proposed an amendment to clause 2.

THE CHAIRPERSON: We always deal with clause 2 last as it deals with interpretation. I put the question that clause 3 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 3, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 4

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 4 do stand part of the Bill.

MR KWEMARA: Thank you so much, Madam Chairperson. When you look at the objects of the institute, they are the same as the functions of the institute. Therefore, I believe that we need to change this because when you look at clause 4(b), it is the same as clause 5(a); clause 4(c) is the same as clause 5(c) and so forth.

I wish to propose that we write clause 4 summarily as the objects of the institute to say, “The objects of institute are to undertake and coordinate wildlife research and training in accordance with the provisions of this Act.” 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Don’t you want to enumerate all these under clause 4?

MR KWEMARA: All of them are under clause 5. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Does clause 5 cover all those areas, which are under clause 4? Can we just extinguish it?

MS MUTAGAMBA: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. I would like to point out that clause 4 is specifically talking about the objects while in clause 5; we are talking about the functions. Definitely the functions originate from the objects so they are not one against the other. We feel that it is important for us to point out the objectives of this institution then in clause 5, we are talking about the functions of this institution.

MR KWEMARA: Honourable minister, I would like to draw your attention first to clause 4(a). The objectives of the institute are to provide for research. Actually that in itself is wrong as that is the objective of the Bill not the objective of the institute. 

Then look at (b): to conduct research in wildlife resources conservation in and outside protected areas. In clause 5(a) it says, to conduct research in resource conservation in and outside protected areas. This is the same thing. The objective of the institute can be written precisely but when we go to the functions of the institute then we enumerate one by one.

MR OBOTH: Madam Chairperson, whereas I would like to agree and also disagree with my good friend, there is no harm in stating the objectives and then just below it, state the functions. I think it is for purposes of clarity. It is just that these are the objectives of the institute. The observations made in clause 4 need to be corrected and we will correct that but the objectives and functions can go. I implore him, as a lecturer, to ignore the repetition as this is for purposes of emphasis. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I think since they are not in contradiction, let us leave them. Hon. Kwemara, are you not comfortable? I put the question that clause 4 do stand as part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 5

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 5 do stand as part of the Bill.

MS KABAHENDA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. On clause 5, the committee proposes to amend, in sub clause 1, by inserting a new paragraph (f) to read as: “To collaborate with other institutions of learning within and outside Uganda as the council may consider appropriate for the execution of its functions.” The justification is to allow the institute to collaborate with other local and international institutions offering the same or related training and research.

MR KWEMARA: Madam Chairperson, on clause 5 I do not have any problem with the recommendations of the committee but I feel there is a lot more on the functions of the Uganda Wildlife Research Institute that we could include. For instance, the Uganda Wildlife Research Institute can conduct research directly but it can also promote other bodies and persons to conduct research. I would like a clause to promote the carrying out of inquiries, experiments and research in wildlife and wildlife environment, if you do not mind.

I would also like to propose a sub-clause on research on wildlife diseases because it is a problem today; wildlife diseases, there are causes and developing ways of preventing them or controlling their occurrence. If the committee does not mind, it could also incorporate that.

In addition, when you do research, it is important that you disseminate the findings. They should also have a clause on knowledge management; how do we access research findings, how are they disseminated and if other people are also doing research, how does the institute also access the findings from other bodies, especially the partnerships?

We could also have another sub clause because the type of research they are conducting is applied research. It is aimed at improving policy and practice -

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable member, you have so many proposals; I do not know whether they are written. I am already lost. 

MR KWEMARA: Madam Chairperson, if the committee does not mind, I can submit something written as it is very useful.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Are you suggesting that we stand over this? 

MS KABAHENDA: Madam Chairperson, with due respect, I really appreciate the contributions of the honourable member but what I understand about research is that it is broad. Unless the honourable member wants us to disaggregate and unpack it, when we talk about research, it is about everything that will require research, including diseases. Therefore, when we talk about conducting research in wildlife resources, I feel we have really covered this.

DR BAYIGGA: Madam Chairperson, the honourable member had also talked about generation of new knowledge out of research and management of such information. Wouldn’t you like to have that one, if he can bring it? I thought it was an important aspect of research.

THE CHAIRPERSON: What is a research for? Is it just for decoration to put in a locker? There is a consumer and that is why there is research. 

DR BAYIGGA: Yes, management of information derived from research is another aspect, Madam Chairperson.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Like what? Copyright?

DR BAYIGGA: Yes, copyright for instance and how it is disseminated and how the rest can access this information is quite important. Thank you, Madam Chairperson.

MS KABAHENDA: Madam Chairperson, if I could draw the honourable member to clause 5(1)(e), when we provide related services necessary, incidental and conducive, we would cover all that.

MR OBOTH: Hon. Kwemara had a very good point. The only thing that I would request is that he is permitted to rephrase and give his proposal so that we can discuss it. He had a very good point in relation to dissemination of research but that should be specific. There are people who conduct research and just keep it to themselves because there is no provision in the law that stipulates they should share their findings; others just sell their research. Therefore, since hon. Kwemara is the author, he can make that proposal.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, it is the institute, which is conducting this research. It is not just anybody.

MR KWEMARA: Madam Chairperson, I beg your indulgence on this. It is one thing for somebody to do research like we have always done research but it is another thing for somebody to be committed to disseminate the findings. Also, there are those who may benefit from this research. It may not be the public; they can be private persons. For example, sometime back I saw somebody who owns a zoo for rhinos on Masindi road. He is not obligated to use his research but this law can make this person to use this research.

There are private people who are also doing research on wildlife. They can also be mandated by this law to disseminate their findings. Therefore, a clause on knowledge management is important.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Can you state what you want to see in the law? 

DR BAYIGGA: Can we include a clause in which we mandate a minister to originate say, a statutory instrument to manage information derived from research? Thank you.                    

MR KWEMARA: I had already framed one here. One of the functions could be: “To establish and operate a system of documentation and dissemination of the findings of enquiries, experiments and researches carried out by or on behalf of the institute or other information on wildlife acquired by the institute.” That is what I had phrased.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Okay, there is no problem with that. I put the question that clause 5 be amended as proposed by hon. Kwemara.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 5, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 6

MS KABAHENDA: On clause 6, the committee proposes to amend by redrafting the entire clause as follows:
    i) There is established a council, which shall be the governing body of the institute.
    ii) The council shall be appointed by the minister and shall comprise of:
    a) A representative of the Ministry responsible for Wildlife;
    b) A representative of the Ministry responsible for Education;
    c) A representative of the Uganda Wildlife Authority;
    d) A representative of the staff of the institute;
    e) A representative of the academic board nominated by the board;
    f) A representative of the district council where the institute is located;
    g) A representative of the student’s governing body of the institute and
    h) Two persons to represents the public.

    iii) The Principal shall be the Secretary to the Council.
    iv) Save for a member appointed under paragraph (h) of sub- section 2, the members of the council shall hold office for three years and shall be eligible for reappointment for only one other term.
    v) The minister shall designate the members appointed under paragraph (i) of sub-section 2 as the chairperson and vice-chairperson of the council.
    vi) The minister shall make the appointment or reappointment of a member of the council at least three months before the expiry of the term of office of the incumbent council and the appointment shall take effect from the date of the assumption of office by the member.
    vii) At least one third of the members of the council shall be women. The justification is for clarity.   

MS MUTAGAMBA: There is one simple question I wish to ask on clause 6 (5) that says, “The minister shall designate the members appointed under paragraph (i).” I do not have that paragraph and so I do not know which members are being referred to. 

MR KWEMARA: Madam Chairperson, I have a problem with sub-clause (i) where we are talking of one of the members of the governing council being the principal of the institute.

I am not comfortable with a research institute having a principal because the connotation here becomes academic. Is this an academic institute or a research institute? 

MS KABAHENDA: Madam Chairperson, this institute is both academic and research because it is a wildlife research and training institute.  For correction on clause 5, the minister shall designate the members appointed under paragraph (h) and not (i).

MR EKANYA: Madam Chairperson, I wish to introduce (i)(f) - I do not know if it is applicable here to state, “Notwithstanding anything in (6), the governing council may invite a professional expert to attend its proceedings.” This is because being a research institute; they may need experts in wildlife. Where do we put it?

MR KWEMARA: Actually, you are building into my argument. This is a research institute and if you make the head a principal, the research function is going to disappear, much as I know that there is a training function. 

Let us go back to the history of this institute. This institute dates back to the 1960s under the University of Cambridge as the new field unit of tropical animal ecology. By then it was headed by Prof. Eric Edroma and one of the research assistants was hon. John Ken-Lukyamuzi. It was purely research. 

I think that in the 1970s when it was not being funded by the University of Cambridge, it was returned to Makerere as the Institute of Ecology. Later on, it was taken to Mweya. However, the principal function was ecology. I am happy that we are now broadening it to wildlife research. I would be more comfortable if it is headed by a director but still maintains a training function. If you give it a principal and an academic board, the research function will disappear. I thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Minister, what do you say to that proposal?

MR EKANYA: Madam Chairperson, I am seeking clarification from the minister to have a provision to give the governing council powers to invite any expert.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I think that would come after the governing council. Let us finish with the governing council and then we can bring in that clause that the governing council may invite. Minister, what do you say about the change from principal to director that the honourable member is talking about? 

MR OBOTH: Madam Chairperson, I do not see any contradiction in the proposal made by hon. Kwemara. When you look at clause 15, there is nothing. If we change the two, the director will still have the same functions and that will also be consistent with other research institutes like NARIRI and NARO that are all headed by directors. I think that directors direct research and train.

Therefore, we would be able to distinguish that from the ordinary principal under the ministry headed by Maj. (Rtd) Jessica Alupo and this other under UWA. I think that we should leave the issue of principals to education, which would make a very good distinction unless the minister has serious reservations. We are not proposing any pay rise or anything in that line.

MS MUTAGAMBA: I appreciate the concerns raised but I would like to say that this is the governing council but we have the academic board that is headed by the principal and that is understandable. However for the governing council, we are drawing on all these other people to be able to make input into the governance of this place.

We should also note that as it has been stated, this institution is recovering from a long time of neglect and at the same time, we know that it was originally the Institute of Ecology and both functions of training and research were part and a component of the Institute of Ecology. We now expect that the experts now being brought on the governing council are for purposes of building the institution and then the Education Board will help in drawing what is required for the institution academically.

I would therefore like to insist that as of now and talking about the governing council, we need the expertise of the people that we are bringing on board. When we come to the academic board, there we shall need the expertise of the head of the institution.

THE CHAIRPERSON: So there is an academic board as well?

MS MUTAGAMBA: Yes, there is an academic board.

MR KWEMARA: Madam Chairperson, before we go to the academic board, let us first resolve the issue of the principal because there is another big debate when we come to the academic board. Let us first resolve that this body needs a director and if anything, it does not even conflict with the functions of the institute. For purposes of perception, let us have a director not a principal then we come to the academic board, which is a different argument and we shall also resolve the issue.

THE CHAIRPERSON: What difference will it make if we call him a director rather than a principal? 

MS MUTAGAMBA: Madam Chairperson, according to the record we have here, the governing council is constituted of ministries responsible for Education, Wildlife, representatives of the staff of the institute, Uganda Wildlife Authority and the district. This is a governing body, which is bringing in all the expertise to manage administratively. When it comes to academics, we go to clause 11 where we are handling that and we are looking at the necessary scientific skills for this school. I believe that this council is going to bring the wealth or the expertise in the governing of this body.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Minister, what the hon. Kwemara is belabouring is that he would want to substitute director for principal as the title of that officer.

MS MUTAGAMBA: I have no problem with the title. You can call him a director or principal. I have no problem with whichever title the House approves here.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Okay. Honourable members, I put the question that clause 6 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 6, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 7, agreed to.

Clause 8

MS KABAHENDA: Madam Chairperson, the committee proposes to amend clause 8 in sub-clause 3 by inserting the phrase, “The vice chairperson and in absence of both the chairperson and the vice chairperson” between the words “chairperson” and “the” on line two. It will be redrafted as: “The chairperson shall preside at all meetings of the council and in his or absence, the vice chairperson and in the absence of both the chairperson and vice chairperson, the members present shall elect one of their number to preside.”

The justification is to authorise the vice chairperson to preside in absence of the chairperson.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 8 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 8, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 9

MR KWEMARA: Madam Chairperson, I would like to suggest that since this institute has got two distinct functions; research and training, we also came up with two specific committees, one on research and another on training and then the other committee as may be deemed necessary. This is going to help us in resolving the impasse that we are likely find on clause 11 when we come to the academic board. I wish to suggest that -

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, hon. Kwemara clause 9 is dealing with committees of the council, for instance a Committee on finance or a committee on administration. It is not dealing with what you are talking about.

MR EKANYA: To allay my brother’s fear, clause 9 is talking about committees and you can have as many committees as you deem necessary.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Members, I put the question that clause 9 do stand part of the bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 10

MS KABAHENDA: The committee proposes to amend clause 10 in the headnote by substituting for the headnote the phrase, “Vacation of office by a council member.” The justification is to cater for other situations other than removal of a member from office. Also in sub-clause 1 paragraph (b) by substituting for the phrase ”Is removed from or by” appearing on line two, the phrase “Ceases to be a representative of”.

It will be redrafted as: “In the case of a person representing a ministry, institution, agency or a department, if that person ceases to be a representative of a ministry, institution, agency or department in respect of which he/she was appointed a member.”

The justification is to cater for instances of ceasing to be representatives other than only removal.

In paragraph c(4) by deleting the phrase “or insolvency”. The justification is it is redundant. 

By inserting a new paragraph 7 as “death”. The justification is to provide for death as a cause for vacating office.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 10 -

MR OBOTH: Madam Chairperson, do we really have to have 10(b), which reads, “In the case of a person representing a ministry, institution, agency or department”? That lapses with appointment, designation or assignment. Do we have to specifically put that? Unless the shadow Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development wants to give me information. If I am representing Parliament in a certain council and I cease to be a Member of Parliament, do you have to put it in the law that when one ceases to be a Member of Parliament, you cannot be - I thought it is upon each ministry, agency or department to appoint, assign or delegate individual officers to go. 

The other issue on C (4) is on bankruptcy or insolvency. These two words are not the same so it cannot be redundant. You are either bankrupt or insolvent. I am not talking about the chairperson but ordinarily, you are either. Therefore, insolvency cannot be redundant; you have to use that interchangeably as it gives different meanings.

I need some clarification on why we must insist on 10(b). Must we have it stated that in case you vacate office - if you were representing a ministry, institution, agency or department and you have been removed from that ministry or agency or department in respect of which he/she was appointed a member - do you have to state that? Is this the first law we are making? You vacate automatically when you have been removed from that ministry.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, there is also another category of people from the public or the student body. Suppose somebody decides to hold out and continues going for the meetings, what do you do? 

MR EKANYA: Madam Chairperson, whereas I appreciate what hon. Oboth is saying, if we had reached that level of development like is displayed in UK, Germany or America then it would be fine but we are weak in oversight and therefore, we need this clarity. I know of former Members of Parliament in the last Parliament who after losing elections, remained board members of some institutions. This is important for clarity.

MR OBOTH: I, therefore, concede.

MS KABAHENDA: Madam Chairperson, I will concede on the insolvency.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 10 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 10, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 11

MS KABAHENDA: Madam Chairperson, the committee proposes to insert a new clause 11 to provide the ministers with powers of direction. “The minister may give policy directions to the council and the council shall comply.”

The justification is to empower the minister to give policy directives to the council of the institute.

MR KWEMARA: Madam Chairperson, I am not comfortable with having an academic board for the following reasons - 

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, we are not yet there. We are on clause 11.

MS KABAHENDA: Madam Chairperson, can we consider the proposed clause 11 before we come to the -

THE CHAIRPERSON: We are looking at the main clause 11, then we shall come to the academic board. Yes, this is a new clause.

MR OBOTH: Madam Chairperson, regarding policy directives or directions, we are proposing that the officer being directed shall comply. What has been our format of legislating in regard to empowering the minister? Do we have to say that the minister shall give policy directives and the recipient must comply? Why don’t you stop at policy directives? How about if the minister is wrong? 

We are creating a situation where a minister, not the one in the chair now, will come and direct on a policy and say, “I am telling you to recruit so and so and this must be complied with.” Why don’t we give some room for the minister to give policy directives but not that the person has no lee way or option? Must we still say “shall comply”? (Interjections) Yes, I wanted to amend by removing the words “shall comply”.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Supposing you have a very enthusiastic director who goes off on his own tangents, completely away from the policies of the government, what do you do? Instead of driving to Kampala, I head to Gulu. What happens?

MR KABAJO: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I remember that we recently passed a law where we used that wording “and shall comply”. If we have recently passed similar laws with similar wordings, I do not see why in this one we should not use the same wording. Thank you.

MR KAKOOZA: Madam Chairperson, I do not know why this clause is there. I would like to support the argument of hon. Oboth that a minister must be accountable to any policy and these policies are developed by technocrats. When you see the drafting that states, “The minister may give policy direction to the council” and then you come and say, “…the council shall comply”, it gives a different meaning.

This office of a minister is not absolute that every time you are going to be correct. You need to be advised and to consult. Suppose a technocrat says, “No, what you are directing me to do is wrong and I am not going to implement it as it might affect other laws”, shouldn’t you comply? This is the problem with this drafting. I propose that it reads, “The minister may give policy direction to the council” and you stop there.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Suppose I give a directive and it is ignored and they say, “We are not obliged to do what you want.” What happens? This is a government institution.

MR KAKOOZA: Madam Chairperson, the prevention of that is: a technocrat in a ministry advises Government and when you go wrong, he cannot do it unless it is written and you have any legal instrument to any technocrat in the ministry if he does not comply.

MR NYOMBI THEMBO: Madam Chairperson, the key word here is “policy directions”. It is not any direction and all of us know that policy issues are handled at the ministerial level. When you stop at, “The minister may give policy directions”, it has no meaning. It has to be qualified. When it is policy direction, this is work at the ministerial level so the policy direction should be agreed to by whoever is given this directive by the minister. Therefore, I support the formulation as it is.

MS ASAMO: Madam Chairperson, I have a challenge with understanding the amendment proposed by the committee because one of the roles of the minister is to give policy direction. In their terms of reference, the same minister is the one who is going to appoint whoever is going to be there so this person is working under the appointing authority. Therefore, I find the amendment to be a bit redundant because it is already known that the minister is going to give policy direction and that is what the council and the director will be operating on. Thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, you have been in this House and you have heard about divergence between bodies and the ministry. Do you want to create a vacuum? 

MS MARGARET BABA DIRI: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I would like to support the statement. What we are saying is that it is the duty of the minister to give direction and this is his role but he does not do it alone. He does it together with the technical people and it is not a directive. Some people are saying that it is directive where you say do this and you must do it. It is a direction, that according to this ministry, we must do this and that and it must be complied with. What is the use of giving direction and it is not complied with? Therefore, I really support that statement. Thank you very much.

MR EKANYA: Madam Chairperson, I want to beg colleagues. It is us who make recommendations here and we complain that our recommendations are not implemented by the ministers. These are ministers whose hands are tied and then we complain bitterly saying, “Minister, we are telling you to do this.” 

Madam Chairperson, I worked in Teso where there is Nyero Rock paintings and in Tororo, there is Tororo Rock and no-man’s land. I may want all of that to be tourist attractions for promotion of tourism so I move a motion and we direct the minister whose hands are tied. What we should do to support hon. Oboth is that the policy direction should be in line with the laws of Uganda and in line with Government or cabinet approved policy if you want to go in detail. 

Our policies are based on Vision 2040, the five-year development plan and parliamentary directives. Therefore, we either have it like this or we put it in conformity with the laws of Uganda.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, we are talking about the policy of the country and we are empowering the minister to keep them within the framework of the government policy. Do you want them to run out?

DR BAYIGGA: Madam Chairperson, we should not run away from the word “directive”. Actually, the minister should give directive in line with policy because the words “policy direction” are given by policy itself and the experts of policy implementation are the technocrats. However, the minister should give directives in line with that policy and that is the function of the minister. Thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Would you like to change the words? Okay, what do we go with? Should we go with your proposal?

MS KABAHENDA: Madam Chairperson, like hon. Kabajo had actually reminded us, in the two Bills, which the same committee brought to the House here; the report on the Bill on Hotel and Tourism Training Institute and the Bill on Uganda Wildlife Education Centre, we passed this clause the way it is here. The committee was told that this is now a standard form of clause legislation that all laws should have.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Members, I put the question that a new clause be inserted as proposed by the chairperson.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRPERSON: I also put the question that the new clause do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRPERSON: Now on the academic board. Hon. Kwemara, do you have an amendment on that? Let us hear from the chairperson first.

MS KABAHENDA: Madam Chairperson, the committee proposes to amend clause 11 in sub-clause (2) by inserting the phrase “Be appointed by the council and” between “shall” and “consist” and to redraft (2) as, “The academic board shall be appointed by the council and shall consist of all the people that are listed under (2) in the original Bill.” 

We only wanted to redraft the phrase that brings about the constitution of that particular structure. The justification is to provide for the appointment of the academic board by the council.

In sub-clause (4) paragraph (f), we propose to insert the phrase “to the council” between the words “submit” and “academic” on line one and to redraft (f) as, “To initiate, prepare, evaluate and submit to the council academic programmes for the institute.” The justification is for clarity.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 11 be amended as proposed by the chairperson.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR KWEMARA: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. My concern with the academic board is, we are talking of a wildlife research and training institute. The assumption here is that the academic board is providing for the training component. However, which structure is providing for the research component? That is why I was saying originally that we may tend to focus more on the training component and the research component is lost.

I beg the indulgence of the committee to go back and also think of another smaller structure below the governing council to provide for research. This is because the research we are dealing with is a science and they must have a research agenda. They must also have research programmes. For instance, what is the relationship between humans and wildlife? We are talking of climate change, water and wetland resources, vegetation ecology and ethno-botany. A committee must come up to define the research agenda and these research programmes. My view is that we have two bodies; one for training and another for research. Thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Suppose we said “academic and research board”, would that not help?

MR KWEMARA: If we say “academic and research board”, to me that would be okay. However, we would need to go back internally because when you start talking of principal registrar, then you are leaning more on the academic aspect. The nomenclature may have to change.

MS MUTAGAMBA: I concede to that.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that the word “research” be added to the words “academic board” so that it reads “academic and research board.”

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 11, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 12

MS KABAHENDA: Madam Chairperson, the committee proposes to amend clause 12 in sub-clause (2) by substituting for the phrase “on behalf” appearing on line four, the phrase “by at least two-thirds” and to redraft (2) as, “Without prejudice to sub-section (1), the chairperson of the academic and research board may, at any time, call a meeting of the academic and research board within 14 days after receipt of a written requisition for that purpose addressed to him or her signed by at least three members of the board.” 

The justification is to provide for the number of members who may request for the convening of a meeting of the academic and research board.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 12 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 12, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 13

MS KABAHENDA: Madam Chairperson, the committee proposes to delete the entire clause 13. The justification is that being an internal board, the tenure of office of the academic board can be regulated internally by the council under section 9(3) and by the regulations made under section 31(2)(b).

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, it is proposed that clause 13 be deleted. I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 13 deleted.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I also instruct that wherever “academic board” appears, we should also include “and research”.

Clause 14

MS KABAHENDA: Madam Chairperson, the committee proposes to amend clause 14 in the headnote by redrafting the headnote as, “Vacation of office by a member of the academic and research board.” 

The justification is to specify that it is a member of the academic and research board and to cater for situations other than removal of a board member from office.

In sub-clause (1) paragraph (a), by substituting for the phrase “removed from or by” appearing on line two, the phrase “ceases to a member of”.

To redraft (a) as, “In the case of a person representing a ministry, institution, agency or department, if that person ceases to be a representative of the ministry, institution, agency or department in respect of which he or she was appointed member.” 

The justification is to cater for situations of vacation other than of removal from office.

Paragraph (b) by substituting for the word “minister”, appearing on line one, the word ‘council’. The justification is to empower the council to remove a member of the academic and research board from office.

In paragraph (b)(4), by deleting the phrase - I think for this one we can take the earlier amendment.

In paragraph (b)(6), by substituting for the word “three” appearing on line three, the word “six”. The justification is to align the provision with the existing laws on vacation of office on grounds of conviction.

In sub-clause (2):
    1. By substituting for the word “minister” appearing on lines one and two, the word “council”. The justification is to empower the council to remove a member of the academic and research board from office.
    2. By deleting the phrase “of that member”, appearing at the end of sub-clause (2). The justification is the phrase is redundant.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 14 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 14, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 15

MS KABAHENDA: Madam Chairperson, the committee proposes to amend clause 15 in sub-clause (1) by deleting the phrase “and a deputy principal” appearing on line one. The justification is to provide solely for the office of the director. I think we changed that.

By inserting a new sub-clause (2) to provide as, “The director shall be a person of high moral character and proven integrity with professional knowledge and experience in wildlife conservation, research and training.” The justification is to provide for the qualifications of a person suitable for appointment as director.

In sub-clause (4), we propose deletion of the entire sub-clause 4. The justification is it is wrongly housed under the provision on the office of the director. 

We propose inserting a new sub-clause (5) to provide as follows: “The minister may, on the recommendations of the council, suspend or terminate the appointment of the director for:
    a) Misbehaviour;
    b) Inability to perform the functions of the office or;
    c) Any other sufficient cause.

The justification is to provide for circumstances of suspension or termination of appointment of the principal or director from office.

MR EKANYA: If the director goes for leave, who will be deputising? 

THE CHAIRPERSON: It is somewhere else.

MR EKANYA: Is it somewhere else?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Okay, honourable members, I put the question that clause 15 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 15, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 16

MS KABAHENDA: Madam Chairperson, the committee proposes to insert a new clause 16 as deputy director.
    1. The institute shall have a deputy director who shall be appointed by the council on terms and conditions which may be certified in the instruments of appointment.
    2. A person to be appointed as the deputy director shall qualify for appointment by virtue of his or her professional knowledge and experience in wildlife conservation.
    3. The deputy director shall perform the functions of the director in the absence of the director from office and shall perform such other duties as the director or council may direct.
    4. The council may, with the approval of the minister, suspend or terminate the appointment of the deputy director for: 
    a) Misbehaviour;
    b) Inability to perform the functions of the office;
    c) Any other sufficient cause.

The Justification is to provide for the office of the deputy director.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Am I to understand that these other officers are redundant? Do you not need the registrar or a bursar? It is because clause 16 was about bursar and registrar. 

MS KABAHENDA: Madam Chairperson, the committee proposed to delete the original clause 16.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Okay, honourable members, clause 16-

MR NZOGHU: Madam Chairperson, thank you. When you look at the clause that we have just handled, the qualifications for the director are very clearly spelt out. However, the ones of the deputy are not very clear, and yet they are saying in the absence of the director, the deputy will take charge. Therefore, I was of the view that we need to zero down on the clear qualifications of the deputy director. 

In view of what is being suggested by the committee that they can step in when the director is not there, it will then imply that actually, they should be having the same qualifications.

MR EKANYA: Madam Chairperson, this is a Wildlife Research and Training Institute. For it to operate effectively, the director and the deputy should have different qualifications because we are bringing two activities under one organisation. It is just proper that the director should either have the issue of ecology and wildlife and the issue of academic and training should be with the deputy. We need to realign this one so that we do not kill one activity within the research and training institute. Otherwise, we will have people who are only biased and then you will kill the other aspect.

Therefore, Madam Chairperson, can we realign and we stand over this so that the issue of ecology, research and training is balanced? 

Also, Madam Chairperson, we need to avoid the issue where the deputy director is appointed by the same organ causing conflict of interest. Who reports to who when they are all appointed by the same people? The appointment level should also be handled.

MS KABAHENDA: Madam Chairperson, I think the deputy director is appointed by the council and I do not see any conflict of interest because the deputy director is not going to be appointed by the director. Both are appointed by the council and I think they account to it.

Madam Chairperson, I did not have any fear about this Clause 16 because on appointment of other staff, it would cater for all the other specifics of research and academics respectively.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 16 be amended as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed.)

Clause 16, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 17

MS KABAHENDA: Madam Chairperson, the committee proposes to amend clause 17 in the headnote by substituting for the word “officers” on the headnote the phrase “staff of the institute” and to redraft the headnote as “appointment of other staff of the institute” The justification is for clarity. 

We propose to delete the word “senior” appearing on line one and the justification is it is redundant.

MR KWEMARA: Clause 17 begins by enumerating the officers: the registrar, the bursar and others. Since we have brought in the component of research and training, I would say we just say all officers and we leave the nomenclature to the governing council. It is because when you say registrar and bursar, you are still aligning yourself more towards the training components. The nomenclature can come much later.

MS KABAHENDA: Madam Chairperson, the committee already recommended that the original clause 16 of registrar and staff be deleted. Therefore, we left the recruitment of staff to take care of the specifics of research and academics under clause 17.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 17, as amended, do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 17, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 18, agreed to.

Clause 19

MS KABAHENDA: Madam Chairperson, the committee proposes to amend clause 19 by substituting for sub-clause 1 the following: “The institute shall award certificates, diplomas and other qualifications for courses conducted by the institute.” The justification is to enable the institute award qualifications other than certificates and diplomas.”

In sub-clause 2, by rephrasing the sub-clause as: “Courses leading to the awards of certificates, diplomas and other qualifications to be awarded by the institute shall be subject to approval of the National Council for Higher Education.” 

The justification is to empower the institute to award other qualifications other than certificates and diplomas.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the questions that Clause 19 be amended as proposed -

MR OBOTH: Honourable Chairperson, it is now dawning on me that this is another university, another school and training - we can call it by many names - these are several issues here. I thought you would do that without coming to the National Council for Higher Education. If we are getting diplomas and certificates, probably you should also award masters degrees and PhDs. 

We need to harmonise anything to do with education so that we do not lose the focus of this very good - now, Kwemara’s issue comes in. The very purpose of this being the support arm is now becoming training and it is coming slowly and duplicating what can be done in other institution. We need to be sure and guard ourselves against having the Ministry of Education and also the Ministry of Wildlife also training and giving certificates. 

Madam Chair, I just wanted to have this painful concern on record. If we are legislating this way, there is no harm but we are doing so many things from many fronts and missing out on the real point, which is of research and training. 

In my view, we would have identified people who work in this sector in order to empower them and give them the skills. In this instance, we are going to award them certificates, diplomas and degrees. Of course degrees are certificates and diplomas. We need to harmonise this. Is this under the Ministry of Education or under the Ministry of Wildlife and Tourism? Why can’t Wildlife and Tourism concentrate on areas they can do better and excel on the basis of the object of this Bill other than going in to awarding? Why do you start awarding what is not your speciality? 

DR BITEKYEREZO: Madam Chair, before I came to Parliament, I was teaching internal medicine in Mbarara University of Science and Technology. I do not want to go far from hon. Oboth’s point. If you look at the objectives of this Bill and the clause that the Chairperson wants to put that, “… courses leading to the award of certificates, diplomas and other qualifications.”

When we talk about other qualifications, you are talking about degrees, masters and even PhDs. This means that we have an institute which is going to be another university of its own. 

As hon. Oboth said, is there a possibility for us to leave here certificates and diplomas and then the degrees and PhDs are left for universities which are already accredited by Government to offer these things? This is because we are going to duplicate and in turn we are going to end up getting problems. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: No. Honourable members, I think you are forgetting the caveat. It says, “It shall be subject to approval of the National Council of Higher Education.” Therefore, there is a clearance process. You do not just start teaching. They will tell you to go to MUBS or Kigumba for that course. This is the process. Isn’t it minister? 

MS KABAHENDA: Madam Chair, for this particular institute, if you read the final object of the Bill and why we brought this Bill here, it is to reinstate its legal status. This particular institute was under the Ministry of Education sometime back and it is coming back to the Ministry of Tourism. 

Secondly, this institute does not stop other institutes from performing the same functions. There could be another research institute that is privately owned or other teaching institutes. That does not stop this one from being the government institute that is going to train our people who are going to perform in the hospitality sector. 

As a centre of excellence, we did not want to limit it and stop it at awarding only certificates. This is because when people excel, they should be given the certificates that match their excellence. 

MR OBOTH: The concern I have – not that I am opposed to the awarding - can’t Government recommend those courses which would be leading to award of diplomas and certificates in the so many available universities? This would do away with the weight -(Interjections)- I have the Floor, Madam Chairperson. 

If you are to be a centre of excellence at least - unless you have benchmarked somewhere, your concentration in this should prove that you are aiming at becoming a centre of excellence. The moment you start getting into awarding of diplomas, people will come there for academic purposes. This is my fear. If it is research and training, you would retain your image as the actual centre of excellence so that the issue of training academia would be left to other institutions. In this case, you can have recommendations of what skills you need in the tourism sector. Then you can recommend those courses. 

Since it is the Minister of Wildlife and Tourism touring into the education sector, it is allowed and I believe we can accommodate this. This is okay with me. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: I was wondering, if I trained in that institute, what would I come out with? If I do not get a certificate, what shows that I was trained there? 

MR WANGOLO: Thank you so much, Madam Chair. The issue was not all about the awarding. The awarding is okay, but we need to be clear on the words they have added, “… and other qualifications.” Which qualifications are those? You mean degrees, masters or PhDs, but on this level, it means that we shall also change the Director or the Principal to another level. 

We know very well that at that level, the way we are making this law, is to handle certificates and diplomas. Probably when you talk of other qualifications, you talk about the certificate of competence or attendance. Let us be clear on this to avoid distortions.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the awarding of those degrees is not automatic. They will have to first apply to the National Council for Higher Education. That is what it says here. If they say you can do it, then you can go ahead.  If they do not give you authority, then you cannot do it.

MR KATWIREMU: Thank you, Madam Chair. My understanding is that this institute will provide training that is industry specific. Like Kigumba, for example - Makerere University and Mbarara University are running courses in petroleum engineering. That does not stop Kigumba from offering training courses that are industry specific. Universities can teach these courses, but it may not necessarily be what you want as a ministry or as a Government.  I have no problem. 

Since the National Council for Higher Education would regulate anyway, you train and put up your courses, which are industry specific and other people are trained in other fields which are similar - there is no harm. 

MR ARINAITWE: Thank you so much, Madam Chair. I will clearly support the proposal by the chairperson. This is because training will remain training. It will depend on the management and the council whether they should run a tertiary kind of institution, offer certificates and diplomas, or they graduate and ask the National Council for Higher Education for other awarding institute levels.

Therefore, we must legislate and allow the council to continue upgrading. If they decide at one moment that they should award degrees in their specific industry, then they go ahead and award. I do not see the problem with the proposal, Madam Chairperson.  

MS KABAHENDA: We already agreed that we are changing the academic board to academic and research board.  This is an equivalent of the senate in a university if you did not know because it is the technical organ that is going to guide all matters. We did not want to open up so much and that is why we put the consultation from the National Council for Higher Education.  Otherwise, by making it an academic and research board, we raised it to almost a university.

MS ASAMO: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I think we need to define what an institution is; is it a tertiary institution, is it any other degree awarding institution? It has to come in the law. That is when the National Council of Higher Education will then come in to look at the training component and then approve the programmes.

We therefore need to define this institution because when we look at the beginning, we were saying that research and training institute - at what level? I think something has to come on board and then we can go with what the committee has alluded to. Thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Let the owner of the Bill tell us what she has in mind. What is this thing which you are presenting to us? The owner of the Bill, I am asking you what you envisaged in this law.

MS MUTAGAMBA: I thank Members. Honourable Chairperson, initially, we are starting the training with the lowest cadre of certificate, to enable people to upgrade to diplomas.

However, in future, this school can become an institution that can award and when that comes, we are putting that provision to somehow give hope and stimuli to the institution so that they can work harder to get there. When that happens, we come back to the National Council of Higher Education for approval but that is to give space of operation and aiming higher.

Conservation is the way to go for this country and we need well qualified scientists for sustainable conservation; both in terms of the challenges that we face, the vegetation, the animals and in the relationships between man and the animals. That is our aspiration.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 19 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 19, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 20

MS KABAHENDA: The committee proposes to amend clause 20 (1) by deleting paragraph (c) (d) and (e). Justification: to align the provision with the Public Finance Management Act, 2015. 

In sub-section (2) by deleting sub-clause (2) and the justification is subsequent amendment. In sub-section (3) by substituting the provision with the following, “Subject to section 33 of the Public Finance Management Act, 2015, the centres shall open and maintain bank accounts as are necessary for the performance of its function on which all money of the institute shall be deposited.” Justification: to align the provision with the Public Finance Management Act, 2015.

In sub-section (4), by re-drafting the provision as follows: “The fees to be charged by the institute shall be determined by the council with the approval of the minister.” Justification: to require the council to determine the fees to be paid at the institute with approval of the minister.

MS MUTAGAMBA: I appreciate the justification given, but for (b), (c) and (d) that talks about monies accruing to the institute - I feel that (c) is part of what we think we need to have. If we only leave fees charged and money appropriated by Parliament, that means that the institution is not able to generate other resources or even to apply for grants and support elsewhere.

So, we would like to encourage the institution to be able to do those other activities, one of which is hosting researchers who come and pay and all those kinds of fees should be catered for. Otherwise, if we do not, it can easily disappear within in the arrangement.

I would like to propose that we combine (d) and (e) to make sure that the revenue earned from the activities of the institution and the other funds received by the institution – (Interjections) - we need to combine it into one instead of two. Otherwise, I beg that (c) remains because it gives us some form of activity to be able to generate money.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, when we were debating the Public Finance Management Act, we had a very lengthy debate on this matter and I think we came to an agreement that the source should be clear and that the board should not solicit from here and there. Is that what we are doing?

MR EKANYA: Madam Chairperson, the proposal of the committee needs to be improved. Fees from students, that one they can manage it but (c); grants, (d); donations and any other source should all be paid to the Consolidated Fund. That is what the Public Finance Management Act says.

Even (d), revenue earned from the activity of the institute under this Act - all that is supposed to go to the Consolidated Fund and even (e). That is what the Public Finance Management Act says. In (c), you are saying that “grants, gifts or donations from Government”, the phrase  “from Government” is confusing.

We therefore need to delete “from Government” and then do (c) (d) and (e) and amend 2 which says that “All funds received by the institute under sub-section (c), (d) and (e) shall be paid to the Consolidated Fund.”

In fact, last time we were supposed to look at the budget of all parastatals and authorities among others. All of them were laid here and we did not look at them because of time. So we need to reconcile this properly.

THE CHAIRPERSON: What is your proposal then?

MR EKANYA: The proposal is that we first of all amend (c) and delete the words, “from Government” because (a) takes care of money appropriated by Parliament. We appropriate here donations or grants. That is taken care of under (a). So, we delete from (C), the words, “from Government”.

However, we can leave, “Any other source”, because you can receive a grant or donation from any other well-wishers. So it can be revenue earned from the activity of the institution; research, consultancy service, that one we need to live it there. And (e), any other funds received by the institute in the performance of its functions.

People can hire the venue of the institute for events like wedding receptions among others but then when we go to 2, which says that “All the funds received by the institute under sub-section 1 (c), (d) and (e) shall be paid to the Consolidated Fund” and it ends there.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, we are now shifting our goal posts. You remember that when we were debating that matter last time, I think that Members were very strong that even donations are included in the budget. That was the argument and that is why I was saying that they should not have their own donations or grants. They should be within in the budget. That was the debate here and we rejected this for other bodies.

MR KAKOOZA: I think I do not have a problem with what we proposed in the committee. That is the very reason that all the monies that come into the institution are public funds. When they become public funds, Parliament is the only authority that can appropriate that money to those institutions, in a budgeted framework.

If there is any activity that is done within the institution, it must be brought and declared to the institution. That is the reason the chairperson was very careful to say that it must be aligned with the provision of the Public Finance Management Act.

This is why we stopped at non-taxable revenues to be spent at source because it disrupts even other institutions. You cannot make a law, which is different from other laws we passed. We need to be consistent. I, therefore, support the position of the Chairperson that, we need to be consistent with the other laws which we have earlier passed in this House.

The Public Finance Management Act says that you do not spend at source; all non-taxable revenue should be submitted - if you want to do something, plan for it and put it in the provision. National Development Programme and all those monies should be appropriated by Parliament.

MS MUTAGAMBA: I concede.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Thank you. Hon. Ekanya that is the position of this House; it has been our accustomed position since we passed that law. We cannot shift goal posts for different bodies.

MR EKANYA: Madam Chair, we are shifting the goal post. The committee is proposing to delete. When you delete, you are denying the institute from receiving grants. For instance, when people go there for weddings, you deny them that opportunity to receive money for any activity or research - they do consultancy. We are telling them that they should not receive this money yet the law says that all the money you receive for any activity should go to the Consolidated Fund. It now becomes public money.

However, the committee is proposing to delete - meaning it is illegal for them to receive money or for any person to pay them money.

THE SPEAKER: That is the position this House took.

MR EKANYA: Yes.

MR KAKOOZA: You see, even in the law, which is within cabinet, which we have not seen, Government is trying to align all those issues - not to be declared. The micro-economic performance of any country - when you donate money and it is not declared to Government then what do you do? That is why it is very important that the source must be declared and known. If it is known, you must align it instead of spending it at source. Otherwise, how would I align it with a single treasury account? All these people who are going to be in this institution are going to be Government workers. The money which will be collected will be appropriated here and it will be very difficult for other accounting officers – (Interruption) 

MR EKANYA: Let me give you information. Hon. Kakooza, I have the report of the committee with me here. They are saying delete (c) and the justification is to align it to the Public Finance Management Act. That is where we agree. However, when you delete it from here, it means nobody can give a grant to this institution. You have foundations like Rock Feller Foundation, Bill Gates Foundation – you get me.  If they are going to put -

THE CHAIRPERSON: It will also be put in the budget. That is what we agreed here when we were making that law. We had a very long argument over this matter. We spent the whole day on that issue and we came to an agreement.

MR EKANYA: Madam Chairperson, I beg to be understood. I am not saying they should spend. What I am saying is that we need this provision in the law so that if Rock Feller – I wish the chair of the committee was listening. If Rock Feller Foundation likes animals and birds and wants to donate money, the principal of the institute will advise him that according to the law of Uganda, our grant is paid to the Consolidated Fund and then we budget. However, if you have no provision that anybody can donate to the institution, then nobody will give a grant and donation because it is silent. When you delete it, it becomes silent and non-existent.

MS ALASO: Thank you very much, Madam Chair. I kind of followed closely what hon. Ekanya is saying to the extent that deletion as per say will really deny us something. Is it therefore possible that we rephrase (c) to say, “Grants and donations from Government or other sources with the approval of the minister -” provided such sources of funding will be declared or be made part of the funding available from the Consolidated Fund. Something along those lines so that we secure the fact that somebody can donate but we also secure the fact that donation will be put in the Consolidated Fund. Otherwise, if we delete it totally, then nobody will donate and that will be detrimental to this organisation.

MS KABAHENDA: Madam Chair, I think we can take the idea of subjecting it to the Public Finance Management Act.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Okay, honourable members, let us make a small adjustment to add the words “Subject to the provision of the Public Finance Management Act” and then we can delete (d) or we also do the same because on this issue, we also subjected it to the Public Finance Management Act, especially if we are to leave them there. The same will apply to (d) and (e); the subject will come at the end of each sentence.

Now, the issue from Government, what do we do about that? We delete the words, “From Government” and then add the words “Subject to the Public Finance Management Act to (c), (d) and (e) -

MR EKANYA: Madam Chair, that subject to the Public Finance Management Act - will be under 2 except fees charged from students.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Where do they go?

MR EKANYA: The fees like in the case of Makerere University - there is Non-taxable Revenue (NTR) which is also included in the budget which they lay here. Are we saying even fees should come in the budget? Then we should say except (b) because (b) is fees charged from students.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Where do your fees go?

MR EKANYA: In the current arrangement, for instance, Makerere University, fees are part of the NTR. When Makerere University wants money from the budget to top up, they declare it as a fee which they have received but they do not send it to the Consolidated Fund Account. It is an NTR which the Ministry of Finance allows them to use. However, you are right; you can say “Subject to Public Finance and Management Act -” because they will apply to the Secretary to the Treasury.

THE CHAIRPERSON: You know, honourable members, I do not want to have different parameters for different bodies. We denied others yet now we are making allowances -

MR EKANYA: I concede, Madam Chairperson.

MR KABAJO: Thank you very much, Madam Chair. I think what we should say in part 2 is that all funds received by the institute under sub-section 1 (c), (d) and (e) will be subject to the Public Finance and Management Act.

THE CHAIRPERSON: So, we add the Public Finance and Management Act to each of these?

MR KABAJO: No, instead of putting on each one, we put it under sub- clause 2.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Read it out and read the sentence the way it is supposed to appear. 

MR KABAJO: The way it reads would remain as it is but for sub- clause 2, it would read as follows: “All funds received by the institute under sub-section 1 (c), (c) and (e) shall be subject to the Public Finance and Management Act.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Do they no longer declare to the Minister especially for 2?
	
MR KABAJO: In that case, there will be no need to because the Act specifies how it should be handled. Meanwhile for the fees, we have been informed that the fees will be in their budget which will be approved by Parliament. So, the fees can be used at source because they have already been appropriated by Parliament.
 
MR KAKOOZA: Madam Chair, I would like to echo the guidance you have given. You talked of consistency on the non-taxable revenue which is collected in the institution - there are some institutions like Uganda Communication Commission (UCC), which are collecting about 1 to 20 per cent of their fees and submitting them to the Treasury. What does it mean? It means that the Treasury, under the Public Finance and Management Act should align it with what you want to do and it must be appropriated so that it does not cause accountability issues. You are allowed to spend non-taxable revenue to this institution. Why do you allow one and yet others are not allowed to spend it? That will be a problem.

If you are making a law, let it apply to all - you do not allow it to leave other institutions to spend at source while others do not.

That is why you were reminding us, Madam Chairperson, that even passport or visa fees collected by embassies are  submitted to the Treasury and we appropriate the money. That was the issue; that it was disrupting accountability. As you go along with the Public Finance Management Act, it was to see how we manage this money that is collected because it was abused.

If you are not consistent with other laws; I am finding it a problem that you pass it now and another law will not be consistent with what you passed.

DR BITEKYEREZO: I would like to bring a scenario so that you can understand what is happening. Government hospitals; more so National Referral Hospitals and Regional Referral Hospitals collect money which is called NTR. When you give them chance to use it at source; the medical superintendent will sit down with his accountant and eat that money - in a blink of an eye, you will never see it. And they will want Government to give them other monies. 

There is a small percentage which you are allowed to use at source. But the other one is also accounted for and it has to go to the treasury. If you say that is what is happening in Makerere; I would like you honourable colleagues to appreciate that in some institutions of higher learning, some people are giving themselves 20 salaries while others are not getting anything.

That is why for NTR, there should be a specific percentage used at source while the other must go to the Treasury. This is a government institution; if you open it and leave it for the bosses of the institute, Madam Minister, I promise you -

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I do not want to be party to permitting use of NTR in the law.

MR EKANYA: Madam Chairperson, I have the law here, that is section 29; Collection and deposit of revenue and retention of revenue. To save us from further debate we should say, “Subject to Public Finance Management Act -”, that takes care of everything we want.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 20 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 20, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 21

MS KABAHENDA: Madam Chairperson, the committee proposes to amend clause 21 by substituting for the clause the following: “Subject to Article 159 of the Constitution, the council may in consultation with the minister obtain loans and other credit facilities as may be required for meeting its obligations and for carrying out the functions of the institute under this Act.” The justification is to subject the borrowing powers of the council to Article 159 of the Constitution.

MR EKANYA: Madam Chairperson, Article 159 is so wide; we need to say, “Subject to Article 159 and the Public Finance Management Act.” Under Article 159 there are areas of exemption of coming to Parliament. We need to relate the two laws together.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 21 be amended as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 21, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 22

MS KABAHENDA: Madam Chairperson, the committee proposes to amend clause 22 in sub-clause 2(1) by deleting the entire sub-clause 2. The justification is that it is redundant as it is provided for by the Government to financial institutions. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 20 sub-clause 2 be deleted in its entirety.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 22, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 23

MS KABAHENDA: Madam Chairperson, the committee proposes to amend clause 23 by redrafting the clause as the financial year of the institute shall be the same as the financial year of Government. Justification: to conform to the government financial year.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 23 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 23, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 24

MS KABAHENDA: Madam Chairperson, the committee proposes to amend clause 24 in sub-clause 2(1) by inserting the word “Financial” between the words “a” and “Statement” on line three. 2, by deleting the phrase, “A statement which shall include a report on the performance of the institute during that financial year”, appearing on line four.

To redraft the sub-clause as; “Subject to any direction given by the minister, the council shall prepare in respect of each financial year and not later than three months after the close of the financial year, a financial statement for that year.” The justification is for clarity.

In sub-clause 3, by deleting the entire sub-clause with the justification that it is an unnecessary detail since it is provided for under the Public Finance Management Act.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 24 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 24, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 25

MS KABAHENDA: Madam Chairperson, the committee proposed to amend clause 25 by substituting the entire clause as follows: Accounts and Audit as the head note.
    1. The Auditor-General or and auditor appointed by the Auditor-General shall in each financial year audit the accounts of the institute.
    2. The Auditor-General shall within three months after receipt of the account, submit to the minister a report of the audited accounts of the institute.
    3. The minister shall submit a report of audited accounts of the institute to Parliament in accordance with the Public Finance Management Act.

Justification: to conform to the Public Finance Management Act 2015.

MR EKANYA: That is a good improvement; but for the minister who submits, it is the Auditor-General who always brings you these audit reports.

Now we are removing the words, “From the Auditor-General” to the minister bringing it to you; unless it is analogue from digital. (Laughter)

We need a provision here, where the minister should be able to take action without waiting; but it is the Auditor-General who brings the report to Parliament.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I think we delete 2 and 3.

MS KABAHENDA: Madam Chairperson, we can delete 2 and re-amend 3 to read that, “The Auditor-General shall submit a report of audited accounts to Parliament.”

MR KABAJO: Madam Chairperson, just like we have been arguing about some of the things which are already in law. Do we have to specify in the Bill that the Auditor-General should be the one responsible for auditing?

I thought by law, it is already established that all Government institutions are audited by either the Auditor-General or an auditor who has been appointed by the Auditor-General.

THE CHAIRPERSON: But there is no harm in re-stating it; because he may go there and they say, “We do not know what you are doing here.”


Honourable members, I put the question that clause 25 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 25, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 26

MS KABAHENDA: Madam Chairperson, the committee proposes clause 26 to read as - investment of surplus funds of the institute; by deleting the entire clause 26. And the justification is that it is well catered for under the Public Finance Management Act, 2015.

THE CHAIRPERSON: We have contentedly rejected corporate investment.

MS KABAHENDA: Yes.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 26 be deleted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 27, agreed to.

Clause 28, agreed to.

Clause 29, agreed to.

Clause 30

MS KABAHENDA: Madam Chairperson, the committee proposed to amend clause 30 in paragraph (a), by deleting the word “or” appearing on line one and inserting the phrase “or any other award” between diploma and or. In paragraph (b), by deleting the award “or” appearing in line one and inserting the phrase “or any other award” between diploma and or.

In paragraph (d), by deleting the word “or” appearing in line one and inserting the phrase “or any other award” between diploma and or. In the third last line of the clause, by substituting for the phrase “forty eight” appearing on line two the phrase “Seventy two” and for the word “two” appearing on the second last line the word “three”.

Therefore, we redraft the provision as “any person who;
    a) Makes use of any certificate, diploma or any other award of the institute to which he or she is not issued;
    b) Alters or defaces a certificate or diploma or any other award issued under this Act or makes a copy with intent to deceive or defraud;
    c) Reveals or discloses examination or test paper information to an unauthorised person;
    d) Sells, buys or steals a certificate or diploma or any other award issued under this Act with intent to impersonate;

Commits an offence and is liable on conviction to a fine not exceeding 72 currency points or imprisonment not exceeding three years or both.” Justification: to protect all other awards of the institute other than certificates and diplomas from falsification and to enhance the penalty for offences against the awards of the institute.

MR KABAJO: Madam Chairperson, I agree with the chair except in part (a) where she says “To which he or she is not issued.” I think she should have kept the word “entitled” rather than say “issued”. Maybe if she can read the way she had changed it so that we can – 

THE CHAIRPERSON: He or she is not entitled.

MR KABAJO: I would prefer that she keeps the word “entitled” rather than “issued” because I heard her saying, “issued”.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Is “entitled” better?

MS KABAHENDA: I concede to that, Madam Chairperson.

MS ALASO: Would not the word be “awarded” rather than “issued” or “entitled”?

THE CHAIRPERSON: I think “entitled” is okay. 

MR EKANYA: I had gone to Tororo, Madam Chairperson; I now see the problem my brother was talking about that this Bill is focusing on training but there is nothing about research and wildlife. Uganda is a rich country and has even been voted. We need to patent the birds, our wildlife so that nobody takes our wildlife to Europe and claims it like the Chinese took our fish and claimed that the Nile Perch is from China.

Therefore, I would like to ask, Madam Chairperson, that we really need to introduce the clause within that and the penalty. If you take Ugandan birds and claim that the birds belong to that country and start promoting it, it should be a crime – there are genetic terminologies for it. Therefore, there is nothing here about our genetic research of how we shall protect and earn revenue.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Also, there is the issue of plagiarism of research works. I do not know whether we could not have something along those areas. 

MS MUTAGAMBA: I know we have a provision under the Uganda Wildlife Authority but there is no harm putting it in this one especially for research purposes; being able to save and protect the research that has been produced here so that we do not sell it out just like that. I support that.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Can someone formulate it so that we add clause (e)? Who is more adaptable to formulation? Can you formulate a provision relating to protection of research? We stand over it and go to clause 31?

MR NZOGHU: I have an issue, Madam Chairperson, on the fine of the offence. Seventy-two currency points is small money. I thought that the fine should reflect the time that the students who go through the institution really take and also the money that whichever Government contribution has been made or even by the parents or guardian of the students.

Madam Chairperson, I was proposing a fine at least of 100 currency points; 72 currency points is too little to deter the prospective offenders. Therefore, it should be within the reasonable limit that someone will feel the pinch of forging or defacing or not adhering to what the rules of those who achieve the awards that this institution gives.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable chairperson, what do you say about the penalty? Minister, is it too lenient?

MS KABAHENDA: Madam Chairperson, the minister had suggested even less than 72 and if the Members think that we can go by 100, I have no - because the spirit of the committee was to improve on the fine so that it is punitive. If 100 currency points is more punitive than what we suggested, it is okay.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, is it okay to enhance the penalty to 100 currency points and then the sentence? Can the sentence remain three years? Okay, 100 currency points and four years, is that okay? I put the question that the sentence be enhanced as proposed?

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRPERSON: Therefore, while we wait for drafting let us go to clause 31.

Clause 31

MS KABAHENDA: Madam Chairperson, the committee proposed to amend clause 31 in paragraph (c) of sub-section 2 by inserting the phrase “or other awards” between the words “diplomas” and “issued”. Redraft the paragraph as the form or certificate, diplomas or other awards issued under this Act.

Justification is to empower the minister to make regulation on the form or any other awards issued by the institute other than certificates and diplomas.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members I put the question that clause 31 be amended as proposed?

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 31, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 32, agreed to.

The first schedule, agreed to.

Schedule 2

MS KABAHENDA: Madam Chairperson, the committee proposes to amend paragraph one in item one by substituting for the phrase “four times a year” appearing on line two the phrase “quarterly” Justification is for clarity.

In item (3), by deleting the entire item and the justification is that it is a repetition of item (2). In item (5), by amending the item and inserting the phrase “the vice chairperson” and in the absence of both the chairperson and the vice chairperson, then between the words “absence and the” on line two, and it will be redrafted as: “The chairperson shall preside at all meetings of council and in his or her absence, the vice chairperson and in the absence of both chairperson and vice chairperson, the members present shall elect one of their members to preside.” Justification: to empower the vice chairperson to preside over the council meetings in the absence of the chairperson. 

Item (6), propose to amend the item by deleting the phrase “A second or” appearing on line four. Justification, it is redundant. We propose to amend paragraph three, item (1) by substituting for the word “chairperson” appearing on line one the word secretary. Justification: to require the secretary to keep the minutes of board meetings. 

Item 2, by inserting the phrase “And secretary” between the words “chairperson” and “in”. Justification: to require the secretary to countersign the minutes of the council meetings.

Secondly, delete the word “other” appearing on line four And the justification is it is redundant.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that the second schedule be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

The second schedule, as amended, agreed to.

MS KABAHENDA: We propose on the cross references to amend the cross references by inserting a new item 3 as “The Public Finance Management Act 2015.”

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that a new reference be inserted as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRPERSON: Any progress on clause 30?

Clause 30

MR OBOTH: For the first time, hon. Ekanya is making me his secretary, but for the record -(Laughter)- being the chairperson of caucus in Tororo. This is what we have come up with and it may need polishing:- creating an offence under clause 30: “Any person who plagiarises research on or interferes, duplicates and/or alters ecological sights, local fauna and flora, commits an offence and is liable on conviction to a fine not exceeding 48 currency points or imprisonment not exceeding two years or both”. Whatever it is, we can polish it up but that is just a skeleton from Tororo.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Can I propose the word “use” after “plagiarises”, before “duplicates”?

MR OBOTH: Yes.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I think the word “use” should also come then we have “duplicates” and “alters”.

MR EKANYA: Madam Chairperson, some of our colleagues travel and tell you that these animals are in Kenya, but yet the Kenyan Government has been advertising certain wildlife which they do not have, but then they bring the tourists here. This is a fact of the matter. So including advertising any wildlife which is not in your jurisdiction or in Uganda or you duplicate –(Interjections)- you know we are in research; we have specific birds, they can do a genetic mutation and you get a different bird then when you go to Mexico, you find that these are the same birds. We need to protect our heritage.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that a new sub-clause be introduced under clause 30.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 30, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 2

MS KABAHENDA: Madam Chairperson, the committee proposes to amend clause 2, by substituting the current interpretation of director with a phrase “Means the director of the institute or any person acting on that behalf.” Justification: to provide for persons who may act in the office of the director in the absence of the substantive director of the institute.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 2, be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 2, as amended, agreed to.

The Title, agreed to.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

7.15
THE MINISTER OF TOURISM, WILDLIFE AND ANTIQUITIES (Ms Maria Mutagamba): Madam Chair, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding_)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

7.17
THE MINISTER OF TOURISM, WILDLIFE AND ANTIQUITIES (Ms Maria Mutagamba): Madam Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled “The Uganda Wildlife Research and Training Institute Bill 2013” and passed it with amendments.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

7.17
THE MINISTER OF TOURISM, WILDLIFE AND ANTIQUITIES (Ms Maria Mutagamba): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled “The Uganda Wildlife Research and Training Institute Bill, 2015”, be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

BILLS
THIRD READING

THE UGANDA WILDLIFE RESEARCH AND TRAINING INSTITUTE BILL, 2013

7.18
THE MINISTER OF TOURISM, WILDLIFE AND ANTIQUITIES (Ms Maria Mutagamba): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Uganda Wildlife Research and Training Institute Bill, 2013” be read the third time and do pass.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that the Uganda Wildlife Research and Training Institute Bill, 2013 be read for the third time and do pass.

(Question put and agreed to.)

A BILL FOR AN ACT ENTITLED “THE UGANDA WILDLIFE RESEARCH AND TRAINING INSTITUTE ACT, 2015”

THE SPEAKER: I congratulate the minister on finally getting all the three Bills from your sector and all of them have been done and we would like to thank the Chair and the Committee on Trade and Tourism for the work done and all the members. 

I would like to give notice to the Committee on Public Service tomorrow their Bill will be on the Order Paper and we need to get it out of the way tomorrow.

MR EKANYA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The Committee on Public Service has stood on the issue of dividing Tororo District for long; the matter was referred there. When are they bringing that report, I hope they will bring it tomorrow?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, yesterday the Business Committee sat and the concern was raised that this matter had not been handled, so we said it was a priority, so it will have to come.

Honourable members, House adjourned to tomorrow at 2 O’clock.  Thank you so much. I do apologise to the Muslims.

(The House rose at 7.20 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 24 June 2015, at 2.00 p.m.) 

