Wednesday, 29 June 2011

Parliament met at 2.26 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, you are welcome to this afternoon’s sitting. You may recall that sometime back, the Government of Uganda had discussed, for a long time, the provision of national identity cards for all Ugandans. This initiative was launched on 12 May 2011, when His Excellency the President, received the first card for the country during the swearing-in ceremony.

I know that certain Members of the Eighth Parliament were registered by the unit from the Ministry of Internal Affairs, but now they have requested me to give an opportunity to the Members of the Ninth Parliament to be registered.

So, the Directorate of Citizenship and Immigration Control Board would like to commence registration of the Members of the Ninth Parliament from Monday 4th. The Members of the Eighth Parliament, who were able to register previously, will be able to collect their identity cards. So, please, accord the officials the necessary cooperation.

Secondly, I wanted to draw the attention of the Government Side that our work normally commences with the State of the Nation Address, which we have not received. We have received the - Oh, it has come? Maybe it has just come today. Okay, that has been hindering a bit of our work. I have also received the text of the Budget Speech and I hope it has been circulated to the Members. So, if those are available then we shall be able to start organising our business. Thank you very much.

2.30
MR AMOOTI OTADA (Independent, Kibanda County, Kiryandongo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise under Rule 51 of our Rules of Procedure and with a heavy heart, to raise a matter of definite urgent importance. Yesterday in the House, a Member for Kyenjojo raised the issue of lightning, which has been killing people in the country. Today, all the newspapers are awash with the news of children who have been struck by lightning in Kiryandongo District and in Runyanya Primary School in particular.

I think this has been the worst of all the lightning disasters that have taken place in recent times and it occurred yesterday at 4 .00 p.m. 

A number of other children have also been brought to Mulago where I have just been visiting. Others are in various health centres and Kiryandongo Hospital being attended to in both serious and bearable conditions.

I would like to draw the attention of this House to the fact that this matter was discussed yesterday, and I was rather disturbed by the response that we got from the Deputy Leader of Government Business. The response did not indicate urgency, and I believe now that these children of Kiryandongo are going to be the ones who will make this matter today be given specific attention.

Yesterday, we expected a statement but the Leader of Government Business said that when they find time at some point, they will explain, but there are a number of issues that come to mind at this point in time because we ask questions such as, “Why was lightning not striking in such a pattern in the past and why is it happening now?” 

I have been reliably informed, but I wouldn’t want to pre-empt debate at this point, that this is a scientific phenomenon, which I believe this government should be aware of. Once the sun gets pointed at a certain point in time, it creates a situation where those points become prone to lightning. Just like when there is some earth movement that actually causes certain parts of the country to be prone to floods, for example. But like I said, I wouldn’t want to pre-empt debate because this is a matter where first of all, we are expecting Government to explain, but –(Interruption)

MS NAMBOOZE: I thank the hon. Member for giving way. Madam Speaker, my heart also goes out to the parents of our innocent dead children. Since yesterday, I have taken trouble to do some research. I wish to lay on Table documentary evidence - articles from medical journals written by different scholars and scientists pointing to the fact that the construction of telecommunication towers attracts lightning. Also, the continued use of mobile phones during thunderstorms causes high risks to mobile phone users.

Yesterday, the minister ably defended this point here when it was raised by hon. Kyanjo and he told this House that indeed these towers increase the risk. I want to read one sentence from this article: “Mobile phone base stations are often threats in exposed elevated locations for the maximum possible broadcast coverage. Often, this unintentionally results in the erection of an un-ideal positioned lightning conductor”.

I have brought all these articles for the benefit of our ministers and for the benefit of this House. I think it is high time a scientific audit is done to assess the dangers posed by the massive construction of telecommunication masts around the country; and the dangers posed by the use of mobile phones. Everybody might agree that these massive lightning incidences are something new. We have always been here and the sun has always been moving around, but why now? With your permission, Madam Speaker, I wish to lay these documents on Table.

THE SPEAKER: We thank hon. Nambooze for that information.

MR OTADA: Let me just wind up such that I do not dominate the Floor. Questions have to be asked why lightning is hitting us now. Why is it striking schools, which are Government buildings? These are UPE schools that we have been building for the last 14 years and I am sure that they are over 17,000 of these, if not more. 

There is information that building standards have not been adhered to. The housing policy I believe has recommendations or building standards, which must be adhered to and as Government, we set the standards and I think Government should be the first to follow them.

If you find a minister going to commission a school with a big ceremony and this school does not conform to building standards, what happens? Many of us as Members of Parliament have been urging parents and children in our constituencies to go to school and benefit from this Government programme called UPE. Some of them do not want to even up to today, but we have continued to mobilise them. Now it breaks your heart if you have mobilised people to participate in a Government programme and the programme becomes a disaster for them. These are the issues that we are at pains to think about. 

It would be unfair for me if I did not thank Government for the good response to those who survived. I was in Mulago and I have spoken to the people on the ground. There was good response; vehicles were sent from Kampala to repatriate people. Those who were brought got very good reception at Mulago and there was a commissioner from the disaster preparedness department, who visited these children.

People will always ask a question that, if this good response is always made to tackle a disaster, why don’t we act with the same zeal and be proactive to prevent the disaster before it happens. When people do not appreciate then one can say that people are not appreciating what Government does. 

Usually, people cannot appreciate a problem that has already occurred. What happens to those who have died, what happens to those who have been injured? 

Finally, UPE is going to be affected; in my constituency, children are shying away from going to school now. They are saying, “To hell with your death trap.”

THE SPEAKER: This matter has become extremely grave in view of what transpired while we were sitting here yesterday. So, I will just give Members two minutes.

2.43
MR HUSSEIN KYANJO (JEEMA, Makindye Division West, Kampala): I do not want to take a lot of time on this issue because it is an issue of grave concern, and given the nature of Parliament, I do not know where the debate could end. I want to beg that at the end of our debate we observe a minute of silence for those who have been killed in this tragic incident.

THE SPEAKER: I was already planning for that at the end of the debate.

2.43
MR SAMUEL ODONGA-OTTO (FDC, Aruu County, Pader): I actually just need one minute. Now that the Minister of Education is here, can you come out clearly on the Floor of this House on whether our pupils should go to school tomorrow? All those 17,000 UPE schools do not have the lightning conductors. Can you come out as Government and tell pupils not to go to school for two weeks until the conductors are installed?
In an event that you cannot come out clearly, would it be wrong for me to tell all the people in Pader not to go to those death traps?

2.44
MR JOSEPH SSEWUNGU (DP, Kalungu County West, Kalungu): It is unfortunate that we are losing children, but I remember last time, when we were attending Parliament from the other side, I talked about schools and you promised to come to my constituency and see whether what I was saying was true.

I was representing teachers on the school management committee. Most of the UPE schools were not constructed well. Some do not have window shutters; we are likely to face a problem of rain killing people again. Most of these classes never got thunder arrestors, yet this is something very cheap. For example, if you get charcoal, salt and copper wires, you can start from those minor materials to put there thunder arrestors.

We have to ask ourselves what is causing the death of these children. Do we predict our weather correctly? Sometimes we make mistakes; What is the colour of the uniforms that these children put on? Red is alleged to be affiliated to that. Two, where are these children found? For example, in DRC, there was a team that was starting to play football and they were hit by thunder. How do these children move back home? Do they move in big groups? Head teachers must be sensitised on that. They must know that children should move alone.

If we predict that there is rain, children should stay at home because the problems in UPE schools are so many; land is being stolen and that is going to come here; they are stealing land as if they are stealing anything; teachers are dying of hunger and they cannot manage these children. All these things must be looked at. 

Finally, we are saying that our Budget -(Member Timed Out.)

THE SPEAKER: Your time is up. Hon. Olanya.

2.47
MR GILBERT OLANYA (Independent, Kilak County, Amuru): I thank you, Madam Speaker. The same incident took place yesterday in Amuru District where Pabbo Primary School was struck by lightning. As I talk now, pupils of that school have refused to turn up at school and following what hon. Odonga-Otto said, can the minister really clarify to us whether the children should continue going to school or not?

Right now it looks as if we are risking the lives of our children and the parents are saying that their children must not go to school because the moment they move to school, lightning may kill them. We, therefore, need clarification in order to save our innocent children. I thank you so much.

2.48
MR SIMON PETER ALEPER (NRM, Moroto Municipality, Moroto): When this matter was raised yesterday, it is true that it is a matter of concern and it touches all the honourable Members of Parliament here and all Ugandans. I do recall very well that you made a ruling that was very wise.

You said that this matter was very sensitive and that the minister responsible should come here to make a statement, and after making the statement, probably we will have a balanced debate, because for now we are going to generate lamentations and discussions endlessly without basis. 

Otherwise, I appreciate the fact that this is a concern of everybody and if it is in the same spirit, I would kindly request the Members to go by the ruling of yesterday by the Speaker that the minister responsible comes to make a statement here. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: I think that we do not know where else the casualty occurred last night. Yesterday we were talking about schools in Busoga and as we were sitting here, it happened in Bunyoro. So, let us just have two minutes each and then the minister shall speak.

2.50
MR KENNETH LUBOGO (Independent, Bulamogi County, Kaliro): Thank you, Madam Speaker. As it stands now, it is obvious that the lightning tragedies are not a one-off incident because they are recurring and they must be given due recognition. I received a report from my constituency in Kaliro this morning that three people died in Namugongo sub-county in a home; they were struck dead by lightning. 

Last week, in Valley Hill Primary School, three children were killed by lightning. In Bumanya sub-county in Kaliro District lightning struck a family although they were not killed. We have registered seven dead so far and yet this is a critical time with a lot of famine in the villages and many injuries have arisen.

It is my proposition that the government takes up the matter seriously and even comes up with a way to help the injured people to get the necessary treatment. I thank you.

2.51
DR LULUME BAYIGA (DP, Buikwe County South, Buikwe): I thank you, Madam Speaker. The first incident occurred in my constituency in a village called Luwombo in Buikwe sub-county, where three children were struck dead and others injured, and subsequent events have occurred. I regard this as a state of backwardness in our country of which I also share the blame. 

Not very many of us have risen up to question the architecture of the buildings which house our children, and the buildings we live in. The question about whether our children will go to school and be assured of good health does not arise, simply because even private homes have been struck and people have lost their lives.

I believe we need some expert opinion as well in order to assure the whole country and to sensitise us about how we are going to live the next day –(Applause)- how we are going to improve our architecture in future to see that we have lightning conductors, beginning with the schools which house most of our children when they are away from home?

I think this can be the way forward and I would not want to pre-empt the speech of the Minister of Education and Sports because it also affects our private homes. 

As to what the country can do in order to help those who have been affected, I think this is another matter that the Prime Minister can talk about.

THE SPEAKER: Let us hear from hon. Anifa and then we shall come to the science later.

2.54
MRS ANIFA KAWOOYA (NRM, Woman Representative, Sembabule): My heart goes to the bereaved families. Much as we appreciate that this matter was discussed yesterday, you made a ruling. I am sure it is a concern of each and everybody of us here and outside there. 

It is my humble request that as you requested the Leader of Government Business to come with a statement, this august House should put a timeframe because we are not going to wait until all the children are struck – the families, the women - from one family!

We appreciate that the Leader of Government Business said they are coming here with a statement - and we need a comprehensive statement that even touches on the construction work, because it is not only lightning that is a disaster in the schools, but also the construction work of classrooms. 

The other issue is the floods. Some people died in the floods yesterday and buildings were collapsing. So, it must be a statement that is comprehensive and cuts across different sectors - housing, education, works and others. All the mothers of this nation are weeping; every parent is weeping. 

On the issue of child abuse – a 10-year-old child was tortured and captured. Its hands were beaten and smashed! While I do appreciate the intervention of the Police, the august House should stand up and condemn that act of child abuse in the strongest possible terms because that is inhumane; it was abusing the child’s and parent’s right. We anticipate this Government to also come out with a statement from Internal Affairs. 

We have spoken about child abuse and made laws - the Equal Opportunities Committee came on the Floor of this House, when I was the chairperson, and it seems like nobody is listening.

DR AJEDRA: Scientific information.

THE SPEAKER: I will come to you. Hon. Mwesigye, Muwuma – who was the other person? Okwenye and then we shall get the scientific information in the middle there.

2.56
COL. (RTD) FRED MWESIGYE (NRM, Nyabushozi County, Kiruhura): I thank you, Madam Speaker. Since yesterday, I have been on the Internet trying to read more about what causes lightning. I want to challenge Members of Parliament to get onto the Internet and really find out the cause of lightning so that they can speak from a scientific position. I am saying this because this is a natural phenomena that calls for concerns from all of us, rather than just apportioning blame on the minister in charge of that sector. We should all get back to our constituencies and sensitize the people on how to avoid being hit by lightninglightning.

Therefore, I would like to urge Members of Parliament to unite over this catastrophic matter –(Interjection)– I don’t accept that information.

MS ANYWAR: Madam Speaker, I am rising on a point of order. Yesterday, we had a scenario here where we expressed our sadness over what is happening in the country. I remember one of our colleagues alluding to the fact that it is a natural phenomenon. You also ruled that as legislators in this country, we have a cardinal duty to find a way forward to such calamities in this country. 

I have noticed that instead of the honourable colleague holding the Floor suggesting a way forward on how we can evade this natural disaster, he is defending the very responsible officers who are supposed to come and tell us what they are doing to contain this situation. So, is it in order for that hon. Member of Parliament to continue blaming the victims over this natural disaster rather than suggesting solutions for this natural calamity?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I appreciate the fact that the issue is causing some emotions, but I also told you yesterday that on Sunday my voters called me asking me about the same thing; why schools are being hit by lightning. I can tell you that I had no answers. So, not everybody has knowledge on what to do. What we have to do now is to advise and assist one another. 

COL. MWESIGYE: Madam Speaker, I am only calling upon all the Members to go and read more about the tips on the Internet, on how to avoid being hit by lightning before we get to our constituencies to alert our people; educate our children and teachers in schools on how to avoid this. We should do this before we look at the building standards, which I also think have a problem. We need to advise the housing ministry that each building should have lightning conductors so that we can move forward as a team instead of apportioning blame.

3.00
MR MILTON MUWUMA (NRM, Kigulu South, Iganga): Madam Speaker, thank you so much. Like the other Members have kept alluding to the issue of construction standards, the fact of the matter is that these standards have deteriorated. During our school days, all school structures used to have lightning conductors. 

When hon. Francis Ayume passed on, this House passed a law on speed governors and car seat belts. Last year, when fires hit schools, this House directed the Ministry of Education and Sports and Ministry of Internal Affairs to intervene in the matter. As we talk, most schools have installed fire extinguishers and that problem was mitigated up to a certain level. 

Also, Ministry of Internal Affairs instituted some security checks at most of the public places. It is my considered opinion that even now, this House should direct the Minister of Education and Sports to ensure that the schools that do not have such –[Members: “Be closed.”]– not closing them as such, but to ensure that each of such schools installs lightning conductors in the meantime. Otherwise, our children are perishing.

Madam Speaker, you remember last week, I had indicated to you that I would move over the same because I thought this was only targeting Busoga region, and I had carried out an inquiry and discovered that 24 pupils in Busoga had died. It was until Sunday last week when lightning also hit the pupils in Aleptong and Mbarara schools were struck by lightning, that I realised it had not been a Busoga affair.

I would like to urge this House to resolve that the Ministry of Education and Sports - as a starting point - issues a circular directing all schools to install lightning conductors because these are cheap facilities that are affordable.

3.02
MR MICAH LOLEM (NRM, Upe County, Amudat): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Mine is a bit different. We are now in the month of June and entering July. In Amudat District, we have only one secondary school called Pokot Senior Secondary School. This school has only 12 teachers, who move very long distances to school. When I checked the Order Paper, I didn’t see anything to do with the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development in terms of what she is going to present –(Interruption)

MR ISABIRYE: Madam Speaker, is it in order for the hon. Member holding the Floor to divert the House from what it is discussing? While we are still discuss issues of lightning, he is now talking about issues of salaries in schools. Is he in order?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, let us first focus on the immediate tragedy. We shall talk about all the others during our debate on the State of the Nation Address.

MR LOLEM: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Otherwise, I just wanted to report that teachers at Pokot SS haven’t received their salaries for the month of May. (Laughter) Last week, the teachers laid down their tools in a strike that prompted the RDC to address them before they went back to teach. We are now in June, what happened to the salaries of May?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, I gave you the opportunity to discuss the issue of lightning. So, have you had lightning in Amudat?

MR LOLEM: Madam Speaker, lightning is a concern, but I know that some children have not been able to go to school because of lightning, and the same applies to Pokot SS where students are not receiving services because the teachers have laid down their tools.

3.06
MS ANNET NYAKECHO (NRM, Woman Representative, Otuke): Madam Speaker, thank you very much. I have noted with concern that we really have a problem in the country now. As you may realise, lightning isn’t hitting only the central, west or east; it is countrywide. Just this morning, as I discussed this issue with my colleague in the office, he told me he had just returned from a funeral of his nephew in Amolator – it is now in the North as well. 

So, I think we really need to come up with a solution to this problem though someone tried to tell me that the cause of this lightning is actually in the Congo Basin in DRC. That person tried to tell me that there is a problem of climate change in regard to temperatures. I don’t know how true that is, but I think we need to come up with a solution to this problem of lightning striking our pupils in schools. That is what we need to look out for now. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Now we have heard from the civilians, let us hear from the scientists. Yes, engineer Ajedra. 

3.07
MR GABRIEL AJEDRA (NRM, Arua Municipality, Arua): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. For some of us who had the opportunity to study science in depth, the scientific explanation is as follows: I think my honourable minister and the chief whip attempted to explain it yesterday that lightning takes place when there are water particles in the air. If there are such particles in the air, there will be friction between those particles that charge the atmosphere and which cause what we call static electricity. 

The static electricity is built up in the clouds, and that electric charge must be discharged somehow into the ground because the ground has zero potential, and that is why you find all major buildings around the world, maybe with the exception of Uganda, having lightning arrestors. So, what is happening in schools is no surprise because as I drive to Arua, through the Acholi sub region, we have schools in the open area and no trees around. The school is at the highest point and it does not have a lightning arrestor. What do you expect of an iron roof? It is a conductor and, therefore, the electric charge must go through the iron sheets and that is why we have these problems in schools. 

Madam Speaker, one of the problems is routed in the fact that in Uganda, we do not obey building standards and regulations. I want to challenge all of us here in this House; go to your house and check whether your building has any lightning arrestor on the roof. If it does not, you are in danger. I have had the opportunity to travel the world over and it is not only in Uganda where we do not enforce building regulations and, therefore, I think debating the issue is not going to help. What we need to do is to consider this as a disaster –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Let us hear some more science from Dr Bitekyerezo. 

3.10
DR MEDARD BITEKYEREZO (NRM, Mbarara Municipality, Mbarara): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I want us to agree that hon. Ajedra has explained it precisely; that to have lightning, definitely you must have liquid and ice particles above the freezing level colliding and building up large electrical fields in the clouds. These are natural things, which will happen and which even the Ministry of Education may not manage. However, you have to know that scientifically, even man is made out of sodium chloride, which is a very wonderful conductor. 

Secondly, we must all agree that most of the buildings we have in Uganda do not have lightning conductors, as the engineer has explained; but we cannot leave it undone and we believe that plastic containers are poor conductors. If these children had worn shoes, they wouldn’t have died. If all children wear shoes in this country, they would survive. We should go back and talk to our people and our schools. The Ministry of Disaster Preparedness should put interventions, for example, to let every child in a primary school wear at least sandals. 

We must know that children should not hide under trees because we have got sodium chloride inside us and a tree has water in it and so, it is a conductor of lightning. At this juncture, this is an emergency and we want all children to go to school. Why doesn’t the Minister of Education form an emergency group or commissioners to go to these schools and monitor these buildings? If they do not have conductors, nobody should enter them and we should put them there urgently, and all children should wear shoes. I beg to move. Thank you very much. 

THE SPEAKER: It means that all Ugandans should wear shoes. The Minister of Education has a statement; I hope it has now been circulated. I do not know if there are enough copies. I will call you after the minister presents. I think her copies are now ready. Please distribute the copies and let the Minister of Education speak. But hon. Prime Minister, this thing is bigger than the Ministry of Education; I think later, you may have to say something.

3.12
THE MINISTER OF EDUCATION AND SPORTS (Ms Jessica Alupo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The subject under debate is very emotional because we all have children and we are all parents. I would like to start by requesting this honourable House to stand and observe a moment of silence in memory of the children and the adults who have died in recent times, due to lightning. 

(Members rose and observed a moment of silence.)

Madam Speaker, you will realise that the disaster that has hit us as a country is comprehensive and might well need to be answered by the different sectors of Government as you have rightly ruled, including that of Water and Environment where the experts of meteorology sit; and that of Disaster Preparedness where Government normally deploys the technical people to quickly rescue the situation in case of a calamity. 

But on the issue of the education sector, which is currently the biggest casualty of lightning strikes, I have come here with a very humble statement and I would like to present it in light of what the ministry is doing, what the ministry has done and what the ministry is planning to do. 

The Ministry of Education and Sports joins all other concerned Ugandans to extend our condolences to the families who lost their children in the recent lightning strikes in Kiryandongo District. Since 2005, the Ministry of Education and Sports adopted a policy of installing lightning conductors on buildings constructed under the Schools Facilitation Grant (SFG) and other programmes. This was prompted by a concern raised by the then Minister of State for Elderly and Disability Affairs, hon. Florence Nayiga Ssekabira. 

The Minister of Education, to that effect at that time, issued a circular to all local governments to ensure that they provide for the lightning conductors in their budgets and that they are installed in all schools. Local governments were also asked to advise private schools to do the same and you can refer to the attachments; there are documents there which were duly signed by the permanent secretary at that time. 

Currently, all buildings under construction in the primary schools, secondary schools, primary teachers’ colleges and business technical and vocational education institutions have provisions forlightning conductors as a matter of policy. 


Yesterday when this debate ensued, I asked the technical people in the ministry to provide me with copies of this policy, which I will later on lay on Table - most probably tomorrow if you allow me to bring them because this afternoon, the copies were not yet ready. 

Local governments, through the district health and school inspectors, should carry out regular inspections to ensure that the installed conductors are not vandalised. During the monitoring of schools, the Ministry of Education and Sports has come across isolated cases of vandalism and local governments have been advised to replace vandalised lightning conductors. 

Maybe to explain this point further, there are some instances where during monitoring sessions by the inspectors of schools, the school administrators have reported that there are some people who think that there is mercury in these lightning conductors, so they go and dig down where the earth wire is placed thinking that there is some mercury. That is what I mean by saying that there are some isolated incidences of vandalised lightning conductors.

Experts have also observed some rare instances where some conductors may lose their conductivity. That means that even during construction, after the lightning conductor is put by the constructorat an appropriate time, the conductivity will be lost and that demands that the school or the local government needs to buy or replace the lightning conductor that has lost conductivity. That is why I am saying that these too, if detected, have to be replaced. 

The Ministry of Education and Sports will conduct, as a matter of urgency, a comprehensive inspection exercise of schools to confirm whether lightning conductors were installed and whether they function. I had asked my technical people in the ministry to also compile a list of schools where the lightning conductors are operational right now. 

The ministry will then proceed to carry out a nationwide campaign to ensure that every school has lightning conductors. All local governments will be required to comply with this requirement. 

The Ministry of Education and Sports will also issue a circular to all institutions asking head teachers to ensure that children or students are taken through safety drills for lightning threats. The safety drills include wearing plastic shoes so that the lightning does not strike you and avoiding using your phone at that time. I think that one will be enforced more by the meteorological experts since we are working in consultation with them. That is the end of my statement. 

I would like to humbly urge my colleagues to mobilise children; try to counsel them and encourage their parents to take the children to school. Then I call upon Members for all your support and the support of all the local governments to ensure that we try to emphasise the way forward. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Who is the shadow minister for education or the shadow minister for disaster?

3.22
MS FRANCA AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Agago): Madam Speaker, I want to thank the minister so much for coming up with a statement. I also want to thank honourable members who have contributed to this debate.

It is really very unfortunate that this kind of disaster is happening and as a country, we have not fully-defined the cause of lightning. I could hear Members giving us incidences of lightning that happened not only in schools, but also in villages and so on. I also had a serious case two years ago, when I was representing the people of Pader in the Eighth Parliament. Lightning struck a family of six; a woman died with five children. The whole family perished at night.

So, it is very unfortunate. However, my observation is that the honourable minister’s concern, especially where she said that everything is in black and white in terms of policy - the biggest problem this country has is that we have so many good things on paper yet putting them in practice is a very big problem! 

I actually went through the policy the minister has been talking about. But I can assure you that today, the honourable minister has promised that inspections will be conducted. This will remain on paper and in her words. I will be the happiest woman if I participate in this inspection because I am a teacher by profession. I will also want to ensure that inspections are done so that every school in Uganda has lightning conductors. At the moment, I am not sure whether all schools have lightning conductors. I think the Ministry of Disaster Preparedness has a stake in this issue. Even the Ministry of Housing should take interest in this area so that as a country, we take it as a serious issue.

I want to call upon my counterpart, hon. Alupo, who is the Minister of Education, to make sure that she informs the House when she is about to conduct the inspections so that I can also do my deployments and ensure this is done.

I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, we all have schools in our constituencies. Why don’t we make it part of our programme, in addition to looking at NAADS and the roads, to check what is happening in these schools? You know, I have been going there, but I have never thought about these conductors. Really, I feel guilty. 

3.26
MR PETER BAKALUBA MUKASA (NRM, Mukono County South, Mukono): I thank you very much, Madam Speaker. It is unfortunate that we are experiencing this disaster. This is a natural disaster. Others had started speculating that maybe someone is bewitching them, and a lot of things have been said. Scientists have also told us that this kind of lightning and disaster can continue up to 2013. 

So, as a Theologian, I would like to advise our people to pray to God for comfort. But we also need to take some precautions. For example, we have been advised to put on rubber shoes; we should also advise our people not to stay under trees when it is raining. We also need to go back to our constituencies and educate our people about lightning. 

But what has been said in the statement by the honourable minister in the third paragraph, does not seem true to me. She says that lightning control gadgets have been put on most of our Government schools. This is not completely true. But we should not only be thinking about Government schools, even children in private schools can also be affected. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

3.28
MS JOVAH KAMATEEKA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mitooma): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for her statement and I want to associate myself with those sympathising with the parents. I would also like to move that this House passes a resolution sympathising with the parents, the teachers, the pupils and schools; we should record our sympathies. You just imagine what the pupils are going through. For example, the pupils of Kiryandongo who saw 18 of their colleagues dropping dead, should be in trauma! So, I think it would be gratifying and comforting for them to know that we sympathise with them.

Turning to the minister’s statement, she seems to be proposing long-term measures. To me this is an emergencey that calls for emergency measures. For example, as the honourable member has said, people should be advised to put on rubber shoes. Let the minister come up with such immediate measures to curb the problem. For example, there should be a check-up on the telecommunication masts to ascertain whether they are a cause of lightning or not. If they are involved in causing it, what can be done to curb the problem? Thank you. 

3.30
MR SIMON MULONGO (NRM, Bubulo County East, Manafwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the Minister of Education and Sports for that elaborate statement that indicated that the ministry did respond to similar situations as early as 2005. 

However, the statement does not cover certain questions which we are raising now. For example, there is no indication as to whether there was a requirement for compliance to this directive. There are no returns since 2005, indicating that this directive was complied with. Did the schools in the returns ever indicate that they constructed these conductors? And has inspection been done annually to ensure compliance with this directive?

Secondly, I think we need an elaborate scientific explanation as to why of all the buildings in this country, it is the UPE schools which are being struck. Initially, we thought it was an issue of Busoga region, because of the failure to resolve the Kyabazinga crisis, but now it is countywide and moreover it is selecting UPE schools. 

Even if we explained it the scientific way as the scientists have done, I still ask, why is it striking schools and not other buildings? So, I would like to support the proposal that we put in place immediate measures much as we may go for long-term measures. Thank you.

3.33
MR TOM ALERO (NRM, West Moyo County, Moyo): I am equipped with the 1970 Act; I also have the 2008 Educational Act; and the 2010 basic requirements and minimum standards indicators for educational institutional. All these documents mention what a school should have before people start using it. For example, the copper wires are being removed by women and girls for decorative ornaments and bangles –(Interruption) 

MR EKANYA: Madam Speaker, I rise on a point of order because without my beautiful mother, I wouldn’t be here today. I find my colleague’s statement dehumanising to women and girls. I have been in this Parliament for long. It took five years for the Minister of Energy to power an electricity project in Tororo County because the earthing system was not complete and I want to thank the current Minister of Energy, Eng. Irene Muloni. She sent inspectors who said, “We cannot power the project in that place because there is a poor earthing system and it can cause a big problem in your constituency.” 

Therefore, is it in order for my colleague to say that the women and girls have been stealing copper wires, which Government installed in our infrastructure? Is he in order to insinuate that the women and girls in this country cannot buy bangles in the markets because they are poor?

THE SPEAKER: Now, hon. Member, unless you substantiate that it is the women who steal the copper and have, therefore, caused lightning, please withdraw the statement. 

MR ALERO: Madam Speaker, I humbly and regrettably withdraw my statement. I beg to proceed. 

Our problem is inspection. Let the Ministry of Education come up with clear and tangible policies and allocate enough money and resources so that our district educational officers and inspectors of schools are equipped with the finances to inspect all the institutions. 

There is what we call ESA (Educational Standards Agency); they are moving all over 
the country, but they have not been given enough resources. They should be given more money so that these -(Member timed out.)

3.37
MR JOHN MULIMBA (NRM, Samia-Bugwe County North, Busia): Madam Speaker, thank you so much. Whereas I join the rest of the speakers who have appreciated the statement from the minister, I find the minister has proposed long-term intervention measures. As we speak, we need short-term and medium-term interventions, because the disaster is apparent and looks like it is growing. 

I would have expected the minister to put out a circular sensitising pupils and headteachers in these schools on how to behave during this disaster situation. For example, not going under trees when it is raining. This will also cover the rest of the population by the way and not only school children. 

We heard scientific information from one doctor who proposed that all pupils wear shoes, but this does not cover the rest of the population - how about our grandmothers in the village. What about cattle? I do not know whether cattle are also going to wear shoes. I think we need to have some comprehensive study and a statement given by the Meteorological Department and Ministry of Disaster and Relief to the effect that caution is taken and also proposing intervention by Government in the medium-term and also in the future.

Two, I also find one paragraph here in which the minister is directing all local governments to ensure that conductors are installed. This is like giving a directive without matching funds and this is what local governments have suffered quite often. Do we have a budget to support this directive? I think this is quite pertinent.

This also goes along with vandalism. I know the conductors which were installed some time ago in many schools were vandalised, but I think this was on suspicion by those who were vandalising that there was mercury underground. How are we going to ensure that we protect this installation from vandalism? After all, as we speak, UPE funds are not providing for security to the UPE constructed schools. (Member timed out.)

3.40
DR CHRIS BARYOMUNSI (NRM, Kinkiizi County East, Kanungu): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I also want to thank the minister for the statement. Let me add some scientific information to my educated colleagues’ - the medical people. Because if I ask you, what is the scientific explanation? Like some others have said, when air molecules collide in the clouds, particularly the rain clouds, namely, the Nimbus and Cumulonimbus clouds, they generate heat like when you rub your hands. And then there is an airspace which is hot and when it meets a cold environment there is a spark in terms of electricity which is lightning. 

It could be horizontal, that is lightning within clouds or it could be vertical. Vertical means that the current will go down to the earth and usually it will hit the highest object it will find, and that is why you are hearing advice that people should not take shelter under trees because it will hit a tree since it will be higher than you. Like now, if it were to hit Parliament, I would be hit because I am higher than most of you. (Laughter)

Now, there is a theory in which someone was talking of Congo, saying that there could be heavy currents, a big drift coming from Congo and because we have tampered with the environment, the atmospheric temperatures and the moisture content has changed and that is likely to be what is precipitating the chemical reaction within the clouds.

Some of the tips are: One, you avoid taking shelter under trees; and two, you do not talk on phones and other electronic appliances when there are thunderstorms, because you can complete the circuit of the lightning. There is also wearing shoes because shoes are made of rubber and they are insulators and, therefore, you cannot complete the circuit once you are wearing the shoes. 

If you are driving, ordinarily, a vehicle cannot be hit by lightning. But if you ignite a vehicle, you can easily complete the circuit and you will be hit by lightning in the vehicle itself. And also when it is raining, it is advisable to avoid touching plumbing materials like sinks and taps, especially those which are metallic because the electric current from lightning can connect with the water and then you complete the circuit and you will be hit.

Yes, I agree that most of our UPE schools are built on high levels and with no trees and, therefore, when lightning comes, it finds the school on a high point. That could be one reason. But also, the government should investigate to rule out the possibility that maybe among the building materials being used, there could be one that is creating a situation where the schools have a higher affinity to this lightning. I think this should be established through expert studies and be ruled out. 

And two, the ministry responsible for the environment should also tell us whether our human behaviours of tampering with the environment could actually explain why we are having these big -(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Ssempijja then hon. Katuntu. Hon. Members, you know we are responding to education, but we have asked the Leader of Government Business to bring a comprehensive statement which will touch on other ministries. So, today, let us just touch on the small emergency and then we wait for the big one, which will set the policy guidelines.

3.44
MR VINCENT SSEMPIJJA (Independent, Kalungu County East, Kalungu): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to also thank the Minister of Education for her timely response and statement. But I want to say that even in 2005 or even earlier, we had problems like we have today and indeed, the ministry responded as the minister has put it. I was there in the district and we got these circulars. 

As the last speaker said, we need to remind the people who are on the ground - in the schools, especially the CAOs, that when they are instructing their contractors to ensure that these conductors are put on these schools when the construction is going on. 

But again we had problems during our inspections because certainly we found out that these conductors were being stolen. When we asked, the headmasters told us that one of the reasons is that even the children themselves somehow play with the conductors and pull them out when they are put just outside on the walls. Maybe the contractors can do something about this so that they are put somewhere where they are hidden, because they attract children to touch them.

Then the other reason was thieves. Some people are stealing the copper plates which they put on schools, to make the Shs 500 coins. 

3.47
MS BEATRICE ANYWAR (FDC, Woman Representative, Kitgum): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Responding to the ministerial statement as it is, I have a feeling that this statement is still lacking compared to the gravity of the problem at hand. My observation is that the minister is just referring to Kiryandongo yet the problem is across the whole country. It would have done the nation better if the Minister of Education had given us more information on how, in the short-term and long-term, the ministry is going to respond. It looks like the statement was written hastily and thus does not embrace all the issues we would have wanted addressed. For instance, I would have liked to see the minister talk about compensation of those who have already been affected. And when we are talking about those victims, we are talking about schools without mentioning families. We wish to see this featuring in her statement. In addition, we would want to see schools which are rented rather than the ones we are talking about being constructed, which the guidelines from the Ministry of Education are indicating. What will happen to schools where people find some buildings and they rent them without knowing whether precautions have been taken for the safety of our children?

I wish to echo and greatly emphasise that we want to see tree planting in schools as a reality –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Half a minute for the proposal.

MS ANYWAR: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for your kind consideration. I propose that let there be an inter-ministerial meeting and not only the Ministry of Education handling this issue because it encompasses ministries of education, environment, housing – I would want to see that they all sit down together and give us a comprehensive and coordinated way forward on how we shall avert this problem.

3.50
Mr Abdu Katuntu (FDC, Bugweri County, Iganga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the minister for the report, but my view is that she could have done better if she was well prepared. I will say why I think the minister was not prepared. In this statement, she does not even tell us how many people and how many of her pupils have died as a result of this disaster. It looks like until yesterday, she was not aware that actually pupils were dying in schools. And that is the reason why this matter came on the Floor. A few of her colleagues even laughed when we were asking Government to explain this problem. In my view, the country needs to know how many schools have been affected; how many pupils have lost their lives – including the adults - and then we can start to assess the extent of the results. 

That brings me to the second point – about responsibility. The lawyers know that crime is either a commission or an omission. And if these disasters are arising as a result of somebody responsible for putting lighting conductors not doing it, that is an omission leading to loss of life. That is criminal! I accepted Government to say that it is going to take stern action against anybody found to have breached the law by not installing lightning conductors on school buildings. At the end of the day, Government should take responsibility and compensate all the bereaved families. This is not even being magnanimous; it is a legal obligation. You cannot just gather people’s children and you do not put security measures in place. (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: One minute.

MR KATUNTU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. So, my advice to the leaders in Government is that you need to take immediate steps to assess the loss and assure the country that you are going to compensate because it is a legal obligation on your part. I hope the Attorney-General is aware of this obligation and will put the process in place to compensate the parents and everybody affected. 

Then to the minister, one of the departments in your ministry which is dead, is the inspection department. That is why the standards of education and schools are deteriorating. That is what the shadow minister of education was talking about; she wants to be party to that inspection. You may find that 90 percent of the schools that were struck by lightning do not have those conductors. That is the biggest challenge you have; the pupils, some of them when they are in school, they are not like pupils. I see in your statement a proposal for drills and one of them was not to use mobile phones - (Member timed out.)

3.54
THE MINISTER OF EDUCATION AND SPORTS (Ms Jessica Alupo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank my colleagues for their concern about the matter under debate. I agree that they have raised fundamental issues, which will enhance my ministry’s ability to formulate action points. But I want to quickly respond in a general way. As I was coming here, a circular to be dispatched to all the primary and secondary schools and other educational institutions was ready – (Interruption)

MS NAMBOOZE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The minister is talking about a circular, which is going to be issued. But this statement she has given to us tells it all. On 17 August 2005, the Minister of State for the Elderly and Disability wrote to the Minister of Education about lightning in Kayunga, but it took five months for the ministry to respond. They sent the letter to the district on 27 December 2005. At this rate the circular will reach the districts in November. Now that we still have the same Permanent Secretary at the Ministry of Education, Mr FX Lubanga, what guarantee is there that this time the ministry will move fast?

MS ALUPO: I would like to thank hon. Nambooze for that clarification. But Madam Speaker, she was referring to 2005, and what I am talking about are issues of 2011. I would like to assert that as I was coming here, the circular was ready for dispatch across all schools in Uganda. 

I would like to note with concern the point raised by hon. Katuntu about compiling the number of casualties and the locations which have been hit by lightning in light of the education sector. I assure this House that it will be reflected in the comprehensive document that the Leader of Government Business will come up with.  I pray that you give us a timeframe, Madam Speaker, so that we can all move at the same pace. 

Most importantly, I would like to refer this House to paragraph four of my statement because it was very clear from the submissions from Members that they were concerned about the timeframe of the implementation of that paragraph.  This is an issue in relation to the budget and I think it will be handled by Government. I would like to appeal to honourable members to let us do what we can in the short-term together as we plan for what we can do in the long-term. I thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Leader of Government Business, you know as we said, this matter is beyond schools. People have been struck by lightning in their homes at night while asleep; the cows have been struck as well. I do not know how we can protect them. People have been struck while playing in the football pitch. Now, could you tell us what you are going to do and could we have it before we debate the State of the Nation Address? 

3.59
THE THIRD DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER (Lt Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali): Madam Speaker, thank you very much for giving me this opportunity.  I would like to thank colleagues for their concern, but I would also like to say that we in Government are concerned about the behaviour of lightning –(Laughter)- of which we cannot be held responsible because we are equally affected. In fact, this morning, I read that even a bishop was admitted, having been a victim of the lightning, though I do not remember in which paper it was written. So, we should not be happy, because we can also victims and you should be careful as you drive. 

However, this morning, Government took serious measures as follows; one, to charge the Minister in charge of General Duties in the Office of the Prime Minister to coordinate with all ministries to establish the extent of lightning damage or number of victims, and what measures can be taken. This is being taken on by Government because we do not know where the lightning will strike next. We cannot ask why lightning is striking schools in particular; and we cannot ask anybody to explain why lightning is particularly striking in these places, but we should be given opportunity to take precautionary measures.  

MR TUMWEBAZE:  Madam Speaker, when the Minister of Education gave the statement, it was tailored towards the casualties of the education sector. In my constituency, a woman was struck dead in a parish called Ntonwa.  From the very amusing statement of the Leader of Government Business, I have not heard a response plan. When the victims were – actually it is The Monitor that published the summary of the places – I do not know whether you have sent response teams to visit the sites of the victims; I do not know whether you have written to RDCs or CAOs to give you information. As a Member of Parliament, when I am asked about Government response in that area, which message should I give them?

I like the Ministry of Health, its other problems notwithstanding. When there is an epidemic in the country, there is always a surveillance plan right from the outbreak of the epidemic up to the point when it dissolves out of the community.  They monitor the development of new cases; they monitor how the treatment – I do not know why the disaster mechanism cannot put in place such a plan. The other day, there were floods and now it is lightning. So, before you query the behaviour of the lightning itself, we should query the plan you are putting in place. I do not know whether you are aware of the places where the victims have been affected and yet to me that is very important. 

MR BAHINDUKA:  Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would also like to seek clarification from the Minister because from the presentation, the main worry is that we should avoid trees. In my constituency, there are some children who go to school under trees, which is worrying me.  Should I ask them to stop going to school or are we going to install conductors on trees? 

I would also like to seek clarification basing on the presentation made because in Ntoroko, there is absolutely no conductor on any school building.  Therefore, instead of wasting fuel going to inspect, please just take the conductors because there is absolutely no conductor on any school.  Thank you. 

MR ATIKU: Madam Speaker, I would like to thank the minister for giving the response. Mine is just additional information. I believe that all districts have disaster management committees. When there were outbreaks of fire in our schools, all districts established disaster safety and security committees, which are in place in all districts. So, I would like to refer the minister to the districts to revive these committee which could easily generate the information that we are searching for in order to take immediate action.  I doubt that we are going to have to wait for some other team when we have committees in place that do the work and bring us information so that we take action. 

Lastly, I would like to appeal to the minister to use the already established communication channels. We have radio networks and telecommunication networks, which we should use to pass some information through sms, which may help the community or the entire country. 

4.05
MRS VICTORIA BUSINGYE RUSOKE (NRM, Woman Representative, Kabarole): Thank you, Madam Speaker.  I would like to thank all the Members for their concerns though most of them do not seem to have an immediate solution. We get UPE capitation grants quarterly, and the first quarter is about to be released because the financial year is at the doorway. I suggest that as an immediate action, the UPE capitation grant released to these schools be channelled to erect lightning conductors because I have established that every school has money, and a conductor costs 1 million. So, instead of these children dying, yet there is an emergency fund which can be replaced later, let this House resolve that we buy and erect these conductors for the safety of these children. 

For those schools that are private, both primary and secondary, since they are income-generating and they collect fees, they should be given an immediate instruction and timeframe to erect their lightning conductors.  

Members of Parliament should move down to the constituencies to continue sensitising the people because some are very poor and cannot make their own. But if they practise survival skills, for example, not running out during the rain and wearing shoes as some people were suggesting - also radio programs should continue to sensitise the people, as well as public places like churches and hospitals. That way, we would be moving forward. 

Other than condemning the Ministry of Education, we should go back to revise and put in place security because these schools were vandalised during the days when there was no avenue for security in the UPE framework. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

LT GEN. (RTD) ALI: Madam Speaker, I was saying that Government has decided that the Minister of General Duties in the Prime Minister’s Office coordinates all the problems arising from lightning throughout the country because it is unfortunate that the lightning only hits schools. What about tomorrow? Because we have hospitals all over and other Government institutions. So, this is going to be studied and Government will come up with comprehensive information.

This issue of when, does not arise because we do not know, really. When is lightning going to strike next time? You cannot ask me to say when, because how do I know? If you know, tell me. 

Madam Speaker, I am telling the truth. Government has taken the decision to coordinate all ministries and all ministries are going to be asked to channel information to the Minister of General Duties in the Prime Minister’s Office. I am also appealing to the Opposition that if they have relevant and important information, let us join hands because lightning is our enemy. Let us join hands. When we bring in the information about lightning in the country, we will have done it together so there will not be any more questions because lightning is actually a source of disaster.

Secondly, yesterday a question was asked about the declining Uganda shilling and inflation. Members asked me to tell them when. This is something I will not do because I have to consult. We consulted this morning and tomorrow, the relevant minister is coming here with full information about the declining Uganda shilling and inflation. That is the information I had and I thought my colleagues should not worry much. Let us coordinate.

Finally, I want to thank the Minister of Education and to pay condolences, on behalf of Government, to the lightning victims throughout the country. More discussions will be made with these ministers as to how we can handle it, otherwise thank you very much for the attention.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, we have spent nearly two hours on this matter, but of course, it was important. 

MR OTADA: Madam Speaker, I seek your guidance. This statement is a ministerial statement, which has been debated as should be and even the honourable minister herself has admitted that a lot of gaps exist in it. She has admitted it herself that there are many things that are not in here. Paragraph after paragraph, you can punch some holes in this whole document, which I would not want to do, but I want to thank her for this statement, which is evidently a statement she prepared arising from the disaster which hit Kiryandongo.

Madam Speaker, I seek your guidance in light of the fact that the Leader of Government Business, who has adopted a new method of work, which I also appreciate because in the past, the Leader of Government Business would give time lines there and then on matters, but now he prefers to consult and give us time lines, which is also good.

Since he is here and that this is not only a matter of Kiryandongo, we all agree that this is a multi ministerial challenge, not only concerning Ministry of Education - we will be misdirecting our rage on hon. Alupo. I suggest and I want to request hon. Alupo if she does not mind, to withdraw this statement so that she prepares a more comprehensive statement.

This is because this statement is not complete and she has accepted it. Listening to all Members who have spoken, everybody alludes to the fact, including the minister, that this statement is not comprehensive. Therefore, I request that in honour of all those children who have died, we should receive a complete package. The Minister should prepare a multi ministerial statement, which will be presented here and then the House debates it. Otherwise, most of us needed to debate this but we left it because we thought it was multi ministerial. Madam Speaker, I seek your guidance.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, yesterday, I directed Government to bring a multi faceted paper because I said this matter is not about Education, but about other ministries as well such as Environment, ICT and Housing. I directed them yesterday. Prime Minister, you know we would want to have this before we begin the State of the Nation Address.

MR NASASIRA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. In addition to what the Leader of Government Business said, in today’s Cabinet, the Minister in charge of General Duties in the Prime Minister’s office is to coordinate all the relevant sectors involved in this matter and Government will come here with a comprehensive statement. This will be before we discuss the State of the Nation Address. We have only tomorrow and Tuesday, and I have not got the programme, but we will deliver it before the State of the Nations Address as required by the Speaker.

Secondly, having thanked the Minister of Education for this brief but necessary information, I think it would be inappropriate to say that we withdraw this statement. I want to ask my friend, hon. Otada, that this statement went some distance. We all agree that it was required at short notice. It gave you what the Ministry of Education has covered so far and when the comprehensive statement comes, it will cover everything. So, there is no need to withdraw this statement. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members I would not agree that it should be withdrawn because it contains vital information, which we can use in our districts to find out what has been happening to the schools. We can also carry out our own census. I think let us make use of it while we wait for the Prime Minister to bring the more comprehensive one. (Members rose_)

When you have a matter of national importance, you let me know before I come to the House. Hon. Otada informed me, hon. Anywar informed me, hon. Ekanya informed me, but none of you informed me. Yesterday, I gave an opportunity to those who informed me.

4.17
MS BEATRICE ANYWAR (FDC, Woman Representative, Kitgum): Thank you Madam Speaker for giving me this opportunity to raise this issue of national importance. I should have raised this yesterday, but I was not able to get space. This is the issue of telecommunication masts radiation and our health. Arising from the numerous telecom masts erected all over the country, including in residential areas, schools and hospitals, I would like to know the effect of the radiation from the masts on our health. From many writings and research carried out all over the world, it has been indicated that telecom masts radiation causes breast cancer, childhood leukaemia, tumour of nerves and a malignant brain, headaches, dizziness, depression, fatigue and sleep disorders.

According to Ronnie Wolf and Danny Wolf from the medical centre in Israel, cancer increases four times especially among women and children from the mobile phone, microwave radiation when one stays within a distance of 350 metres from the various equipments.

According to Gad Holland from Netherlands, the ministries of economic affairs, housing, special planning and environmental welfare confirmed that the health effect is higher when one is within 80 metres from the mast. This is from researchers who have carried out research. 

Others like Dr Woodman from Germany have also done research on the effect of radiation from telecom masts.

I would like to know from Government how much Ugandans get when they give their land to companies to erect telecom masts, and thus risking their lives to the operators. We have seen so many of them around the country. We want this to be one of the issues that the minister should tackle. What are the standard precautions that Government has put in place for those operators to ensure the safety of Ugandans?

Why can’t the telecom companies have a joint mast that is in one location rather than having them spread over the whole country? In other countries like South Africa, operators have co-location of one mast and in selected areas, but for us it is competitive and each operator is fighting to erect a mast next to another which already exists.

I would also like to find out from Government how soon the use of optic technology will be in full use to replace the telecom masts.

I would like Government to give comprehensive details about this because it is a health hazard. It should be in the shortest possible time. As I was coming in, one of our colleagues also told me that she was trying to buy a house in Kyambogo under National Housing, but the houses there are surrounded by masts. I have information also that there is a school under the mast, as you go to the shrines.

In my district, there is a hill in the residential area where there are competing masts. They are all over the country and with this information, Ugandans are at risk, and we would like Government to come up clearly on these issues so that we advise citizens to take precautions on their health.

I would like to put a notice of a motion to deregister all those telecom companies which will be found lacking in compliance of health standards. They will have exposed Ugandans to health risks by erecting masts in residential areas.

MR NASASIRA: I have heard the statement about telephone masts from the shadow minister of oil. I do not know whether she is asking in her capacity as an MP or as a shadow minister of oil. I thought procedurally it would have been better for her to prepare questions for oral answer so that an appropriate minister can then respond.

We have taken her statements, but I would have preferred that she prepares questions for oral answer so that the appropriate minister can respond.

THE SPEAKER: So, you can reduce it to writing so that we give it a date. You will write it out.

4.26 
MR GEOFREY EKANYA (FDC, Tororo County, Tororo): Madam Speaker, it is known to Government that this financial year is ending tomorrow. I have spent time analysing the budget. I have looked at the Vote-on-Account. Today, I had a meeting with one technical person from Ministry of Finance, with whom we tried to discuss, but we did not conclude the discussion.

On Monday, Government tabled a Vote-on-Account which had a lot of gaps and loopholes. The Minister committed himself to come back with a Vote-on-Account with factual figures and to adhere to the Constitution. I am surprised that the Minister did not turn up yesterday. Today, when I saw the Order Paper in the morning, that matter was on, but later in the afternoon, a different Order Paper was issued.

I am worried that Government is deliberately delaying to bring the Vote-on-Account to push us to the deadline – to the point that we cannot tell the Minister to correct his deeds. The country will blame this Parliament for failing to appropriate money. 

If that happens, salary will delay for one month, there will be shortage of drugs and Government systems will be paralysed. The Ministry of Finance will say, “It is Parliament that delayed us.” 

Madam Speaker, for example, you may not know that in the budget of the Parliamentary Commission, there is no allocation for the contractor building here. There is nothing totally and the contractor is working while some Members of Parliament are parking their cars on the streets.

THE SEPAKER: Hon. Ekanya, I think you wanted to know when the Vote-on-Account will come, but now you are going into the details of the budget which you say we do not know. I think you should just ask when it will come and we get the answer.

MR EKANYA: I would like to seek your indulgence that Government commits itself that today they will submit the details on the Vote-on-Account. 

To avoid us having a crisis and a paralysis of systems, we can have the Committee on Budget and the Committee of Finance handling this matter very early tomorrow morning where we reconcile the figures, agree and disagree instead of waiting for the House and then we find a lot of defects on their statement on Vote-on-Account. We do not want to be pushed to a position where the Government says, “We have no time. This is the deadline.” 

I am seeking your indulgence, that you direct Government and the Committees of Budget and Finance to meet with the Minister of Finance tomorrow morning so that we avoid a crisis. I thank you.

MR NASASIRA: We shall not have a crisis unless we want to create it ourselves. Hon. Ekanya, as the Shadow Minister of Finance, should know that when the Business Committee met, they agreed that the Vote-on-Account will be presented tomorrow. 

I know tomorrow is 30th June, but we also know that we should not really get into unnecessary details on Vote-on-Account. Vote-on-Account is to get a third of the approved budget and the full budget will come later, for us to discuss in detail. 

Therefore, I want to inform the Shadow Minister of Finance that the Vote-on-Account does not need unnecessary detail. It is just a third, so that Government systems can run until the budget is debated. More details will be discussed in the budget.

MR EKANYA: We are here - a third of what is supposed to be spent - what we know of Government, they bring a third of what is not very necessary, like their payment of quotas, and so, once you have passed a third of what is not necessary, tomorrow you will find that there are necessary sectors and Government will say, “You passed that money and in the last four months we have spent and so we have no more money since we are operating a cash budget.” 

This has been happening – normally unnecessary awards; items Government has not approved, and where there are queries from the Auditor-General. That is where Government concentrates and makes payments which are illegal because we pass them without analysis and that forms part of the “a third” and tomorrow there is no money to cater for the necessary expenses during the budget debate.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, let us not engage in speculation. Let us wait for the Vote-on-Account and whatever details they bring tomorrow, we will handle them if they come.

4.31
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman Representative, Serere): I thank you, Madam Speaker. The issue that gets me up is the issue of the quarantine that has been imposed in all the eight districts of Teso for the last four months, I think since 7 March 2011, and has to do with the Foot and Mouth Disease.

In Teso, the cattle markets are closed, animal movement has been stopped, the butcheries are not operational and you cannot sell any livestock.

However, I think the commissioner having imposed that quarantine in Teso should have moved in the direction of vaccination. Unfortunately, there is no vaccination ongoing in Teso. The only attempt that has been made to vaccinate the animals is very inadequate.

My district has about 200,000 heads of cattle, but only 25,000 have got the vaccine, meaning it may take more than two years for the vaccination to be done, which has caused a lot of financial distress in the region.

The last school term has been practically impossible for parents because they depend on the sale of these animals to raise school fees. In Teso, meat is a luxury. We have to import meat from Mbale and it costs about Shs 10,000 per kilogramme when you find it in Teso. If it is stealthily being sold, they have to call it by all sorts of weird names for you to discover that there is meat in that village.

What I would like to get an assurance from Government is that if there is a means to address the Foot and Mouth Disease, vaccines should be sent Teso immediately so that the animals get vaccinated, so that we get relief, and the quarantine is lifted. If Government does not have the capacity to provide the vaccine, then you leave us to eat the sick cows and maybe we can make some money. 

I really need an urgent explanation from Government, particularly from the Minister of Agriculture, about when he plans to lift this quarantine and whether he plans to continue with the vaccination. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: I believe the Prime Minister has heard the issue of the quarantine in Teso.

4.34
THE THIRD DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER (Lt Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali): I think we shall convey the concern of the honourable member to the Minister. I also wish to ask her, if she can, to meet the minister even before he comes here to discuss this problem because it is affecting the cows in her area –(Laugher)– and, therefore, it should not wait. 

MS ALASO: I would like to thank the Leader of Government Business. I think it is not only the cows that are affected, but also the human beings –(Laughter)- the human beings are seriously affected, but I have already hinted this to hon. Atwooki – I think he is the Minister of Agriculture now and I am hoping that he will follow up on this matter. I think he has a clue.

THE SPEAKER: Do you have information about the quarantine?

4.35
THE MINISTER OF STATE, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (TESO AFFAIRS) (Ms Christine Aporu): The issue raised by hon. Alaso is being handled. 

This morning, I had a meeting with the Minister of Agriculture because the LC V chairpersons and RDCs have raised that matter, and we are waiting for a response. I thank you.   

THE SPEAKER: You can follow up on the issue of the quarantine with the Prime Minster and the Minister of Agriculture. The point has really been noted.

MS ALASO: I heard the Minister in charge of Teso say it is being handled and that is quite vague to me, because I thought she would tell me that maybe the vaccines are on the way or something like that. What is being handled? That is what I would like to know.  

MS APORU: Madam Speaker, the issues raised by the eight districts of Teso are very many; The vaccine programme, the availability of the vaccines, the status quo, the quarantine, the butcheries and many others. They are all going to be responded to by the Ministry of Agriculture. There will also be on-spot visits to the various districts of Teso. That is what the minister told me. 

Tomorrow, I will again be interacting with the Ministry of Agriculture officials because the issues of schools fees and the market are very touchy in Teso right now. That meeting will put together the Minister of State for Teso Affairs, the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, and the Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries in order to come up with a concrete answer to that matter. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

MS NAKATO KYABANGI: Madam Speaker, the issue of the quarantine is not only affecting Teso; even the people of Gomba have been affected, where we have a number of cattle keepers. So, hon. Minister, I am requesting you to handle Gomba as well. Thank you very much. (Members rose_)

THE SPEAKER: No, I think we have had enough. I will give you tomorrow.

4.39
MR KASSIANO WADRI (FDC, Terego County, Arua): Madam Speaker, thank you very much for giving me this opportunity to raise an issue that is of great help in regard to the announcement you made to the Members that beginning from the 4th to 8th July, there will be a registration exercise going on in this Parliament.

However, you will realise that last time when the same officials of Ministry of Internal Affairs came here, it was discovered that some districts and constituencies did not appear in their data bank. So, I do not know whether this time that error has been corrected. If that has not been done, one might go to queue only to find Kamuli District missing in the data bank –(Laughter)– well that is just an example; it could be Terego or any other administrative area. 

My prayer is that the relevant minister assures us on whether they now have complete data capturing districts, counties, sub counties and parishes. This will help the people to be identified with the right administrative area. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: This is an important national exercise. I hope that the Prime Minister will convey the worry of the Members and ensure all the parts of Uganda are captured in the identification card exercise.

4.41
MR JOHN KEN-LUKYAMUZI (CP, Rubaga Division South, Kampala): Madam Speaker, first of all, I bring you greetings from the Rubaga South people who sent me specifically to address this matter to you.

That said, allow me to raise a matter of public concern according to Rule 51(1) of our Rules of Procedure. On 11 June 2011, The Daily Mail of London, through its Defence correspondent, Ian Drury, published a story that read thus; “UK Aid cash helped President Museveni to buy himself a 30-million pound jet.”

In that story, Lord Ashraf, a Member of the House of Lords revealed that President Museveni had diverted £30 million in 2008, out of £70 million donated to Uganda for the alleviation of poverty so as to acquire himself a gulfstream G550 private plane.

Under our Constitution, if what has been reported in this article is correct, there are some important issues that honourable members would note. If the President truly misappropriated the said funds from the poverty alleviation sector to the purchase of a personal plane without Parliamentary approval, the act of doing so would be in open defiance of Article 93(1)(iii) of the Constitution of Uganda. And in accordance with Article 107(1)b(ii), such an act would be inimical enough to lead to the impeachment of the President. (Laughter) I am not talking about impeachment in practical terms; I am addressing it constitutionally because it is part of the written material in terms of literature.

Madam Speaker, I would like to ask the following questions before I leave the Floor and they are addressed to the Leader of Government Business. Will the Leader of Government Business tell this House what exactly happened? Is this a pack of lies or not? You tell us, we represent the masses who have read the story as published literature. 
The second question is, is it true that President Museveni misappropriated the money intended to alleviate poverty and instead chose to purchase a plane without the knowledge of Parliament?

MR KAKOBA: Madam Speaker, I rise on a point of procedure. If I listened carefully, hon. Ken-Lukyamuzi is moving under Rule 51 of our Rules of Procedure –(Interruption)– well, he requested to comment on the statement under Rule 51 of our Rules of Procedure. However, when I perused through this rule, I realised that for hon. Ken-Lukyamuzi or any other Member to be allowed to speak, such a Member has to be supported by at least five Members before he can be allowed to talk. So, since he has not procedurally moved in that direction, I wonder whether he is still in order to continue speaking.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, you are supposed to follow the Rules of Procedure. If you have not yet mobilised, you will have to organise yourself. Let us move to another item.

DESIGNATING MEMBERS TO THE SESSIONAL AND STANDING COMMITTEES OF PARLIAMENT IN ACCORDANCE WITH RULE 135 AND RULE 160 OF THE RULES OF PROCEDURE RESPECTIVELY

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, yesterday when we constituted the committees, my Clerk-at-Table was overwhelmed by the amount of paper work she had. As a result, there are two committees that she did not read. I want to ask her to read the membership for those committees before we get to the chairpersons.

Committee on Social Services

1.	Hon. Mary Nalubega Tunde, Workers Representative, Independent;
2.	Hon. Joseph Kiyingi, Mawookota County South, Independent; and
3.	Hon. Olanya Gilbert, Kilak County, Independent.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I put the question that those Members be added onto the list of Members on the Committee on Social Services. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Committee on Privileges and Discipline

1.	Hon. Rose Iriama, Woman Representative, Nakapiripirit, Independent;
2.	Hon. Fox Odoi, West Budama County North, Independent; and
3.	Hon. Vincent Ssempijja, Kalungu County East, Independent.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that those Members be added to the Standing Committee on Rules and Privileges. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Committee on Information Communication Technology

Hon. Maj. Gen. Jim Owesigire, UPDF Representative.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I put the question that Hon. Jim Owesigire be added to the Committee on Information Communication Technology. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, one of the Independent Members, hon. Lilly Adongo, wants to move from the Standing Committee on HIV/AIDS to another committee. So, we will have to make an adjustment to get her to another standing committee. I just wanted to give notice on that. 

MR NASASIRA: Madam Speaker, we have a few adjustments to make on some Members who missed out on the list. I would like to seek your permission to pass this on to you so that these changes can be recorded on the Hansard. 

THE SPEAKER: Clerk, can you read that? These are the Members who stood up and said they were not on the list. 

1.	Hon. Helen Grace Asamo, PWD Representative, Eastern, NRM – Committee on HIV/AIDS;
2.	Hon. Gudoi Yahaya, Committee on Local Government Accounts;
3.	Hon. Samson Lokeris, Committee on National Economy;
4.	Hon. Gabriel Ajedra, Arua Municipality, NRM - Committee on Science and Technology;
5.	Hon. John Brian Mulimba, Samia Bugwe County North, NRM - Committee on Commissions and Statutory Enterprises; 
6.	Hon. Lyndah Tibigamba, Woman Representative, Kyenjojo, NRM - Committee on National Economy;
7.	Hon. Freda Kase-Mubanda, Woman Representative, Kyenjojo, NRM - Committee on HIV/AIDS;
8.	Hon. David Muhumuza, Mwenge County North, NRM - Committee on HIV/AIDS;
9.	Hon. Felix Okot Ogong, Dokolo, NRM - Budget Committee.

SESSIONAL COMMITTEES

1.	Hon. Teopista Ssentongo, Workers Representative, NRM - Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development;

2.	The following Members of Parliament have been transferred to the following sessional committees:

3.	Hon. Veronica Babirye, Woman Representative, Buyende, NRM - from Committee on Presidential Affairs to Committee on Agriculture

4.	Hon. Medard Bitekyerezo, Mbarara Municipality, NRM, from Committee on ICT to Committee on Social Services;

5.	Hon. Alex Ndeezi, PWD, Central, NRM - from the Committee on Public Service and Local Government to the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary affairs; 

6.	Hon. Samson Lokeris, Dodoth County East, NRM - from the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development to the Committee on Natural Resources;

7.	Hon. John Mulimba, Samia Bugwe County North, NRM - from the Committee on Trade, Tourism and Industry to the Committee on Foreign Affairs;

8.	Hon. Peter Okeyoh, Bukooli Island County, NRM - from the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development to the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs; 

9.	Hon. Judith Mary Amoit, Woman Representative, NRM - from the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development to the Committee on Presidential Affairs; and 

10.	Hon. Micah Lolemu, Upe County, NRM - from the Committee on Equal Opportunities to the Committee on National Economy.

4.51
MS BETTY AOL (FDC, Woman Representative, Gulu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. On our side, we have hon. Mohammed Kawuma, Entebbe Municipality, DP. He was missing from the list. He now goes to the Committee on National Economy. We also had some Members that were put on the Business Committee, but have since been transferred to different committees:

1.	Hon. Winifred Kiiza, Woman Representative, Kasese, FDC - to the Committee on National Economy; 

2.	Hon. Bernard Atiku from Ayivu County, FDC - to the Committee on Government Assurances; 

3.	Hon. Reagan Okumu, Aswa County, FDC - to the Committee on Statutory Authorities and State Enterprises; 

4.	Hon. Betty Nambooze, Mukono Municipality, DP - to the Committee on Local Government Accounts; and

5.	Hon. Beatrice Anywar, Woman Representative, Kitgum, FDC - from the Committee on Equal Opportunities to the Committee on HIV/AIDS. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I put the question that those changes be effected, as proposed by the whips on both sides.
 
(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, yesterday, we had a lengthy debate on compliance with the Constitution and we tasked the whips to sit down and come up with an acceptable position. So, I would now like to invite them to make their presentation. 

MR AJEDRA: On Rule No.134(5), yesterday we spent a lot of time debating the issue of representation of women in the various sub-committees. Madam Speaker, when you posed questions as to whether we approve the constitution of the various committees, we said yes. I thought that it had been understood that the resolution had already taken place. We opened the debate to try to see whether there was fair representation of women in positions of chairpersons and vice-chairpersons. I thought that when the House passed a resolution, it was approved as such. Sub clause 5 says the parties shall have the power to withdraw and relocate Members from individual sub-committees. So, were we yesterday challenging that particular rule because they have the powers to do so, notwithstanding what is stated in the Constitution that women should have 30 percent representation? I seek your guidance, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, there were no issues about composition of the committees. The issue was leadership and this is what we want the whips to report to us on. There is no problem about composition; that was resolved. 

4.56
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr John Nasasira): Thank you, Madam Speaker. As you have told the House, indeed this issue was discussed at length after the chairpersons and vice-chairpersons of committees had been read. I think it was clear and the general consensus from this House was that from the reading, gender balance was not fully achieved. We, therefore, decided to meet, with the guidance of the Speaker and the whips, and the Leader of Government Business to come out with a position that will help and guide the whips as we form these committees, and as we reform our committees and rules during this session. What we have come to from both Government side and the Opposition side is a guiding resolution that will solve this problem once and for all. 

So, I would like to read this proposed resolution which is supported by my colleague on the opposite side of the House.

Under Rule 43 of our Rules of Procedure, following your guidance;

“WHEREAS Objective 4 of the national objectives and directive principles of state policy under the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda provides that the state shall ensure gender balance and fair representation of marginalised groups on all constitutional and other bodies 

AND WHEREAS Article 33(4) of the Constitution provides that women shall have the right to equal treatment with men and that right shall include equal opportunities in political activities among others 

AND ALSO AWARE that Article 7 of the Convention on the Elimination of all forms of Discrimination against Women (CEDAW) provides the basis for realising equality between women and men through ensuring women’s equal access to and equal opportunities in political and public life including the right to vote and stand for election among others 

Considering that the parties in the Ninth Parliament in accordance with the Rules of Procedure of Parliament designated chairpersons and vice-chairpersons to standing committees and sessional committees that did not fully reflect the proportional representation of women Members of Parliament and other Members of Parliament 

AND FURTHER considering that the leaders of parties in the Ninth Parliament have taken note of the need to conform to the constitutional provisions mentioned and their party constitutions on access to leadership positions of women and have to that end committed themselves to proportionately consider female Members of Parliament in accordance with the Constitution and their respective party constitutions when designating chairpersons and vice-chairpersons of committees in the next session of the Ninth Parliament 

NOTING THAT some committees are overloaded with and, therefore, affecting their efficiency in delivering according to their mandate and 

FURTHER NOTING that some sectors of Government are not catered for by the current parliamentary committees

NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved that;

1)	Parliament binds itself to abide by the above constitutional provisions and party constitutions –(Applause)- when designating chairpersons for the next session of the Ninth Parliament;
2)	Parliament amends the Rules of Procedure to conform to the provisions of the Constitution; and 
3)	Parliament considers creating more committees to efficiently handle their mandate.”

Madam Speaker, I beg to move.

MS AOL: Seconded.

5.00
MS BETTY AMONGI: (UPC, Oyam County South, Oyam): Thank you, Madam Speaker. What the Government Chief Whip did not indicate is that while I was in the meeting, I did not agree with some of the issues in the resolution.

One of the issues is that when we leave it as a principle - that we presume that parties shall abide by the party constitutions when we do not know what the constitutions of the parties provide, yet legally, we know that at least, we want a minimum of 30 percent or 40 percent. My proposal was that since the constitution of NRM and the constitution of FDC say, and I quote Chapter 5 of 38A of the NRM Constitution, “In electing the leadership of the organs of NRM, 40 percent of the positions shall be reserved for women except in cases where it is impractical to do so.”  The same is with FDC. My issue is that, can we commit ourselves that at least we have some minimum reservations for women in these organs?

I am saying this because in all these international conventions - Uganda signed the African Union Convention at the Third Ordinary Session of the Assembly in Addis Ababa by heads of state where they committed that the benchmark is 50 percent. It is included in the African Union Constitutive Act; 50 percent as a benchmark. The African Union also says 30 percent is the benchmark. We have 34.7 percent as a benchmark. 

If we leave it open, what measure are we going to apply to make sure that this is achieved? That is my question. How are we going to measure because if these people were following their party constitution, we would not have started this debate yesterday? They would have automatically ensured that they put the 40 percent of the leadership of NRM in the women. The FDC would have also automatically - my issue is, can we amend this resolution? Of course, there are some terms which are not gender-friendly and they are not – when you are drafting for gender and you say proportional representation, it is another discourse of basing on population or other aspects. My thinking is that we should amend the resolution so that when it is going to the rules committee, we have some minimum or we say a minimum of 30 percent.

MR SSEBAGALA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The guidance I am seeking from you is the way we are looking at the presentation by hon. Nasasira. It seems to be unconstitutional. 

Yesterday, we had a heated debate. Women of this country, women all over the world are not seeking for a favour. This is a constitutional right –(Applause)- We cannot debate unconstitutionality. There is no way a resolution can come and we say, “Let us wait for the next session.” We must put things right. These women must get what they are supposed to get. It is their right. (Applause)

The framers of the 1995 Constitution and the framers of all international conventions knew that we men are very greedy. They needed to tame us because we do not have a speed governor, even if it means taking all leadership posts. (Applause)

It is against that background that we stand by our Constitution. I am proposing that all parties should do the needful and put women in leadership positions as per the Constitution. (Applause) We cannot debate unconstitutionality.

5.06
MS JACQUILINE AMONGIN (NRM, Woman Representative, Ngora): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. First, I would like to thank the Government Chief Whip for his submission. But I would like to suggest and to move in this House, that we have the Constitution, which is the supreme law of the land. Therefore, all the other laws are within the Constitution.   
  
And when you look at the different conventions, the CEDAW Convention that Uganda ratified, it is very clear. I would love to see this Parliament setting a precedent for the other lower governance systems in Uganda because if we cannot get equal representation in Parliament, how else can we be an example to the other local systems of governance.

So, Madam Speaker, I beg to move – I think it is by consensus that women are not begging for leadership, but we are capable of rendering service to this country by leading different committees. I would, therefore, like to move that a question be put that the list that was read yesterday be differed and a new list be tabled in the House for equal representation in as far as committee leadership is concerned. I beg to move.

5.09
MS ANIFA KAWOYA (NRM, Woman Representative, Ssembabule): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to move as follows;

“TAKING NOTE that both Government side and the Opposition concede that the Constitution is the supreme law; 

AND TAKING INTO ACCOUNT that the Eighth Parliament passed a resolution that established the Equal Opportunities Commission; 

AND TAKING INTO ACCOUNT that issues of women are vital as stated in our Constitution; 

AND NOW that both Government and Opposition concede on this matter, I move that the leadership of the committees be reconstituted to conform to the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda.”

5.10
MS NAOME KABASHARIRA (NRM, Woman Representative, Ntungamo): Madam Speaker, I rise to support my sister hon. Kawoya, that since the leaders of the Opposition and Government sat and agreed to postpone it; let a precedence be set in this Parliament. Let them go back and reconsider this. What they did was not right. Women of this Parliament have the capacity, just like the men. I support this motion. 

5.11
MR GERALD KARUHANGA (Independent, Youth Representative, Western): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like you to guide us on whether it is constitutional for us to make a resolution to abide by the constitutional provision in future. As a lawyer, I know that there is no person in any given land that can make a resolution to abide by a given law. 

Madam Speaker, I pray that the honourable minister withdraws the motion considering the sentiments and views of the Members, and reflect on the constitutional provisions which they want to reflect upon in future. Let them be reflected upon now so that we abide by the law that were established.

MR NASASIRA: Madam Speaker, we should move an amendment rather than move more motions; we can propose amendments to the motion. And even if it does not happen now, we can still consider it and propose the amendment to this motion. 

Secondly, and this is to my young brother the lawyer, I might not be a lawyer, but I am one of the makers of the Constitution of 1995. When you read the Constitution, Article 334 talks of women having the right to equal treatment with men and those rights shall include equal opportunities in political, economic and social activities. Some people are interpreting it as if it means having fifty percent for each. It means that whatever we consider, women should be taken into account. 

For these other resolutions that we talked about, where it was said that NRM will guarantee that women take 40 percent, that is true. I am told FDC also gave 40 percent to women. But I was surprised that Hon. Amongi who was quoting these provisions did not tell us whether the UPC Constitution also gives 40 percent to women. 

Therefore, our dilemma was not only the Constitution, but the procedure in relation to how far we have reached. That means that we sack the very people that this House appointed. When you talk about 40 percent – on our side we were around 30 percent and the Opposition side were over 30 percent. We agreed that the point be noted and that we should amend the Rules later. But we should go on for this session instead of going against what we have already passed in the House. We should just correct whatever was amiss. There is nobody who does not admit that this needs correction, but it should be done later and the point would still be made.

5.15
MR EDDIE KWIZERA (NRM, Bufumbira County East, Kisoro): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Article 33 states thus;
iii) “The state shall protect women and their rights. 
iv) Women shall have the right to equal treatment”.

A right to equal treatment is not ring-fencing positions for women. It says that if a man can become a Speaker, even a woman can become a Speaker. 

Secondly, that does not include state policy; state policy is outside the Constitution of Uganda. The Constitution starts with chapter one. What we are reading is outside the Constitution of Uganda. State policy does not form part of the Constitution. 

Rule 168(1) of the Rules of Procedure says, “Chairperson or a deputy chairperson of a committee may be removed by Members of the committee on a motion supported by two thirds of all Members of the committee on any of the following grounds -” 

When you look also at rule 134(8) it says, “Members designated under this rule shall be announced by the Speaker in Parliament and accordingly assume their respective membership or offices.” The Speaker yesterday announced these names through the clerk. So, Madam Speaker, it would be erroneous for us to do this business when the rule is very clear. Thank you. 

5.17
MS MONICAH AMODING (NRM, Youth Representative, Female): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also want to add my voice to this debate. Hon. Kwizera has just been trying to deviate from what we are discussing. I am reading the Constitution and it is a general principle which is built on the other international principles that we should ensure gender balance and fair representation in all constitutional bodies. Madam Speaker, I think committees are constitutional as established by the Constitution.

The second point I wanted to raise is that yesterday I missed to contribute on this debate, especially on the constitution of committees. The international - it is called the IPU - (Interjection))- Inter Parliamentary Union, thank you. The Inter Parliamentary Union has been releasing reports assessing the performance of women. And the research has shown that women are always put in committees which are tagged “committees for women.” 

Yesterday when you read out the names of Members of committees, I noted with concern that Equal Opportunities almost had all women; Social Services, women; HIV/AIDS, women. Those that are chairing committees, we are chairing only two committees which are standing committees. And it is generally recognised that we need to move from those traditional committees to standing committees, for example budget. That is why last year, when hon. Akol was chairing the Budget Committee, we were sharing the national budget, a standing committee, through which we believe we can use to be able to effect the change that we are talking about for gender fairness. 

So, Madam Speaker, I want to draw the attention of the House to this matter and the Leader of Government Business to review this and look at that motion in a better way. 

I would also like to propose that in future we need to be more careful. Let us move away from the traditional thinking. There are many women who can chair these committees, especially standing committees. Hon. Members, give us the space to chair these committees and we shall deliver. 

The Government Chief Whip, I would also like to add my voice, as you are thinking about which Members you are going to relocate, please think about standing committees and committees through which we know women can be able to effect the change that we need. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

5.20
MS JALIA BINTU (NRM, Woman Representative, Masindi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and the presenter of the motion, and the Chief Whip from the Opposition. Madam Speaker, I want to move an amendment to the resolution that has been moved by the Government Chief Whip that the principles and the articles of the Constitution that have been quoted become effective this session. I beg to move that amendment. 

5.21
MR SAMUEL ODONGA OTTO (FDC, Aruu County, Pader): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. Being a lawyer, in law I know there is what we call conflict of interest, but I will try to be as objective as possible because it looks like I am one of the intended beneficiaries - (Laughter)- of the current issue being contested. I will not let that stop me from being objective. And in any case, if someone is so obsessed with my position as chair, I can always give it to anyone available here because the work is also not easy by the way. It is not just a matter of having the title. (Laughter)

Madam Speaker, these are the Rules of Procedure of this Parliament. They are the rules we used on the first day we put you in that office. The first debate we had in this Parliament according to the Hansard was on which rules to use to elect the Speaker, until the Chief Justice ruled that this is the rule of the current Parliament.

Now, legally speaking, this is what we use. This is the same rule hon. Onyango Kakoba used to make hon. Lukyamuzi abandon his motion. This is the same rule we have been using over the last few days to bring ourselves to order. This is the same rule that was amended by the Government Chief Whip to accommodate expanding the number of committee Members from 20 to 30. 

So, when you want to change the law, there is a right way of doing it. No one has stopped all those who are saying women should be given equal representation - a view I support strongly - from amending the rules. Hon. Betty Amongi is a senior Member of this House. We had the whole of yesterday and today we would have been debating amending the rules. No one did that. So, we are not going to come - we have the law here and this is what we shall follow in the circumstances.

So, what I am appealing to Members is that there is wide and open room for amending these rules to accommodate what I would call “those sentiments” which are being raised. If these rules are not amended -(Interruption)- yes General. 

GEN. TUMWINE: Thank you, Madam Speaker and my brother for giving way. I am very happy that you have raised the point of these rules. I have been in this Parliament and I know how we use the rules. The information I want to give is that I raised the point that some of the rules here were violating the Constitution. As we speak, the whips representing the parties - where I do not belong, but I belong to this Parliament constitutionally - went to decide for us and they came back with an unconstitutional position. And when we stick to the rules we stick to them as long as they are in accordance with the Constitution and aspirations of the people of Uganda. When they are not, Madam Speaker, and for your information, rule 14 is about suspension of rules; since these rules are made by this Parliament any rule can be suspended with the permission of the Speaker. 

And it is on that point that the information I wanted to give is that we suspend this rule. The information is that we can suspend this rule where the rule is marginalising some people who are constitutionally present in this Parliament not to be represented and go further - I thought it was the UPDF which was being marginalised alone. I thought it was the Independents who were being marginalised, but now the women are being marginalised. 

When the position of the commissioner came, the Constitution and the rules provide - that is Article 90 - for your information, Article 90(1) says, “Parliament shall appoint committees necessary for the efficient discharge of its functions.” And last year when women were chairing committees, we were informed that they performed their functions very well. 

Article (2) says, “Parliament shall, by its rules of procedure, prescribe the powers, composition and functions of its committees.”

Now, for this Parliament to function properly, the information I wanted to give is that all parties must be able to participate and be represented. The parties, the non-partisan, and the Independents must all have the same equal opportunity to contribute and –(Applause)- and be on any committee and even chair it. The only committee where the UPDF is not allowed to chair is the defence committee. But in the 25 years I have spent in this Parliament, I have not had opportunity be on the Parliamentary Commission; I cannot chair any committee; I cannot be responsible for anything because it is a violation of the Constitution –I am not partisan- as you are violating that for the women. (Laughter)

MR ODONGA OTTO: Thank you for that submission. Just for the record – because my colleagues were yesterday selectively quoting the Constitution to suit their personal ends. There is nowhere in this Constitution where it is stated that there should be 30 percent women representation. Members who have been submitting on this Floor are bringing by inference – (Interruption)

MR OBOTH: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I know that hon. Odonga Otto is a lawyer and he is holding a copy of the Constitution. He is also familiar with Article 33 which says that: “Women shall be accorded full and equal dignity of the person and equal opportunities in political, economic and social activities with men.” In fact, what we are doing – looking at 30 percent - is actually unconstitutional because “equal” means 50-50. (Applause) I wonder why men in this country fear the women. I want to inform hon. Odonga Otto that even the new head of the IMF is a woman. Let us get ready in this country to embrace the fact that the women have been oppressed for a long time and it is their time now.

MR ODONGA OTTO: The role of interpreting the law lies with the Judiciary. We may have different legal opinions of what “equal” means, but there is a mischief this Constitution was trying to cure. We come from a background in this country whereby women were deprived deliberately. In some cultures, they do not sit on the chair, wear trousers, eat eggs and so forth. This is the kind of background we are from. 

The architects of this Constitution in their own wisdom – like Gen Elly Tumwine – they resolved that women should be treated equally. And today we are all here as equal Members of Parliament. But the moment we are here – even if we are only men – not all of us can be chairpersons because the positions are not available for everyone. That is the starting point.

Madam Speaker, I want to be on record and I am very happy that this is one of the first debates this Parliament is getting engaged in under your chair. If someone is advocating for a woman to chair it must be because of competence not because she is a woman, because if you get up on the Floor of this House and say, “I want to chair because I am a woman” then we men can say that we are being discriminated against just because we are men.

MS NYAKIKONGORO: Is it in order for the honourable member of Parliament to say that women who are seated in this Parliament are not competent? They were elected and we have women who stood with men at the constituency level and beat them; we have women who have performed in various fora and have performed very well. We also have women who have been appointed as ministers – moreover in very good positions – and they are doing it very well. So, how do you come to say that – moreover chairing a committee – what does it require? Some of these things that are coming up - I think it is the Rules of Procedure which are not clear. If the Chief Whip left the designation of leadership of the committees to be identified by Members of the committee I do not think that we would be having this entire circus. Is it in order?

MR ODONGA OTTO: Lastly, Rule 134(8) says: “Members designated under this Rule shall be announced by the Speaker in Parliament and accordingly assume their respective offices.” Madam Speaker, yesterday you requested the respective whips of the parties to announce and I heard my name announced as chairperson of the Government Assurance committee. (Laughter) According to this rule, I have already assumed office. The only rule that can work to remove me is Rule 168 which talks about removal of the chairperson. And if we joke with that the Supreme Court will help us to determine what its interpretation is.

5.34
MS ROSE AKOL (NRM, Woman Representative, Bukedea): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Yesterday when we were concluding, your instructions were very clear. The instructions were to amend the chairpersons of these committees to include at least 30 percent of chairpersons as women. The provisions in the Constitution are very clear. Article 33(4) says: “Women shall” – it is an obligation – “have the right” – it is a right – “to equal treatment with men and the right shall include equal opportunities in political, economic and social activities.” It is an obligation and not a point for debate. I do not know why we are taking all this time when the Constitution is very clear. And in any case the provision here overrides the rules if they are inconsistent with the Constitution. 

MR KYANJO: Madam Speaker, I stand here on a point of procedure on a matter that has ignited this House. I thank God you are the chair and it is interesting. I want to re-confirm to the Members that you are the Speaker of this House, at long last. The point of procedure I am driving at is that there has been a great realisation on both sides that there is need for extra care this time round, when positions are being allocated. (Applause) Two, we have met at the roundabout of our own dilemma of detailed laws; whether it is advantageous or not, that will be a matter for the future. 

Madam Speaker, the third and last point that I would like to belabour on is that of that very realisation; the realisation will run back to the President through the Leader of Government Business that Parliament has recognised the fact that women have not been duly considered; so, the President will have to go back and reconstitute the Cabinet; the ambassadors will have to be looked at; the Generals in the Army have to be reconstituted and promotions must be instituted this evening; RDCs - and each of us received a list of accounting officers; if that is possible, there is absolutely no problem whatsoever. And happy news to the women is that even if all those positions were occupied by women, there will not be a finger raised against it. 

So, for the sake of that realisation, Madam Speaker, I would beg that we desist from scoring points - men against women; elected leaders against those who were not elected or appointed, and we recognise this fact and go back and sit down and let this year pass because there is the fact of going through the budget process. But if the President will be comfortable going through the whole exercise, I have no problem, Madam Speaker.  So, would it be procedurally right that we continue to belabour only the element of Parliament when the entire country has fallen into this problem? I beg to propose, Madam Speaker.

MS AKOL: In conclusion, Madam Speaker I would like to support the amendment that was introduced by my Commissioner, hon. Bintu that let the effect of the provisions of this Constitution take effect this session and not next session.” I beg to submit. 

5.39
MS AIDAH NANTABA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kayunga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would, first of all, like to call upon the ladies in this Parliament to appreciate what God has done for us. None of us ever knew that we would get a Speaker of Parliament who is a woman. Let us, first of all, appreciate and thank God for what we have achieved so far. (Applause)

Now, coming to Parliament as a woman is also something else to thank God for. I have heard that you cannot quench fire by fire. The hon. Nasasira has been pushed to the wall and we are also pushing him very much, but he has still refused to act constitutionally. 

Now, I beg the honourable members of this House who are ladies to – I have also heard that Rome was not built in one day. Let us be slow; let us not push for everything at this particular time. (Applause) If we have achieved three women to be chairpersons of committees, let us wait; slowly by slowly we shall get where we want to be later.  (Applause) 

Why do we fight God? Madam Speaker, this is my maiden presentation. God did not make women to be equal with men 100 percent. (Interjections) I beg for your protection, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Let the Member finish. 

MS NANTABA:  Ladies in this House, as you are here today, I know you will get where you want to be tomorrow. Take it slow; don’t fight to be there; time will come when this country will even have a woman president. So, I beg you to wait. If you are not designated to be a chairperson and you are a lady, you won’t die, will you? So, wait; our time is coming. Thank you, Madam Speaker. (Applause)

5.42
MR SIMON MULONGO (NRM, Bubulo County East, Manafwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand to support a well initiated debate by the honourable Woman Member of Parliament from Kayunga. The question on the Floor is not as to whether women should not be accorded equal opportunity with men. But we also have to take into account the fact that it is both an objective and an obligation. And as an objective, we have to reflect as to where we are coming from, where we have reached and where we intend to be.  

We should be reminded that we have come a long way to be where we are. As the NRM Government, we have taken it upon ourselves to push for -(Interjections)- Madam Speaker, I speak as an NRM Member of Parliament and there is no doubt about it. As an objective, we cannot achieve it in one day and the Government Chief Whip did state very clearly that the fact that we have just appointed these Members into office; it is also very difficult to begin firing them on the same day. I believe that this can be corrected and we shall move steadily towards the time when the equal opportunities will be attained in terms of numbers as well. 
So, I beg the Members to agree to the position of the fact that the Rules, as they stand now, do contradict certain provisions of the Constitution. 

So, the first thing we need to do is to set a move towards the correction of the Rules; amend the Rules in compliance with the Constitution. But we don’t have to do this by merely suspending the rule as stated by one Member because it is more than just one rule that we can just change; it is quite entrenched in various provisions regarding the parties’ activities in relation to appointment of Members to the committees.

So, it would have been better in terms of procedure, Madam Speaker that we constitute ourselves fully in terms of committees and one of the immediate obligations we shall have is to amend the Rules such that next time when we do the appointments to these offices, we take into account the amendments that we shall have done. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

5.45
MR ABDU KATUNTU (FDC, Bugweri County, Iganga): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Yesterday, I spoke on this subject and at the risk of some Members misunderstanding me; I will insist that the motion being supported by both the leaders of the Opposition and the Government be supported. And I will give reasons why, Madam Speaker.  

Before I go into the matters of the Constitution and maybe our rules, I need to make a few clarifications. First, Gen. Tumwine suggested that that rule be suspended. If we suspend that rule, then this Parliament will have no rule at all to designate chairpersons. You will have created a vacuum. 

So, for some of these things, I don’t want to call it a motion, let us think through them and say –(Interruption)– Gen. Tumwine, I did not interrupt you, it is my own interpretation and I wish we could give each other a chance. I really pray - disagreeing is okay, but at least listen to your friend before you disagree with him; but to interrupt before you even listen to him does not make sense. 

So, my interpretation of that suggestion is that we will create a vacuum under our rules and there will be no way of designating chairpersons. But I am even cautious of this debate for one thing, Madam Speaker, and I am happy that Gen. Tumwine raises it –(Interruption)

GEN. TUWMINE: Madam Speaker, we have been in this House with hon. Katuntu for a long time and we have suspended rules of this house before and we have continued to deliberate on important issues. Is hon. Katuntu in order to tell lies and to say that if you suspend a rule for a purpose, we will be creating a vacuum that cannot be solved? The rules are made by this House. Rule 14 says if a motion is moved, any rule can be suspended with the permission of the Speaker for solving that particular purpose. Is hon. Katuntu in order, therefore, to mislead this House that if you suspend one rule you have created a vacuum that cannot be solved when we have all the powers? 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, sometimes we do suspend rules, but I think we need to evaluate when we should do it. Please conclude. 

MR KATUNTU: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. You see, these rules were a little bit exhaustive. They envisaged a situation - for example, if a rule provided that you needed 30 days notice before you bring a motion, you can suspend that rule, meaning that you can bring that motion anytime. Those are the circumstances under which the rule you cited were legislated upon. So, even amongst the rules, there are rules which you cannot suspend and it’s provided for. For example when you look at 14(2), it clearly shows you, this rule shall not apply in respect to Rules 4, 5, 10, 11, 12, 183 and so forth; it is provided for.

The rule it is seeking to actually suspend is not one of these, but once you suspend it, then you have no procedure and that is the problem, because the only procedure provided for under the rule is exactly what it is seeking to suspend. What we can do, and really if you can listen for a little bit of professional advice, is to actually amend that rule. That would be okay; but to say that you suspend it to do something, which was being hindered by that rule, is practically impossible, Madam Speaker. I sometimes think we need to have your guidance, Madam Speaker. This general debate has started with women and I love it. It should go all the way. For example, when you look at the Constitution, it says all state organs - whether it is the Army Council, High Command - we need to know how many women are generals? How many women sit on the High Command? We need to know because that is also provided for under the Constitution, but for people to come here and start pretending that they are crusaders of women’s causes when actually they are not practising it is very unfortunate. So, the principle is very good, but let us not try to apply it selectively as it borders on populism. 

Having said that, we go to the Constitution because I have heard colleagues and everybody is running to the Constitution, but actually some of the provisions they are citing do not apply in this case. If they are talking about beginnings, this has nothing to do with the beginning. I will give you an example. If all people of different religious affiliations should be treated equally under the Constitution, and they should be able to access political offices, I want to ask somebody how many of those chairpersons are Muslims like me, because that should also come. The Muslims should stand up and say it is our right enshrined under the Constitution that we must also be reflected.

Two, let me say this -(Interruption)

MS NANKABIRWA: I thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to know if it is in order for the honourable Member of Parliament to try to derail us from a point. The point in this House today is affirmative action for women and if there is a proportion for women. If there has been a point with the Army or in some Government commission, we have heard about it. We want to first of all address the issues today. We are legislators in this House. It would be wrong if we connive to make a coup d’état on ourselves regarding affirmative action.

THE SPEAKER: Please conclude.

MR KATUNTU: Well, that is the problem, Madam Speaker and my view is, I wish Members were following these workshops and induction courses we have been having, because then, you would know when to raise a point of order and when you need to raise a point of information, because really what my colleague is saying has nothing to do with order.

Having said that, let us go back to the Constitution. I am well schooled in both the Constitution and the rules so it would do you better if, when I am speaking on this, you listen. In circumstances like these, I implore my colleagues. Let us not turn it into men against women. I really implore colleagues. (Interruption)

MR OTADA: Madam Speaker, I want to support hon. Katuntu specifically on that point because if it comes to a point of women against men and it is a democracy of voting, will you win? So, it is consensus that we have to build; we have to listen to each other and get consensus because if we go into our different cocoons, you would want to arrive at an equality position which we accept, but there is a route through which you arrive and that route is democratic; so if we now say us against you and we say put the question, tell me if you will win?

MR KATUNTU: Madam Speaker, I have to say this. This House is proud of you as our Speaker and I am sure when honourable members voted for you, they knew that they were voting for a competent Speaker of Parliament and you have done us proud. I am sure when people were voting for you in this House, nobody voted for you because you are a Musoga and if he did that, it was not correct.

I do not want people to start owning you, Madam Speaker. You are ours as Parliament, I see them, they have started owning you and that is disastrous. “This is our woman, this is our woman”, that is wrong. You are our Speaker and we respect you because you are competent and you have been steering us well. Let nobody genderise your position because one colleague stood up here to say that they elected you as a woman and so forth.

We elected our Speaker and she has delivered, and I can tell you that there are many women in this Parliament who have chaired committees and they have delivered; one is opposite me, that is the hon. Rose Akol. She did not deliver because she was a woman; she delivered because she has the capacity to do it.

I, therefore, pray and I implore my colleagues to support this motion and we go back and address the rules fundamentally once and for all. This debate will not come back. A session is actually less than a calendar year. It is around nine months. Really, the subject has come up; the leadership of both sides should sit and we move forward as a Parliament without this acrimony.

6.00
MRS CECILIA OGWAL (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Thank you, Madam Speaker, I think the people of Uganda are waking up to realise and understand the power of women. I am very happy that this debate has united us; it is not only the women crying for the rights of women, but it is now men and women seeing the gap and I want to thank you for that.

However, we have stumbled on a problem, yesterday the Prime Minister blamed me for causing him a problem, but today I am blaming myself and blaming my conscience because I and my fellow women ought to have engaged this Parliament before we pronounced ourselves on the setting up of the committees. I think that is where we have made a mistake and I want to acknowledge that.

Yesterday, I stood up to challenge the leadership of committees after Parliament pronounced itself on the formation of the committees and the leadership.  I want to state what I know because I remember that the Government Chief Whip announced the leadership of the various committees and the Opposition Chief Whip did the same. I did not challenge the membership, but I challenged the leadership and that is when I stood up. I was mainly targeting the Government side because they have 19 committees and I only heard two or three names; so, I got concerned and that is why I stood up.

Yesterday when we were discussing, lobbying and trying to see how we can move forward on this matter, we acknowledged three things - and allow me to talk; whether you like it or not please listen to me. I do not know whether I will be boxed by a man or by a woman because when you are trying to be neutral you do not know whose side you are. But I do recognise one thing, that the Bible tells us that the religious people of today who were the Pharisees of yesterday were so emotional about Sunday that even if your cow fell in a pit on a Sunday, you were not allowed to pick it, I think we can borrow a leaf from the Bible; we can say yes, we have made these rules, but these rules should not imprison us. These rules should liberate us; I think that is the point I am trying to get to.

It is true that we have made these rules; it is also true we stumbled. Please understand that yesterday I am the one who challenged the decision first because instinctively I did not see the women at the top leadership.  I followed it up by sitting down and trying to find out how we can cure the problem. What I want Parliament to understand is that we have pronounced ourselves on the committees and the leadership. Now we have to find a solution and the solution that I think could be possible is to acknowledge that we have made these rules and we can change them.

The second option is what I engaged the Government Chief Whip on, that there are certain committees that he has not yet allocated leadership for and yesterday he committed himself that he could give them to women. I want to hear that and I hope you have not changed your position.

The third point which I encountered yesterday was that the Government Chief Whip lamented about the attitude of the women and please understand me, he said that much as he requested the women to apply for the leadership, the women did not respond by applying for the leadership of committees.

I am not accusing him and we are not in a court of law, but I am just trying to get the women to understand the problem we have. First of all, we must come and challenge. If you are going to challenge the decision of the whip when actually we have not positioned ourselves, you make our situation difficult. This is the point that I am trying to put forward. 

What I am trying to say is that right now, to reverse the decision of yesterday practically can be done, but legally, it may be problematic.  That is why I am saying that we have to go back to the rules and see what we can do. 


The chief whips should probably informally - (Injection)- you want to give me information? Can I finish this sentence and then you can give me information? I would think that one practical approach would be under your guidance, Madam Speaker - is that the two Whips could acknowledge that there is a problem and they can lobby and talk to some of their Members who are male chairs to surrender their positions. I think that would be a practical way forward that the male chairpersons could willingly agree –(Interjection)- I am about to give you the position – could willingly agree, but it would be difficult to say they are not. I think that is the practical problem that I see.

I have engaged the Office of the Chief Whip on the Opposition and also the Leader of Opposition –(Interjection)- can you just let me. I am not trying to be – when I am thinking, I think on a straight line. (Laughter)

I have engaged the Leader of the Opposition and his whip or our whip and I have asked that some adjustments be done. I have tried to scan through the list and I want you to help me understand this if it is true that the Opposition has given the entire whip’s office; both the Chief Whip and Deputy Chief Whip, to the women and they have given a couple of other slots to the women, but that is as far as the Opposition is concerned.

Madam Speaker, I want you to recognise on one part that the Opposition has only got four slots for the committees whereas the government has 19. So, I think we have more to get from the government side.

I would really want my dear nephew, hon. John Nasasira – I am so happy and pleased that you are there. Please do us a favour just as your mother did you a favour –(Laughter)- yes, I am winding up.

I want to wind up by saying that there are windows and doors of hope. It can be done, but we need to lobby because these laws are made by us and we can change them. I also do appreciate when the women say that we wait until the next session, that maybe too far. 

Let me tell you, Madam Speaker, that when these men are in trouble, they come to us and when there is difficult work to do, they look for women, but when they have no problem and when they do not have any difficult work to do, they do not need us – yes, it is true. We are not here to just be like the master key to open the door for you and once you are there, you forget the women. (Laughter) 

I think it is very important and, therefore, this time round –(Interjections)- now I do not know who is -(Laughter)– I am winding up by saying that the women have a case. The chief whips on the government side and the Opposition side must sit down and create room for the women and change because the situation is loud and clear. Even if we are given one week, we will be debating in a circle; the women are saying we want it and those who are saying that women do not qualify - I want to put it on record that it was the appeal and pressure from Mrs Ogwal, who is a woman that brought about multiparty democracy. 

I am a woman and not a man –(Laughter)– and, therefore, if today you are enjoying multipartyism, first of all, you must salute me -[Mrs Ogwal salutes.]– (Applause) I thank you.   

6.12
THE THIRD DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND DEPUTY LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Lt Gen.) (Rtd) Moses Ali: I want to salute hon. Cecelia Ogwal for her advice and I wished I had the power to stop her at a point where she said that women are to blame also for failing to apply when they are asked to do so. Now, if you did not show your interest - the Constitution says marriage should be with consent - now, are we going to force you? Suppose it is marriage –(Laughter)- so they did not want it?

This debate has engaged all sides, and again as hon. Cecelia Ogwal says, even if we discuss their issue, even for one week, we will never reach consensus. People were asked to give their preferences and they declined, and after a decision has been taken, what position are you filling? 

If you are one of those already approved by the House and they told you to step down because a certain lady from somewhere has been missed out and yet she did not show interest - (Interjections)- this information is not necessary  -(Laughter) – honourable, sorry but I have noted –(Applause) 

THE SPEAKER: Order.

MR MOSES ALI: Let me finish. As I said, I want to advise. One thing that I have listed down and taken seriously - I think all of us in this House have seriously taken the concerns of the women and I really do sympathise. But the Government has also done very well because we have come from very far and women have been given all opportunities; some bad traditions and cultures have been stopped. In some cultures if a man goes and puts a spear in front of a house -[HON. MAXWELL AKORA: “He is there.”]– Yes, you are there legally –(Laughter)- this is what the Constitution is talking about. Because you are married with family cows, you, therefore, belong to everybody in that family - that is what actually the Constitution is driving at – somebody’s husband dies and the brother is entitled – those are the very bad traditions and this is what we trying to drive at, but not for chairpersons of committees and so forth –(Interjections)- I have personally taken into account your seriousness, but it will have to be considered on the next occasion, but allow us now to go ahead and start with serious business. We are not really popularising ourselves here by talking –(Applause)- we are carrying out the business of the country. I beg that we move on. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I listened intensely to this debate and I think one of the things we are learning is how a multiparty system should operate. Perhaps there was need to really advertise and also inform the Speaker that they had applied for those posts. That is when I would then say, yes, the women applied for those positions, but you didn’t give them the chance. So, we may have to design ways on how to apply for these positions so that the process is well-known to all the parties and the Members. 

Let me also inform the Members that after every session, you should not just apply for membership to a particular committee, but also indicate whether you want to be the chairperson or not.

Secondly, we need to cater for other interests. We may solve the women’s problem, but there is need to cater for the Independents, youths and the UPDF Members. I would like to think that the point is now well taken and that everybody in the House has accepted that mistakes have been made. 

However, I just want to let you know that we have a vehicle that can correct those mistakes. That vehicle is the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline. And I expect that as we constitute the committees we shall have public hearings on this matter. I will implore this committee to invite everybody so that when we make the final changes, all the interests in this House are included. I think that will be the most orderly manner in which to move.

As of now, I would like to appeal to you that we move as per the resolution by accepting that mistakes have been made - we must engage the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline, which must be constituted very urgently so that they start work immediately. In fact, I might even give them permission during the sessional committee meetings to sit because of the urgency of this matter; many areas of our rules need to be adjusted. 

Let me appeal to the House that we accept the motion as moved. We hand over the instructions to the rules committee – with an amendment?  The rules committee should invite all the Members to present their views including those on percentages so that when they bring them back here, we will all agree as a House on how we should head our committees. 

It should also look at the idea of splitting the committees, which are big, to create more committees so that more opportunities are created for the Members. I now put the question that this House approves this motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Motion adopted.)

THE SPEAKER: Okay, hon. Members, we have two committees that are incomplete –

6.20
THE LEADER OF OPPOSITION (Mr Nandala-Mafabi): Madam Speaker, I want to thank you for the opportunity. I am so happy that we have started on a very good note; that we now know the rules of procedure and the Constitution of Uganda. But I would like to implore you to read all the rules from the first one to the last one; also to read the Constitution from the first article to the last one. And for those who have been successful in becoming chairpersons and vice-chairpersons, you now know that you already have gone into the tanulu and so if you don’t perform, you can lose leadership in one day.

Having said that allow me to say that the moment we assign committees leadership and then we say there are two places not filled up, I think that is a lacuna in the law that the Speaker can take advantage of. So, if we have some places not filled up, I think you have the right to fill them up because that is where our colleagues, the Independents could benefit from. Yes, you could say, they are not ours, but they are not yours too; they are for Parliament.

Madam Speaker, as you said, the issue of assigning Members to committees and election of leaders needs to be looked into. I recall I became a chairperson of a committee in 2001, but on the basis of competence; but also there were women who were elected to chairpersonships because they are good leaders and we cannot deny that fact. We thank you for accepting leadership this time. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: There are two committees – yes, hon. Alaso.

MS ALASO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I have no intentions to take this House back given the fact that you have already made the ruling after the voting over the motion as tabled by hon. Nasasira.

However, what I want to take this House back to is just the record of this House. To the best of my recollection, and I think the Hansard will bail us out, we didn’t pronounce ourselves yesterday. So, you might then want to put a question for us to vote on the leaderships of those committees. We didn’t do it yesterday – the Hansard can bail us out on that.  Otherwise, what I recall is that you only put a question for us to vote on the composition. When it came to chairpersons, immediately they were proposed, you spoke about the concerns of the leadership. And to the best of my recollection, that matter was not resolved; there was no resolution and so there was no approval by the House yesterday over that matter. 

You will also recall that throughout this afternoon, we just continued to project the impression that a question had not been put, but that matter has been overtaken by –(Interjections)– no, wait a little. I would like to request you, as the Speaker, to get this resolution done by the House in regard to the chairpersons of these committees.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, this business was not concluded because there were two committees whose chairpersons had not been named. I now want to name the chairpersons from the Members who have not received – yes, Government Chief Whip.

6.25
GOVERNMENT CHIF WIP (MR NASASIRA JOHN): Madam Speaker, first of all, according to Rule 134(8) there is no requirement for voting on either the committees or their chairpersons. The rule only talks of a mention and I can read it out: “Members designated under this rule shall be announced by the Speaker in Parliament accordingly to assume their respective membership and offices.” That is why hon. Odonga Otto said he had already taken over office and is working. 

Let me also say that the Speaker delegated us to announce these names on her behalf. Secondly, the other two spaces for two names that I had missed out were intended to accommodate the Independents only that we were still discussing this issue in our caucus. And since we hadn’t reached a resolution – in one committee it was only the chairperson missing, but there is already the vice-chairperson and as long as that vice-chairperson is there, that committee can still function. The second one was missing the vice-chairperson, but with the chairperson already appointed.

Anyway, Madam Speaker, I would like to promise that we shall bring the names of these two Members next week to make the committees complete. But I also want to use this opportunity to first of all thank you, Madam Speaker, for allowing everybody, especially the women of Uganda, to be heard. We have all listened to the various views. 

But I also want to appeal – although this is an emotional subject – that the best way we can debate matters properly in future is by having the patience to be heard. I am saying this because when you don’t have the patience to hear, nobody will listen to you when you stand to speak. I have realised that we are getting to a point where everybody wants to stand up on a point of information, order, or clarification. Let us develop a culture of listening to whoever is on the Floor and then get time to respond. Otherwise, we shall not be heard and we shall not get along. I am just appealing to the House, through you, Madam Speaker. But otherwise, those are the two positions. 

Lastly, we should really support the development of multiparty democracy in our country. We have just had only five years. These rules were made for five years and we had not had a multiparty system for more than 20 years, and when it came, we are developing it bit by bit. So, one process of developing it is to amend the rules where we find that we were not adequate, and that is through the issues that have been raised today, where we may not have pleased everybody. This is a process and I thank everybody who debated. I also thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving us the opportunity and I appeal to you, once again, that as we debate, we are heard; and I promise to bring the two names next week. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, I think next week is really far because this process is delaying my work. I want the Business Committee to meet and I want them to meet when it is fully constituted. 

MR NASASIRA: Let us consult and I will bring them tomorrow.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, we do not deny the Government Chief Whip the opportunity to bring the names next week, but there is a procedural problem. You do not have the authority to nominate an Independent Member and the day you will do so, you will have made a mistake. It is only the Speaker who can do it. If you have done it in good faith, you will have surrendered those two places for the Independents. You have said that we should build multiparty politics and we all agree on that, but for now, since we have all agreed that we are going to give them two places, then allow the Speaker to nominate. But if you are still interested in them, then take them since you want everything. 

MR NASASIRA: I said that we are consulting with the Independents. I should have added that we are consulting with the Speaker too. But the fact that I said that does not stop us, according to our Rules, from having our right as a party to select those two names and for me, as the Chief Whip, to designate them here. So, please, leave it to us. You will fill your position. 

MR OTADA: Madam Speaker, I beg to disagree with hon. Nasasira, respectfully. I think in law, the honourable Leader of the Opposition is right to say that neither the Opposition Chief Whip nor the Government Chief Whip have the power to designate an Independent Member of Parliament. It is the Speaker who can do that and when we had just started this Parliament, honourable members, the Speaker, who is conversant with these rules said that she is the whip of Independents and she was spot on. 

Therefore, first of all, I want to thank hon. Nasasira, the Government Chief Whip, for the consensus because in a multiparty democracy, I believe that we can go far if we achieve most of the contentious issues through a bipartisan consensus here and there. Therefore, the two slots which hon. Nasasira yesterday put on record that he had left them through consultation, to be available for the interests of Independent Members - because the rules provide that the interests of Independent Members must be taken care of. If they do not get something, it simply means that their interests have not been taken care of. Therefore, the two places which have remained, Madam Speaker, are within your power to designate so that the business of Parliament can commence forthwith. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I am the Whip of the Independents. Give me some time to sleep over it; I will give you the names tomorrow. I want to thank you very much for the work done today. House is adjourned to tomorrow at 2.00 O’clock. 

(The House rose at 6.32 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 30 June 2011 at 2.00 p.m.)
