
THE REPUBLIC OF UGANDA

IN THE PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA

Official Report of The Proceedings of Parliament

FIFTH SESSION - 1ST SITTING - FIRST MEETING

________________________

Tuesday 7 June 2005 

Parliament met at 2.30 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

NATIONAL ANTHEM

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi,
 in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

OPENING OF THE FIFTH SESSION OF THE 7TH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA

THE SPEAKER: Proclamation by Edward Ssekandi, Speaker of Parliament of Uganda.

“WHEREAS Clause (2) of Article 95 of the Constitution empowers the Speaker to appoint a date of the Session of Parliament;

AND WHEREAS it is expedient that the Fifth Session of the Seventh Parliament of Uganda should commence;

NOW THEREFORE, in exercise of the powers conferred upon the Speaker by Clause (2) of Article 95; it is hereby proclaimed that the Fifth Session of the Seventh Parliament of Uganda do commence on this 7th day of June 2005 at 2.00 p.m. in the Parliamentary Chambers. 

Given under my hand at Parliament House this 7th day of June 2005.

Signed 
Edward Ssekandi”. (Applause)

Your Excellency, Yoweri Kaguta Museveni, the President of the Republic of Uganda, your Lordship the Chief Justice of Uganda, hon. Deputy Speaker, your Lordship the Deputy Chief Justice, the Vice-President of the Movement, the former President, hon. Prime Minister, the National Political Commissar, honourable ministers, heads of Diplomatic Missions, hon. Members of Parliament, all distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen.

I wish to take this opportunity to welcome His Excellency the President to the permanent home of Parliament. (Applause)

Your Excellency, in the last nine years or so, this has been your first time to visit Parliament at its home. (Applause) You are most welcome. All other guests please, accept our warm welcome. I thank you for finding time in your schedule to come and witness the commencement of the Fifth Session of the Seventh Parliament, and the delivering of the constitutional address by His Excellency, the President, on the State of the Nation.  

ADDRESS BY HIS EXCELLENCY THE PRESIDENT ON THE STATE OF THE NATION IN ACCORDANCE WITH ARTICLE 101(1) OF THE CONSTITUTION

THE SPEAKER: “WHEREAS under Article 101 of the Constitution the President has to deliver to Parliament an Address on the State of the Nation at the beginning of every session; 

AND WHEREAS the Speaker has just proclaimed the commencement of the Fifth Session of the Seventh Parliament of Uganda; 

NOW THEREFORE, as Speaker of Parliament I do hereby invite the President to deliver to Parliament an address on the State of the Nation this 7th day of June 2005.” 

Your Excellency, the President. (Applause)

2.37
THE PRESIDENT OF UGANDA (Mr Yoweri Kaguta Museveni): His Excellency, the Vice President, the Chief Justice, Rt hon. Prime Minister, hon. Members of Parliament and ministers. I am still waiting for my written speech. Meanwhile, I will make a few comments.

When I was last here I was in another capacity; I was Speaker of Parliament. (Laughter) I have, therefore, been displaced by the new arrangement. (Laughter)

Secondly, I notice that this room is really small. (Applause) You are many but we have a reason why we made you many. When we started the process, we wanted to empower the women, the youths -(Applause)- those with disability, the workers. If we had taken the simplistic approach, which is done in other countries of just having representatives of constituencies, of course you would be few but so many people would not be represented. 

Out of the 214 constituencies, I do not know how many are women; last time they were only eight out of the 214. I do not know how many they are now - about 12 - that is a very small number. So you can see that our political engineering is good, correct and suited for the conditions of Uganda. (Applause)

We rejected the other simplistic approach of saying that democracy means representing constituencies yet so many people are not empowered in the first place. You find the women cannot come up through the constituencies, or the youth and so on. That is why we have got this formula, which seems to make Parliament big but in the end it is much cheaper. You would rather have more democracy although you may pay a little more than having less democracy and you pay more through controversy and marginalisation.

I am very happy to be here this time. I do not know why these people have delayed to bring my speech – Mwandha is saying that it is the supporters of Uganda Peoples’ Congress who have sabotaged it. (Laughter) The Uganda Peoples’ Congress members are so few that they cannot make – anyway, we shall sort that one out in a few months; you do not have to worry about that.  

This room should be expanded but we should expand it more to this side. (Laughter). This side is going to remain small so we should expand that side and accommodate more people.  

Mr Speaker, if you could please permit me to sit down for a while as I wait for this document. Could you allow me to sit? Thank you.

(The President thereupon resumed his seat).

(On resumption of the presentation_)

MR MUSEVENI: Well, this was due to some inefficiency but I had already done the protocol.  

Since my last State of the Nation Address, at the opening of the Fourth Session of the Seventh Parliament in June last year, we have lost several members of this House. We lost Esther Dhugira, Bernadette Bigirwa, Lukanga Ndawula, Basoga Nsadhu, Francis Ayume, James Wapakabulo and Patrick Musisi.  The nation joins you in grief. We shall always remember what they did for the development of this legislature and the improvement of the conditions of their constituencies. May their souls rest in eternal peace.

Mr Speaker, I am very proud of our daughter Dorcus Inzikuru who only last week –(Applause)- ran the fastest 2,000 meters chase ever, in Milan. I hope that Dorcus will continue to carry our banner to greater heights. 

I also salute our football team of Villa, which won the Kagame trophy without conceding a goal to any team in the contest. When those young people came back I hosted them to a dinner. I was interested in discovering who these super performers were. Do you know what I discovered? Many of them had been born in 1986. (Laughter) They are the new Movement Ugandans. So, you see the Movement generation and what it can do.  

I would also like to express our gratitude to the British Prime Minister, Tony Blair, for his deep concern for the African condition. Given his gifts of persuasion, we hope that the G8 nations will take up his bold proposals to cancel our debts and to increase aid. We promise him and his colleagues that we shall match their generosity with hard work, great transparency and better governance. In particular I salute his commission’s report, especially chapter 6, which deals with market access for African products. The report also identifies unplanned urbanization as another bottleneck to the welfare of Africans.

Parliamentary business: Mr Speaker, I thank you for the leadership of this House over the years. (Applause) I also thank members of this august House for working smoothly with the Executive especially in recent times. (Applause)

In the past years disharmony between Parliament and the presidency cost us the following projects: One, Bujagali power project. That delayed for several years and as a consequence you have been having load shedding in the country. That problem of the Bujagali power project was caused by the delays in Parliament, amongst other factors.
Two, the Uganda Airlines. You remember that died democratically. We put it to the committee of Parliament chaired by Mr Mutyaba and for a long time they could not agree with the Minister of Finance. I met them many times trying to mediate until Uganda Airlines just died democratically. That was another of the casualties.
The privatisation of NEC pharmaceuticals was another project that aborted because of controversies between the Executive and Parliament. It is always important to remember that if we are to build good and strong governance, all the branches of government must support and not work against each other. The Executive is pleased with the good relationship, which exists between the Legislature and us in the absence of whips in recent times.
During the Fourth Session 2004/2005, Government tabled 17 Bills. Of these 11 were passed by Parliament and one Bill, the Constitution (Amendment No.1) Bill, was withdrawn. 
Notable among the Bills passed by Parliament were the Uganda Peoples’ Defence Forces Bill and the Access to Information Bill. (Applause) The UPDF Bill is a piece of legislation that fulfils Article 210 of the Constitution, which enjoins Parliament to make laws regulating the Uganda Peoples’ Defence Forces in respect of organs, structure and procedures of the good management of the force.
The access to information in the possession of state organs by citizens of this country, if it does not jeopardize the security or sovereignty of the country or violate the privacy of other people, is provided for in the Access to Information Act. We hope that this law will contribute greatly to the enhancement of good governance through increased transparency and accountability.
During this Fifth Session, Government plans to introduce 79 new Bills. Among these Bills there are those, which are important to the political transition and the forthcoming elections, namely the Political Parties and Organization Bill, the Electoral Commission (Amendment) Bill, the Presidential Elections Bill and Local Councils Elections Bill.
There is a lot of unfinished business carried over from the last session to this one. I hope that you will exert yourselves untiringly so that you hand over a clean slate to the Eighth Parliament next year.
I have initiated a constituency development fund for Members of Parliament –(Applause)– to assist you to start development projects in your constituencies and save you from incessant fundraising pressures. These fundraisings will create corruption, apart from putting undue pressure on leaders. Schools, clinics, roads et cetera are built by the state not by private citizens, unless of course they are private schools or private hospitals. 
For a Member of Parliament or group of private citizens to take on the responsibility of building public schools, is really disorientation. However, you are the ones who started that habit of fundraising and I remember I tried to warn you at that time that it was just disorganizing the politics of the Movement. 
A person has no money to run public functions. If you try to go into that in the end you will see very bad results. You start lobbying Indians –(Laughter) When I go to those fundraising functions I do not normally know who is the guest of honour, whether it is Sudhir or whoever. So it is going to compromise leaders.
I warned you about this. I remember those who started it, I tried to talk to them but they would not listen and now it has got out of hand. So we should stop it. It should be stopped by the Leadership Code. A leader should not be allowed to fundraise using his private money. Where does he get that money? It should be illegal to do that and if there is any fundraising, it should be done from the constituency fund. (Applause) However, that should also not be for schools and clinics, because those are built by the state. 
There is no need for political leaders to fundraise for schools, clinics and so on. Maybe we can permit limited fundraisings for non-state, social institutions such as Churches, Mosques and others, but this should also be limited. We should be able to say that, “You are not allowed to contribute more than this in a given period,” and it should be low. Even those who invite you, tell them, “Please, I am not allowed to do that”.

This one was not part of my speech but there is another angle to it, according to how I have been investigating this matter. This law may cover those who are in Parliament but the ones who are aspiring to come -(Laughter)- somebody may go and do kyeyo in America and comes here with some dollars and while he or she is not in Parliament she starts kakuyege to undermine the one who is in Parliament by pretending that he is a development NGO and the like. We should find a law to cover that so that we protect the ones in Parliament. We should guard against the ones who are coming from outside. We can say, “They should wait for ten years or something like that”, then they can come.
  
I hope you will take advantage of this constituency fund so that you can do legitimate things in the constituency, not this ad hoc, cheap populism. This is dangerous. You are going to find yourselves with Indians, businessmen and every religion and tribe and this will compromise our leaders. We need leaders who have no pressure. A leader must be able to see, not to worry. If you are worried, you cannot think properly.

Economic growth: compared to the period between the early 1970s and 1986 when the economy shrunk by 20 percent, economic growth has not fallen below 4 percent for any single year since 1986. The other rate of growth has been 6.3 per annum. With the size of the economy tripling in less than 20 years, the size of the Uganda economy has tripled in the last 19 years. (Applause). Preliminary estimates for this financial year indicate that the economy grew by 5.8 percent compared to 9.5 percent in 2003/2004. The Minister of Finance will talk about this tomorrow.

On the side of investment, strong investment growth has been the backbone of the overall economic growth. Real investment growth has averaged 9.7 percent since 1986, with investment ratio rising from 9.3 percent of GDP in 1986/87 to 22.3 percent of GDP in 2004/2005. Investment growth has been driven primarily by the private sector supported by growth in foreign direct investment. Annual FDI growth has averaged over 20 percent in US dollar terms since 1993/94, with its share of GDP doubling. In 2004/2005, real investment growth exceeded 10 percent for the fourth successive year.

Export earnings of goods and services have more than quadrupled since 1992/93. The export earnings have grown four times since 1992/93. Equally as important, dependence on coffee earnings has fallen from over 50 percent of total exports in the early to mid 1990, to just 11.4 percent in 2004/2005. Export diversification has been achieved by re-invigorating other traditional export sectors such as cotton, tea and tobacco, and promoting the non-traditional goods export sectors such as fish, flowers and tourism.  

The share of non-traditional goods exports increased from 15 percent in 1992/93 to 44.8 percent in 2004/2005.  Export earnings continued to increase in 2004/2005 although growth slowed considerably from 28 percent in 2003/2004 to 9 percent. 

Total exports of goods and services are projected to exceed US $1 billion for the first time due to continued growth in non-traditional exports such as fish and flowers, as well as the other exports. This figure does not include US $600 million from Ugandans living abroad, called kyeyo. So if you put the two together it comes to almost US $2 billion or US $1.8 billion.  

However, one of the major challenges facing the export sector in 2004/2005 has been the appreciation of the shilling against the US dollar. The Uganda Shilling has been strengthening with almost all of our export earnings received in US dollars. The effect of the appreciation has been to erode gains in favourable world price movements thereby squeezing profits and putting downward pressure on farm gate prices. This experience has reiterated the need to reduce aid dependency so that aid flows do not cause our exchange rate to appreciate unnecessarily. Remember I mentioned that point in my new year’s speech. 

Two, we need to add more value to our exports through improved quality blending and processing. As I told you in my new year’s speech, too much undirected aid is injurious to the economy, not only by covering the exchange - it causes the exchange rate to appreciate artificially as pointed out above - but it also increases interest rates. Some people have been wondering why the interest rates have continued to be high in spite of the fact that since many years ago we controlled inflation. I have finally found out what the reason has been, and we found this out last year. The Ministry of Finance helped us to discover that. 

When you get too many dollars coming into the economy, call it blood transfusion. It is not your own blood. Your blood is manufactured in your bone marrow but when they give you too much of other people’s blood - in this case too many dollars coming from friends - what happens is that the Governor of the Bank of Uganda issues shillings to match the dollars that come in. So, you get too many shillings in the economy. Then the governor of the bank must do something. He then sells Treasury Bills to suck back the shillings, which he put there in the first place to match the dollars. Because of that, in order to attract the public to buy the Treasury Bills, he must give them attractive Treasury Bills rates. So he must put them up; they must be more than the saving rates. Once the Treasury Bills rates are up, then the lending rates must also go up. That is the reason the interest rates have been high.  

Not only that, each year we spend about Shs 250 billion as payment for the interest rates for the Treasury Bills. This is money from the Treasury, from the taxpayer. Therefore, real aid should go to any infrastructure such as roads, rails and maybe piped water and electricity, to make Uganda more competitive by lowering the cost of doing business here. But this aid, which comes in as pocket money for bureaucrats to run up and down, capacity building and seminars, is not good at all. It really subverts the economy. On the one hand it makes the exchange rate artificially high, therefore, it undermines the profitability of the export crops like tea and tobacco. 

This happens when the shilling goes up because of these dollars pumped into the economy artificially. If somebody is getting one dollar per kilogram of tea and the dollar’s exchange rate is shs1, 800 when the shilling becomes strong, then the dollar reduces to shs1, 600. That means now a kilogram of tea is no longer worth Shs 1,800 but now worth only Shs 1,600. Therefore, the margin becomes squeezed. So we should deal with this issue very carefully.

Aid should go to infrastructure: roads, rail, piped water and electricity but this pocket money, this chakula for chai - in fact there is something called CHAI - for workshops, seminars and capacity building, which is not good for the economic structure. The Government will not allow that type of money to continue coming into the economy.

What we need in East Africa is to build this railway to the sea -(Applause)- to build the railway to Kasese; to build the railway to Pakwach and then eventually to Southern Sudan. That is where the money should go, but not this pocket money for workshops, capacity building and consultancies. If we spend the money on the infrastructure, then it will make Uganda more competitive. You will be able to go from here to Mombasa and take goods cheaply. That is the real help Uganda needs.  

We also need cheap electricity. That is how China is out-competing other countries in the world. They built power stations cheaply using state money, without having to pay interest. That is how they out compete other countries.

Industrial growth has averaged 10.2 per annum in real terms since 1986, outpacing growth in services, 7.1 percent, and agriculture at 3.8 percent. As a result the share of industry in total output has increased from 11 percent of GDP in 1986/1987 to 20 percent in 2004/2005. This is a very important point. 

If you read the first two five-year plans of 1962 to 1969, which was during the time of the Aggrey Aworis - doing well does not lead into collapsing. When somebody collapses, then you know that he has not done well. That is the litmus paper test of not doing well. The aim of those five-year plans was to make industry, as a share of GDP, to go from about five percent to about nine percent. They never achieved it. 

You read those two, five-year development plans of 1962 and 1967. One of their stated aims was to raise the industry percentage of GDP from five to nine. Now the Movement is talking of 20 percent. (Applause) I am not yet satisfied with industries as a share of GDP. You hear me always quarrelling with the Ministry of Finance. However, this is really remarkable given that we could have done much more directed planning instead of just laissez-faire and things happening, but still you can see the considerable achievements.

These shifts constitute the process of structural transformation whereby production moves slowly away from subsistence-based agriculture towards a mix of commercial agriculture, industry and services. Despite power shortage throughout 2004/2005, which is now being addressed through the industrial development strategy, industrial growth improved from 8.1 percent in 2003 to 9.1 percent, the highest industrial growth rate since 1998/1999.  

The construction sector continued to register strong growth while the former manufacturing sector is now showing signs of a return to more dynamic performance with strong growth in sub-sectors such as sugar processing, cotton ginning and cement. Incidentally here, as I told the Vice-President to inform you during the May Day speech, the situation in the world is improving in our favour and if we take advantage of this we are going to move very fast. 

You know, the raw materials have had a price reduction. Why have the raw materials had a price reduction? Because up to now the affluent part of the world has only been Western Europe, North America and Japan. That group has been the world living a good life with cars and with television. All these raw materials we have are going to service that small group in the world. Now they said, “There are more raw materials in the world than are required”. So the price of steel went down, that of cement and of all other commodities went down. 

What is happening now? The price of copper - if you remember countries like Zambia, Zaire were very prosperous with copper - went down. China is growing very fast; the huge Chinese population is also for the first time enjoying good life and building permanent houses. So they need steel, cement and copper for various applications. 

The price of steel has gone up, just like that of cement and petroleum. You think it is a bad thing but actually it is a good thing. The Chinese leader, Mao Tsetung, used to say that the situation under heavens is turbulent and the situation is excellent when there is turbulence. That is, when the situation is excellent for a revolutionary it is very good.  

In fact I got some figures but I do not have them here. Somebody told me that now 40 percent of consumption in the whole world of steel is going to China because they are building and they are so many. So, if you have got the huge population of China living a good life, which means they need more steel, or Mitayimbwa. They need more cement and more copper for the wires, therefore, the price of raw materials has gone up. If you add on the population of India, which is also coming up, Brazil and Africa will also come up. The raw materials industry, which had collapsed, will now gain more value - and it is already gaining value.  

Of course, there may be a move to get alternative raw materials. That is normally what happens but still that is good. We should take advantage of it now and because of that Uganda could be one of the leading producers of steel in Africa. 

The other day when I opened the steel factory near Iganga we discovered that Uganda is now one of the least costly producers of a tonne of steel. To produce a tonne of steel in China is very expensive - I do not have the figures now. In the European Union it is very expensive; United States, very expensive and Uganda is very competitive. We can produce steel cheaply and that is how our steel industry has now come up.  

Even some of the people who had neglected their steel mills, like the Madhivanis, are now reviving them in Jinja because steel is becoming profitable again. We should take advantage of this by moving fast so that you get - as Julius Caesar called it – time. “In the affairs of men, which if taken at a high time, leads to success and when you miss it you go into shallows and misery”. This is a good time for us to take advantage of what is happening in the world; the structural changes. 

In fact some parts of the third world are becoming opulent (rich), leading a rich life. It is not only the small population in Western Europe, North America and Japan; the small aristocracy of the world is expanding. I am also joining the aristocracy; I also want to join it. (Laughter) The bourgeois –(Interjections)- now you can be bourgeois without exploiting –[Mr Awori: “Or being exploited?”] Like myself for instance, Aggrey Awori is always – we should just ignore Aggrey Awori. (Laughter)

Economic reforms and micro-economic management: economic reforms such as liberalisation of key markets, abolition of price controls, privatisation and public expenditure control have been successfully implemented and consistently maintained, resulting in the positive achievements. Credibility of government’s micro-economic management is high as evidenced by the strong growth in private sector investment, including foreign direct investment. Foreign direct investment coming to Uganda is quite strong.

Privatisation has given opportunities to competitive private providers in activities previously confined to the public sector and has fostered innovation and improved service delivery. For example, opening the telecommunications sector to competition has been a major success with huge growth in the mobile phone sector. The number of mobile phone subscribers, as you know, has increased from just 3,000 in 1996 to over 1,000,000 in 2004. 

The combined share of the health and education sectors as a percentage of the total budget has more than doubled over the past 15 years, totalling approximately Shs 1,000 billion in 2004/205; with education having the largest share of all the sectors in the budget. 

In recent years an increasing share of total expenditure has also been transferred to district level for numerous local government programmes such as district road maintenance, agricultural extension, advisory services, education, primary health care and water.

Expenditure on local government programmes now amounts close to Shs 800 billion, almost 25 percent of the total expenditure. 

Government’s substantial investment in universal primary education has more than tripled the number of children enrolled in primary school from 3 million in 1997 to over 7.6 million currently. And the gender gap in most levels of primary education has been eliminated. (Applause) To meet the growing demand, the number of primary teachers on the pay roll has increased by over 50 percent in the duration of four years from 82,000 in 2000 to 124,000 in 2004.

Enrolment of children with special needs also rose from 20,000 in 1997 to 218,000 in 2002 –(Applause)- of which 46 percent were females and 54 percent males. The proportion of enrolled children from the lowest income quartile increased from 50 percent in 1992 to 83.7 percent in 1999. Adult literacy has also improved due to functional adult literacy programmes.

There is now clear evidence that government’s universal primary health policy and the recent reforms within the health sector have brought about a significant expansion in the usage of the health system. Out patient department (OPD) attendance has increased dramatically in most health facilities across the country, from 9.3 million cases in 1999/2000 to 17.7 million in 2002/2003. The out patient utilisation rate has, therefore, improved from a baseline of 0.40 visits per person per year in 1999/2000 to 0.72 per year dramatically.  

The proportion of people among the poorest 20 percent of the population who seek care when ill also rose from 46 percent to 73 percent between 1999 and 2003. The Government has also built 4,000 new centres and upgraded 180, including maternity services. In addition, the prevalence of HIV/AIDS has fallen from 30 percent in 1993 to 7 percent in 2005. (Applause)

Access to water in rural areas has increased from about 20 percent in 1991 to 60 percent today; while in urban areas it rose from 54 percent in 2000 to nearly 65 percent today. Considerable improvements have also been registered in roads infrastructure, with a proportion of national roads in a fair condition improving from 6 percent when taken over from the Aggrey Aworis, to 75 percent. (Laughter) [Hon. Awori: “Iganga-Bugiri road?”] Iganga-Bugiri had a bad contractor; we are going to sort it out. (Laughter)

Those contractors are not Ugandans; they are from abroad. You are the one who like things from abroad. (Laughter) So, they are the ones who messed up that road but I think the Minister of Works will answer that in one of the – Oh, he has already answered it. And the district roads, which are in good condition, have risen from 15 percent to 67 percent between 1988 and 2003.

Government’s quest to eradicate poverty has not been free of challenges. In spite of the general trend of declining poverty, both income poverty and inequality have recently risen from 34 percent in 2000 to 38 percent in 2003. In addition, agricultural growth has slowed and some farm gate prices have declined. The stagnating poverty eradication figures call for more industrialisation to create employment. We must build the factories for coffee, textiles, fruit processing and other industries. 

Nevertheless, the foregoing discussion highlights the ability of the Government of Uganda to develop an effective strategy to achieve sustainable poverty reduction notwithstanding the emerging challenges. Ability to absorb temporary and permanent shocks to the system and the integrity of the officials responsible for the implementation of PEAP at all levels, are the most important determinants of the plan to success. 

It follows that to achieve the overall objective of reducing the number of people living in absolute poverty to 10 percent by 2017, the Government of Uganda remains committed to making growth more pro-poor, enhancing social service delivery, increasing household incomes and maintaining macro-economic stability.

The outlook for the economy is positive with average growth over the period 2005/2006, 2007/2008 projected to 6.2 percent per annum, compared to 5.5 percent for the last five years. Provided that conditions return to normal and through successful implementation of the rural development strategy, agricultural growth is expected to steadily improve with cash crop growth in particular expected to be boosted by a rebound in coffee volumes as the sector starts to reap the benefits of the replanting programme that has been undertaken as part of the strategic exports programme. 

Industry is expected to grow at rates of between 8 to 10 percent with the formal manufacturing sector supported by improved electricity supply as a result of the introduction of thermo generation and commissioning of the two new units at Kiira Power Station. 

This plan of growth will be more pro-poor than the recent experience by directly boosting incomes of the nation’s 3.8 million agricultural households. In particular the programme of agricultural zoning as well as value addition will both commercialise agriculture and create employment.

When I got to the countryside I find that some of the areas do not have any commercial activities, they just work for the stomach – subsistence farming - and that is where the problem is. I visited for instance Sironko, where I went with the hon. Wabudeya into those hills. Dr Wabudeya had recently introduced some cows, which were producing some milk, and one man had built a house with ebaati and bricks out of that.  

So, I really appeal to all of you honourable members - when I invite you to visit me at Rwakitura I normally do not invite you to tour. I know there are efforts for tourism promotion but this is not one of them.  I always want you to come and see what some of us did when we were still young people. We campaigned among those people who were nomads to make them settle down first, but later on when I was able - after I had come back from exile - I was able to introduce the selling of milk. Those people had been keeping cattle since time immemorial but they were never selling the milk, which is where the problem was.  

So, in 1989 I worked with the hon. Kagonyera, was Minister of Animal Industry at that time -(Laughter)– I persuaded him to disregard the Twenty Year Dairy Master Plan by the Danish. The Danish had something called the Twenty Year Dairy Master Plan. I said, “What would the Banyankore be doing in twenty years? Dealing with cows? It just needs six months.” And we introduced Friesian cows in a few families, then the others took their example and eventually the area shifted from subsistence farming to commercial farming. 

This is where the cure to poverty is. If the people in your area are still engaged in subsistence farming, okukolera olubuto, to work for the stomach, then you need to do something and the Government can help you. You do not have to use your money. 

There is this money, which is floating around, for instance NAADS. I agree that NAADS is being misused but that is for you to give guidance. You should give guidance to the ministry. You can go and talk to these ministers in the district council. (Interruptions) No! Do not cover up mistakes. You know, we are different players; you are the one representing your people. The civil servants are doing a job; they are job seekers. 

You who are representing the people must be the ones – for instance when I introduced commercialised milk production in that area where I always invite you to, I had to fight the Government; which government I head. I was President of that government but I had to fight it because they did not believe in it.  

I said, “I want these people to commercialise milk production.” They said, “No, it is impossible.” I said, “How do you know it is impossible?” They sent somebody from the ministry, he went and drove from Ibanda, through Kazo to Kabogore, the railway station and he came and wrote a report. He said, “This area cannot sell milk.” 

The proof that they could not sell milk was that when he was driving he saw some calves, which were starved. “If there was no milk for calves, how can there be milk for people?” (Laughter) Yes, that report is in the ministry, it was written by those experts. I said, “This is nonsense!” I rejected it. So, I struggled with those people until I put coolers in that area. 

That is what you need to do. You should not be led by those NAADS. Those civil servants have got resources, which have been given to them but they do not know how to use them. You should be the one to insist. If I am in a situation, I will insist.

The other day I was in Wakiso. There is a very good LC V Chairman there, Kyeyune. (Applause) He has used that money, which is floating around, to start a district finance programme, because that money is there. It can either be wasted or the leaders can use it. Kyeyune is there, just 14 miles from here; he started a micro finance programme using the money of NAADS, small and medium enterprises, LGDP and CHAI. (Laughter)

That is the money he used to start a micro finance programme, because that money was there. If you do not insist on it, then it will be used, it may not be stolen literally, but it will simply disappear. So, please, let us agree. Do not represent a constituency where there is no commercial agriculture. Ensure that your people are selling something and work with the Government’s programmes. 

Ensure that you use the Government money available to enable your people produce and sell something. Like recently I was in Bugiri, in that Kibimba, they are beginning to engage in growing rice. [Mr Awori: “UPC”.] (Laughter) How can a woman produce a child and abandon that child and then come after 40 years and say, “This was my child,” when the child is already old? (Laughter)

UPC is not viable. If you are a mother you will go and prove that you are the mother. You should produce a child and look after it until it grows up. If you abandon it and only come to claim motherhood when the child is already an adult, then that adult belongs to the one who looked after him. (Laughter)

So, please let all Ugandans who are listening to me - because I hear that you speak live on television when you are here. Let me take advantage of the fact that you are always on television. Really the way to getting rid of poverty is to ensure that. That is why we have introduced zoning. There should be no family in the rural areas, which is not selling something. And if they can sell something that is more profitable, then better use our programme of agricultural zoning.  

Decentralization is one of the most fundamental policies, which government has nurtured and developed over the last 15 years. Today it is providing an ideal framework for implementing other policies and programmes of government geared towards poverty eradication. The programmes include Universal Primary Education, primary health care, Plan for Modernization of Agriculture and others. The policy is very popular among our development partners, which has enabled government to mobilize funds from external forces. We shall have transferred Shs 800 billion to local governments by the end of this financial year 2004-2005.  

Government has decided to abolish graduated tax with effect from the 1st July 2005 because it has been regressive and unpopular among the population. (Applause) The tax collectors have been using crude and primitive methods of enforcing payment and this is totally unacceptable to us. Government is looking for a new tax, which will replace graduated tax and this will be announced soon. 

However, in the short run local governments will be compensated by the central government for the loss of revenue as a result of the abolition of graduated tax. We have received demands and requests for creating new districts from various parts of the country based on various premises namely: the need to bring services closer to the people; and the promotion of cultural and linguistic identity, and so on.

In response government has decided to create a number of new districts. Proposals for creating new districts will be submitted to Parliament in the near future and we hope that the approval sought will be quickly forthcoming so that they can be established by 1st July 2005. (Applause)  

In a bid to attract and retain leaders in local governments, government has decided to pay the salaries of district chairpersons, members of the district executive committees, the chairpersons of sub-counties and town councils, from the Consolidated Fund. This is because the majority of local governments are financially weak and unable to pay attractive salaries to their political leaders. The decision takes effect on the first of July 2005.  

The other day when I was coming from Masaka I was stopped at Lukaya by the ones who roast Gonja and Mchomo and they told that they were being taxed. The Banyankole say, “Owashaba oshabire nigwo omwenda gutakuka”. If you ask from a poor person, that will bring permanent poverty. To demand for taxes from omwoki wa gonja is really not acceptable. So, those local governments must stop introducing illegal taxes, which are regressive. I told those people at Lukaya - and somebody also had introduced tax on boda bodas, which we abolished because it was illegal in the first place. I found this in Fort-Portal and I heard about it in Kampala here. 

You do not tax omwoki wa gonja. Let the one roasting gonja, roast his gonja and sell. Next time he roasts and sells and puts some little money in his pocket, he will go to the bar and drink a bottle of beer. A bottle of beer has got a tax on it. So, the mwoki wa gonja will eventually pay the tax but we has also got some blood supply in his system. But if you start taxing him as he sells the gonja, then the man will simply die and you will never even get the tax because he will not buy the beer. So we can get the taxes in a win-win situation. Those people can pay tax through consumption rather than this crude way.

The Government has made a number of amendment proposals to the Constitution in order to strengthen local government.  Government intends among other things to re-centralize the authority to appoint and discipline Chief Administrative Officers and Town Clerks –(Applause) 

In this regard, the District Service Commission may appoint Chief Administrative Officers (CAO) and Town Clerks in the above category, but if the National Public Service Commission can discipline in case local authorities do not act, we shall discuss it when we come to it.  But the centre must have a say over the (CAO); because (CAOs) have become another problem.

Government has also made an amendment proposal to introduce a regional tier in the local government system –(Applause)- and here I would like to salute the Movement supporters in Parliament -(Applause) - plus a few friendly forces that came from the other side. But the Movement had already finished the job. (Laughter)

I would like those friendly forces to continue with the Movement block, they should not come seasonally and go back, they should continue.

We have also developed a Bill to amend the provisions of the Local Governments Act, 1998 relating to procurement.  This Bill will upon becoming law introduce Contracts Committees in local governments and abolish District Tender Boards in a bid to improve the quality of procurement in local governments, promote accountability and transparency and bring about value for money in the acquisition of goods and services and civil works.  

Contracts Committees will be appointed by the Chief Administrative Officers and Town Clerks – (Interjection)- we shall discuss that.  The idea here was that they can be appointed by the Chief Administrative Officers and Town Clerks but to be composed of technical officers employed by the Local Government; that was the proposal, if you do not like it, we can see what else to do.

Mr Speaker, I stated in my election manifesto of 1996 and 2001, that we cannot have growth and development, and transform society without dealing with corruption and criminality perpetuated by State agencies.   I am glad that we have dealt with State inspired criminality decisively and eliminated some aspects of corruption through our policies of decentralization, privatisation and liberalization.  What is still not resolved is corruption due to bureaucratic bottlenecks and systems  We are now sorting out how to deal with this aspect with lessons from what has been done in the Uganda Revenue Authority.

If you want to know how the Movement fights corruption in the bureaucracy, look at the new Uganda Revenue Authority Movement cadres who have finally taken over the top-most responsibility for that organization.  Watch their performance, those who are always talking about the Movement – the Movement took over the Army in 1986.  The ones who were engaged in ghost soldiers are now in court and it does not matter who- whether General or Brigadier or what.  That shows you how we deal with corruption.  

But Movement took over the Army to end the criminality, the killings, and the Army brutalizing people- that we finished.

Now, corruption; corruption in the civilian sector needed different types of soldiers; it needed auditors, educated people, accountants- it is not the same thing as the Army. That is why it is a different challenge.  

The Constitution – I do not remember which Article, the one which gives power over money and contracts, is it 164 – when I hear all these people talking about corruption, the power over money, contracts, and personnel in departments under the Permanent Secretary, that is where the power is.  So, if the Permanent Secretaries were determined to fight corruption, there would be no corruption.  

The regulations say that in case the political head- the Minister wants to make you do bad things, you can insist that they put want they want you to do in writing.  You will survive; who will sack you, I am the appointing authority.  I have not heard and you know I have been here for quite a few years –(Laughter)– I have never had a permanent secretary coming and telling me that this Minister is forcing me to do this and yet it is against the regulations.  If I could get that, you would see what I would do with that Minister and yet the power is squarely in the hands of the permanent secretary.  

Because for us in the Movement, we finished with extra judicial killings by the Army; the Army can no longer kill people as it used to happen in the past.  If there were ghosts in the Army, we dealt with them as you saw; anything junk, whatever you call it.  Incidentally I want to try my junk helicopters on hon. Aggrey Awori, if you could –(Laughter)– what I propose is that these junk helicopters, do not have to fire very near where he is, he can be a hundred metres and they just fire nearby.  But when he is nearby there, I am sure he will come and give you a different story here. (Laughter)

Those helicopters were not junk; there was only one problem. They were not overhauled; that was all. There was one step, which was missed by those who were involved; they were not overhauled. We overhauled them. You can go and ask Kony about those helicopters.  In fact the Kony people now call them “Ariyo-Ariyo” because they come in twos, “Ariyo-Ariyo, Mbiri mbiri, Sura mbaaya”.  So, the best example is of the Revenue authority where we have deliberately built up young cadres for the last 15 or so years, who have now taken it over. 

If you want to assess the Movement fighting corruption, you go there, you go and see what they are doing. Those young people took over that organization finally because in the past they were under other people, but now they have taken over the organization. As you will see in the budget tomorrow, we have over-collected more than 60 billion shillings- (Applause)-beyond the target. The target was Shs 1830 billion; we have collected Shs 1899 billion - more by Shs 60 billion.  

We may get a few casualties also, because when you are in a war, some of your people may be captured by the other side, that is not a problem and some may defect. But I can assure you the movement cadres are people with patriotism, they can fight corruption; and I would like all the Civil Servants to be patriotic- not selfish; to think only about themselves, that is where the problem is.  It is a problem of orientation and it is not a problem of lack of political will as I hear some people saying. “Political will, political will, Political will”.  That Museveni has no political will to arrest a thief if I know who he is.  Hon Nkuuhe will show me one. (Laughter)  I will call hon. Nkuuhe to show me one with evidence and he will see what I will do to him. 

But I cannot arrest; it is the Police. It is not I who arrests by the way; you have even forgotten your constitution.  You are the ones who wrote the Constitution, you do not even know what it is – it seems you do not remember.  It is the Police who arrest and the Police arrest on the orders of the DPP. This is your law, you do not seem to know it, you also talk like these foreigners who just come and blow out air without seriously thinking.  You cannot arrest a Ugandan unless the Police say that you get arrested. And the Police cannot arrest him unless the DPP says so.  

Even if I wanted him to be arrested - how many have I wanted to be arrested for subversion? (Laughter)  There are so many people I would like the Police to arrest but they are just running around and -(Laughter) It is not a question of political will, it is a question of the cadres, the right cadres in the right place.  

In 2001, I launched a three-year anti-corruption plan of action for the period 2001 –2004 to strengthen accountability and integrity in all aspects of public life.  In April this year, I launched the national strategy to fight corruption and enhance ethics and integrity in the Public Service and Local Government for 2004/2007.  The strategy prioritised the enforcement of legislation accountability, the implementation of the public sector, pay reform procurement and enabling civil society to monitor Government activities.  In the anti-corruption action, we concentrated on raising public awareness about corruption and its ills, and building coalitions locally and internationally to fight it.  

A lot has been achieved to this end. We have been able to raise public awareness on the institutions concerned with combating corruption, which has in turn led to increased reporting of corruption cases in the media and to the office of the IGG.  We have been very active in international forums, in relation to setting standards and legislation, which we have already ratified.  

Government is seriously addressing issues of public finance management and procurement management, both at local and central levels.  We have set in motion the process to deal with management issues in URA, leading to increased revenue collection in excess of Shs 200 billion per month since December 2004. And we are addressing the issue of the remuneration of Civil Servants progressively (Applause)  

Before we intervened in URA in 1991, they were collecting only Shs 12 billion a month.  When we intervened by putting in a few people, like Akabway, Mrs Mbabazi and a few others, -(Interjections)- Mbabazi, the hon. Amama Mbabazi. (Laughter)  The wife- not him, the wife is a very capable manager. She has got masters in biochemistry and she is one of our old comrades.  Those people were only about 8, Akabway and a few others.  

The revenue collection jumped from Shs 12 billion a month to Shs 57 billion and now as I am speaking, with this new group, it has jumped to Shs 200 billion per month, which they are collecting. (Applause)

So there are those who misdiagnose the problem of corruption and present it as a problem of political will, when in fact it is a problem of technical will. The technocrats who are supposed to do it are the not doing it.  I cannot go to the border to collect revenue however much political will I have, I must act through people.  

Now if those ones are still a problem, then that is where the problem is. So those songs of “political will, political will” - to deal with one thief, we have dealt with bigger problems; how can I fail to deal with a thief if I know him or her.  

So, please the problem here is technical capacity; we need people who are technically able and patriotic, this is where the problem with corruption is.  We are now looking at the capacity of law enforcement agencies. 

Dairy Corporation- I will have time to discuss that with you.  –(Interruption)- Honourable Awori thinks he can distract me.   

Progress has been made in strengthening of accountability in local governments, the enacting of the anti-corruption legislation and the ratification of the African Union and United Nations Conventions against corruption; and conducting commissions of Inquiry and implementation of Cabinet recommendation thereafter.

Mr Speaker, we were able to win a struggle against fascism because we had enough of our military cadres to assist us, but we have not yet eliminated corruption because the method used to dislodge fascism and its armies was not applicable to this new problem, since we did not have enough cadres to fill the public service positions.  In any case, such an act would have been totally misunderstood.

We did not have the cadres to man the civil service. But even if we had them and dismissed all the ones we found there, you would have been the first to accuse us of sectarianism- that we were biased.  

So corruption is in the hands of the public servants, that is what the Constitution says, and we have used URA as a pilot project to show you what NRM can do with public servants.  

Now, the State pillar is secure and the North is near stability. Our next task should be to begin reorganising other state functions, including identification of educated graduate cadres, in skills, integrity and patriotic attitudes towards our struggle of liberation; to take charge of strategic positions prone to embezzlement, graft, abuse of office and bribery.  

Honourable Members, you will recall that the NRM Government set up the institution of IGG to deal with issues of corruption, abuse of public office and Human Rights.  We also set up the Directorate of Ethics and Integrity to coordinate Government and corruption efforts at policy level, as a response to the expressed need to coordinate the anti-corruption policy and other integrity related issues in the management of public affairs.  We later separated the aspect of human rights from the IGG’s mandate because it was realised that Human Rights should stand on their own. 

Government intends to propose amendment of the Constitution, to strengthen the institution of the IGG and the Leadership Code Act. (Applause) We shall also initiate other legislation and measures, including the reorganisation of the management of local governments to ensure that Ugandans get a fair deal.  However, I urge Ugandans to see public assets and resources as their own.

Employment and Poverty:

Mr Speaker and honourable Members, the creation of employment is a top priority of the Movement Government.  For this we have solicited investment within and outside the country and we established the Uganda Investment Authority to handle investors.  Although we are trying our best to create employment opportunities, unemployment still remains one of the greatest challenges of our time.   

In the Agricultural Sector, which employs most Ugandans, there are many varying degrees of disguised unemployment and until the sector is modernised, this will remain the case.  Most of the 38 per cent of Ugandans who live below the poverty line are to be found in rural areas, eking out a living through the practice of archaic agriculture.

For the last few years, the presidential initiative against hunger and poverty has targeted especially the rural poor to improve their food security and sovereignty, to improve the environment in their homes, but more importantly to improve their incomes.  In other words, to make them genuinely employed instead of labouring with very little reward and under-employment. Our objective is for every household to have at least Uganda shillings 20 million per annum. 

 Now I will tell you something, my friend Aggrey Awori.  When we were fighting Amin, Aggrey Awori was staying in Nairobi.  He had an office opposite Ambassador Hotel, and I used to come and see him there, and see other Ugandans.  Now, there are Ugandans who had no confidence in themselves, I do not want to say who those are (Laughter)  They would say that, “the best way to get rid of Amin is to get Israeli mercenaries to go and kill him and we give them money.”  Even some of our people were saying that.  

Then I said “why do you have no confidence in yourselves?  You give me that money; I will fight Amin, not as a mercenary but a freedom fighter- you give me that money”.  

Now these people could not believe that we could fight and liberate ourselves.  Here we are, we liberated ourselves -(Applause) Our own Ugandans doing the work themselves. And in the last phase, when we fought the last dictatorship- you know the other time with Amin, we mixed up with our Tanzanian brothers, and so on. There was Katogo and the issue was not clear.  But during this last struggle against the Obote regime, we were by ourselves.  We did not even have external support. We had very little support but here we are; we have stood on our own- we have faced all these problems, like with Sudan; without United Nations, without this entire crowd around here.  

Now I am standing here and telling you that a Ugandan family will earn more than Shs 20 million a year.  This is our target and we shall get it (Applause).   In the same way as we defeated the fascists by our means, we are going to show you that a Ugandan family can get more than 20 million shillings a year.  You just wait. 

To that end, we have established “Bona bagagawale” which means “all to be rich”.  We have got three movements, “Bona basome, bona bagemebwe, and bona bagagawale.” This means, “education for all, health for all and wealth for all.” These are our three –(Laughter)  It seems there are some people who believe in the trinity –(Laughter)

But, seriously it is possible, there is a man – you people like honourable- my friend- the man of Agriculture, honourable Odit.  I asked honourable Odit and his committee to visit one of my allies, a man called Nyombi- he is in Mityana. I am sure you have not visited him. I have not heard you visiting him.  You go and visit honourable Nyombi - he is a honourable, but in growing fruits –(Laughter)- go and visit this man and come and write a report to your colleagues here to show what can be done. There is even a man in Soroti on the way to Serere; I have forgotten his name; go and visit him. We have got these people who can demonstrate to you what can be done on these small plots of land, three hectares, 4 hectares- so that we harmonize our views on getting rid of rural poverty. 

 I invite you to Rwakitura, but do not think that I invite you for tourism. No. I want to show you that it is possible to get rid of rural poverty. If you go to Nyabushozi, Kazo and those other areas, you cannot find a person in a grass hut today. 

 I started this movement in 1989; that is when we started selling milk and I have been inviting people to go and see what can be done.  So, let us use these examples like the man of the fruits in Mityana, like this man of fruits in Soroti, like Dr Wabudeya’s people in the mountains. There is even a man in Iganga –(Interjection)- yes, there is a man there; is it Bugiri? (Interjections)- yes, that man there, I have forgotten what we call the place – he is doing a fantastic work there.  These families can at least get 20 million shillings a year and more than that. That should be our target. 

But, they are doing nothing now. If you go in most of the villages, people are doing nothing; they just sit there. If you drive- like when I am going to Kisozi early in the morning- you try to stop in trading centres and say, “muli mutya?” (How are you)? “Nti tulya awo” –(Laughter)- (we are there).  “Nti esente muzigyawa?” (Where do you get the money from?) “Ate munange tuziraba?” (Do we ever see the money?) This is not acceptable, that pacifism – what is the English word –(Interjections)- complacency. Well I have taken long but you who invited me to speak to you –(Laughter) 

Today this initiative is being implemented in 30 districts of Uganda and we hope to cover the whole country in the near future. Government will make direct intervention in at least 1000 homesteads in each district and we intend to take the private sector on board in this exercise.  Intervention will include training in modern agro-practices, establishment of agro-production export villages, production of high value crops and provision of breeding and planting materials for this purpose. 

Tourism is growing at the rate of 15 percent per annum. And between 2001/2003, the number employed in this sector rose from 30,000 to 40,000. Uganda has concluded an agreement with the Peoples’ Republic of China and through this agreement we expect 2 million Chinese to visit Uganda annually–(Applause) The Chinese are now rich- they need to travel, they have money and they have put Uganda as one of the destinations –(Applause) It is anticipated that by 2010 1.5 million Chinese will be visiting Uganda annually earning us, US dollars one billion. This in-flow of Chinese visitors would definitely have an effect on employment. 

In the trade sector - and that is why honourable Akaki, wants some money, to put some little facilities at the source of the Nile, so that when you go there, you do not only see the current, but going to see something there and a few other places like that. 

In the trade sector, the small economic units dominate especially in the rural areas where 150,000 of them are found. In the rural areas in Uganda, you find 150,000 small businesses overall. These small units employ 445,000 people.  The industrial sector is dominated by small and medium enterprises. These have registered a 10 percent growth over the last 5 years and create 150,000 jobs annually.  The large-scale industries add 20,000 annually to the sector - 20,000 jobs. By the year 2004, the industrial sector was employing in excess of 3.3 million people. This is really a very big improvement, because when we started, very few people were working in these industries.  

Cooperatives have been revived and today 80,000 people are employed there; this does not include the boda-boda. There also transport cooperative societies and independent operators where an estimate of 100,000 people is employed. 

There is a cry for creation of more jobs at all levels, if we are to absorb the 300,000 people who join the job market annually.  

Government, the private sector and the job seekers should become partners in the job creating enterprise. 

External Relations:

Mr Speaker, honourable Members of Parliament, the policy of the Movement Government is to have peace with our neighbours and the world at large. I am happy to report that we are at peace with all our neighbours –(Applause and Laughter)- and I am confident that whatever misunderstandings we may have with some of them, they are not peace threatening. (Applause). 

Kenya, Tanzania and Uganda have a long history of economic cooperation, and through the East African Community, we recently signed the Customs Union Protocol, with a common external tariff and our fast tracking. Our ultimate objective is to form a federation, which we hope to achieve by the end of this decade. (Applause)

Uganda supports the entry of both Burundi and Rwanda into the East African Community for the overall development of the region. We also hope that their entry in the community will help reduce tensions within the region. 

Uganda is deeply involved in the regional initiative on Burundi and we have continued to contribute to the Burundi peace process and transition. We hope that the conclusion of the recently held elections in Burundi will usher in a period of peace and prosperity in that country.

Since last year, their Excellences, President Mkapa, Kibaki and myself resolved to fast track the East African Cooperation process leading to the formation of the East African Federation. Only recently we met in Dar-es-Salaam and reaffirmed our support for fast tracking the East African Integration.

I want all Ugandans to take interest in this process. The future of Africa greatly depends on such processes. Africa is a continent of weaklings. Many of the African countries are weak, they are not strong because of structural reasons and it is the duty of this generation of leaders, to ensure that the weaknesses of Africa are eradicated. 

You cannot sit here with these small units and other people are going to the moon. What are they doing on the moon? You are not there; you do not know what they are doing. You are just here running around. But can Uganda do anything on strategic issues? We are just running here; we are running around with those small things of ours. (Laughter)

That is why, for a long time I have always supported the creation of an East African Political Union not just –(Applause) In fact I want to bring a formal resolution here in Parliament so that you support that. I put it in the Movement caucus, they supported it but I want the whole Parliament to support it. (Applause) We shall bring a Bill; that is no problem. Whatever form is needed we shall bring it. But we must look at the strategy of the future. 

Why was Africa colonized? It was colonized because when the chiefs were faced with a threat from outside, they did not see the need to get together. They preferred to remain with small groups and the colonialists conquered one by one. How did we get Independence? It was by two miracles. One miracle was the Europeans fighting among themselves in the First World War. They were quarrelling over the world.  Germany, which was a new power – Germany, had got united in 1870 under Bismarck, and when they came on the scene, they said, “ no, the world has been divided unfairly; we also want a share.” They were quarrelling over us as if we were “ekishambu”, a piece of garden. 

So, there was the First World War among the Europeans, which weakened them. Within the First World War, there was the Russian Revolution. Russia, a huge country of Europe was taken over by communists, who did not believe in colonialism. So, they started opposing colonialism and supporting anti-colonial movements- we who wanted to get Independence. 

Then the Europeans again fought among themselves in the Second World War. By the end of the Second World War, they were so weak, they could no longer hold on to the colonies. They tried to hold on, but they could not. The French tried to go back to Indo-China; they were defeated. The Dutch tried to go back to Indonesia; they were defeated. There was uprising in Kenya, the Mau-Mau. India got Independence. 

So, what gave us Independence? Two things. The quarrels among the Europeans and the Russian Revolution; the communists taking over a big part of Europe and then eventually China also going under communists. Because of that, we got freedom. Now instead of consolidating this freedom in the last 40 years, we are just sitting here about small things- running around. 

Now, we want to make the strategic steps, which will ensure that the black race will be guaranteed forever. (Applause) Nobody will dare to assault the dignity of the black race. But it cannot be guaranteed by Uganda. East Africa is one house. The bedroom is Uganda, the sitting room is Kenya, the guest room is Rwanda, and the other room is Tanzania. To go from the bedroom to the sitting room you need a passport. This is rubbish, and Africans allow this to continue and you are just talking about small things. This is really betrayal. The present African generation of leaders are betraying Africa like the chiefs betrayed Africa in the past. (Applause)

When the Europeans were taking slaves, the Europeans had no power to come and penetrate the continent and take slaves. It was the Africans who were capturing their own brothers and selling them and the Europeans were at the coast to receive them. Now we are continuing that! That is why I am strongly convinced that the East African Federation is the first State in providing strategic security to the black people.  It is easy to liaise with these countries and I am happy, Presidents Kibaki and Mkapa are very much convinced. 

I met the candidate of CCM who has just been selected, hon. Jakaya Kikwete; we talked and I am very much convinced that we are moving -(Applause) I want you to support in the formulation so that we really create a body with a critical mass on this continent, which can stand for the dignity of the Black people.

Relations between Uganda and Sudan:

Relations between Uganda and Sudan have continued to improve. The peace process ushered in by the Sudanese Peace Agreement augurs well for the stability of Sudan and the relations between our two countries.  Collaboration between Uganda and Sudan Governments has enabled the tracking down of the Kony’s terrorists more effectively and we are pleased for the access, which has been accorded to us since 2002 to fight Kony on the Sudanese soil. 

This problem of Kony is really being resolved. We have captured so many of these terrorists, killed many of them, many have come out, and Kony is remaining with small groups of people. Two days ago, we killed seven of the terrorists who killed people in Koch-Goma; there was a massacre some few weeks ago where ten people were killed. Yesterday but one, we killed seven of those who were on the spot and three were captured, so that problem is being resolved. 

We still maintain a two-track policy; Betty Bigombe continues trying to talk to the remnants of Kony, but for us we are hunting them and we shall finish this problem.  There is a lot of pressure; I do not know why some people do not want Kony to be defeated! There must be reasons why some people do not want Kony to be defeated.  They really come and confuse outsiders, then they talk about the humanitarian problem.  The humanitarian problem is there but it will not be resolved by begging Kony, defeating or forcing him to come out if he wants to save himself will resolve it. 

All parts of the North are now totally accessible; you can take relief wherever you want. We have degraded Kony so much that he has no capacity to ambush roads, vehicles and kidnap any more. So those who are using the humanitarian argument have no point, because if you want to take relief, you can take it without any problem.  If there are bad conditions in the camps, just organise more relief, more boreholes, let us organise more supplies of whatever is needed but do not argue because now the conditions in the camps are not because the camps are not accessible; they are accessible.  

If there are bad conditions in the camps, it is because we don’t have enough resources to provide everything that is needed but not because the camps are not accessible.  So those who are using that argument, it is a sterile way, somehow, they do not want Kony to be defeated, -(Interjections)-I have no idea; there must be some reason, either they want to show that we cannot solve our problems or some people for some reason do not want Kony to be totally defeated. Maybe they want to keep hanging in there, distracting us with negotiations, peace, this and that so that we lose time but I don’t buy that view. 

Our view is that the amnesty is still available, if he wants to come out, he can come out, and others can come out too. Banya was captured; Sam Kolo came out himself and others. Kony can come but if he doesn’t come we shall get him- (Interjection)- Never mind, I will give him to you. Our work has been to degrade his capacity by capturing people around him and killing those who come in our line of fire. In the end we shall get him.

The International Criminal Court is a good ally because it makes Kony untouchable as long as it has got indictment; anybody who touches him will have problems with the International Criminal Court, therefore, that is the advantage.  Now, some people who went to confuse the International Criminal Court wanted to relieve Kony from that pressure. Like for instance, if Kony goes in the part of Sudan which is far away from where we operate and there is an indictment, they will be under pressure to follow him, but if there is no pressure, then he will be free. They wouldn’t be as pressurised as when there is an ICC indictment. 

As part of Uganda’s participation in post conflict Sudan, the Uganda People’s Defence Forces are preparing a battalion to join other forces under the auspices of the African Union to implement the United Nations Security Resolution 1590 to deploy a 10,000 United Nations strong force to assist in the implementation of the peace accord ending the war in Southern Sudan.

In addition, the Uganda Police Force is training 14 senior officers who will start training 250,000 Sudanese police officers starting later this month. Uganda’s private sector and civil society actors are already playing a vital role in the social, economic reconstruction of Southern Sudan.  The resumption in March this year of Sudan airways flights to Uganda after a period of ten years is an indication that our relationship is improving and economic relations are moving in the right direction -(Applause)

The relationships between Uganda and Democratic Republic of Congo:

Uganda has continued to cooperate with the transitional government of Congo in normalising relations fully since the reopening of our embassy in Kishasha in April 2004.  There have been exchanges of meetings at various levels, which have further improved our relationship.

As chair of IGAD, Uganda was mandated by the African Union to steer the peace effort in Somalia. Uganda will make her humble contribution to the IGAD-Somali force to help the Somali Government settle in that country.  Uganda acceded to the African peer review process in June 2004; in February this year, we welcomed the African peer review team here and signed the memorandum of understanding with the team.  We hope that is will enhance good governance in our country; they can come and review us.  

Africa peer review mechanism is a correct way because it is a mutual review, you discuss and say, “How do you look at me, am I very bad?” Then you give your opinion, “I can also review you.”  But the other arrangement where there is natural review, somebody comes and says, “No, you are no good.” “How did you come to your conclusion?  That is your opinion, but mine is that I am very good.” So where do we end?  That is why the African peer review mechanism is much better.  I can listen to my peers’ review of me and me reviewing them. Unilaterally being marked as if I am a schoolboy sitting for exams!  

Uganda has signed a standby arrangement agreement with the UN, which has enabled us to become a troop contributing country for the first time; we can contribute to the UN peacekeeping.  There is quite a bit of industry in the UN, you go there and get money for your country by sending troops to go and sit there.  If others are taking it, why can’t we also take a little bit of it?

As a result of this arrangement, Uganda has deployed civilian police and military officers to Liberia, Ivory Coast and Sudan on peacekeeping missions.  As regards the Middle East, Uganda supports the creation of a Palestinian State, which should exist side by side and in peace with the State of Israel. Uganda condemns terrorist acts by all groups.  

Asia and the Pacific region are potential leaders in the world with giants in the making such as China and India.  This is a potentially important market and source of investment for Uganda.  We shall therefore endeavor to open as many resident missions as possible in the region to add to the four we have, namely Beijing, Tokyo, New Delhi and Canberra.  Relations with the United States of America and Canada continue to be very good with increasing aid and trade investment. This is a powerful part of the world and we shall do what we can to strengthen our relationship with these countries. (Applause)

The USA has assisted to boost our trade through the AGOA initiative and in July 2004; Canada agreed to open her markets duty free to Ugandan textiles and apparels.  We continue to enjoy cordial relations with the European Union and we are sincerely appreciative of the support they have given us towards the development of our country.  We look forward to the extension of our cooperation with the ten new members of the European Union and look forward to closer cooperation with Russia and other countries of the former Soviet Union.

Conclusion: 

Mr Speaker, I appeal to members of this august House whatever political beliefs they hold not to divide our country – (Applause) - not to try and divide; they may not succeed but they should not even try.  Over the last 19 years we have urged unity because our destiny as Ugandans is truly joined.  Religion, region and ethnicity divided us in the past; they polarised our nation in the past; let them be consigned to the dung heap of history.  Dung heap is called orubungo in Runyankole, where you throw the cow dung.  So sectarianism should be put on orubungo, on the dung heap or cow dung heap of history.  

With the coming era of political pluralism - and that is what I was telling some people in Wakiso. Last week you passed the Second Reading of this regional tier Bill, that regional tier was passed by all Ugandans.  Those who take a sectarian view would never have got the majority we got here of 246 MPs voting for the regional tier. (Applause)

If you take a sectarian view, you will not get that support, you will end up with a small piece, and that was the problem of politics in Uganda in the 1960s.  I remember the elections of 1962 which some of these people know, UPC through cheating – (Laughter)- I know UPC cheated because I have got some of my friends who told me.  They got 37 seats in Uganda other than Buganda; DP got 24 seats in areas outside Buganda.  Here in Buganda there were 21 seats of Kabaka Yeeka who had not been elected directly, they had been elected indirectly through the Lukiiko – (Interjection)- I said an election but not a direct one, these are English words which I am sure hon. Lukyamuzi knows.

When you looked at the votes - you, the young MPs, go to the Makerere library. Look for the Uganda Argus of some time in April 1962. I do not remember the date, but when the elections were announced, when you looked at the actual voters outside Buganda, because within Buganda there was no direct voting; outside Buganda the actual numbers of UPC and DP were almost the same, it was 50-50, the votes were the same but UPC because of changa, changa –[Mr Awori: “Because of Intellect”]– Honourable Awori has put it well, that because of intellect –(Laughter) They had more seats, but in terms of votes, you should do research; do not just talk about things you do not know. 

You go and read the Uganda Argus, it was 26th of April, 1962; you can go and read the Argus of the two days after, the figures are there. You will see that the votes were almost equal.  Therefore, with that type of arrangement, you couldn’t get national unity.  But now to come here and get the majority of 246 on an issue as contentious as the one of a regional tier, you are able to bring the Members of Parliament from Buganda, Bunyoro and Nakasongola -(Laughter)

The Members of Parliament from Teso, Adjumani and our daughter, Jessica Eriyo, to all vote!  This shows the strength of the Movement politics superior to these other sectarian positions. Therefore, those who take sectarian positions are really enemies of progress because now with this non-sectarian approach you can have a win - win situation. Everybody can get what he or she wants so that you all move forward instead of the other sectarian approach.  

So, those who are still in the habit of using the sectarian approach should really be condemned. We shall of course isolate them because we are well equipped with our mouths; we can talk and expose those who take a wrong position.  With the coming era of political pluralism, let us have principled standpoints and let us not be carried away by our emotions and hatred.  Unity should be the crusade running through the politics of our country.  

The struggle to end the tyranny in this country will have been in vain if we go back to the bad old political habits that led us there in the first place, led us to the tyranny.  We in the Movement have always worked for the prosperity of our nation with the leaders of this country. This House should be at the forefront of this crusade.  You should show those you represent how to conquer the extreme poverty in which most of them live.  

Incidentally I would like to tell you about principled politics.  You know, I was a supporter of DP from 1960 up to 1970. I remember in 1966, I came to collect Doctor Semmogerere and Humphrey Lwande. I took them to Mbarara to campaign for DP because I was a very strong DP youth and when I am for something, I am not really there by half measures.  

Then, in 1970 I joined UPC briefly.  I joined UPC because at that time it had banned other political parties. I was fighting a local war in my area, and I also wanted to give Obote a chance to see whether we could move together but it was only for five, months then UPC collapsed just by itself (Laughter)  But what I want to tell you about principled politics is that, when Amin overthrew Obote, my DP colleagues who had been with me in DP and a few other of our associates, took the view that the enemy of your enemy is your friend.  That because you were against Obote, anything against Obote was welcome.  So they embraced Amin.  So I said,” This is very dangerous, this man Amin is ignorant; he is very dangerous.”

We had finished Obote with his bad politics, but this one was very dangerous.  That is why I opposed Amin from the word go when I heard him swearing on the radio. He could not even read the document they had prepared for him.  I had never met Amin before, I just heard him on the radio saying, “I I Idi Amin.” This is a President of a country?  I said no, such a leader couldn’t lead me.  So on the 26th of – the coup was on 25th, on the 26th I organized some money; on 27th I left to oppose Amin, I never ruled by Idi Amin.  

Now when I got to Tanzania, you know what the UPC said? “You, why have you ran away?  You are not part of us”, and it is true I was not really close to them, I was not with UPC; “you are a spy”, so they reported me to Tanzania authorities. “This man is a spy because he looks not to be real UPC”; and in Tanzania I was put in jail 8 times. There is no jail of Tanzania which I do not know. (Laughter).  In Bukoba two times - who were doing this, the UPCs, because when I went there I told Mwalimu Nyerere that we can defeat Amin but we must have new politics, we must have the politics of the movement. 

I wrote a memorandum for Mwalimu Nyerere, I said, “we must have the politics of the movement”, I did not use the word ‘movement’ at that time, I was using the words ‘united front’, “we must have the politics of the united front”; and I gave it to Mwalimu. Mwalimu was convinced that I was right, but the UPC because they had their contacts in the Tanzanian system, they made sure that I was put in jail. Bukoba two times in jail; here at the border near Kagera, one time; Mwanza, one time; Tabora, one time; Dar-es-Salaam central police station, two times. (Laughter)  Then finally, we were put in Ukonga maximum security prison -(Interjections)- no they were just framing – in fact one time they were telling the Tanzanians, “You know, this man is Amin’s spy, even if you hand him over, nothing will happen to him.”

But the point is that my DP colleagues made a mistake of saying that because they were against Obote, anything that was anti-Obote, they must support and the consequences were very bad for the country.  Because if the DP leadership had stood up that time, the struggle would have been much, much faster.  But in any case, many of our DP leaders were also in the end killed by Amin.  The late Ben Kiwanuka, the late Alexander Atim – the one from Acholi, the late Serapio Obonyo from East Acholi, the late Martin Okello MP from Nebbi, these were all DP leaders killed by Amin, because of the unprincipled handling of issues.  

Saying that the enemy of my enemy is automatically my friend, is what we have been telling people. Kony is an enemy of all Ugandans.  Nobody should give comfort or soft words for Kony.  You refer to Kony as Ladit.  I am speaking our language from the North.  These people do not know what it means.  Ladit in Luo means Owekitibwa  in Luganda.   We were monitoring some phones; some people were talking to Kony and calling him Ladit; Owekitibwa Kony.  Lapwony is a “teacher”, that Kony is a teacher, mwalimu!   You know that is very dangerous.  You should never give comfort to evil even if you are against somebody.   I did not really agree with Obote, but I could not support Amin.  This is what I am trying to tell you, you must have a boundary. Although they were persecuting me in Tanzania, locking me up and so on, as far as fighting Amin was concerned, we continued fighting alongside.

Then when we came back, the UPCs as usual, started persecuting the people of West Nile.  They looked at everybody from West Nile as if he was Amin’s person.  We said, “No, this is wrong.”  Amin was an individual, he did not produce the people of West Nile, and even his own children were not responsible for his actions. 

We again had problems with the UPC when we came back. I had problems with DP supporting Amin because they were against Obote; I had problems with UPC persecuting all West Nilers because they were Amin’s kith and kin.  That type of politics is not good, and please, we are going to expose those who are engaged in that politics -(Applause) We shall defeat them.  Because they are like Kony.  I have stood against Kony; I can forgive Kony; I will forgive him if he comes and begs for forgiveness, but if he does not, we shall sort it out as we have done.  Those who take the unprincipled line of giving comfort to Kony are really not helping this country.  Let me finish, I have talked for so long.
Karamoja:

We are moving well.  We are disarming those Karimojong warriors.  Now the Government of Kenya has also joined us and I appeal to our Karimojong leaders to encourage the people to hand in the guns.   The other time we arrested some Karimojong warriors and put them through a court martial.  Because they have been doing things with impunity and the court system is so weak, it cannot manage these people.  So we are using the court martial to try them and they have been sentenced .We are going to transfer them to Luzira to be locked up for the necessary sentence.  I hope this will send a message to the others to stop. (Interjection) Are they implying that honourable Lokeris is one?  No.  

We in the Movement have always worked for the prosperity of our nation.  You the leaders of this country in this House, should be at the forefront of this crusade.  You should show those you represent how to conquer the extreme poverty in which most of them live by being role models in agriculture and business and by educating them through your own successes.  The peoples you represent will lead a decent and happy life.  This is what we should all aim at, to pull those we lead out of the depth of misery and despair to which poverty condemns them.  Thank you, Mr Speaker (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Members, distinguished  guests, permit me on your behalf, to most sincerely thank His Excellency the President for this important address he has made to us in fulfillment of his constitutional duty.  But again permit me on your behalf to thank His Excellency the President for making this address here. (Applause)  Because as you will note that by making this address here today, he has appreciated the environment under which we are, and as you have heard, he has ordered that we expand this side. (Applause) Therefore, next time the Commission goes to the Executive for funds to expand this side, I think our case will easily go through.

This address has helped us to know what the Government has done in the past Parliamentary year and what is intended to be done in the coming or the year that has started.  I am relieved from the statement he has made about the districts, because as I see honourable Engineer Wambuzi Gagawala will cease to flood our –(Laughter)  I am happy that he has also come in to assist us with this fundraising and so forth –(Applause)- and that a substantial constituency allowance will be given so that we use it to develop our constituencies. 

Honourable members, shortly you will have an opportunity individually to make comments on this address to audit the account, which His Excellency has given us so that both the Executive and the Parliament work together to work out something good for our country. 

Honourable members, and distinguished guests; as you appreciate a new Session has started and a lot is expected of us.  You have heard that we are going to handle 79 Bills on top of what we still have, to handle the Budget, to handle the constitutional amendments for you to go in the constituencies to mobilise and sensitise people about the importance of the referendum for which we requested the Electoral Commission to conduct and to do other things in preparation for other events that have to come and as you know it is necessary for us to use our committees to do a thorough job before we debate here.  

The Sessional committees that we used in the past Session ceased to exist and, therefore, under our Rules of Procedure, in particular rule 153 (1); all of you apart from the Ministers are required to indicate in writing to the Clerk to Parliament as to which committee you intend to serve in the new Session.  This should be done promptly, I will not say starting from today because after this function we have another function, but maybe tomorrow, or any other day so that by next week we have set up these Sessional Committees to help us function.

Honourable members, and distinguished guests without exception you received an invitation from me on behalf of Parliament and that card indicates two functions. We are ending the formal function here but the day will not be completed without going to another function. Therefore, I am inviting all of you without exception to join in another function where we shall have more interaction than the interaction we have had today. 

With this I once again, want to thank His Excellency the President and all our distinguished guests, members of diplomatic corps and others for gracing this occasion.  

This brings us to the end of today’s business. The House is adjourned until tomorrow at 2.00 p.m. to deal with another important function. Our distinguished guests, don’t get tired; you are also expected to come tomorrow. Thank you. The House is adjourned.

(The House rose at 5.30 p.m. and adjourned to Wednesday, 8 June 2005 at 2.00 p.m.)




