
Monday, 14 June 2021

Parliament met at 10.05 a.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.
PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Ms Anita Among, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this sitting. I once again congratulate you upon your election to the 11th Parliament.

I would like to take this opportunity to thank you, for overwhelmingly supporting me during the election of Deputy Speaker. (Applause) You are such wonderful Members of Parliament. In addition, as I promised you in Kololo, we shall work together for the betterment of this country, without segregation.

As you may recall, at the Third Sitting of this House, held on Thursday 10 June 2021 at Kololo Ceremonial Grounds, the House was adjourned to Tuesday, 15 June 2021. However, upon careful consideration of the urgency of two pending motions that we were unable to dispose of at the sitting, I decided to reschedule the sitting to today to dispose of those items.

In addition, I have a communication from H.E. the President regarding the appointment of an additional minister of state on top of what we approved on 10 June 2021. This implies the need for the House to approve a variation of a number of ministers as per Article 114 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda.

The sitting will, therefore, consider the following three motions:

To approve the variation of other ministers in line with Article 114 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, 1995.

To approve the appointment of the Vice President in accordance with Article 108(2) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, 1995.

To approve the appointment of the Prime Minister and Leader of Government Business in accordance with Article 108(A)(1) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, 1995.

Please, note that the approval of these motions require a simple majority.

Honourable members, the 10th Parliament passed a resolution for the distribution of hoes to the population as part of Government effort to increase agricultural productivity. I have been informed that the hoes have been delivered to different districts. I urge you, Honourable Members, to make a follow up on the distribution of these hoes so that they do not become like face masks and that, of course, gives you a political mileage. Each household is supposed to get two hand hoes in every district.

Honourable members, as I communicated at the last sitting of the House, the Appointments Committee will convene at 2.00 p.m. in the Parliamentary Conference Hall to consider the appointees to Cabinet. This serves as a reminder to all committee members. It also enables us to know that this session should be as brief as possible because all the matters that are being discussed are constitutional in nature.

Honourable members, the COVID-19 pandemic continues to wreck havoc to our society. Reports abound of the spike of infections and mortality of Ugandans from all walks of life. This implies that the pandemic has become a problem to our society.  Parliament is not different from this. We have many Members of Parliament who have the same problem. Let us pray for each other.

In response to the threat of COVID-19, specifically within the Legislature, a raft of measures have been put in place and communicated to all heads of departments. The measures include:

Downscaling on the number of staff that are physically present within the precincts of Parliament to 20 per cent. Therefore, only 20 per cent of staff of Parliament will be working.

Strict observance of the required Standard Operating Procedures. When you come here, you are supposed to wash your hands, sanitise and keep a distance. 

Consultations are currently underway with the relevant authorities to evaluate the fate of the House sitting during this time of COVID-19. 

I will communicate the subsequent decisions that would have been arrived at with other authorities like the Ministry of Health about where we shall be sitting and how we shall be sitting. Therefore, for that reason, after today’s session you will wait for the decision of Parliament.

The threat of COVID-19 has also affected prior arrangements of activities that had been put in place like the orientation seminar that was supposed to take place from 14th - 16th.
That has been pushed ahead - we shall communicate the new date depending on the pandemic.

The threat of COVID-19 has deprived the community of prominent members that are known to most of us in this House. They have gone to be with the Lord. They include:

Hon. Manzi Tumubweine – who served as Member of Parliament for Rukiga County in the Sixth Parliament and a former Minister of Trade and Privatisation.
Hon. Mujuzi Pius - former Member of Parliament of Kyotera.
Hon. Jowali Kyeyago former Member of Parliament of Bunya.
Mr Kagole Kivumbi - former Permanent Secretary of Judiciary and former staff of Parliamentary Commission…
His Lordship Ephraim Okalebo, a retired Judge of the High Court and a former Constituent Assembly delegate for Kumi;
Dr Peter Kalani Emodek, a prominent ENT specialist;
Mr Jotham Mulongo, a retired educationist; 
Mr Willie Otim, a retired Commissioner of Children’s Affairs at the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development;
Bishop Remelia, Bishop Emeritus of Madi; 
Henry Magomu, ex-minister of Bamasaba;
Mr George Opio, former Assistant Commissioner Accounts, Ministry of Education and Sports.

May we rise and observe a moment of silence.

(Members rose and observed a moment of silence)

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO VARY THE NUMBER OF OTHER MINISTERS IN ACCORDANCE WITH ARTICLE 114 OF THE CONSTITUTION OF THE REPUBLIC OF UGANDA

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: This is a motion for a resolution of Parliament to vary the number of ministers. It is going to be moved by hon. Fox Odoi-Oywelowo and seconded by hon. Abdu Katuntu, Bugweri County.

(Motion seconded)

10.17
MR FOX ODOI-OYWELOWO (NRM, West Budama North East County, Tororo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise to move a motion for the resolution of Parliament to vary the total number of other ministers under Article 114(3) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda. This motion is moved under Rule 56 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament.

Madam Speaker, this motion imposes a charge on the Consolidated Fund and can, therefore, only be moved on behalf of Government. I rise to move this motion on behalf of the Government, with the express permission of His Excellency the President. 

“WHEREAS Article 111 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda provides that the Cabinet shall consist of the President, the Vice-President, the Prime Minister and such number of ministers as may appear to the President to be reasonably necessary for the efficient running of the State;

AND WHEREAS under Article 111(2) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, the Cabinet is mandated to determine, formulate and implement the policies of Government and to perform such other functions conferred by the Constitution or any other law;

NOTING THAT under Article 114(3) of the Constitution, the total number of other ministers shall not exceed 21 except with the approval of Parliament;

AWARE THAT on the 10th day of June 2021, Parliament passed a resolution varying the number of other ministers under Article 114(3) from 21 to 50; 

REALISING THAT for the efficient running of the State, and to balance the country politically, His Excellency the President of the Republic of Uganda has determined that there is a need to adjust the total number of other ministers approved by Parliament on the 10th day of June 2021 by providing an additional Minister of State in the Ministry of Information, Communication Technology and National Guidance;

NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved by this Parliament that the total number of other ministers provided under Article 114(3) of the Constitution, and subsequently varied by Parliament on the 10th of June, be increased from 50 to 51.”  I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the motion by hon. Fox Odoi-Oywelowo seconded? 

(Motion seconded)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I can see it is seconded by hon. Katuntu, hon. Chemaswet, hon. Chris Baryomunsi and the whole House.

(Motion seconded)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Fox Odoi-Oywelowo, can you speak to your motion. You have eight minutes.

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Much obliged, Madam Speaker. Madam Speaker, with your leave and by way of justification, permit me to read into the record a letter of His Excellency the President, dated 10 June 2021 and addressed to yourself, that sets out the justification for this motion.

The reference of the letter is “additional ministers of state” and it reads as follows: 

“Reference is made to the resolution of the NRM Parliamentary Caucus on the seventh day of June 2021, and reference to my speech of today, during the Budget reading. The number of Cabinet ministers and other ministers (Deputy Prime Minister and ministers of state) is for two purposes. 

Purpose 1 is to provide effective political supervision over the huge Government machinery. Since some time ago, the NRM reduced the number of Government ministries from 38 to only 21, and now 25. These are East African Affairs; Education and Sports; Public Service; Energy and Mineral Development; Defence and Veteran Affairs; Foreign Affairs; Works and Transport; Gender, Labour and Social Development; Information, Communication Technology and National Guidance; Karamoja Affairs; Water and Environment; Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries; Finance, Planning and Economic Development; Internal Affairs; Justice and Constitutional Affairs; Lands, Housing and Urban Development; Local Government; Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities; Trade, Industry and Cooperatives; Water and Environment; Health; the Presidency; Security; and Science, Technology and Innovation.

Then there are ministries that are in the President’s Office and the Office of the Prime Minister. These are Security; Presidency; Science, Technology and Innovation.

The total ministries are, therefore, 25 with a total of 25 permanent secretaries and accounting officers. We, therefore, reduced the number of ministries by putting together many departments. If, for instance, you take the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development, it has got a total of six departments; these are women etc., youth and children, the disabled, the elderly, culture and cultural institutions, labour, and industrial relations. These are sectors where each used to be a ministry in the past; e.g., the Ministry of Foreign Affairs - those who are old enough remember Joyce Mpanga and Miria Matembe - Ministry of Labour, Ateker Ejalu; Ministry of Culture, C.B. Katiti in the 1960s.
Now all these huge sectors are serviced by one Permanent Secretary and one administrative structure, which in itself creates a great financial saving. That is why, at a minimum, we need one political overseer in the form of a minister of state, hence, the proposed 51 ministers of state. 

I salute the Parliament for passing the resolution on 10 June 2021 agreeing to vary the number from 42 to 80. 

In order to improve efficiency and also to balance the country politically, I request Parliament to add one more minister of state in the Ministry of Information and National Guidance for two purposes: on the one hand, to have more effective supervision and secondly, to address, even more effectively, the issues of inclusion and participation. 

This is, therefore, to ask Parliament to use your powers under Article 114 Clause 1 and Clause 3 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda to contribute in addressing this issue that is part of the national interest. 

Madam Speaker, I am not competent enough to say any more by way of justification. I beg to move that the House be pleased to find the justification and the motion acceptable.”

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, hon. Fox Odoi. May I invite hon. Katuntu, MP Bugweri to second the motion.

10.26
MR ABDU KATUNTU (Independent, Bugweri County, Bugweri): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I stand to second the motion. I have been asked to second this motion and my justification is to look at the National Objectives and Directive Principles of State Policy. 

During the Budget Speech, the President informed us that while designating ministers, he had missed out one sub-region of Kasese. When you look at the democratic principles under the political objectives of our national Constitution, which come slightly after the preamble to the Constitution, the Constitution gives directives and guidance; that the State shall be based on democratic principles which empower and encourage the active participation of all citizenry at all levels in their own governance. 

All the people of Uganda shall have access to leadership positions at all levels, subject to the Constitution. Most importantly is Clause 2(4) of the political objectives; “The composition of Government shall be broadly representative of the national character and social diversity of the country.”

When you look at the designated ministers, the region of Kasese is missing. When you look at all sub-regions, from Bugisu to Karamoja, Busoga, Bukedi, they have representatives in Cabinet but there is no representation from Kasese.

The Constitution is saying that the composition of Government shall be broadly representative of the national character and social diversity of the country. This is a constitutional demand; it is a constitutional guidance. 

Even when you look at political organisations in their own political setting, the Constitution demands that all political and civic associations aspiring to manage and direct public affairs shall conform to democratic principles in their organisations and practice, including political parties themselves. 

That is why you find that in all these political organisations, you have a President, then vice president – East, vice president – South, vice president in charge of Central. All regions have to be part of the administration of the political organisation. 

The political party I used to belong to did not only stop at the presidency, it also went to the chairpersons. There is a national chairperson and all the regions produce vice chairpersons. They also have two secretary generals. 

If you are going to reflect the national character and social diversity, there is no reason one sub-region should miss in its representation. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, hon. Katuntu. Is there another person seconding the motion? 

10.30
MR ABDI CHEMASWET (NRM, Soi County, Kween): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to appreciate the effort of Members of Parliament when they approved the motion to increase the number of ministers to the number that the President wanted. It would not be an offence for them to add one. 

In 1962, we had 17 districts, which are now subregions of Uganda. Of course, in the zoning of the country, the Government looks at developing Uganda and transforming the nation through social transformation. Government said that we add one sub-region in West Nile. Now we have 18 of them in terms of planning. 

In 2015, when we were approving the municipalities in the whole of Uganda, we had Bugiri, Kapchorwa, Kotido and the others. My friend, hon. Asuman Basalirwa is a beneficiary of the approvals that we did in Parliament in 2015 –(Interruption) 

MR BASALIRWA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I request my colleague, hon. Chemaswet to sit down as I raise the point of order. Is it in order for hon. Chemaswet, without knowing my view on the motion, to begin anticipating that I am likely to be against the motion simply because I was a beneficiary of a process? Even if I had not contested, there would have been somebody to contest for the seat of Bugiri Municipality. Is it in order for him to anticipate and to bring my name in issue? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think that was a light moment. The House is so cool and he wanted to make people happy. (Laughter)

MR CHEMASWET: Thank you, Madam Speaker. That is why the reference was about my friend, hon. Basalirwa. 

The question of one minister to cover Kasese is an idea that is very important. It would cover areas that the population was crying about and saying Kasese is not covered. Now the President has proposed that we cover Kasese by giving them a minister. This is of course a consideration from the President. Who then would say that let us not cover Kasese and take care of other places? The consideration is perfect and very important and in a moment that it deserves.
	
Covering Kasese and having an additional minister being approved by Parliament right now would be an important factor in terms of any other consideration and will be history in this country.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I want somebody from Kasese, hon. Sowedi. after we can have hon. Akol.

10.35
MR SOWEDI KITANYWA (NRM, Busongora County North, Kasese): I am rising to support the motion to increase the number of ministers as presented by my previous colleagues. 

Honourable members, the framers of the Constitution under article 114(3) saw that situations are not static, they therefore provided for extension of the number of ministers if Parliament so wishes.

We are currently in a world where ICT is very important and that if we are to have a productive society, driven by information and technology, then we must have structures that are able to lead us in that direction.

Proposing to have a state minister who is going to oversee this area is very important for us as a nation but like my colleagues said; that if this is approved by Parliament, then Kasese takes a share.

This a welcome idea, I am very sure that none of my colleagues here would refuse a piece of meat if it is to be put in their plate. I welcome this and beg my colleagues in the House to support this motion, I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, this matter was extensively discussed on 10th June and for that we require few members to speak and we pass. 

1.38
MR ANTHONY AKOL (FDC, Kilak North County, Amuru): Madam Speaker, I am a bit disappointed with the mover and the seconder of the motion. I hold a lot of respect for hon. Katuntu and I was very disappointed when the justification for this increment was to benefit Kasese.

First of all, it is an indication that the President forgot Kasese and that is very disappointing to the nation and especially, very frustrating to hear a Member of Parliament from Kasese standing up to say; “we were forgotten the other day so we are supposed to be benefitting from the extension of one more minister.” (Interruption)

MR SOWEDI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Is it in order for hon. Akol who must have listened to the President when he spoke clearly to the nation that he had already put a Member from Kasese as a minister but because he was keeping the list secret to avoid leakages, he handed over that list to the secretaries and they forgot to include the name of a Member from Kasese.

Is it in order for hon. Anthony Akol to claim that the President forgot Kasese? When Kasese was already considered?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The message of the President that day was very clear so I do not think it is very good to say that they forgot Kasese, Kasese is part of Uganda and it cannot be forgotten.

MR AKOL: Madam Speaker, I am just on the verge of thinking that we are creating a position now and I am not sure if you appoint for a position which is not created and he tells us the way we are rubber stamping in this Parliament.

I am one of the persons who believe in balanced leadership in this country and for all regions to benefit in this leadership but it is unfortunate at this point that we are setting a precedent that a region should get a minister on extension.

I want to put it very clear on record that we have different regions in Uganda that benefited differently; there are areas that got 9 ministers, 8, others 5, 2, 3. If the President wants to vary leadership in this country, we do not need to increase the number of ministers in this House for Kasese to benefit. 

We need to balance the areas that have 8 ministers with one going to Kasese. When we are anticipating here and extending the number of ministers, we should not use Kasese as a justification. 

We are legislating for the country and that position we are creating-you mean to tell us is going to remain for Kasese? Every time there is appointment, that position will remain for Kasese, that is the question we need to put into our heads.

MR SSEWUNGU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I congratulate you for attaining that office. Hon. Akol, it is very funny to find members of Kasese fighting for a minister other than their King “Omusinga” who is under incarceration. Not going back to his kingdom and the one who shot the King with his people is a Member of Parliament here, Gen. Elwelu.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Ssewungu-

MR SSEWUNGU: Before they think about a minister, they should talk about the “Omusinga” who is under incarceration.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Ssewungu, we are looking at article 111 of the Constitution not about the Kingdom for today. We will discuss the issues of the Kingdom another day so for today let us look at an addition of a minister irrespective of whether he is going to Kasese or Karamoja.

MR AKOL: Madam Speaker, at this point, I would advise the members of the 11th Parliament, who I trust and have respect for and I know how they started this House and they want to do business differently - It is important, at this point, not to increase the number of ministers now as a way of doing business in the country.
 
The other day, I said, and I want to repeat it today, that it is not the number of ministers that will translate into performance. There is no evidence given in this House that when the ministers went up to 21, there was better performance or when the number increased to this number, they performed better.

In those circumstances, increasing the number of ministers will not – (Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: There is a procedural matter but it came after the point of order.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of procedure, embedded in a point of order because of the way we seem to be moving. (Laughter) 

Madam Speaker, I rise in respect to rule 222, which provides for the reconsideration of a decision of the House and it reads thus: “It is out of order to attempt to reconsider a specific question upon which the House has come to a conclusion during the current Session.”

Madam Speaker, during this very Session, on the 10th, this 11th Parliament unanimously resolved on the question of variation of ministers. Indeed, it was not based on an addition of one person for the elderly but on varying the number, under Articles 113 and 114. Today, we are reconsidering the same motion for which a resolution was passed.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Ssekikubo, this is not reconsidering a motion. This is a new motion. So, can we have –

MR SSEKIKUBO: Most obliged, Madam Speaker. This is a matter where the indulgence of the House was sought and indeed, it was granted. Considering the basis of this, under the National Objectives and Directive Principles of State Policy, I stand to be corrected but this is the very motion that we moved last time. Another district shall come up –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I have said this is a new motion; it is not reconsidering the old motion. Can you take your seat? Hon. Opendi. 

MS OPENDI: Thank you, Madam Speaker –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: There is a point of procedure from hon. Nathan Nandala-Mafabi. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. First of all, I want to also congratulate you for ascending to such a high office.

Madam Speaker, we make rules and you are the custodian of these rules. Since you are the custodian, if something has been raised, your word is final.

The procedural issue I am raising is: we all know that if a motion has been moved and passed and one wants to make a change, there is always a method for us to follow. I do not want us to put our heads in the sand because you wanted us to quickly have an additional Member – (Interjection) - my friend, I know orders.

Madam Speaker, wouldn’t it be procedurally right for us to interrogate this thing - that you give time for us to interrogate and discuss it? This is because a motion was passed and if we want to change it, there is a method to use. They say that at every first sitting of Parliament, the President will ask for an amendment if he wants to vary the number of ministers. At the first sitting, we sat and decided. We are still in the first sitting. Therefore, before you do anything concerning that motion, you need to follow the procedures, Madam Speaker.

Wouldn’t it, therefore, be procedurally right that you give this time, seek a legal opinion from your legal officers before handling this matter? Failure to do that, from day one this motion will have a problem.

MS AMONGI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I take note of the issues raised by hon. Nandala-Mafabi and other colleagues. However, rule 222 is very clear. It talks about an attempt to consider a specific question. It is about a specific question. It does not make reference to a motion.

Secondly, rule 16 permits, with your consent, any Member to move that a rule be suspended. If in your wisdom the matter raised by hon. Nandala-Mafabi and my colleagues warrants consideration, then, Madam Speaker, I would procedurally request that you look at rule 16 and guide. In which case, I would be ready to move the House to suspend rule 222. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can we allow hon. Akol to finish?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, thank you very much. That is why we like hon. Betty Amongi; she knows the problem. That is why she is moving to suspend the rules.

Madam Speaker –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: By the way, we are not suspending the rules, because this is a new motion. It is not making an adjustment on the existing one. So, that is out; we are not doing it.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, this is a constitutional matter. It is, of course, clear that the President is mandated to ask for more ministers and Parliament will do it at the first sitting. We are saying the first sitting was done. 

Madam Speaker, wouldn’t it be procedurally right for you to interrogate the system further? What hon. Amongi Betty has raised is one of the ways to get out of this problem - by suspending our rules. If we start suspending rules from day one, then every time we want something and get a problem, we shall run to suspend.

Madam Speaker, I beg for your indulgence because we have a lot of business on the Order Paper; let us stay this one. If we discover that we can adjust it every now and then, some of us will also move that we should have ministers for tribes. So, I propose that we stay this, go to the next item as we interrogate it further, Madam Speaker.

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I move on a point of procedure. 

On the matter regarding rule 222, you have ruled and guided the House that what we are considering is not reconsideration of the decision of the House.  Therefore, is it procedurally correct for Members to keep challenging your ruling, when the rule properly guides that once the Speaker has guided, there is another formal way of challenging the guidance and ruling of the Speaker? So, is it procedurally correct for hon. Ssekikubo to remain anxious, when you have properly guided the House? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Members, I have made a ruling on this issue. This is not a reconsideration of the previous motion; this is a new motion. If you are not in for the motion, vote against it. However, this is a new motion. Hon. Akol, can you continue please? After him, we shall have hon. Opendi.

MR AKOL: Madam Speaker, you will realise that the matter is very contentious for the nation. In my conclusion, I would like to put it very clear on the  record that if we are going to vary the number of ministers in the country to 81, from the original 80 that we passed the other day, we should not put it on record that we are doing it for Kasese. It should not be mentioned that every time a region is left behind, you create another ministry.

Therefore, at this point, that there is no need to increase the number of ministries. The most important thing is that we have regions with more ministers. You just need to balance the boat to ensure that the country benefits equally, other than deciding on Kasese at the last moment, when they have been left behind. Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. When you look at the motion, you do not see Kasese written anywhere. 

10.56
MS SARAH OPENDI (NRM, Woman Representative, Tororo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Allow me to congratulate you upon your election as Deputy Speaker of this House. In the same spirit, allow me to congratulate all those who have been named as Vice President, Prime Minister and Ministers designate.

The motion that was moved this morning by my brother hon. Fox Odoi does not mention Kasese anywhere. Just like you have said, it will be dangerous for us to sit here and start attaching this particular motion and creation of this additional ministerial position to a particular district.

Madam Speaker, there are other districts that do not have ministers. If you start talking about Kasese, then all the other districts will come and demand, which is not good.

Aware that appointing ministers is a prerogative of His Excellency the President and  aware that it is Parliament’s responsibility, in the event that His Excellency wants to appoint more than what is provided for in the Constitution, to make the approval -

We have discussed rationalising Government’s agencies. I hope, at an opportune time, we shall look at this matter, once we are done with rationalisation.

Having said that, Madam Speaker, since the motion was moved, seconded and debate ensued, I do not think we should waste any more time. I, therefore, want to move a motion that we close debate and the question be put. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Members, this motion was debated upon, and we have also agreed that the issue of Kasese is out of the equation. There is a procedural point from hon. Basalirwa.
 
MR BASALIRWA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. We are finding ourselves in a very big dilemma as a House. You have just stated that this motion was moved and debated. Yet, at the same time, however, you have mentioned that this is a new motion. So, for purposes of guidance, if this is a new motion, then whatever transpired in Kololo does not arise. It means the new motion must be opened up for discussion. 

Since you seem to be – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let him finish on the procedural matter and then you bring -  

MR BASALIRWA: I am raising a procedural matter. The procedural guidance I seek from you is how we are treating this motion. Is it a new motion, in which case, it would be subject to debate? Or is it an old motion that should be treated as a continuation? 

Either way, if it is a new motion, then rule 62 on withdrawal of motion should have been followed. The motion in Kololo should have been withdrawn, and then a new motion would be brought and subjected to debate. If it is an old motion, and it is a continuation - and we are talking about reconsideration, then rule 222, (2) should come into play.

We need procedural guidance on this matter. How are we treating this motion? Is it a new motion? In which case, what happens to the previous motion in Kololo? Was it withdrawn? If so, was the withdrawal in accordance with rule 62? If it is reconsideration, are we following rule 222, especially with regard to notices? That is the guidance we seek from you. 

MR TAYEBWA: Madam Speaker, the motion in Kololo was very specific. It was for increasing the number of other ministers to 50, and it was closed. This motion is saying we move the number to 51 ministers of state. So, it is a new motion. 
You cannot tell me that because I had talked of 50 ministers of state the previous time, when I want to increase the number of ministers of state to 51, I must go back to the motion to vary the number of ministers of state to 50, to say either I withdraw the other motion or amend it. This is a new motion, and it is very specific. Madam Speaker, We would plead that you treat it that way.

We have a motion on the Floor. Are we moving right to continue bringing in other issues, when we have a motion on the Floor? Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, we have a motion on the Floor. Can we proceed with it? 

We are moving with a motion, which is on the Floor. The motion that was moved on 10 June 2021 was passed. So, we are not reconsidering it. We are considering the motion of today. 

Somebody had put a question - 

MR EKANYA: Madam Speaker, I want to proceed with the motion on the Floor.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: There was a motion on the Floor, which was not resolved. I am putting the question to the motion, which is on the Floor on the variation of numbers from 50 to 51. 

 (Question Put and agreed to.)

MOTION SEEKING PARLIAMENTARY APPROVAL OF THE APPOINTMENT OF THE VICE-PRESIDENT IN ACCORDANCE WITH ARTICLE 108(2) OF THE CONSTITUTION OF THE REPUBLIC OF UGANDA

11.05
MR THOMAS TAYEBWA (NRM, Ruhinda North County, Mitooma): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Before I move the motion, allow me to congratulate you on your election as Deputy Speaker of Parliament. I pledge my support to you and that of my colleagues whom I have spoken to and we are very sure that the business of this House will move very well. 

Madam Speaker, I stand to move a motion under Rule 56 of our Rules of Procedure, for a resolution of Parliament approving the appointment of hon. Maj. Jessica Alupo Rose Epel as Vice-President of the Republic of Uganda. The motion reads:

“WHEREAS Article 108(1) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda provides that there shall be a Vice-President of Uganda, appointed by the President with the approval of Parliament by a simple majority; 

AND WHEREAS under Article 108(3) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, the Vice-President shall deputise the President as and when need arises and perform such other functions as may be assigned to him or her by the President, or as may be conferred on him or her by the Constitution; 

AWARE THAT His Excellency the President of the Republic of Uganda has in exercise of the powers conferred upon him by Article 108 of the Constitution appointed the hon. Maj. Jessica Rose Alupo Epel as Vice-President of the Republic of Uganda; 

NOTING THAT this appointment is subject to Parliamentary approval as mandated by Article 108(2) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda;

NOW THEREFORE, be it resolved, that Parliament in accordance with Article 108 (2) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda approves the appointment of hon. Maj. Jessica Rose Alupo Epel as Vice-President of the Republic of Uganda.”

I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Is the motion seconded? It is seconded by hon. Bakabulindi, hon. Orone, hon. Chemaswet and hon. Santa Alum and by many Members in the House.

There is a procedural matter here.

MR OKUPA: Thank you, Madam Speaker and congratulations. Could the mover of this motion proceed very well by pronouncing the name of the Vice-President nominee correctly? He is mispronouncing the name of the nominee. Could you, please, read it as it is written, so that you proceed very well, otherwise we are going to have a different name? It is not Epelu but Epel.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Jessica Rose Alupo Epel.

MR TAYEBWA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I hope that if I gave hon. Okupa a chance to pronounce the name of my son Rubanda Mayonza, he would get a retake. However, it is hon. Jessica Rose Alupo Epel. Thank you.

Madam Speaker, the President of the Republic of Uganda is empowered by the Constitution to nominate individuals to the Executive of Government with the approval of Parliament.

In the exercise of the powers conferred upon him by the Constitution, the President has nominated our colleague, hon. Jessica Alupo Epel, to the position of Vice-President of Uganda.

He has demonstrated rare acumen and care in all these selections and the number of times he has been re-elected is an acknowledgement by the people of Uganda of his choices and methods of work. These appointments, Madam Speaker, have been rotational in nature and this particular time, he has appointed hon. Alupo as Vice-President. 

It should be noted by this august House that President Museveni was the first president in the whole world but to be specific in Africa to recognise the special abilities of women when, in 1994, he appointed Her Excellency Dr Wandera Kazibwe, as the first female Vice-President of the Republic of Uganda.

You may also wish to note that for all democracies like the US, it had to take over 200 years to realise the potential of women.

Madam Speaker, with these introductory remarks, I wish to present to you the hon. Maj. Jessica Alupo, a very vibrant and distinguished citizen of this country. 

Hon. Jessica Alupo is a District Woman Member of Parliament, representing Katakwi in Parliament. She was born on 23 May 1974, in the present day Katakwi District. She is a Ugandan politician, educator and former military officer.

Hon. Maj. Jessica Alupo attended Kangole Girls’ school where she obtained her ordinary level certificate of Education and Ngora High School; from where she attained her Advanced Level Certificate of Education. She then joined Makerere University for a Bachelor’s Degree in Political Science and Religious Studies.

Hon. Jessica Alupo holds a Post Graduate Diploma in Public Administration and Management and Master’s Degree in Management Studies from the Uganda Management Institute. She also holds a Master’s Degree in International Relations and Diplomatic Studies from Makerere University.

In 2015, hon. Alupo was awarded an Honorary Doctorate in Science by Shenyang University in China and is the first Ugandan to have it.

Madam Speaker, hon. Alupo is a retired army officer. She completed her officer Cadet course in Jinja in 1999 and attended the Counter Intelligent Course and Technical Surveillance in 2001. Hon. Alupo has been very active in leadership. Throughout all her school life, she was a leader. She took up leadership as a Deputy Head Girl both at Apuuton Primary School and Kangole Girls’ Secondary School; and also served as Vice-Chairperson, Uganda National Students Association at Ngora High School.

She is the current chairperson of the NRM veterans’ league, Katakwi District; where she mobilises veterans to work together, to improve their standards of living. 
Hon. Alupo also served as a Minister of Education, Science Technology and Sports, from 2011 to 2016; a position in which she excelled, overseeing the implementation of Universal Primary Education programme, which has benefitted millions of poor Ugandans. During her tenure, she especially improved the performance of rural schools to the level now that they can compete with the so-called Kampala schools.

As a Minister of State for Youth and Children Affairs from 2009 to 2011, hon. Alupo organised the youth to start self-help projects and skilled them in different fields. She was instrumental in advocating for the rights of children in the whole country and getting them off the streets back to school.

This distinguished lady seated in front here, who has been nominated as the Vice-President of the Republic of Uganda, served Parliament very well as the deputy chairperson of the Parliamentary Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs from 2006 to 2009. Hon. Alupo oversaw the deployment of Uganda People’s Defence Forces (UPDF) on various peacekeeping missions and ensured that the welfare of servicemen as well as their families was catered for as per the memorandum of understanding signed by the Government of Uganda.

Hon. Alupo also worked as a staff officer, Chieftaincy of Military Intelligence (CMI), Kitante; staff officer, Chieftaincy of Operations and Training in Bombo Military Barracks; Instructor in charge of female trainees at Singo Military Training School; and a teacher at Katakwi High School and Usuk Secondary School. 

The illustrious service that hon. Alupo has rendered in the various ministries has given her vital experience in handling matters of the state. The training and experience she has got has prepared her as a Vice-President who will be consuming very important state secrets and information to know what to do, who to speak to, who to speak what to and at what time. This is the right person we have for the position of the Vice-President of Uganda. 

Beyond that, hon. Jessica Alupo is a publisher, who has written extensively on areas of education and integration of East Africa, employee motivation and employee performance in the telecommunication sector, as well as the plight of refugee women in Uganda, to mention but a few.

Throughout her career, hon. Alupo has been a peacemaker, a very good negotiator, patriotic and focused. She is a leader who ensures that no one is left behind among those she is leading. She is a self-driven individual, results oriented and output focused. She prioritises and allocates more time to performance of her duties and attainment of the key results.

It is upon this background, which I have laboured to summarise, that I present this distinguished lady to you, honourable colleagues, for approval as the Vice-President of the Republic of Uganda. I beg to move.

The deputy speaker: Thank you, hon. Tayebwa. Can I now invite hon. Bakkabulindi to second the motion? You have five minutes.

11.17 
Mr Charles bakkabulindi (NRM, Workers Representative, Central): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to second the motion. I am called Charles Bakkabulindi, Member of Parliament representing workers and a senior person in this House.

I have worked with hon. Rose Jessica Alupo for some good time, as a fellow Member of Parliament and my senior minister. When I am talking about her, I know what I am talking about.
I also happen to be close to the outgoing Vice-President. I have seen the quality, character, nature and the type of person that deserves to sit in that chair of Vice-President. I salute His Excellency the President of Uganda for appointing –(Interruption.)

Mr aogon: Madam Speaker, I did not want to raise a point of procedure just for the sake of it. However, we are seated the other side and not connected to the House at all. There is no loudspeaker. Is it procedurally right for the House to continue in bits while leaving the other section out?

The Deputy Speaker: Clerk, can you take care of the small tent. People in the small tent, if you want to speak, you should come this side. 

I think they are now installing a public address system the other side. You can continue.

Mr bakkabulindi: Thank you, Madam Speaker. As I told you earlier, I have known hon. Jessica Alupo for some good time. She is accessible and dependable and walks the talk for others to see but not to simply command. I was the Minister of State for Education in charge of Sports and she was my senior minister. We could coordinate.

The mover talked about hon. Jessica Alupo having been the Minister of Education and Sports. Dear colleagues, this is the ministry that covers almost the entire country, from pre-primary, primary, secondary schools to institutions of higher learning and universities. In order to handle those people, including the sports, you must be a person who interacts with each and every person. Indeed, she made it a point that sports and education were improved. I salute you for that.

She has another unique character and quality. If you are discussing a certain issue with hon. Alupo and you are not convinced, she will not go until you agree with each other on how to move on with the issue. Indeed, these are the characteristics that we should be wishing to have in a leader. 

She will be a good link between the Members of Parliament, the Executive and the first office. That is the purpose for which we are here saying that His Excellency the President made the right choice.

One other quality that I discovered with hon. Alupo for that long period we were together is that she does not like to be told lies. She does not want to be praised for the sake of it. Tell her how you feel and you will move together. 

Honourable members, I would like to say that we have got the right person and request that let us all support hon. Jessica Alupo for that big office. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

I beg to move.

The Deputy Speaker: Thank you, hon. Bakkabulindi. Honourable members, the question for debate is that Parliament resolves to approve the nomination of hon. Alupo Jessica Rose Epel as the Vice-President of the Republic of Uganda. 

Let us restrict ourselves to the provisions of the Constitution concerning the appointment of the Vice President as per Article 108(2) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda; “The President shall, with approval of Parliament by simple majority, appoint a Vice President”. This House will take a vote at the end of the debate on this issue and it shall be by a simple majority. The debate is now open. Hon. Ababiku, there is a point of procedure from hon. Okot.

MR MOSES OKOT: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I must congratulate you for having been elected to the office. Is it procedurally right for the movers of the motion and the seconders to have a plethora of talking about the motion without substantiating it with any evidence? 

We have heard about the qualifications that were brought forward but I am sure that no Member in this House has received Curriculum vitae (CV) of these alleged qualifications.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The Chairperson of this House has all those qualifications.

MR MOSES OKOT: Taking into account that this is a whole House approval that needed such within our disposition.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Okot, as the Chair of the House, I have all the qualifications, that is how we were able to bring this motion on the Floor and I represent you in that.

MR MOSES OKOT: Most obliged.

MR TAYEBWA: Madam Speaker, for clarification, as a matter of courtesy, however late, I gave the CVs of the Prime Minister designate and the Vice President designate to the Leader of the Opposition in Parliament. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The Leader of the Opposition.

11.26
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Mathias Mpuuga): Madam Speaker, I kept silent and kept my peace because I thought, without having to really belittle the quality of my dear colleagues who are nominated, the honourable whip designate is not really being courteous to me. Less than 10 minutes ago, he presented to me a file probably assuming redundancy on my part - sneaking a document on my table - but I thought I should hold my peace because this House is competent enough to listen and process this particular appointment.

I think hon. Bitek had a point; probably Members kept their peace because they thought we could process this but this should not be the manner in which we are going to conduct House business. In addition, as the whip and House takes shape, there should be a lesson that this is not going to be the manner in which we are going to do business, that people come and throw around documents and expect Members to simply nod in approval - that cannot be our method of work, Madam Speaker.

The Government side coming to this House must be prepared. We almost had a problem on the first motion because I believe the mover of the previous motion was shabby and again moved shabbily on this motion. I expect that side to take shape and move with us, with respect. Otherwise, you will be in for a surprise going forward. Please, if you are going to come to this House shabbily like that, be ready for shocks.

Therefore, Madam Speaker, it is a kind invitation to the Right side to put your house in immediate order to work with us. Otherwise, the honourable member had a legitimate point and we are keeping our peace to really see how shabby you are at the moment and how much time you need to put your house in order. We are prepared, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Tayebwa, next time you need to give all the Whips of the Opposition the documents in time.

MR OKUPA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. It is my belief, following what you have stated that you have a copy of the Vice President nominee’s CV; it is proof that they did submit this document to the Clerk. It is the responsibility of the Clerk’s Office to ensure that all members of Parliament get CVs of the Vice President and Prime Minister nominees. We had expected, like we have always seen for the last 21 years I have been here, that they would be distributed in the pigeonholes. 

Madam Speaker, it is not your fault neither is it the Government Side’s fault but a failure of the system of the institution, which must be corrected. 

In addition, I do not want anyone to go with any doubt that my sister, hon. Jessica Alupo, does not have any qualifications or the equivalent. I can categorically state that I studied with her. However, that notwithstanding, Madam Speaker, can you instruct the Clerk to avail some copies to the Members as we proceed with the debate?

MR SSEWUNGU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I think we have to put the records right. I was happy with hon. Fox Odoi when he brought a motion where he was not a beneficiary, as of then. However, is it procedurally okay to have Members masquerading as ministers before they are even vetted? I am hearing hon. Tayebwa is not yet a whip. We know by words and news that he was appointed Chief Government Whip but he has not yet gone through the process –(Interjection) - I am on a procedural matter honourable member.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: He is on procedural matter.

MR SSEWUNGU: The procedural matter I am raising is that I have been in this House as well - at least this is my third term. When we are vetting these people, someone cannot vet them as a whip or a minister. Actually, all those sitting on the front row are masquerading - they are not yet ministers; there is no Prime Minister-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Ssewungu, we are not debating on ministers; the debate is not on ministers. 

MR TUMWEBAZE: Madam Speaker, Members of Parliament are here on the invitation of the Clerk to attend this sitting. Every person is playing his or her role as a Member of Parliament. Is it in order, therefore, for hon. Ssewungu, who stood up purporting to rise on a point of procedure and is blatantly belittling Members that they are masquerading - are you chairing a House of masqueraders? Is he, therefore, in order, Madam Speaker?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I am chairing a House of Members of Parliament. There is no minister in this House. We are only about to approve the Vice-President and the Prime Minister.

Honourable members, I want us to be considerate of COVID-19. Once somebody gives you a paper - COVID-19 does not only pass through other ways but even through the mere papers that you are given. I would implore the Clerk to upload these documents on the intranet. Not all Members have iPads. Therefore, send those documents to all the Members’ WhatsApps. We should not accept even the Order Paper. COVID-19 is more in this Parliament than anywhere.

MR SSEWUNGU: Madam Speaker, as I conclude, I want to put it on record that one of the masqueraders I can assume is hon. Frank Tumwebaze. He has always been driving a ministerial vehicle and yet, his term of office expired.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Ssewungu, can you withdraw your statement that he is masquerading to be a minister because he has not said that he is a minister?

MR SSEWUNGU: Madam Speaker, I saw he came in a ministerial vehicle, yet he is not a minister.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, he is not driving a car in the House.

MR SSEWUNGU: Madam Speaker, what I was saying is that when somebody is presenting a motion, the Backbencher – Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Withdraw the statement; he is not masquerading. 

MR SSEWUNGU: I was saying that he is masquerading outside driving a ministerial vehicle.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No.

MR SSEWUNGU: Madam Speaker, I can withdraw. Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can we move on with the debate? 

MR EKANYA: Madam Speaker, I wish to take this opportunity to congratulate you upon attaining the Office of the Deputy Speaker. I would like to seek your indulgence. The way we are to conduct business in this era – (Interruption)

MR SSEWUNGU: Madam Speaker, the honourable Member on the Floor is an FDC member and hence an Opposition Member. Is it in order for the honourable Member to speak from the NRM side yet he belongs in the Opposition?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Because of COVID-19, it is free sitting. (Laughter)

MR EKANYA: Madam Speaker, I want to thank you very much. However, I would like to seek the indulgence of Members – (Interruption) 

MR SSASAGA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I congratulate you as well. You have well guided the House that the Office of the Clerk uploads the Curriculum Vitae of the Vice-President and Prime Minister on the intranet. If not, upload it on our WhatsApp. Madam Speaker, I have checked my WhatsApp and they have not yet uploaded it. Don’t you think that it would be right that you suspend the House –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: First of all, you are not appropriately dressed for this House. Therefore, whatever you are saying cannot be taken. Members, it is a process to send this.

MR EKANYA: Madam Speaker, I want to seek the indulgence of Members, especially your office. The way we are conducting business is as if we are in a normal environment. Colleagues, COVID-19 is real. I have guests at the airport; they are being tested and you have to wait to get results and the airport is getting congested. 

Schools have been closed, children are sick and business is being affected. We need to change the way we conduct business and then go and help other citizens who are facing difficulties. We cannot continue to conduct business – procedure, technicalities – Madam Speaker, on certain technicalities, the Committee on Rules, Discipline and Privileges must sit and vary them so that we conduct business as if it is a war situation. 

As I speak, we have over 1,000 schools that are on auction. Some owners of these schools like the owner of Mother Manjeri died due to pressure because his school was put on auction. We need a Government in place to take action so that we put the country back to work. Madam Speaker, I beg.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, hon. Ekanya. By the way, for one to be a Vice-President and a Prime Minister, you must have a qualification that allows you to be a Member of Parliament. Because hon. Jessica Alupo was voted as a Member of Parliament, that means she has a qualification to be even the President of this country. Can we continue with the debate? Hon. Ababiku, Hon. Ojara Mapenduzi - Check your WhatsApps, the CVs are there.

11.39
MS JESCA ABABIKU (NRM, Woman Representative, Adjumani): Thank you, Madam Speaker for this opportunity. I want to thank His Excellency the President of the Republic of Uganda for ably performing his mandates by ensuring that our country gets its Cabinet at the rightful time. 

I also want to congratulate those who have been nominated for various positions. I support this motion because first of all, the person appointed is a person that I know, to the best of my knowledge. I have trust and confidence in the person who is supposed to be the Vice President of this country.

Madam Speaker, I know our colleague as a very dedicated, humble, committed and focused person. I want to thank God for giving us our humble leader. Hon. Jessica Alupo, we are proud of you because it is not the first time that you are coming out in public. You have served this country with diligence, and we have highly benefited from your services. Thanks be to God, your parents and His Excellency the President, who has given us your name. Therefore, with your performance record, I highly support this motion. 

As I stand here, I have never heard of a written petition against hon. Jessica Alupo. She worked with us at various levels. She started as a humble teacher, she joined the military, she became a Member of Parliament and a humble farmer in her rural district. She inspired many people in this country.

She became a minister and served us diligently. Therefore, her foot marks can be read by any person. Madam Speaker, ICT has come to help us Google and get more details. Even before we receive information on our iPads and phones, any person can take that initiative. She has a very rich CV. (Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Jesca Ababiku, thank you. Can we have hon. Mapenduzi and then hon. Kivumbi? As I told you, we have another session in the afternoon. You need Cabinet.

11.42
MR OJARA MAPENDUZI (Independent, Bardege-Layibi Division, Gulu City): Thank you. Madam Speaker, permit me to begin by congratulating you upon your successful election as the Deputy Speaker of this Parliament. 

Madam Speaker, I have no doubt in the capabilities of hon. Jessica Alupo. I worked with the Local Government for 15 years and 10 years as the District Chairman of Gulu. The time hon. Alupo was the Minister of Education and Sports, we realised that she was more of a field lady; very committed, traversing the entire country and we saw the level of commitment and determination to make a difference.
       
I am here not to, in any way, paint any picture that would be negative upon her appointment. However, in literature, there is a technique that is used by people to express their frustration in a polite way. That is called sarcasm. For almost two consecutive years, for those who follow stories through social media, on a monthly basis you would see Ugandans posting on Facebook and other social media platforms, reminding Ugandans – they put it in form of an announcement and I would like to quote what they would say. They would say, “This is to remind you that hon. Kiwanuka Ssekandi is still the Vice-President of Uganda”. You would see this continuously on a monthly basis. 

For some of us who passionately follow and try to internalise such communications, it is a way of expressing frustration and showing that Ugandans do not understand certain things. It also means that, probably, that office has some challenges. My hope is that hon. Jessica Alupo will be given the opportunity and the environment she needs, first, to change the face of that office so that Ugandans stop sending that announcement. It is an expression of frustration. People are disappointed. It is my hope that hon. Jessica Alupo will bring something new so that Ugandans can once again become confident and look at that office as a useful office. 

I am very confident that based on the experiences I have had working with hon. Jessica Alupo when she was a minister for education, she is going to do her best to create a big difference in that office. Thank you.

11.46
MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI (NUP, Butambala County, Butambala): Madam Speaker, I congratulate you for having been elected to this office. 

I would like to pick up from where hon. Ekanya left. These are terrible times we are in. For us to sit here and engage in our usual long debate, to which material substance will not change the subject matter, would be – I can predict that the manner we decided on the first motion is the manner in which we will decide on this one –(Laughter)– and there will not be any big substance added, no matter how long we spend here.

May I beg your indulgence, because we are in a COVID-19 situation, that you please put the question? I beg to move –(Interjections)- I move a motion that you put the question because we are facing this COVID-19 situation. 

This is the deputy of the President; if the President wants a lousy Vice-President, it is to his own discord. However, we are going to have big questions during the debate to approve the Prime Minister. This is because the Prime Minister is going to be the Leader of Government Business. I move that you put the question and we move on to the motion to approve the Prime Minister. I beg to move. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, is the motion seconded? 

HON. MEMBER: Madam Speaker, I stand to second the motion.

(Motion seconded)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that hon. Jessica Alupo Rose Epel, Woman Representative of Katakwi District, be approved as the Vice-President of the Republic of Uganda.
(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, as per the motion that was moved by hon. Thomas Tayebwa and seconded by hon. Bakkabulindi, in respect to the appointment of the Vice-President, hon. Alupo is now the Vice-President of the Republic of Uganda. (Applause)

Congratulations to Her Excellency the Vice-President. May I now invite you to make an acceptance speech as the Vice-President of the Republic of Uganda? Hon. Chemaswet, can you take your seat? (Laughter)

11.51
HER EXCELLENCY THE VICE-PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF UGANDA (Ms Jessica Alupo): Madam Speaker and colleagues, Members of Parliament, allow me to use this opportunity to congratulate you, Madam Speaker, on assuming the office of the Chair of the Deputy Speaker of Parliament. Also, allow me to congratulate our brother, the Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah, for assuming the office of the Speaker of the Parliament of the Republic of Uganda. Congratulations!

I would like to sincerely express my gratitude for the support you have shown me, honourable members, by approving me in this Parliament to serve in the second highest office of our country. (Applause) I am very grateful indeed and I do not take it for granted.

I also take this opportunity to sincerely thank the appointing authority for the great confidence he has placed in me with this appointment (Applause). I certainly do not take it for granted. 

In the same vein, Madam Speaker, I would like to thank the NRM party, which I proudly call my home, for bestowing upon me this honour and indeed others before this. 

Most importantly, allow me to thank God for bestowing favour upon me and all of us. I would like to warmly congratulate my colleagues; the honourable ministers designate and the Rt hon. Prime Minister designate for having been identified to serve in those respective positions during this term of office.
I am sure you will be appearing before members of Parliament soon as well and I wish you a pleasant and an enriching -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Madam Vice-President, just some small interruption. We did not announce the results because everybody was excited. Those in favour of Ms Jessica Alupo as Vice-President put up your hands. And those not in favour?

Okay, now that everybody is in favour – oh, we have one person against and so, the ayes have it. Thank you. You can proceed.

MS JESSICA ALUPO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I request to continue from where I ended. I was wishing my colleagues, the honourable ministers designate, a very pleasant and enriching interaction with members of Parliament when they appear before them for approval.

Before I conclude, I also would like to use this opportunity to promise you and the people of Uganda at large that I will not spare any energy in me while serving this country in this appointment and that I will work very closely with them as a team to ensure we serve our country, which we all love dearly, expeditiously.

I also promise that I will work with all people regardless of their political shade, background or views. I pledge to work with all sides in this august House to ensure the NRM manifesto is implemented to the dot, as well as other Government programmes.

Allow me to state that I will recognise the responsibility of the media fraternity while discharging my duties as Vice President.

Finally, kindly allow me to conclude on a note that the time for politicking has come to an end and I am, therefore, counting on each one of you and indeed all Ugandans, regardless whether they supported me or not, as I embark on this very important assignment. 

Thank you, once again. For God and my Country!

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Your Excellency, the Vice-President. Thank you, Members for overwhelmingly supporting the Vice-President. We promise to work with you too. There is an attendance register under the other tent; ensure you all sign.

MOTION SEEKING PARLIAMENTARY APPROVAL OF THE APPOINTMENT OF THE PRIME MINISTER/LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS, IN ACCORDANCE WITH ARTICLE 108(A) CLAUSE 1 OF THE CONSTITUTION OF
THE REPUBLIC OF UGANDA

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The motion is being moved by hon. Chris Baryomunsi and seconded by hon. Betty Amongi, the Member of Parliament for Oyam South.

11.59
DR CHRIS BARYOMUNSI (NRM, Kinkizi County East, Kanungu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I take this opportunity to also congratulate you upon being elected Deputy Speaker. I also congratulate hon. Jacob Oulanyah, upon being elected Speaker. 

I warmly congratulate Her Excellency, Jessica Alupo, upon being confirmed by the House. I also congratulate the Leader of the Opposition, the Chief Opposition Whip and the Members who have been designated to be approved as ministers in the new Government.

I am the Member of Parliament for Kinkizi East in Kanungu District and I am here to move a Motion for a Resolution of Parliament to approve the appointment of hon. Robinah Nabbanja as Prime Minister and Leader of Government Business in Parliament of Uganda. I move under rule 56 of our Rules of Procedure. 

“WHEREAS Article 108(A)(1) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda provides that there shall be a Prime Minister who shall be appointed by the President with the approval of Parliament by a simple majority from among members of Parliament or persons qualified to be elected members of Parliament;

AND WHEREAS under Article 108(A)(2)(a) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, the Prime Minister shall be the Leader of Government Business in Parliament and is responsible for the coordination and implementation of Government policies across ministries, departments and other public institutions and shall perform such other functions, as may be assigned to him or her, by the President or as may be conferred to him or her by the Constitution or by law;

AWARE that His Excellency, the President of the Republic of Uganda has, in exercise of powers, conferred upon him by Article 108(A) appointed hon. Robinah Nabbanja as Prime Minister and Leader of Government Business in Parliament;

NOTING that this appointment is subject to Parliamentary approval as mandated by Article 108(A)(1) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda;

NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved that Parliament, in accordance with Article 108(A)(1) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda approves the appointment of hon. Robinah Nabbanja as Prime Minister and Leader of Government Business in Parliament.” 
I beg to move, Madam Speaker. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Baryomunsi, would you like to speak to your motion and is the motion seconded? It is seconded by hon. Amongi, hon. Frank Tumwebaze, hon. Alum, hon. Mwijukye, hon. Ojara Mapenduzi and hon. Muhanga. Can you speak to your motion Dr Baryomunsi? Hon. Ssewanyana is also seconding.

(Motion seconded)

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. In 2014, hon. Nabbanja invited me to be a chief guest in her constituency.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You have eight minutes.

DR BARYOMUNSI: I told the people of Kakumiro that they had a great leader who was destined for great things. I am not a prophet, neither am I related to one but I am happy to be here, justifying this motion, where our sister, hon. Nabbanja, has been nominated by the President.

The appointment of hon. Nabbanja has caused excitement in the country. Over the weekend, there has been a debate and on the balance of debate, Ugandans have approved her to be the Prime Minister. (Applause)

Madam Speaker, let me briefly give a justification for the motion that I have just moved, for the record of Parliament. Otherwise, the debate has been on and I think Ugandans now understand who hon. Nabbanja is. 

However, for the record of Parliament, allow me to present to you, honourable members, a very dynamic and distinguished citizen of this country in the name of Robinah Nabbanja, who is our colleague, serving as the Woman Representative of Kakumiro District and now designate for Prime Minister and the Leader of Government Business in Parliament.

Hon. Robinah Nabbanja was born in present day Kakumiro District on the 17th day of December 1969, just shortly before Christmas; she was born with blessings. She attended Nkooko Primary School and later joined St. Edwards Secondary School, Buukumi, where she did both O and A-level and obtained the Uganda Certificate of Education and the Uganda Advanced Certificate of Education, respectively.

Hon. Nabbanja later joined Uganda Martyrs University, where she initially obtained a Diploma in Democracy and Development Studies and proceeded and obtained a Bachelor’s Degree of Democracy and Development Studies. She is now completing her Master’s Degree in Monitoring and Evaluation. Hon. Nabbanja is married and has children. 

Madam Speaker, like I said, hon. Nabbanja is a Member of Parliament. She joined this Parliament in 2011, as the Woman MP for the then Kibaale District. Later, when Kibaale was sub-divided, she stood as the Woman Member of Parliament, Kakumiro District in 2016, where she came to Parliament unopposed. She was also recently voted again in January as the Woman Member of Parliament Kakumiro District, where she garnered over 80 per cent of the vote. This shows the people of Kakumiro love her and appreciate the work that she does. 

That is why when you go to Kakumiro, they call her “Honourable Majegere”; a person who moves mountains. This is the person I am presenting to you.

On 14 December 2019, hon. Nabbanja was appointed as a State Minister of Health in charge of General Duties. During her tenure, she waged a war against the sale of Government drugs by health workers in this country and the country appreciates the role she has been playing as the Minister of State for Health.

She made impromptu visits to hospitals during the day and night to curb the habit of extortion of patients in need of services. She directed health workers to put on uniforms while on duty, for ease of identification and she has been very instrumental in ensuring that the Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs) are observed in the era of COVID-19.

I spoke to the health workers in Mulago Hospital. On one side, they were saying, “We have missed our bulldozer as minister but we are happy she is being elevated to the position of Prime Minister”. She has been moving things and I am sure those who have served in the Ministry of Health and are here can testify to this. Even those of us who have been in Parliament know this.

In the Tenth Parliament, she was unanimously elected to serve as a Parliamentary Commissioner. For us who were in that Parliament, we know how she moved things and really represented us very well. 

As a Commissioner, she chaired the Audit Committee of the Parliamentary Commission, where she steered the development of the internal audit and Parliamentary Commission Charters, which were adopted by the Parliamentary Commission.

Earlier on, in the Ninth Parliament, while representing Kibaale District as a Woman Member of Parliament, we elected her to serve as the treasurer of the NRM Parliamentary Caucus here in Parliament; where she planned and budgeted for the NRM Parliamentary Caucus funds and ensured effective and proper accountability for the funds disbursed.

One thing we know about hon. Nabbanja is that she is a no-nonsense, when it comes to corruption, transparency and use of public resources. We want to thank her for that.

Hon. Nabbanja had also earlier served as a member of the African, Caribbean and Pacific - European Union (ACP-EU), where she internationally held the Uganda flag very high. Therefore, you cannot question her diplomatic credentials, when it comes to relating with foreign partners and also ensuring that the foreign policy of this country is implemented. 

Hon. Nabbanja served in various capacities before she came to this House. She was a Resident District Commissioner (RDC) in the districts of Pallisa, Busia Budaka for a period of about ten years. While she served as a Resident District Commissioner in the various districts, she ensured service delivery through monitoring the implementation of Government programmes.

There was a story yesterday in the newspapers that when there was a crisis of fuel in 2007 due to the violence in Kenya, hon. Nabbanja led a team of security officers to go and get free vehicles from deep in Kenya – 100 kilometres inside Kenya – to ensure Uganda gets fuel. That is the kind of leader we are presenting this morning, Madam Speaker.

Hon. Nabbanja had earlier on served as a district councillor for Nkooko Subcounty in Kibaale District at the time. She had also been assigned responsibility of Secretary for Health, Gender and Community Services for the district during that period. She championed a number of legislations at that level in the area, where she was serving.

For instance, she championed the passing of an ordinance on proper hygiene in the community and a number of by-laws, through which the lower local governments endeavoured to guide the district’s processes. So, she is a person who works. Once you give her a responsibility, she discharges it with distinction and excellence. This is why the President was able to choose her among many of us to lead us as the Leader of Government Business.

Hon. Nabbanja is a patriot, a team player and experienced, as you have heard. She will offer leadership to this country as a Prime Minister and the Leader of Government Business, once given this opportunity, as we approve her as Parliament.

Like I have described, she is a Member of Parliament. She has been a Parliamentary Commissioner, served in the local Government and she has been an RDC. What I did not also highlight is that she initially began as a secondary school teacher. So, she is all round. She is not a “top soil” politician but somebody who has been groomed from the grassroots to the level of Member of Parliament, minister and now going to the Prime Minister level. 

Madam Speaker, the appointment of hon. Nabbanja makes it the first time since independence that Uganda is going to get a female Prime Minister and Leader of Government Business in Parliament. (Applause) So, we should be happy that for the first time, the President has identified a woman to be the Prime Minister. For us, the men, we support you, the women, and we ask you to support your own to lead as the Prime Minister. 

Secondly, people have been arguing that she is young. Yes, we are happy that the President has appointed a young woman who was born just 50 years ago. She will act as a bridge between the past and the future, and the young and the old. Therefore, we commend her. I would like to introduce to you, hon. Nabbanja, the young lady before you.

Madam Speaker, I would like to draw reference to the Bible. I beg the indulgence of those who are not Christians. I think the examples I will highlight still remain relevant even if you are not a Christian. There are many examples in the Bible where people got favoured but in the eyes of the public, they seemed not worthy. 

When God chose Moses to go and lead the Israelites out of Egypt, he found Moses tending to the flock of Jethro, his father-in-law. A flame just came up and the voice of God talked to Moses. Moses was afraid, but God gave him the authority and power. He led the Israelites out of slavery into Egypt. You recall when they reached the Red Sea, by the power of God Moses was able to enable these Israelites cross the Red Sea. I am sure, in hon. Nabbanja we shall be able to cross the Red Sea. 

When God chose Jeremiah to be a prophet, Jeremiah was young. He complained that he was young and he did not know how to speak. God, however, comforted him. He told him, “I will give you the words to speak. Do not fear the people you are going to lead.” Indeed, Jeremiah became a very great prophet as we know in the story recorded in the Bible. 

We know that when God sent Prophet Samuel to identify David in the House of Jesse to replace Saul as the king, David was young and he was also scared. God, however, chose him. Even when Saul did not want David to replace him as a king, he eventually became king for over 40 years and he did great work. We also know that in the Bible, the Messiah, for whom we are waiting as Christians, descended from the house of David. 

So, God can do great things. He has done great things through the President of Uganda by identifying hon. Nabbanja to be our Prime Minister for these five years.

As I wind up, I therefore bring to you hon. Nabbanja who will bring into Government energy. She will bring energy to that office of the Prime Minister. She will bring passion in her work. She will bring stamina in her work as the Prime Minister. She will bring ability in that office of the Prime Minister. She will bring vivacity in that office of the Prime Minister.

She is a person who is able to relate well with all stakeholders - both on Government side and also on the side of the Opposition. 
I bring to you hon. Nabbanja, who will bring integrity and ethics in that office of the Prime Minister. She is a person who is altruistic, who goes forward to work for others, and a person – (Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can we have the seconder. 

DR BARYOMUNSI: Madam Speaker, just the last words. She is a person who relates very well with everybody. She has good mobilisation skills. She is a person who is reliable, dependable and whom all of us shall support to be successful as the Leader of Government Business in Parliament. 

Madam Speaker, I beg to move. Thank you. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Dr Baryomunsi. Can I now invite hon. Amongi to second the motion. 

12.18
MS BETTY AMONGI (UPC, Oyam County South, Oyam): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Let me also start by congratulating you, the Speaker, the Leader of the Opposition and the party Whips for taking leadership in Parliament. Let me also congratulate my sister, the Vice-President, Her Excellency Alupo, for the overwhelming approval she got from the House to be the Vice-President. Congratulations, your Excellency.

Let me start by thanking His Excellency the President for not only appointing a Vice-President and Prime Minister who are women, but also for the first time in the history of the country, appointing strategically over 40 per cent of women to the Cabinet, including the Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development-designate. I would like to congratulate the women of this country. We could not have been better at this stage.

Madam Speaker, I am proud to second this motion as a woman. I am proud that hon. Nabbanja will be the first female Prime Minister in the history of this country since independence. What does this show? What is the significance of this appointment? That is what I would like to dwell on.

Firstly, Article 33 of the Constitution talks about affirmative action. This affirmative action was not meant for those who have the means to go to the good schools like Gayaza High School and others. The affirmative action was meant to raise the girl child from the grassroots to the table of decision-making of this country.

Today, we are seeing Article 33, which gave the women of this country space to be in decision-making, being achieved by these two women seated here. I would like to congratulate you for making the dividend of affirmative action to be realised today. That is why I need to thank the appointing authority. 

What is the other significance of this appointment? The debate has been about “Where has she studied? Where has she been? What has she done? What is her qualification?” Over 60 per cent of the people of this country start from the grassroots! The majority of us seated here were brought – (Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let us have the point of order. Please mention your name. 

MR KAMARA: I am raising a point of order. Is it in order for an honourable member to stand here, in these days of COVID-19, and start repeating what Dr Baryomunsi has said? (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I remember that when we were in Kyankwanzi for training, the President said, “You spend all the time in Parliament on points of order and information”. Let us debate as per the Rules of Procedure. 

MS AMONGI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. This nominee is significant to the struggles of many Ugandans out there. Ugandans are hardworking people. Ugandans are hustlers. They start from the grassroots, whether it is in business or agriculture and you will find a Ugandan from Kikuubo trading in China. You will find Ugandans in Dubai and everywhere in this country because they have risen from the grassroots, have hustled and have succeeded.

Rt Hon. Nabbanja, as you have heard from hon. Dr Chris Baryomunsi, her CV starts right from the grassroots; a teacher, councillor, secretary at the district has risen from the way a typical Uganda succeeds and now is here. She is a true reflection of a Ugandan. Uganda will have a Prime Minister who reflects them and knows their problems, understands them and knows what to do for the over 60 per cent of Ugandans.

Madam Speaker, she is an inspiration to very many girl-children out there and many Ugandans who are struggling; they will say, “If hon. Nabbanja can be a Prime Minister from a school teacher, then I can work hard and I will also make it.” 

I would like to tell you that for the time I have worked with hon. Nabbanja, she is a mobiliser, knows what to do and the Office of the Prime Minister is not a magical office. What do you need to have to be a Prime Minister? First of all, you have to understand the vision and mission of your appointing authority. Do we doubt that hon. Nabbanja does not understand the vision and mission of His Excellency, the President? We do not doubt.
 
Secondly, she must understand the contract that her party made with the people of Uganda. Do we doubt that she does not understand the manifesto of her party? I do not think we doubt that. The ability to coordinate us Members of Parliament with the Executive; do we doubt that hon. Nabbanja will not listen to you, whether you are an NRM, FDC, UPC, or DP? She is a person who will listen to everybody.

She is a person who will coordinate Government business, manage and coordinate all the ministries to bring resources – (Member timed out_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Please conclude.

MS AMONGI: I conclude by requesting the honourable members to approve the appointment of hon. Nabbanja as the Prime Minister of Uganda. I second the motion. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I put the question for debate that Parliament resolves to approve the nomination of hon. Nabbanja as the Prime Minister and Leader of Government Business in the Parliament of the Republic of Uganda. 

Honourable members, let us restrict ourselves to the constitutional provision concerning the appointment of the Prime Minister under Article 108(A) and at the end of the day, we will take a vote on this by show of hands. The debate is open. 

MR CHEMASWET: Madam Speaker, there was a first motion that had been moved by hon. Tayebwa, which was a substantive motion on the approval of the Vice-President. Then, there was a subsidiary motion that was moved by hon. Kivumbi on putting the question considering the fact that COVID-19 is a serious pandemic to the Republic of Uganda. 

What is the difference? Within the context of the two motions, we would be looking at the question of COVID-19 as an item that is so grievous in this country.

Therefore, Madam Speaker, I would like you to put a question to the motion that had been moved on the approval of the Prime Minister. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that the motion that has been put forward because of the COVID-19 pandemic and what has been spoken about the Prime Minister and Leader of Government Business, that we put the question that the debate is closed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I now put the question that hon. Robinah Nabbanja, the District Representative of Kakumiro, be approved as the Prime Minister and Leader of Government Business in the Parliament of the Republic of Uganda?

(Question put and agreed to.)
 
MR SSEWUNGU: Madam Speaker, this matter is bipartisan -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Ssewungu, you are the ones who brought a motion; I had allowed everybody to debate and you said that because of the COVID-19 pandemic, we should follow the procedure that we had gone through. We put it to vote and the “ayes” took it.

MR SSEWUNGU: Madam Speaker, the procedural matter I am raising is simple. I heard hon. Muwanga Kivumbi very well. He said that when it comes to the Prime Minister, there should be a debate. None of us - I have not seen any of us -(Interjection)- I am on procedure. Hon. Kaducu - a former nun - first listen to me. Let us learn Parliament - and if you did not learn, go back for induction. 

Madam Speaker, the procedural matter I am raising is that we are not against the Prime Minister but it is practice and even within the rules that once a Prime Minister is appointed, there is an open debate for him or her because she is going to work with us. Let us not get excited because we love hon. Nabbanja – (Interjection) - I love her more than you do, by the way. She is even Catholic, if you do not know that.

Therefore, would it be procedurally okay that you open a debate of two minutes for every Member to say something about the Prime Minister? We are not attacking her but will you say that Parliament will be adjourned because of –

The Deputy Speaker: Order, hon. Ssewungu. Can I have order in the House? Allow me to chair. Please, sit.  A motion was brought and it has been passed. The “Ayes” had it. Now, by show of hands, how many of you are in support of the motion? How many are not in support?
 
(Members voted by show of hands.)

The Deputy Speaker: The motion was brought in support that we should not debate this motion because of the pandemic and the previous motion that we had passed and that we should still pass this the same way. How many supported that motion? How many did not support it? 

(Members voted by show of hands.)

The Deputy Speaker: The “Ayes” have it

Honourable members, I now put the question that hon. Robinah Nabbanja, the District Woman Representative for Kakumiro, be approved as the Prime Minister and Leader of Government Business of the Republic of Uganda. Those in favour, vote by show of hands - we have three hands up for those against the motion. 

We have registered 293 Members of Parliament; 290 are in favour of the motion and three are against it.

(Question put and agreed to.)

The Deputy Speaker: 292 Members were in favour of the motion for the Vice President and one was against it. 

I wish to congratulate the hon. Prime Minister and Leader of Government Business. May I invite you to make an acceptance speech if you so wish. Thank you, hon. Minister and congratulations.

12.36
rT HON. robinah nabbanja (NRM, Woman Representative, Kakumiro):  Your Excellency the Vice-President, Rt Hon. Speaker, the Hon. Leader of the Opposition, Ministers Designate and honourable colleagues.

First and foremost, I thank God for the gift of life and the opportunity He has given me through His Excellency the President, to serve the people of Uganda as Prime Minister. (Applause)

I thank the people of Uganda for repeatedly entrusting our President, His Excellency Gen. Yoweri Kaguta Museveni Tibuhaburwa and the National Resistance Movement (NRM) with the mandate to lead this country. I strongly believe that with the vision that God has given us to embark on socio-economic transformation, the future of Ugandans will be secured.

Allow me to congratulate you, Madam Speaker and our Vice-President Maj. Jesca Alupo for your appointment. We are truly proud of you as the second Female Vice-President in the history of this country.

Let me take the opportunity to congratulate our brother the Rt Hon. Speaker, Jacob Oulanyah and you honourable colleagues for having been elected and sworn in to serve in the 11th Parliament.

I do not take for granted the trust His Excellency the President and you honourable colleagues have put in me. I know that it requires hard work, commitment, humility, patience and teamwork. I request all of you for your support and Prayers as we embark on this journey.

Allow me to thank you for considering and overwhelmingly approving my appointment as the first female Prime Minister and Leader of Government Business in the history of our country. I am truly humbled. Thank you. 

To the people of Kakumiro District and greater Kibaale, thank you for electing me to the Ninth, 10th and now 11th Parliament, which has given me an opportunity and exposure to serve my country at national level.

Allow me to thank my predecessor, the Rt Hon. Dr Ndugu Ruhakana Rugunda for His exemplary leadership. I will carry on the work he and other predecessors have been doing and build on their successes for the good of our country.

I commit to build on the foundation laid by my predecessors. This will be done through:

Strengthening the link between the Executive and Parliament,
Ensuring availability of Government Business in Parliament on time,
Together with the Government Chief Whip, we shall ensure, this time round, that the ministers regularly attend Parliament.

I pledge to work with fellow ministers and you honourable colleagues to ensure that the NRM Manifesto is effectively implemented especially transforming a good percentage of the 3.3 million households still in subsistence economy into money economy.

Fellow leaders, Ugandans expect and are yearning for quality service delivery from Government. This, we can achieve if we put our minds together and focus on timely implementation of Government Projects and programs.

The priorities of Government are clear and are well spelt out in the Vision 2040, the Third National Development Plan and the NRM Manifesto. I appeal to all of us to focus on what is good for this country as we implement this agenda.

As you are already aware, COVID-19 remains one of the greatest challenges today. I appeal to you fellow Ugandans to keep safe by observing the Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs) and guidelines set by the Ministry of Health together with the Head of State. We can only say we have achieved when we are all alive.

Leadership is a gift from God. Through teamwork, transparency and accountability, together we shall secure the future of Ugandans. I would like to assure you. I count on you for support across the political divide to make this happen.

For God and my Country.  I thank you. (Applause)


THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Congratulations, Rt Hon. Prime Minister. Honourable members, I would like to thank you for the work you have done today in this House and for performing your responsibility as Members of Parliament. I wish to congratulate hon. Alupo and hon. Nabbanja who have this morning been approved as Vice-President and Prime Minister respectively. Congratulations.

I would like to remind the members of the Appointments Committee that we have a meeting this afternoon at 2.00 p.m. in Conference Hall A, where we are going to approve the ministers.

As you go out there, I want to remind you to take care of yourselves because COVID-19 is real.

MR KIVUMBI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. You have just communicated that the Appointments Committee is going to sit this afternoon. I would like to move under rule 59 (1)(d) - motion without notice. It says, “The following motions may be moved without notice- 
(d) Motion for the suspension of any rule of procedure.”

Madam Speaker, I would also like to go to Rule 165(2), which says, “Proceedings of the Committee on Appointments shall be closed.” I would like to move that this rule be suspended so that proceedings of the Committee on Appointments are in public. 

We have just approved the Vice-President and the Prime Minister in public. Government ministers, for long, have been approved in darkness. It is the only committee where even Members of Parliament are not permitted to enter or follow proceedings. 

In addition, you are aware that upon completion of that process, you only come to Parliament to announce the results of your process without debate. The only way the country can know the quality of ministers that this country is going to have is to ensure that proceedings of this committee are open.

Madam Speaker, I am moving a motion to suspend rule 165(2) so that the proceedings - and it will be a milestone under your leadership – of the Appointments Committee while vetting Government ministers is done in the open. In that way, those who qualify to deliver services will be are clearly known and the public will know. 

I beg that the Prime Minister now, who is the Leader of Government Business, supports us on this, so that you lead a team whose competence, quality and qualifications the public knows. 

There is no harm in being open. We are in an era to deepen democracy and this will be a milestone for this Parliament if we suspend this rule so that the people of Uganda can know that proceedings of Parliament regarding appointments are open. I beg to move, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Members, this is a substantive matter that has long been debated and it is the Parliament that approved it - the seniors of this Parliament. All along, you have not allowed the proceedings to be in the open. 

However, at the same time, in those closed proceedings you realise that there are some Members who have been thrown out because of academic papers. I would request, for now - because it would require debate of the House – that we suspend these rules. I do not see any reason why a Member of Parliament is denied to go and attend that committee.

If you have issues as acting Leader of the Opposition, come. I will be there, but it will not be open to the public. By the way, a Member of Parliament is not public.

MR KIVUMBI: Madam Speaker, when they say the proceedings are closed, they are even closed to Members who are not members of the committee.

Secondly, Madam Speaker, we follow East African Community protocols and East African parliaments no longer proceed with appointments in darkness. I do not know for how long this will happen here.

Every Parliament, ideally, should be able to make its own Rules of Procedure. However, that not being the case, we just believe that this motion will mark a new day for democracy and openness in the way Parliament goes about the duty of appointment.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Members of Parliament, whoever wants to attend the Appointments Committee, so long as we observe standard operating procedures, please come and attend.

MR KIVUMBI: What about the media?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Why would you open your house to the media?

MR KIVUMBI: This is not a house, Madam. This is a public institution. My house is a private institution and I believe being open means doing things in the open. This will be a new day for Uganda and it is what Ugandans have been crying for. 

Madam Speaker, I still stand by motion and pray that it is substantively debated. In addition, I will not care if it goes on record that there are Members of Parliament in the 11th Parliament that want to operate in that manner. I request that we debate it and subject it to a vote.

MR BASALIRWA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The procedural issue I seek to raise relates to the motion that has been moved by -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The motion should first wait because it was smuggled in. 

The Ministry of Health requires those who wish to take the COVID-19 vaccine to register with the Clerk to Parliament immediately. The Minister of Health will then determine the need and the Members will be informed where they will be vaccinated from. Please, continue.

MR BASALIRWA: Madam Speaker, now that there is a motion on the Floor, I seek your indulgence to guide on whether we can proceed to have it seconded and debated, so that it is shot down on the Floor and not nipped in the bud at its infancy. Madam 
Madam Speaker, I am ready to second this motion, if you give guidance.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I have not yet asked for secondment.

12.52
MR BARNABAS TINKASIIMIRE (NRM, Buyaga West County, Kagadi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Before I submit on the matter on the Floor of the House, I want to congratulate the Vice President and the Prime Minister and to thank the honourable Members who have stood with us, the people of Bunyoro. In the history of this country, she is the 11th Prime Minister and no one had ever come from Bunyoro region. What else do we need from you? We have been standing with you, you have showed a good touch and on behalf of the people of Bunyoro, I want to thank you very much.

Concerning the matter on the Floor of the House, whereas I agree that there should be openness and that we want to deepen democracy, we must also understand what is prevailing in the country. We are saying that we are only allowing 20 people to enter in the churches. Already, the Appointments Committee only from our side, are more than 20. If you add from other parties, we are talking of between 33 and 35 people. 

Through your ruling, you have waived and said those Members who have interest - as members of Parliament - can come in. You are going to see the number increase to 50. If we open it to the public, the number will be too big and the risk will be increased.

All said and done, we have a culture in this country that when people are going to sit for interviews, they carry briefcases embedded with their CVs and original academic papers. They sit before a panel, which I think in the case of Parliament, is the Appointments Committee. I have not seen anywhere, where the press is inside. 

Therefore, we should not set a precedent as of today. Maybe, when we change the Rules, we can go that way but not to suspend the rules today, simply, in the face of COVID-19, when we have a serious threat. I deeply sympathise with my honourable colleague. He knows how much I would love to see those who have not gone to school panicking with their CVs from Nasser and Nkrumah Road. 

However, in the face of COVID-19, how many people do we want to bury? I beg to submit, Madam Speaker.

12.56
DR JOYCE MORIKU (NRM, Woman Representative, Moyo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Allow me to thank and congratulate the Vice President and the Prime Minister. I thank my colleagues, for entrusting and giving them the mandate to exercise their duties for this country. 

Concerning the issue at hand, on this Floor of Parliament, indeed looking at our Rules of Procedure - Rule No.7 - the general authority of the Speaker. Rule No. 7(5) reads, “The Speaker may decline debate on any contribution.” Since the Speaker made it very clear that the members of the Appointments Committee to go for that meeting, I think that as members of Parliament, we cannot overrule the authority of the Speaker, when it is clearly stated in our Rules of Procedure. 

Having said that, Madam Speaker, allow me to remind colleagues and Members of Parliament that today is the maiden day for our Rt Hon. Speaker. This is her first sitting and her maiden chairing the House, having been elected to that Office. For that matter, Madam Speaker, allow me to congratulate you and thank you for chairing the House in a manner that really - this very important agendas in our – (Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, under our Rules of Procedure, there is what we call conflict of interest. If you have conflict of interest, you must always declare it in advance. That is why you are seeing people running away from openness; I think this is because of their conflict of interest.  

Is it procedurally right for a member to come and cry on a microphone that Madam Speaker, you have been appointed, now, she is bribing her in advance so that when you see her, you do not look at her papers? Is she procedurally right to come and make noise here in the House instead of saying that she has interest in the matter before the House?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members of Parliament, with due respect, this debate is a controversial one. All we can do, first, we have a very confident team in the Appointments Committee. 

Where a leader from the Opposition wants to come and attend a particular verification of somebody or vetting of a particular minister, with my permission, we will allow you to enter. I want to suspend this debate and I am adjourning this House sine die. Thank you.

(The House rose at 1.00 p.m. and adjourned sine die.) 
