Wednesday, 16 March 2016

Parliament met at 3.14 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I would like to welcome you to this afternoon’s sitting. I also would like to thank those who stayed yesterday to do quite a bit of work. 

Let us start by welcoming teachers and students of Ndejje Senior Secondary School. Can you stand up? They are represented by hon. Khiddu Makubuya and hon. Brenda Nabukenya from Luwero District. You are welcome. (Applause) 

Hon. Alaso had a small problem, which she wanted to address.

3.16
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman Representative, Serere): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. The issue I would like to raise concerns the security of the people who I represent in this Parliament.

We had an election, which can best be described as terrible or no election at all. However, that is beside the point. The point I would like to make is, from the time we concluded the elections, my people continue to be harassed by the RDC and the DPC of Serere who should be protecting them. What is going on now is that people who are perceived or known to be my supporters or ordinarily FDC leaders in the area are being framed. They are referred to as rebels. Whenever they want to point out somebody and label them as a rebel planning to overthrow Government, they pick an FDC supporter. 

I think it is very unacceptable for people to be persecuted for supporting a different political party. Even when the person you support has lost, I ordinarily thought that those who won or lost should be magnanimous enough to accommodate those who are now seeking comfort and peace of mind. However, that is not what is happening in Serere. Only yesterday, they rounded up two of my agents in Kateta, Jafali Omadi and Calvin Oceu, and framed them as rebels. Surely, nobody can conduct a rebellion in a place as open as Serere and the eye of the state does not see it.

I would like to ask the Minister of Internal Affairs - my sister - and the Minister of Security to help us and probably get to the ground and ask the people who are manning security matters in that place to stop framing people. We feel extremely insecure. I might have to bring a few of my agents to camp here in Parliament for their personal security because they cannot sleep in their houses anymore.

Madam Speaker, that is what I would like to raise, and that is the request I would like to make to Government. Thank you. 

3.20
MS BEATRICE ANYWAR (FDC, Woman Representative, Kitgum): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. We have disturbing news about the destruction of Nyimbwa Forest, which is situated in Luwero District. About 160 hectares have already been earmarked for destruction because the local council made a resolution to the effect that Nyimbwa Forest should be given away to pave way for industrial development. 

Madam Speaker, we have procedures, which we have set to save the forests in this country. It will be sad to allow a resolution of a local council quickly destroy the existing forests. Moreover, we have just committed ourselves in Paris to save our motherland from climate change effects. 

We would like to bring to the attention of Government the pending destruction of Nyimbwa Forest in Luwero. Is Government aware of this plot? If they are aware, don’t they know that we have procedures, which must be followed to de-gazette an existing forest? Moreover, we have an obligation globally to conserve the environment. I would like this to come to light immediately to save this forest. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Is the honourable Minister of Internal Affairs ready to comment now or she needs time?

3.22
THE MINISTER OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Ms Rose Akol): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity to respond to the issues raised by my sister, hon. Alaso, regarding the security situation in Serere and continued harassment of the people there.

Madam Speaker, at this point, I can commit myself to request the Regional Police Commander (RPC) together with his team to go and evaluate the cases that have been reported to police and also talk to the people there. 

They will also get in touch with the honourable Member of Parliament so that these allegations, which are being made, can be looked into. I will talk to the RPC and request him to get in touch with the honourable member so that the truth comes out. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The issue of security is a very serious matter and it is not only in Serere but all over the country. One cannot move in this country freely at night. You find soldiers everywhere; there is even a garrison at Kololo Airstrip. 

Can the minister, therefore, come to this House and tell Ugandans if the security situation is not under control? We have heard the President saying that nobody can disrupt security in this country. We foresee him addressing the nation in a cave. What does that mean? It means that there is trouble in this country and you must come up with a statement to address the situation and to tell Ugandans what the security situation is like at present.

THE SPEAKER: The Minister of Environment. Can we ask the Prime Minister to ensure that the ministers come here because this is the only remaining forest and we are destroying it to create industries? I think that is a serious matter, so please ask the ministers to come and make a statement on this issue next week.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON GOVERNMENT INTERVENTION TO COMBAT HEPATITIS B

THE SPEAKER: The Minister of Health. Let us go to the next item.

MS ALASO: Madam Speaker, I am a bit disturbed by the continuous absence of the ministers of health. The situation concerning hepatitis B in this country is terrible. There are more people getting infected everyday yet there is no sensitisation going on. Moreover, this is a statement that we began asking for around June last year and it has not come. I think it is really unacceptable. 

This House must pronounce itself in condemning the attitude of that ministry to this very important issue. This is about people’s lives and it is about our watchdog role. We have appropriated money but Government does not want to come and explain what has happened to the money.

Madam Speaker, would it be wrong if I therefore concluded – There has been talk in the corridors that the money was eaten and the vaccines were not bought. If we wait for a minister for four consecutive times, – the Speaker keeps calling up a particular minister to come and give an explanation and the minister is not coming – I think this House would not be wrong to conclude that the money has been eaten up and the vaccines are not forthcoming. As such, Ugandans should give up or probably ask the Auditor-General to carry out a specific audit of that money. Maybe that will help because this is not acceptable, in my view.

MR SSEWUNGU: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for calling us to come here because we have to conduct our business. You see, the situation is different on the other side because there are two different categories. There are those who never stood and there are ministers who lost and all these were not invited to Kyankwanzi. However, there are also those ministers who won and are in Kyankwanzi, and the Minister of Health is among them.

Madam Speaker, procedurally I do not know how we are going to handle this situation, unless there is delegated authority among those members who might have lost unwillingly or who are here under any other circumstances. Therefore, I would ask you to guide us on this procedural matter. Some of the Members here, like hon. Tarsis Kabwegyere and the Minister of East African Community Affairs, are ex officio members. A majority of the Members of the Frontbench, especially those who won, cannot be here because of the party’s decision.

Government must continue to run despite the fact that there are activities taking place in Kyankwanzi. If as the Chief Whip of DP I choose to take my members and FDC also takes theirs, work will be paralysed. Hepatitis B is killing people not only in Serere and Kalungu but in other parts of Uganda as well but Kyankwanzi has taken centre stage. Therefore, are we proceeding well? Some of those ministers are not happy. (Laughter) I know that because I am their close friend.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members and my dear Member from that side, you know an election is risky business in which you can win or lose. I think it is not fair for you to continuously open the wounds on that issue of losing an election. Secondly, whether they lost or not, they are Members of Parliament until May; they are still on duty. 

However, honourable minister, there are three ministers in the Ministry of Health. It is several months since we asked for this statement and hepatitis B is ravaging the country and even the region. Therefore, we need answers urgently, especially about the distribution. When is the next dose coming? Please, direct your subordinates to come and answer on Tuesday.

MS ANYWAR: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I stand on a point of procedure. This House, which you are ably presiding over, is in session. We finished our elections and got an invitation to come and do business in the House. Is it procedurally right that our colleagues on the other side decide to go for a retreat yet we have a lot of pending business before our term ends? Can’t those people be called back so that we finish with our business and then they can go back for their retreat? Thank you.

3.31
MS JOY ONGOM (Independent, Woman Representative, Lira): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The issue of hepatitis B has appeared on the Order Paper for more than three times. The second time it appeared, the minister was around and you instructed her to come with the report. Up to now, we do not see her. 

Madam Speaker, I suggest that you give a deadline to the ministers so that we can get that report. We are not supposed to come, sit here and go back without getting reports. Our electorate need a report on hepatitis B. We budgeted for it and money was availed.

Madam Speaker, it is not only hepatitis B; we budgeted for the SAGE programme as well. The donors wanted to pull out because Government was not putting in any money. Parliament appropriated Shs 11 billion to support SAGE but up to now, we do not know about the implementation of SAGE. Can you believe that when we went for elections, the technocrats used the money! What is that?

When we appropriate money, we know what money is in the budget. I think the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should assure this House as to whether they are releasing funds or not. In fact, issues of SAGE and hepatitis B are the reasons why many of the Members of Parliament lost their seats. This is because we promised the voters and told them that we put the money in the budget but there is no implementation. Can you assure us, honourable minister? Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Let us hear from the Office of the Prime Minister.

3.33
THE MINISTER, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (GENERAL DUTIES) (Prof. Tarsis Kabwegyere): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Two things are very clear: one, we have had elections and the party that won is preparing to take over the state machinery again and that is not a small matter. We all know that the new MPs are sharing views on how to move – (Interruption)  

MS ANYWAR: Madam Speaker, I rise on a point of order. We have been discussing issues concerning the people who voted us into this House. We are aware that the elections have ended and as I said earlier, the business of this House has resumed. 

Is the honourable minister in order to disregard the directives of one of the arms of Government to do business by trying to insinuate that they are still preparing after the win they had and yet they are aware that Parliament is mandated to do its work? Is he in order to continue disregarding the work that we do as Parliament, which is part of Government business? 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, when I received the information that the newly elected Members would be going away, I found that okay because they have not been sworn in. My understanding was that the sitting MPs would be here. (Applause) I am equally caught up in this; I am looking around but I do not see Members and yet the bulk of the work is for the Government. 

We are in the budget period and yesterday, we gave the Government a deadline. Even if I wanted to, I could not leave because we had set a deadline in the Public Finance Management Act for the policy statements to come here so that they are sent to the committees.

MR KWIZERA: May I seek some clarification from the Prime Minister? If the induction is for the new Members of Parliament, shall we have an induction for Members of Parliament who have been around for 20 years? Is that an induction?

Secondly, the Government is there and it is functioning. There are three ministers in the ministry and all of them have been there for more than 10 years. Why can’t they be here for the Government to function? We are going to pass the budget but there are no people here and hepatitis B is “finishing” people. Being in Kyankwanzi should not disable Government. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Prime Minister, Prof. Kabwegyere, we have a deadline to have the Appropriations Bill by 28 April. This disruption is really causing problems. I would have wanted the committees to start work today or tomorrow because we really have a very tight deadline.

PROF. KABWEGYERE: I thank you, Madam Speaker. You are in charge of this House and it is within your powers to call Parliament and direct Members to come back. If it is within your powers to do so, then do so. I am sure you know where the Members of Parliament who are not here today are – (Interruption)

MR NIWAGABA: Madam Speaker, I am at a loss of words when I hear a senior Member of this House, who has been in Parliament since I was in P.3, stand up and say, “If the Rt Hon. Speaker is in charge of this House…” In effect, this places doubt on the powers of the Speaker. Is Prof. Tarsis Kabwegyere in order to doubt and put into contempt the powers of the Speaker? 

THE SPEAKER: You should not question the powers of the Speaker because they are in our rules and everybody should know them.

Prof. Kabwegyere, we have a standing agreement with the Government that if there is work, at least one of those ministers should be here. I am therefore directing that at least one of the three ministers in that ministry comes to attend the House because this is your business; this is your work. Prof. Kabwegyere, do you want to say something?

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Madam Speaker, the second point was on hepatitis B. I am pledging that I will have something to say to this House tomorrow on that matter.

THE SPEAKER: Okay.  

LAYING OF PAPERS

MINISTERIAL POLICY STATEMENTS FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2016/2017

3.40
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PUBLIC SERVICE (Ms Mbaguta Sezi): Madam Speaker, in accordance with section 13(13) of the Public Finance Management Act, 2015, I wish to lay on the Table the policy statement for the Ministry of Public Service, vote 005, and the Public Service Commission, vote 146. I beg to lay.

THE SPEAKER: They are sent to the sectoral committee for perusal and report back. There is the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development for items No. 4 (A) (II) - the Financial Intelligence Authority vote.

3.41
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (General Duties) (Mr Fred Omach): Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, I beg to lay on the Table the policy statement for vote 129, Financial Intelligence Authority, for the financial year 2016/2017. (Interruption)

MS CECILIA OGWAL: Madam Speaker, the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development has just told the House that he is laying on the Table a policy statement for the financial year 2016/2017. May I know under what law he is laying that policy statement on the Table because I am aware that by law, the statement should have been laid latest yesterday, the 15th of the month?

May I know under what law he is laying this policy statement on the Table? Is he therefore in order to act illegally, moreover in Parliament? Is he in order as a finance minister to breach his own law? 

THE SPEAKER: Can the minister explain the circumstances under which he is here today? (Laughter)

MR OMACH: Madam Speaker, I have already laid it on the Table under section 13(13) of the Public Finance Management Act, 2015. 

MS CECILIA OGWAL: Madam Speaker, can the minister read the section that he has just quoted for our information? What does that section say? For the purposes of the Hansard, you have to read it because the Speaker is not going to allow the minister to act illegally with the approval of Parliament. 

We make these laws so that we can streamline the operations and governance of this country. These ministers have been in the country and hon. Omach is holding the portfolio of finance and he is not alone. Yesterday, the Speaker kept on calling for the policy statements to be laid on the Table by 5 o’clock. We were here up to 7 o’clock but the minister did not turn up. Now you are coming a day after and you want us to agree with you to break the law. Is this minister in order? - (Interjections) - Can the minister read the section, which he has just quoted? 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, as you recall, our colleague told us last week that he had gone to “Masaka” and within our rules, we provide for extension of time as we take into account all those circumstances. We will permit the minister to lay the policy statement on the Table. 

MR OMACH: Madam Speaker, I do apologise – (Applause) - for not laying this policy statement on the Table yesterday. As you recall, we lost a very senior member of society, the late Chris Kassami, so we went for burial. 

Now, with the permission of the Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the Financial Intelligence Authority policy statement, vote 129, for the financial year 2016/17 in the presence of all of you.

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, for the record, for the people who will be reading the Hansard in the future, hon. Cecilia Ogwal, the acting Leader of the Opposition, asked the minister to read the section. The minister said section 15 but he has not read it and yet we know what that section is about. So, that leaves the question unanswered because those who will be reading the Hansard might think that is the section which stipulates that all policy statements should have been laid on the Table by yesterday. 

What the minister has said can stand for that. I think let him withdraw that statement and the apology is taken. Otherwise, there is a mix up which affects consistency and understanding for those who will be reading the Hansard in the future.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, just correct the statement and move on.

MR OMACH: Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table - without referring to the section of the law.

THE SPEAKER: The policy statements are sent to the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development to peruse and report back expeditiously. I understand the Ministry of Works and the Ministry of Internal Affairs have sent in their policy statements.

3.48
THE MINISTER OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Ms Rose Akol): Thank you, Madam Speaker.  I beg to lay on the Table the ministerial policy statement for the Ministry of Internal Affairs for vote 009, internal affairs headquarters; vote 120, National Citizenship and Immigration Control; vote 144, Uganda Police Force; vote 145, Uganda Prisons Service; and vote 305, Government Analytical Laboratory. 

THE SPEAKER: The reports are sent to the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs to peruse and report back.

MS AKOL: Madam Speaker, I also beg to lay on the Table the policy statement for the Ministry of Works and Transport for financial year 2016/17 under vote 016; vote 113, Uganda National Roads Authority; vote 118, Uganda Road Fund; and vote 500, local government. 

THE SPEAKER: Local government is under which ministry? What is that document you are laying?

MS AKOL: Madam Speaker, I first laid on the Table the policy statement for Ministry of Internal Affairs and later for Ministry of Works, but on behalf of the minister who is not around. He requested me to lay that policy statement on the Table on his behalf.

THE SPEAKER: But you also spoke about local Government; that is what caught my attention. 

MS AKOL: Madam Speaker, the abbreviation is LG, vote 500.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the policy statements are sent to the relevant committees for expeditious perusal and report back.

MS AKOL: Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the ministerial policy statement for financial year 2016 for the Ministry of Defence. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, is that all for now? 

3.53
MR WILLIAM NOKRACH (NRM, PWD representative, Northern): Madam Speaker and members, I beg to lay on the Table reports and opinion thereon of the Auditor-General on the financial statements for the year ended 30 June 2014 for the following district local governments:
i) 	Kapchorwa District Local Government
ii) 	Kibuku District Local Government
iii) 	Kween District Local Government
iv) 	Mbale District Local Government
v) 	Pallisa District Local Government
vi) 	Kyankwanzi District Local Government 
vii) 	Bududa District Local Government
viii) 	Tororo District Local Government
ix) 	Kiboga District Local Government
x) 	Bulambuli District Local Government
xi) 	Mbale Regional Referral Hospital
xii) 	Mubende Regional Referral Hospital
xiii) 	Masaka Regional Referral Hospital
xiv) 	Mbarara Regional Referral Hospital
xv) 	Kabale District Local Government
xvi) 	Kamwenge District Local Government
xvii) 	Manafwa District Local Government
xviii) 	Bukwo District Local Government
xix) 	Budaka District Local Government
xx) 	Kanungu District Local Government
xxi) 	Kiruhura District local Government
xxii) 	Sironko District Local Government
xxiii) 	Busia District Local Government

I beg to lay.

Madam Speaker, I also beg to lay on the Table reports and opinion of the Auditor-General on the financial statements for the year ended 30 June 2014 for the following town councils and municipal councils: 
i) 	Sironko Town Council
ii) 	Kyotera Town Council
iii) 	Masaka Municipal Council
iv) 	Lukaya Town Council
v) 	Kalangala Town Council
vii) 	Lwengo Town Council
vii) 	Malaba Town Council
viii) 	Kapchorwa Town Council
ix) 	Mityana Town Council
x) 	Bulambuli Town Council
xi) 	Budadiri Town Council
xii) 	Kibuku Town Council
xiii) 	Kiruhura Town Council
xiv) 	Bududa Town Council
xv) 	Katooke Town Council
xvi) 	Katuna Town Council
xvii) 	Rwimi Town Council
xviii) 	Bundibugyo Town Council
xix) 	Busolwe Town Council
xx) 	Tororo Municipal Council
xxi) 	Lwakhakha Town Council
xxii) 	Pallisa Town Council
xxiii) 	Nakaloke Town Council
xxiv) 	Butaleja Town Council
xxv) 	Kiiko Town Council
xxvi) 	Nagongera Town Council
xxvii)	Mbale Municipal Council
I beg to lay

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, Commissioner Nokrach. The items under 4 (B) will be sent to the Public Accounts Committee while those under 4(C) will be sent to the Local Government Accounts Committee for expeditious perusal and report back. Thank you.

QUESTIONS FOR ORAL ANSWER
QUESTION 33/1/09 TO THE FIRST DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND MINISTER OF EAST AFRICAN COMMUNITY AFFAIRS

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, is there any one standing in for hon. Sam Otada? He is not here.

MS CECILIA OGWAL: Madam Speaker, this is a mistake. Last week on Thursday, the same question was brought and I was able to quote it. The way this is constructed is more or less the same question, but I do not mind reading it again. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the question last week was about conventions and treaties and whether they have been domesticated or not. This one is specifically about East Africa. The other one was about the African Union. Proceed to present it.

4.01
MS CECILIA OGWAL (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo): “(i) Would the minister brief the House on the progress of integration of the East African Community? 
(ii) What efforts has the ministry made to domesticate the various protocols/treaties with respect to the EAC integration? 
(iii) How are the EAC member states addressing the challenges to the integration process?”

4.02
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EAST AFRICAN COMMUNITY AFFAIRS (Mr Shem Bageine): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The question raised is about a brief on the status of the East African integration. 

Since the coming into force of the Treaty establishing the East African Community in 2000, a number of milestones have been achieved including the establishment of a number of protocols as provided for under Article 5 of the Treaty.

Madam Speaker, the first protocol is the Customs Union - (Interruption)

MS CECILIA OGWAL: Madam Speaker, I have asked this question on behalf of hon. Otada. Yes, the minister is giving me a reply but I do not have a copy of the statement. Can the minister avail a copy of the statement because I have checked and it is not uploaded on the iPads? Can he avail a copy of the reply he is giving me on behalf of hon. Sam Otada?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, under the Rules of Procedure you are required to write to the Member asking the question and send him or her an answer. Where are the answers? Honourable minister, we cannot accept an oral answer from your head. (Laughter)

MS ANYWAR: Madam Speaker, in light of the fact that the honourable minister does not have the information for this House and he just has it for himself, would it be procedurally right for us to continue with this presentation? Wouldn’t it be right if he downloaded it from his head and let Members have the copies so that we proceed together?

THE SPEAKER: I also do not have a copy. Can you avail a copy to me and to hon. Cecilia Ogwal?

MR BAGEINE: Madam Speaker, the statement is here but I do not know whether it has been circulated to Members. My understanding is that these are oral answers – (Interruption)

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Madam Speaker, I stand on a point of order. The Minister in charge of East African Community Affairs should be aware that when you are presenting a statement, be it at the East African Community or the UN, one has got to have a copy of the statement, which should have been circulated a day in advance. Is the minister, therefore, in order to come and start talking to this House as if he is not in charge of the ministry, which actually should speak for this nation?

THE SPEAKER: How long is the answer? I think let us allow the minister to organise himself. He can give us the statement next week but send copies to the House.

MR BAGEINE: Madam Speaker, most obliged.

MS WINIFRED KIIZA: Madam Speaker, there has been a concern by the Members of the East African Legislative Assembly (EALA) that this House does not give sufficient and adequate attention to their matters. Even at a time when the minister has been given sufficient time to update the voters of the Members of the East African Legislative Assembly about what is happening and why they are not doing things right, the minister is not treating this time with respect and giving it the attention it deserves.

I would imagine that the complaint be shifted somewhere else, not necessarily to this House. Members of EALA complain that Parliament of Uganda is not giving them attention yet we are now giving attention to the minister, but he is just ignoring the opportunity. I think it is high time the minister realised that it is important and critical to make Members know what is taking place at EALA. Thank you.

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, last week we faced the same scenario with one minister from foreign affairs – hon. Mateke. However, we allowed him on the basis that they bring a comprehensive report on the protocols and agreements signed this week. We had expected that as the minister presents, because they fall under the same ministry, even that report would be presented to this House. I would have loved to know whether the minister is in possession of that comprehensive statement today or he is bringing it together with the one you have pushed to next week. 

However, I also think that the technocrats should help the minister. I am saying this because I saw the staff from that ministry fidgeting behind Madam Speaker’s seat with the copy of the report, trying to pass it to the minister. How can you escort your minister to Parliament but decide to sit comfortably while the minister is struggling? How can you just sit and look at the minister being embarrassed? I think this should stop. Why leave your bosses to such an embarrassment? 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, for the record, in the Appointments Committee when we were considering the nomination of hon. Shem Bageine and thereafter that of hon. Kirunda Kivejinja, we told them that the most difficult area of interaction is between the East African Community and the Parliament of Uganda. They really undertook in that committee that things would change. 

Therefore, honourable minister, I would like you to keep your promise because that was the agreement we made in the Appointments Committee. Please, bring the statement next week and let us also have the other comprehensive one on the African Union.

MR BAGEINE: Madam Speaker, I have heard you loud and clear. I will have these statements prepared and delivered next Tuesday.

QUESTION 34 /1 / 09 TO THE MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES

MR GILBERT OLANYA: Madam Speaker, Question 34/1/09 was asked and responded to by the Minister of Agriculture, Animal industries and Fisheries in 2014. I stood in for hon. Acire. He was absent then; it was done.

THE SPEAKER: I hope the Clerk will look more carefully at the questions completed and those which are pending. So, the questions are no longer 56; they are probably fewer.

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC ACCOUNTS ON THE REPORT OF THE AUDITOR-GENERAL ON THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30 JUNE 2013 VOLUME II CENTRAL GOVERNMENT (ENTITIES WITH QUALIFIED OPINIONS VOLUME II: HEALTH INSTITUTIONS WITH QUALIFIED OPINIONS)

4.13
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC ACCOUNTS (Ms Alice Alaso): Thank you, Madam Speaker. This report was already presented to the House. I think we are just waiting for the debate to ensue. That is the information I have.

THE SPEAKER: Just give the highlights in 10 minutes.

MS ALASO: Madam Speaker, this is a report of the Public Accounts Committee on the Auditor-General’s findings on the health institutions for the year ended 30 June 2013. The institutions covered hereunder are: Uganda Blood Transfusion Services; Uganda Cancer Institute; Uganda Heart Institute; and the Uganda AIDS Commission – (Interruption)

MS ANYWAR: Madam Speaker, we have been lamenting about the absence of Government ministers as we raise issues in this House. Is the minister, who has just presented, in order to leave the House when he is still supposed to respond to the needs of this House?

THE SPEAKER: He is out of order.

MS ALASO: Madam Speaker, under Uganda Blood Transfusion Services, the first query was about the general consolidated financial position of the entity. The committee recommended that the Uganda Blood Transfusion Services should be granted autonomy and be adequately funded by the Government to carry out its mandate as it is a critical sector.

Procurement Documents

The committee noted the submission of the accounting officer and recommends that the process be fast-tracked.

The Uganda Cancer Institute

The query was on excess expenditure. The committee recommends that the accounting officer should always spend NTR in appropriation in aid only to support the approved budget.

The committee further recommends that the accounting officer be held responsible for spending Shs 316,894,620 without due regard to the Public Finance Accountability Act.

Domestic Arrears 

The committee recommends that entities should adhere to the Government’s commitment control system.

Instrument creating the Entity

The committee recommends that since it is a vote, an instrument should be created to give legal basis to its existence.

Lack of a Strategic Plan

The committee recommends that sectoral committees of Parliament should only have budgets for entities approved inter alia upon presentation of strategic plans.

The committee further recommends that the entities should desist from enlisting the services of consultants to develop their strategic plans.

Staff Training Arrangement

The Auditor-General observed that the Uganda Cancer Institute had an allocation of Shs 192 million for staff training but it did not have a training plan in place. The committee recommends that the sectoral committees of Parliament should only approve the budget for entities in respect of human resource development upon presentation of a human resource policy and staff training plan.

The committee further recommends that the accounting officer should fast-track the staff training plan.

Lack of a Procurement Plan

The committee recommends again to the sectoral committees of Parliament to stop approving budgets of entities without procurement plans. 

The committee further recommends that the appropriate human resource be recruited to facilitate effective running of the institute.

Stores and Inspection

The committee recommends that the accounting officer be held responsible for failure to take timely action on the poor storage of supplies. 

Unutilised Laboratory Equipment

The committee observed that lack of adequate provision for reagents undermines service delivery; the committee therefore recommends that there should be a shift in Government policy to take into account the peculiarity of the sector in order to avoid hampering service delivery.

Non-existence of a National Policy on Cancer 
The committee recommends that the Minister of Health fast-tracks the Cancer Prevention and Treatment Policy and reports to Parliament within one month.

Procurement of Drugs

Cost of Drugs

Whereas the accounting officer agreed with the Auditor-General’s observation, the committee observed that this was anomalous and should be corrected.

Consignments not received by the Uganda Cancer Institute 

The committee recommends that the Executive Director of the National Medical Stores should be held responsible for negligence of duty which has a direct impact on the life of patients.

Quality of Drugs Delivered 

The committee observed that delayed supplies, stock-outs of drugs, inability to supply specialised drugs and medical transits, supply of poor quality drugs and deliveries made to the Uganda Cancer Institute affected service delivery during the period under review.

The committee observed that whereas there is a National Drug Authority, an entity mandated to deal with the quality of drugs, there is still supply of poor quality drugs by the National Medical Stores.

The committee, therefore, recommends that the National Drug Authority should strengthen inspection and testing of drugs imported and locally manufactured to ensure that they comply or meet international set standards.

The committee recommends that the Minister of Health puts in place a mechanism to harmonise the requirements of the hospitals, the user departments and the procuring agency - the National Medical Stores. Means should be devised to address the current challenges in the implementation of the policy on the procurement of medical drugs.

The committee recommends that the National Medical Stores should act professionally and desist from supplying drugs different from the specifications ordered for.

Partial, Selective and Erratic Supply of Drugs and Sundries

The committee recommends that the National Medical Stores should strictly adhere to the orders as made by the Uganda Cancer Institute.

Delayed Supplies and Stock-Outs 

The committee recommends that the National Medical Stores should ensure timely delivery, strict procurement and stocking of all drugs required for cancer treatment.

Construction of a Five-Level Cancer Ward for Uganda Cancer Institute 
The Auditor-General noted that the contract for the construction of a five-level ward worth Shs 5,783,789,573 was awarded to a company but there was a change of the construction site without making adjustments to the bills of quantities.

The committee recommends that the consultant and the accounting officer be held responsible for certifying the work for which there were no bills of quantities.

The committee recommends that the accounting officer be held responsible for paying out Shs 2,197,840,106 without a valid contract. 

The committee recommends that the accounting officer be held responsible for any losses that may have resulted and for flouting the PPDA Act and regulations thereunder.

The committee further recommends that the Inspector General of Government (IGG) investigates the said procurement with the intention of prosecuting those culpable. 

The committee recommends that an urgent engineering audit be undertaken to establish value for money.

The Uganda Heart Institute

The first query was on the legal framework. The Auditor-General noted that there was no Act or instrument creating the Uganda Heart Institute.

The committee observed that whereas the Uganda Heart Institute lacked a legal instrument, a draft Bill had been presented to Cabinet to cure this anomaly.

The committee recommends that the Ministry of Health should fast-track the processes of having a legal instrument in place and urgently table the said Bill to Parliament within one month.

Management and Operational Challenges at the Uganda Heart Institute 

The committee observed that while the Uganda Heart institute was a body corporate and Government had already made a decision to grant it a vote status, the institute needed to harmonise its relationship with the Public Service Commission, the Health Service Commission and the Uganda Heart Institute board.

The committee recommends that in order to smoothen the operations of the Uganda Heart Institute, there is an urgent need to bring together the stakeholders and define the roles under a new legal framework, that is, the Uganda Heart Institute Bill.

Lack of an Approved Organisational Structure 

The committee recommends that the Ministry of Health should fast-track the process of having a legal instrument in place. 

The committee further recommends that the Government pursues the option of lifting the veil of incorporation with the view of turning Uganda Heart Institute Limited into Uganda Heart Institute.

Lack of a Human Resource Department

The committee recommends that the Minister of Health seeks advice from the Solicitor-General to establish the relationship between the entity and other Government departments.

Lack of a Corporate and Strategic Plan

The committee recommends that the relevant parliamentary committee ensures that strategic plans from which annual work plans are drawn should be a basis upon which resources are allocated to the entity. 

Irregular Budget Supervision

The committee recommends that the accounting officer be held responsible for diversion of public funds. The committee recommends that the relevant parliamentary sectoral committee should never approve activities that do not fall under the entity. 

Lack of a Procurement Plan   

The committee recommends that sectoral committees never recommend approval of budgets of entities without a procurement plan. 

Supply of Drugs and Medical Sundries by National Medical Stores to Uganda Heart Institute
The committee observed that delayed supply, stock-outs, inability to supply specialised drugs and medical sundries and supply of poor quality drugs and deliveries made to the Uganda Heart Institute affected service delivery during the period under review. 

The committee recommends that the National Drug Authority strengthens inspection and testing of drugs imported. The committee recommends that the Ministry of Health puts in place a mechanism to harmonise requirements of the hospital, user departments and the procuring authority. 

Non-existence of a National Policy of Cardiothoracic Related Elements 
Audit observed that the country did not have a national policy on cardiothoracic management to give direction on how prevalence should be managed. 

The committee recommends that a policy on cardiothoracic elements should be put in place by the Ministry of Health –(Interruption) 

MS JOY ATIM: Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. This document was uploaded on our iPads last year and we are trying to retrieve it but we cannot find it. It is a very important document that we need to debate and I do not know how we are going to it. 

Perhaps, the honourable members have it on their iPads but I have tried to find it and it is not available. Therefore, is it procedurally right to move on without the document being available? How shall we discuss this? 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we had requested the chairperson to give us the highlights because it was long ago when it was presented. Please, read the subject and the formulation. How many pages have you read? 

MS ALASO: Madam Speaker, I am midway this report. I am only reading highlights of the queries and the recommendations. 

Project Account No. 223 to 14082.1

The Auditor-General reported that the project account was opened by Mulago Hospital on behalf of the Uganda Heart Institute. This was during the time when it was a department of Mulago Hospital. This is a long query and I would like to read it all. This was the time when it was part of Mulago Hospital Complex. Shs 2.060 billion out of Shs 4.8 billion was transferred by the Treasury to Mulago Hospital account and that money was not remitted to the Uganda Heart Institute. 

The committee recommends that a special audit be carried out to ascertain the value for money for Shs 303,000,000 directly paid to the suppliers by Mulago Hospital for and on behalf of the Uganda Heart Institute. 

The committee further recommends that a forensic audit be carried out to establish the value for money for Shs 975 million. 

Uganda AIDs Commission 

Over Expenditure

The committee recommends that the accounting officer be held responsible for abuse of budgetary control procedures. 

Inappropriate Structure of the Entity

The committee recommends that the accounting officer should always carry out prompt reviews of the structure and make submissions to the board subsequent to public service filling the vacant posts.

Capacity to Manage Dollar Funds

The committee recommends that the entity strengthens its finance and audit functions.

Staffing Positions 

The Auditor-General noticed that the organisation structure provided for 54 posts but only 46 were filled. The committee recommends that the recruitment be fast-tracked to fill the staffing gap and efforts be made to address the high staff turnover. 

Funding Arrangements to the Entity

The committee noted the proposal mooted by the accounting officer about exploring the possibility of creating a national AIDS fund. The committee urges Government to allocate more funds to the commission. 

Generator not delivered 
The Auditor-General noted that although the entity had fully paid out Shs 27,000,000 to a firm to supply the generator, this had remained undelivered. 

The committee observed that there was laxity on the part of the accounting officer and this amounted to breach of contract. The committee recommends that the issue be further investigated to ascertain the culpability of those involved. 

The committee recommends that the matter be referred to the Attorney-General for civil action. The committee strongly recommends that the police follow up this matter to a logical conclusion. 

Domestic Arrears

The committee observed the failure to adhere to commitment control systems mainly due to litigation. The committee recommends that the accounting officer be held responsible for failure to adhere to the Government commitment control system as provided in the financial regulations. 

There was a query on follow up of the forensic audit report on the commission’s activities for the year 2008/2009. The committee recommends that the accounting officer be held responsible for failure to implement recommendations of the forensic audit. 

The Inter-Governmental Authority on Development Regional HIV/AIDS Partnership Programme
There was a query on inter-account borrowing. The committee recommends that the accounting officer be cautioned to desist from carrying out inter-account transfers with project funds as it could cause discontinuation of aid. 

Lack of Internal Audit Reviews

The committee recommends that there should be regular internal audit reviews to avert possible fraud in the entity. 

Non-acknowledgement of URA Remittances 

The committee noted laxity on the part of the accounting officer and recommends that the entity should promptly pick receipts from Uganda Revenue Authority. 

Expenditure Lacking Accountability and Supporting Documents
The committee recommends that the accounting officer be held responsible for failure to account for Shs 17,645,000 advanced to various officers within the statutory time and be made to recover them. 

Delayed Release of Funds

The committee recommends that release of funds should be streamlined so as not to affect planned activities of the respective entities. 

Fixed Asset Management

The committee recommends that the accounting officer be held responsible for failure to maintain an assets register. 

Acting Appointment for the Position of IGAD Focal Person Uganda

The Auditor-General observed that the position of a project focal person responsible for the general coordination and direction of project activities had remained without a substantive officer for 11 months. 

The committee recommends that the entity should always comply with memoranda of understanding signed under projects as non-compliance impacts negatively on the entity’s capacity to undertake projects.

Maintenance of Records

The Auditor-General reported that the project maintained one set of records for IGAD funds and the UNHCR funded activities contrary to the memorandum of understanding. 

The committee recommends that in future, separate records should be kept by the accounting officer.

Inspection

The last segment is on inspection. The Auditor-General conducted inspection on health facilities; one, in Busia Hotspot in Busia District. The Auditor-General raised a query on unutilised funds. He reported that Shs 88,706,250 advanced to Busia District Local Government in 2010 was still on the account at the time of the audit. The committee recommends that there should be timely release and accountability of funds. 

Money advanced to Friends of Christ Revival Ministry

The Auditor-General noted a discrepancy in the work plans.

Amuru Hospital Hotspot 

The Auditor-General raised a query on the implementation of planned activities. He pointed out that out of the total Shs 45,584,000 advanced to the district for planned activities for the first half of the year, only Shs 19,366,600 had been spent by the time of audit.

The committee recommends that the accounting officer should carry out timely implementation of projects for effective service delivery. 

Madam Speaker, I thank you very much. I hope I have refreshed the memory of the Members. (Applause) 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, chairperson of the Public Accounts Committee and your team, for carrying out your constitutional duty. I just have three areas of concern. 

About two years ago, I wrote to the Ministry of Health and inquired when the drug supply would increase. I have sub-counties which are a confluence of different districts; people from Bulopa, Luuka, Jinja, Iganga would all come and within a few days, the drugs would be gone. I, therefore, wrote to the minister and at that time, he told me that we need to first finish the census exercise in order to know how many people we have. The census was done long ago and the patients are still suffering from a shortage of drugs.

The second issue has to do with the recommendation of the committee about an AIDS fund. I do not know whether this is the same fund that we put under the law. There was a law we passed here and we established a levy – the AIDS trust fund. Is what you are saying different from the other one? We would like to know how that one is panning out. 

I also would like to know when we decided to end the health centres II because the demand in the villages is so high. If it was a decision of the Cabinet, then I think they should revisit it. It is not realistic for our people. 

Honourable members, you are free to debate.

4.39
DR MEDARD BITEKYEREZO (NRM, Mbarara Municipality, Mbarara): Thank you, Madam Speaker, and I thank the chairperson of the Public Accounts Committee for giving us wonderful highlights on these key sectors or departments within the health sector. However, the unfortunate part is that we do not have the Minister of Health here but we hope that the ministers present here – Maybe Prof. Tarsis Kabwegyere will take the message, as you are the most senior person here.

As we talk, there are some places in this country which are very hard to reach. Even if you had the desire to put a health centre III in one specific place, some people will never access treatment. The most hard to reach areas are the mountainous places and the Lake Victoria region where crossing from island to island is very difficult. For such places, there is no option but to give them health centres.

Secondly, right now there are two Bills in my committee - the Uganda Cancer Institute Bill and the Uganda Heart Institute Bill. However, before the Uganda Heart Institute Bill came into place, the heart institute was owned by individuals. It was operational in Mulago Hospital but was actually a limited company and even had shareholders. Later on, Government took it up. 

Today, I had a meeting with officials from the National Drug Authority. Over the weekend, I had a meeting with officials from the Ministry of Health together with the Uganda Heart Institute and the Uganda Cancer Institute. There is an outcry in Mulago. We do not have drugs for cancer. When we talk about cancer, this is simply an abnormal proliferation; if you do not give somebody drugs to stop that abnormal proliferation, the cancer will kill them. 

In other words, the Uganda Cancer Institute needs a mandate to procure drugs urgently for anybody who has been found with cancer, without these jargons of yours like the PPDA and the like. Diseases do not read books. If I am a doctor and you have come to me and I have found you with cancer, I must give you drugs and not speeches. 

I am trying to work on the Bill, Madam Speaker, and I hope you will give me a slot on the Order Paper immediately after Easter. I would like to leave this Parliament after I have worked on the Uganda Cancer Institute. I am now writing the reports. (Applause) Give me a chance also to leave this Parliament as a doctor who worked on the Uganda Heart Institute Bill. When we legislate on this law, we shall create some small avenues where drugs can be procured without necessarily passing through the hurdles of the National Medical Stores.

All the money we get for the Uganda Heart Institute Mulago goes to the National Medical Stores; they procure drugs and then bring them to the institute. The Executive Director of the Uganda Cancer Institute told us that the National Drug Authority does not have the capacity to test the efficacy of the cancer drugs we are getting here; they are called cytotoxics. This means, if you give somebody drugs that are not very good, you can end up having resistance coupled with the cancer disease not curing. 

I met them today and they have over Shs 14 billion fixed on an account in the bank. The executive director was sacked and they had to employ another one. This newly employed director has assured me that they have got enough machines and possibly, they could be having issues of human resource.

Madam Speaker, the National Drug Authority does not get money from the Government of Uganda. It is being funded by its clients, which means that it can easily be compromised. This is why the minister should have been here. Hon. Tarsis Kabwegyere, the National Drug Authority that is meant to regulate the drugs that come into the country to ensure that fake drugs are not imported and are sent back to their places of origin is not funded by the Government of Uganda. When they bring in drugs, they give them money to test their drugs. If I come with a drug and I have got money and I pay you to test the drug for me and I ask you to ensure that the drug passes the test, can you refuse?  This is why this Government – before I leave this Parliament - should create a vote specifically to cater for the National Drug Authority.

The Uganda AIDS Commission receives money through the vote of the Ministry of Health and the oversight role is done by the Ministry of the Presidency. I am of the view that the entire budget of the Uganda AIDS Commission should be under the Ministry of the Presidency so that the money which is meant for the Ministry of Health comes directly from the ministry and not from this department that we cannot oversee. 

That is why hon. Alaso is talking about accountability issues in the Uganda AIDS Commission. There is nobody to oversee them, because the Ministry of Health is very big, and yet the commission is handling health-related issues. When it comes to oversight, it is the Ministry of the Presidency.

As a health professional, I would wish to have the Uganda AIDS Commission strictly with its budget in the Ministry of the Presidency so that these others are transferred to health. If we do not do that, there is artificial inflation of the budget of Ministry of Health on paper and yet in reality the money is not there – (Mr Bataringaya rose_)

THE SPEAKER: As the honourable minister comes up, this was my fourth point: I have received about six petitions from different people complaining that the budget committee transferred the Uganda AIDS Commission to the Ministry of the Presidency and they do not want it.

DR BATARINGAYA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and honourable members. The information I would like to give my colleague is that this is a report that was written two years ago and I have heard those issues on health before. Being a member of that family, I would like to inform hon. Bitekyerezo that the Government has already taken action concerning issues of the Uganda Heart Institute. There was a Bill that was discussed by Cabinet. 

Dr Bitekyerezo and Dr Omona, who are both members of the Committee on Health, know that the Uganda Heart Institute Bill should be before this august House. Dr Omagino, Dr Rwakojo and I contributed to the discussions at that particular time and some of the issues on cancer have been addressed by this Government. Therefore, it would be good if this House refers it back to the Government so that we come with what we have– (Interruption)

MS ANYWAR: Madam Speaker, we are discussing a killer disease of this nation and the colleague who raised this issue is a medical doctor. I also know that the minister is a medical doctor by profession and the report is from the Public Accounts Committee. The concerns are already raised in the report and Members of this House are responding to those concerns. 

Is hon. Kamanda Bataringaya in order to pour cold water on this burning issue of cancer when everybody is looking to this House to save this nation, by saying that the Government is already working towards it? In my family, I have a child suffering from cancer, who goes to Mulago but is not being helped. Is he in order to downplay the magnitude of the cancer appeal by saying that Government is doing something, which is not even visible, and yet we are calling upon the Government to double its efforts?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, what I understood from the minister’s submission is that we should expedite debate on this report and adopt it, and then they will bring a Treasury memorandum to tell us what they have done. 

DR BATARINGAYA: Madam Speaker, I was not watering down the issue of cancer or hepatitis. I was just giving information because this is a report dated two years back. I am happy that the chairperson articulated those issues on health very well and I was giving a response from Government that most of the issues have been handled. However, when the chairperson presented the report, there was incoordination. We would have come with the responses – (Interruption)

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Is the minister in order to tell this Parliament and the country at large that issues of health have been properly handled by the Government? Have you been to the Uganda Cancer Institute in Mulago? Have you been to the hospital to see how the issue of blood transfusion is being managed?

In Kapchorwa recently, people were rushed to Mbale Hospital because there was no blood. You say the Government has handled these issues but the issues of health remain very touchy in Uganda. It is a thorn in the flesh. Ugandans are suffering because of health issues and yet you are telling us the Government has handled them very well. Go to the hospitals and see what is happening. Are you, therefore, in order to come and water down what hon. Bitekeyerezo is talking about?

THE SPEAKER: Let us work quickly to adopt this report and find solutions.

DR BITEKYEREZO: Madam Speaker, I would like to be understood. I am the chairperson of the Committee on Health. I believe in honesty as a virtue and when I leave this Parliament I want to be remembered for that virtue.

I interfaced with the Executive Director of the Uganda Heart Institute, Dr Oryem. He taught me internal medicine in 1990 in Mbarara University of Science and Technology. He told me that he does not have enough drugs for cancer patients in Mulago. We even have it in our report. The Uganda Heart Institute was owned by some individuals and they have created an anomaly, but we are trying to create a law to give them autonomy so that they can start procuring some drugs that are very urgent. 

Hon. Kamanda Bataringaya, Dr Omagino told me that during heart surgery you may want to use Ethicon to tie – Remember, the strongest muscle in the heart that pumps blood to all parts of the body is the left ventricle; the moment you tie the left ventricle with very bad suture material, when the heart contracts it will open and burst. Will that person survive? He said that they would like the Government to give them autonomy so that they can procure these specific things they want for themselves. 

As a doctor, if a patient dies in my hands I cannot sleep. It is very painful. It is true Government has done these things but we need more, like Oliver Twist. Let us work on these things as soon as possible so that the cancer and heart institutes are fully functional and we stop people from going to China and India for treatment when we have our own.

Regarding issues of accountability, we have said that the oversight role of Uganda AIDS Commission should be played by the Ministry of the Presidency but the money should go through the Ministry of Health; it creates artificial inflation – (Interruption)

MS ALASO: Thank you, hon. Bitekyerezo. The information that should be given to this House, which I know the honourable minister should have considered in his submission, is that we already presented our reports for 2012 to 2013 and these issues are recurring. This House adopted that report and this is a carry-forward issue – the challenges that are effecting those institutions. If you went to Mulago now, you will find that these issues are still obtaining. It would be helpful to this debate if the minister pointed out the issues they have acted on in very specific terms.

However, if there is a Bill, you are actually saying it is draft Bill and you cannot give autonomy in a draft Bill; you have to get an Act working and give autonomy. Our report may be for 2014 but the issues are still as current and as valid and they required action yesterday.

DR BITEKYEREZO: Madam Speaker, as I conclude, I kindly request this House to help me pass these two laws before I leave so that you remember me for it. Whatever I have said on this Floor of Parliament, I have said it in good faith. I am not a doctor who will change diagnosis for the sake of making someone very happy. I am a doctor who believes in honesty and I would like to give a proper diagnosis; the cancer drugs in Uganda Cancer Institute are not enough and they are not even there now. 

The doctors say patients are dying.  We want to portray in the Hansard that things are very okay when they are not; we are not faithful to ourselves and to the Ugandans that elected us. I would like to be honest that the cancer drugs in the Uganda Cancer Institute are not there; the doctor has told me. I thank you very much.

4.50
MR MICHAEL MAWANDA (NRM, Igara County East, Bushenyi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for its report. 

I would like to confine myself to the Uganda Cancer Institute. We have talked about very many diseases, but I would like to bring it to your attention that cancer is a silent killer. Last year, I sponsored two medical camps in my constituency to screen for cancer. In the first medical camp, we did not advertise; we just set up a camp and started calling people. We screened more than 5,000 people. However, specifically, we called about 50 women just casually. Surprisingly, out of the 50 women that were screened, 25 of them - who were not even sick but were by-passers whom we just called to come and test - had cancer and they did not know.

I wrote a report and gave it to hon. Baryomunsi because it shocked me. I noticed that something must be done. First of all, we need to sensitise our people so that they get to know that cancer is a silent killer. People in the villages do not know; when they fall sick, they go to witch doctors and they do not know that it is cancer killing them. Government has put a lot of attention on AIDS but now, cancer is killing more people than AIDS is doing.

Madam Speaker, I am glad the committee has highlighted some of these things. This cancer institute at Mulago has remained closed and very few people know about it. For the second medical camp that I sponsored, I contacted some doctors from Mulago and we advertised the camp. Out of the people we screened in three days in my constituency, more than 500 were diagnosed with cancer. 

It is unfortunate that the Minister of Health is not here; we would have wanted the minister to take note of this serious problem. The Uganda Cancer Institute has remained closed and they have not gone out to sensitise the population about this killer disease.

Secondly, they also do not have drugs. The doctors who attended my second medical camp confessed that they have a problem of drugs. As Dr Bitekyerezo said, diseases do not wait for procurement. I am glad that the committee was able to cite one of the problems in the institute as lack of a procurement plan. I would also like to join my colleagues to agree that the sectoral committees should not approve budgets for entities which do not have procurement plans. If these institutes do not have medicine and procurement plans, it means they do not have work plans.

Finally, I would like to request that the national policy in respect to the treatment of cancer be brought to Parliament for us to be able to approve it as soon as possible so that the Government can pay more attention to this silent killer disease, which is killing people more than AIDS is doing.  I thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

5.00
MR JAMES KAKOOZA (NRM, Kabula County, Lyantonde): Thank you, Madam Speaker. My concern is about the reports of the Auditor-General. It seems the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development has left, but this is a weakness; these problems highlighted in the Auditor-General’s report should not have reoccurred.

Section 53 of the Public Finance Management Act says, “(1) The minister shall submit a Treasury memorandum to Parliament within six months from the date of Parliament’s consideration of the report of the Auditor-General in accordance with Article 163 (5) of the Constitution.

(2) The Treasury memoranda shall indicate measures taken by each vote to implement the recommendations of Parliament in respect to the report of the Auditor-General of the preceding financial year on the vote.”

When you read and listen to what the chairperson of the Public Accounts Committee is saying, for whatever recommendations we make, there should have been action taken and we would have known how far they had gone. However, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development does not do this.

Recently, I read in the media that Parliament had recommended that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should buy new machines for the finance management system within Government - they have been faulting the old ones. However, you heard that recently, we lost Shs 18 billion and yet Parliament had recommended the securing of new technologies so that this fraud and controls within the system stop.

If the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development brought these Treasury memoranda, we would know the actions taken but they deliberately do not bring them. This means the recommendations we make, even those by the Auditor-General, are not adhered to. This is what you hear now - two years on, the issues are recurring, action has not been taken and the situation continues as it is.

My submission is to specifically supplement what you said on health centres II. Honestly, we must have a policy shift. Health centres III are far from parishes, so there are some areas which require health centres II in order for people to access services. We need to consider this depending on the geographical nature of the area so that health centres II help to decongest the health centres III. 

If someone is coming to give birth from as far as 15 or 20 kilometres away without transport and the road is bad, what happens? Cabinet needs to think about a policy shift. We need to agree that the parishes, which are far from health centres III, get a health centre II because they help. Most of the diseases, which are - (Member timed out.)

5.03
MR SAMUEL SSEMUGABA (NRM, Kiboga West County, Kyankwanzi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee members for the good work done. 

They have talked about lack of reagents in the hospitals but also at health centres III there are no reagents. Government changed the policy saying that they are going to strengthen, equip and supply enough drugs to health centres III, but there are no drugs and reagents. Go to a health centre III to check for yellow fever or typhoid and they will say that they do not have reagents. They refer you 100 kilometres away and yet our poor people cannot afford transport to reach that far. I call upon Government to supply enough drugs and reagents, which are very essential to help our people on the ground.

We are here advocating for health centres II but if they have failed to properly manage health centres III, how will they cope? I call upon Government to carry out its mandate properly so that all the required drugs for our people - There are no reagents for syphilis, yellow fever, typhoid and other diseases related with animals, which are very common and our people are suffering. I would like to suggest that Government rises up and carries out their mandate of providing adequate health services to our people. Thank you.

5.05
MS WINIFRED KIIZA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The health situation in this country is not an issue of yesterday but it is a situation that keeps reoccurring. I would like to give an example of what is happening in Kasese District. Bwera Hospital, which is a health centre IV, should have been the biggest Government hospital in the district. However, the hospital has no x-ray or scan machines. When one is required to go for a scan, he or she is directed to a private provider in town; they ask them to first go and do a scan or an x-ray in town. 

Eventually, people start looking at their elected leaders and they ask, “When we vote you into power, will you buy us a machine for scanning in a Government hospital?” You ask yourself, “Am I now the one playing the mandate of Government?” That is the situation in which we are.

When hon. Bitekyerezo was talking about the cancer situation, I really felt bad because there are announcements everywhere on radio stations that there is screening of cervical cancer for women. The adverts are all over and they are advertising how cervical cancer is a killer and calling on women to go for screening and vaccination. However, when they go to the health unit there are no vaccines and there is nobody to attend to them. 

Honourable minister, even when Government is trying to do what it takes to ensure that services are delivered to the people, the health sector has been given little attention. I would imagine that much of the attention would be given to the health sector because it is a healthy population that is productive; so if we are to consider anything, then health should be given priority.

Madam Speaker, it is very important to note that for some of us who come from mountainous areas, the health centre II policy was a good idea. You can image a parish in those mountains of Rwenzori, Elgon and Kabale; from one corner of the mountain to the other is more less the size of a subcounty in some other areas. Therefore, to us the policy of a health centre II was a welcome idea. However, when it was watered down, it became a problem to us. The problem is when those local people move from the parish or villages and go to the subcounty hospital and find no drugs, it even becomes a more complicated issue. 

Therefore, giving attention to this report is very critical. Since we are going into the budgeting process, I would appeal that this is the time for Government to look into this issue and see how we can give priority to the health sector as we consider having a healthy population that will be productive to help us progress and develop our nation. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: I would like to remind the House that one of the reasons we sought for the certificate of gender equity was to know how much Government is providing for maternal health and for the children. Please, take note.

5.09
MS JOY ONGOM (Independent, Woman Representative, Lira): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. It is unfortunate that we are discussing issues of health and we are in the budget period but the ministers for health are not here. I do not know whether the ministers who are here will report exactly what we are bringing out as issues. The minister sitting in for the Prime Minister, please, these are real issues, though you are not listening to the discussion.

Madam Speaker, we got the report and one of the issues that we got out concerns our health centres II. Sincerely, some subcounties and parishes are too far from health centres III. Some of our people are dying simply because the health centres are very far and when you go there, the services are not good. 

However, what I would like to bring out is that we have health centres III that sometimes make referrals. If they refer a patient to, maybe, a hospital or regional hospitals, there are no ambulances to take these patients. These people have challenges; the patients that would have been helped die because there are no ambulances. We feel Government should consider this as a priority. Members of Parliament, with their meagre resources, are now labouring to buy ambulances on behalf of Government. I do not know whether Government is happy to see Members of Parliament buy ambulances when it is the duty of the Government. 

Madam Speaker, another issue is about the HPV vaccine for cancer. On radio stations you hear them saying that girls of 10 years and below should be taken for cervical cancer screening and vaccination. However, when they go to the health centres, they do not get the drugs. 

In Kasese, they are saying that mothers and children should go for screening and in Lira they are only saying girls less than 10 years should go for screening. The information is different - I do not know what Ministry of Health is up to – and yet when you go to the health centres, you do not find any drug. This is very dangerous. When girls clock 15, 16 or 18 years, these are victims of cervical cancer, which is really very common at Uganda Cancer Institute. We feel the Ministry of Health should take this as a serious matter.

Madam Speaker, I am a member of the Committee on Health. The minister said that issues of cancer were handled by Government but I sat with officials from the Ministry of Health and also the director of Uganda Cancer Institute just about four days ago and they raised their complaints. One of their major complaints was that National Medical Stores is not giving them quality drugs. 

The other issue they complained about was late delivery of drugs and numerous drug stocks-out. They complained that National Medical Stores and National Drug Authority do not have the capacity to test the drugs. This is a matter for Ministry of Health to assess- What quality of drugs do these people purchase to bring to the Uganda Cancer Institute? 

They gave their challenges and they gave us a testimony that the Prime Minister took a patient to the Uganda Cancer Institute and he was the one following him up. One time, the Prime Minister asked about the progress of the patient and they said the patient was progressing well. However, all of a sudden, there were no drugs and the patient died the next day and they did not have anything to tell the Prime Minister.

It is a challenge. They asked Parliament and Ministry of Health if there is any way they could be given leeway first of all, to assess the drugs that will be brought to them and also not to follow this bureaucratic way of PPDA so that they purchase the drugs directly for the Uganda Cancer Institute. Secondly, handling of figures is very difficult for National Medical Stores. They want to hunt for drugs themselves so that they can handle their patients. Many of the patients are dying. If you went to the Uganda Cancer Institute, it is really alarming. Can Parliament help in this? Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I would like to thank the Members for their contributions. They have made a number of proposals. Chair, please, windup and then we put the question.

5.15 
THE CHAIRPERSON, PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (Ms Alice Alaso): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the Members for debating this report. 

I just want to note that the debate on the Uganda AIDS Commission’s location - health or President’s Office - has been on this Floor for over 15 years. I do not think that it is something that can even be resolved this afternoon. I do not understand for what reasons it has become a difficult debate. The way forward lies in the commitment made by hon. Bitekyerezo. The committee has been having those two Bills and if we can get them expedited, we will be able to establish autonomy for the commission and probably open up for more resources and such associated requirements.

Madam Speaker, our report highlights one thing, which is extremely important for this House - the role of the sectoral committees. We have not been making these recommendations, but when the sectoral committees scrutinise policy statements and authorise allocation of money when they themselves have not looked at a work plan or a procurement plan – they simply say,  “Ministry X, get this money” - it constitutes a very big loophole in accountability. That is where the confusion begins from. Therefore, since this is the start of the budget cycle, I pray that as we consider the policy statements, we should insist on procurement plans and work plans that will help us follow where the money is going.

Finally, I just have a thought; if half of the money used in this country for flying patients to India for cancer and heart disease treatment was made available to the Uganda Cancer Institute and the Uganda Heart Institute, I am sure that a majority of lives would be saved. (Applause)  In the long run, we would even stop going out of the country.

I am told of a story where somebody was taken to the Uganda Heart Institute and he was told that they could do the operation but certain things were lacking. So, this person went to Aga Khan Hospital and the same specialist was called to treat him at Aga Khan Hospital. We can buy our drugs and other sundries; we have the brains in this country. If we can only put in money, I trust that it will save many lives. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that the report of the Public Accounts Committee be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we shall reconvene on Tuesday. Please, organise your papers, foreign affairs and internal affairs, and come ready on Tuesday at 2.00 p.m. 

Honourable chairperson, you talked about the Bills on the heart institute and cancer institute but they are with you.

DR BITEKYEREZO: Madam Speaker, I have two Bills with me. I have convened meetings with the Uganda Heart Institute team and the Uganda Cancer Institute team. I have looked at the Bills and have sat down with the relevant stakeholders. The last meeting today was with the National Drug Authority. 

Madam Speaker, I have begun writing the reports and I can assure you and the House that immediately after Easter, I will come with the reports; they will be precise so that we can start working on them. So, I promise to give you a gift before I leave. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: House adjourned to Tuesday at 2.00 p.m. Tomorrow, you can go and do other things and get ready.

(The House rose at 5.20 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 22 March 2016 at 2.00 p.m.)
