Tuesday, 29 March 2016

Parliament met at 2.10 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this sitting. I have received sad news of the untimely death of the former Uganda Cranes goalkeeper, the late Abel Dhaira, who succumbed to abdominal cancer on Sunday. Many of you knew the deceased and the role he played in uplifting the standard of the Uganda Cranes’ games. I ask us to rise and observe a moment of silence. 

(Members rose and observed a moment of silence.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, you recall that on 10 March 2016, the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, on behalf of the President, presented to Parliament budgetary proposals for revenue and expenditure estimates for the fiscal year 2016/2017.

Ministerial policy statements from Government agencies have been presented to the House and referred to the appropriate sectoral committees for consideration. I, therefore, intend to suspend plenary sittings at the end of today’s sitting to allow sectoral committees focus on the proposed annual budget, policy statements and the revenue Bills and report back to the House in accordance with the following programme: 

If we rise today, that means from 30 March to 15 April, committees will be able to scrutinize the annual budget, policy statements, alternative policy statements and the revenue Bills and finalise with the reports, ready for plenary. From 18 to 22 April, committees will report to the Committee on the Budget to facilitate the harmonisation of the figures in preparation for supply. The Committee on the Budget will present its report from 25 to 26 April to the House and recommend the figures for supply. On 28 April, I reasonably project that Parliament will be able to approve the Appropriation Bill, in which case the figures that would have been supplied would have been accommodated in the Appropriation Bill and thereby passed.

May I also take this opportunity to wish the Uganda Cranes success in today’s match against Burkina Faso, which will take place at Mandela National Stadium, Namboole starting at 7.00p.m. All of us should be in prayer so that the Uganda Cranes win this match. Thank you very much. You should also go there because we shall be rising early today.

2.15
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman Representative, Serere): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for allowing me the opportunity to raise this particular issue.

I visited Luzira prisons, specifically the condemned section, in relation to a Bill that we have before this House. They asked me to convey to this House their appreciation and to ask that the House speedily expedites the processing of this Bill since it has a serious bearing on the general state of prisoners in the condemned section. The Bill, as you know, is the Law Revision Miscellaneous (Amendment) Bill, 2015 and I hope that the committee will process it very fast. 

Besides that request, the prisoners put forward about four things that they asked me to convey to this august House. One, the issues of the prisoners in the condemned section of Luzira are attended to or handled by lawyers on state brief. This particular group of lawyers, I am meant to understand, are private lawyers who should be the ones to help them. Unfortunately, the state has not put in place provisions to ensure that the lawyers on state brief duly accomplish the tasks given to them. They are not paid and therefore, more often than not, these lawyers never meet the inmates. They probably show up in court once in a while and if they show up, matters of appeal are not followed up. 

I would like to ask that Government puts in place a better way of facilitating the lawyers on state brief so that they are paid and these inmates are duly attended to, especially on matters of appeal - (Interruption)

THE OPPOSITION CHIEF WHIP (Ms Cecilia Ogwal): Mr Speaker, the matter that hon. Alaso is raising is very important to this country and it calls for justice to those who have been incarcerated.

I would like to understand, procedurally, why such a matter would be raised in Parliament and yet I do not see the Leader of Government Business who would be able to convey this information to the relevant ministry for the purpose of implementation. May I know and confirm that the sole minister seated in front has been given the full mandate to carry out the role of the Leader of Government Business, so that whatever matter we discuss here will be translated into action and we can correct some of the problems, which are of great concern to this country? Mr Speaker, I beg to be guided on this procedural matter. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable member and Opposition Chief Whip. By the Order Paper that was issued earlier, this House is supposed to commence sitting at 2.00 p.m. and that is why we are here. Whoever is not here has not responded appropriately to the order that has been issued from the Clerk’s office appointing the time of commencement of this particular sitting. 

I cannot account for the absence of the particular minister that you have interest in. I can only say that there is one minister and I will ask whether she has a brief or not and if she is here in full capacity to deal with all matters. However, an extract is always got for whatever matter is raised on the Floor of Parliament and it is submitted to the responsible minister to prepare appropriate responses where there are gaps that require answers. Honourable minister, would you like to say something about this?

2.20
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (PRIMARY HEALTH CARE) (Ms Sarah Opendi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am here to represent the Government. Therefore, whatever matter that will come up will definitely be passed on to the relevant ministers to take action. Therefore, the Leader of Government Business is ably represented by me for now. I expect him to be here shortly. Thank you.

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: I rise on a point of procedure, Mr Speaker. This country knows that there is a Leader of Government Business, who is the Prime Minister. Everybody knows that we have up to six ministers in that ministry. The whole country knows that we have returned from the elections. People went to Kyankwanzi and finished their business there about a week ago. However, when you look around the House, it is empty and the Frontbench has got only one minister -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, for the purpose of the record, if this House was empty you would not be speaking. The House is not empty. Proceed.

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Mr Speaker, we know the quorum of the House is two-thirds. If we want to pass any Bill, we must be two-thirds -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, one-third.

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Yes, but we are not even one-third in this House. Secondly, we have got 77 ministers; the Constitution says the Government will have 21 ministers. We are bogged down when important issues are raised on the Floor of Parliament because there is nobody to answer. 

The prisoners have asked one of our colleagues to raise this issue on the Floor of Parliament. They are suffering. I listened to the Director of Prisons; there are supposed to be about 130 prisoners within Luzira prisons but today, they are three times the number. It is this Parliament, which can rescue our people and help those who are suffering in prison, but the Minister of Internal Affairs is not here. The minister present just came up and said she can do it but we know who the Leader of Government Business is. Mr Speaker, we would like to move forward because we do not have much time.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Just like I stated earlier, this House will proceed with business. If there are pending issues that need further answers, those issues will be communicated to the responsible ministers using the minister currently at the Front Bench. The system in Parliament, through the Office of the Clerk, will also extract the minutes and submit to the responsible ministers. Thank you.

MS ALASO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I had just talked about the state brief and the fact that these are volunteers who get a brief from the state and are not paid yet they are supposed to represent people whose lives are on the chopping board. I think this country must rethink how to facilitate this team of lawyers so that they can ably do their job. This would ensure that justice is done for those prisoners in the condemned section and elsewhere where their services are required.

The third issue that they asked me to present to this House is that they are having trouble obtaining records of proceedings from the trial courts, especially when they have made their appeals to the Supreme Court. There are cases they gave me but due to lack of time, I may not be able to mention the individuals. However, there are people who were tried in 1999 and to date the Supreme Court does not have a record of the proceedings from the trial courts. Mr Speaker, you lawyers say, “Justice delayed is justice denied” but this is no longer the case. I think justice is not there completely. I think it is unfair that somebody cannot even proceed to appeal for their very life.

In a country where judicial errors are very common and there is very poor investigation machinery, where people can be taken to court and be almost hanged on falsehoods, the issue about the right to appeal and getting a fair hearing is something that prisoners crave for. I would like to pray that the Government puts something in place. 

Everything is getting modernised in this country but you go to court and they are using typewriters. With the fundamental change that we have had in this country and the steady progress, can’t something be done to create steady progress and fundamental change in the courts? Must courts take three years to transcribe proceedings in order to forward them to the higher courts?

They also told me to inform this country that it is mainly the poor offenders in the condemned section who are waiting to be hanged. The rich ones go to court, appeal and get out and they are walking normally with us here. They think that those of us who are out here should help them find a way in which justice can be made affordable. The death penalty, according to them, is largely a matter for the poor and not the rich. They said that the rich rarely get hanged.

Mr Speaker, the other issue is the different procedures for appeal provided for in the UPDF Act. They said it is very complicated and that there are people who are in the condemned section who were committed way back in the 1990s or so. There is somebody called Ovelle and others who have been there and nobody is following up on them. It looks like they have been dumped forever. The period between 1999 and 2016 is a long time. They think that probably there can be a way of harmonising these legal frameworks. I hope that this Parliament will, in time, consider an opportunity to harmonise the provisions of the UPDF Act and the other provisions in the laws of Uganda regarding matters of appeal. Otherwise, it is really threatening and a very scary thing.

Lastly, Mr Speaker, I would like, on a personal note, to note the rehabilitative effort that goes on in the condemned section because that is where I visited. Together with the prisoners, we would like to say that there are no people that are beyond rehabilitation. The work that they have done - the spiritual transformation - should move all of us, if we can, to give people an opportunity or a second chance. Even if it is for forgiveness’ sake, I think it would be good to note that people can be rehabilitated and forgiven. God wants us to forgive and the prisons are doing their utmost to change some of those individuals. 

I will point out a case that bounces back to us. It is the case of a notorious somebody we all read about in the papers. I did not interact with him but he is called Arinaitwe. He is known to all of us. His story is about a boy who was mistreated by a stepmother. Therefore, some of these characters in there, whom we are condemning today, are characters that we produce as a community. Arinaitwe would never eat food. His stepmother would give him a big chunk of meat but stuff it with pepper so that the child would not eat. She would then tell her husband, “Look, your son does not want to eat.” When the man was out of town, she would tell the boy to go and sleep where the goats were. How do you expect such a character not to become a terrible criminal in future? 

It is up to us, as a people, to also change because our society has the very nature to produce criminals. Once they become criminals, maybe we need to think about forgiveness. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

2.30
MS LUCY AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Amuru): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank hon. Alaso for raising this very important issue, especially the last bit on showing love to the condemned. I would like to give a personal testimony. I took my daughter for the sacrament of confirmation in a prison and everybody thought I was mad. However, that was very good to the prisoners and those who got out thanked me so much. I wanted to emphasise that bit of love as important.

These people can be rehabilitated. There is a young man who was in prison and during his reflections, he composed a song about one of the seven last words that Jesus told the people at the cross; he said, “Woman, see your son”. The song is now famously sung especially in Gulu Archdiocese. However, so many people do not know the brain behind that song. It was composed by a prisoner who never thought he would get out. Luckily, today he is out because he surrendered himself and he was given an opportunity to be rehabilitated.

I would like to thank hon. Alaso and I wish that all of us would find time to visit and support these people in any way we can. Thank you very much for giving me this opportunity.

2.31
MR JACK WAMANGA-WAMAI (FDC, Mbale Municipality, Mbale): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The situation in all prisons in this country is the same. I do not think that ever since the British left this country, the successive Governments of Uganda have ever done anything in the prisons. The buildings have asbestos roofs and we know that asbestos causes cancer and many countries have banned it. I raised the issue of asbestos to the Ministry of Works and Transport when I was here last time but the situation still stands. 

Secondly, there is congestion in all prisons and yet some prisoners committed petty crimes. If one goes to prison and is reformed, if they are not written off they could do community service by cleaning and then they are left to go. I visited Mbale and I was talking to some of the prisoners and the prison warders told me that there was nothing that had been done for all these years. 

Mr Speaker, in some countries, people put up prisons and Government rents from these individuals so that they improve the situation of their people. We saw these people acting in Luzira prisons. If one has been good, his or her period in prison should be shortened. Some have sat for exams and even passed. Government can follow up to see if they have reformed so that their cases are shortened and they come out. I thank you.

2.33
MR EDDIE KWIZERA (NRM, Bufumbira County East, Kisoro): Mr Speaker, I wish to appreciate hon. Alaso’s concern. What is very important now is that there are a number of prisoners who would like to appeal but their records are not there. They are seeking for a retrial but a number of them cannot appeal because there are no copies of their appeal and they have also not been facilitated to be retried. Government should pick a lot of interest in those cases where the records are missing. People would like to appeal but their chances of retrial are non-existent. I do not know if that is not a violation of human rights.

Another issue that is of concern to the public is non-compliance by judges and other judicial officers. It is provided for in the Judicial Code of Conduct that when a matter is concluded, a judgement must be read or given within 60 days. However, nowadays, you can conclude a matter in court and the judge may take five to ten years to give the judgement. This has affected the investors in this country because they know that our judicial system does not conclude issues. This also affects our rate of investment because our judicial system cannot be predicted; it depends on the individual who is handling the matter.

Therefore, I call upon Government, as much as they hold Parliament and other sectors to account for their actions, there must be a system where the Judiciary accounts for its performance to see if they are complying with their own standards. I thank you.

2.35
MR LATIF SSEBAGALA (DP, Kawempe Division North, Kampala): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Since all of us are potential prisoners, as legislators we must ensure that all these prisons are in good living condition. If we do not do that, by the time we are sent there, it will be too late for us to cry that things are bad and yet we had the opportunity to change them while we were still outside.

My humble appeal, as we scrutinise the ministerial statement, is that we put a lot of emphasis on the Ministry of Internal Affairs, especially in the prisons section, so that we improve the conditions in all the prisons to accommodate everybody. The conditions should be the same for all. As my colleague has said, if you are taken there and you are rich, your condition could be a little better as compared to someone who is poor.

Secondly, Mr Speaker, decongesting prisons is of paramount importance. We have heard of the community service arrangement, where people carry out activities in the community and they are not taken to prison, so that prisons are not congested. However, we have seen people who have committed petty crimes like being idle and disorderly being taken to Luzira and various prisons and those prisons are extremely congested. My humble appeal is that we improve our community service arrangement so that those with petty cases can do community work and contribute greatly to the improvement of our communities. 

Mr Speaker, it is very expensive to feed prisoners. I have seen, time and again, when ministerial statements are brought here food for prisoners is under unfunded priorities. It cannot be an unfunded priority because they must eat. However, if we try to improve on the community service arrangement, we may decongest the prisons and also cut down on our expenses on food. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, I think the point raised by hon. Alaso was not a welfare issue. It was not about what they eat or where they sleep, the games they have access to and what they do while in prison. Basically, it was a justice matter; how the lawyers on state brief are facilitated to expedite the handling of their cases. This is a problem.

Secondly, there is the issue of the records of proceedings of the trial courts that take ages to be prepared thereby inhibiting the process of appeal. She specifically talked of people in the condemned section. All of us know that in the operation of the law, a person condemned has an automatic right of appeal up to the highest court. If the process is bogged down at the lowest court or the court of first trial – Let us say it is the High Court that has condemned a particular person to death; if that record delays and yet this person has a right to appeal to the final court, you can now imagine how long the whole process will take before the person appears in the Supreme Court where the final decision will be made.

I think the plea is a justice issue that the Government should look at in regard to how to facilitate these lawyers on state brief and also how to energise the courts to expedite the process of preparing records of proceedings in the trial courts. This is in order for them to facilitate the appeal process. Those are the issues that have been raised in this particular matter that has come from Luzira prisons through hon. Alaso of Serere District. I think we should conclude that matter. If the Government has something to say on this, they can do so. 

2.40
MR MICHAEL MAWANDA (NRM, Igara County East, Bushenyi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance in respect to Ugandan traders who supplied goods and services to the Government of South Sudan some time back and they have not been paid to date. 

Mr Speaker, this matter came up last year while we were discussing the committee report for the Ministry of Trade and Cooperatives. We exhaustively discussed it and resolved that Government should look for money to pay off these traders so that they can remain in business. This is because most of them had pledged their assets and business in banks to be able to raise money to do business in South Sudan.  

It also came up when we were discussing the committee report of the Ministry of East African Affairs and we also resolved the same. The Minister of Trade and Cooperatives as well that of East African Community Affairs decided that they should be given two or three weeks within which they can consult, come back to this House and advise us on the way forward. However, up to date, nothing has been done. 

There was a MoU that was signed between these traders, the Government of Uganda and the Government of South Sudan in 2014. Most of the banks had relaxed in following up these traders because there was hope that payment would be made. However, beginning this year, banks have started harassing these traders and some have already lost their property. 

Mr Speaker, I wonder whether our resolutions were communicated to Government. What is the Government doing to assist these traders? We are all aware that this economy is driven by the private sector but if they are not assisted, I think we shall have a problem.

The Kenyan Government has assisted its citizens and traders who also participated in the trade with South Sudan. We wonder why our Government is not doing the same. Moreover now, South Sudan has been admitted into the East African Community. Why can’t they look at this serious problem so that our traders do not lose their property having delivered their goods to this country? I, therefore, send this message to Government so that they can come up and help our business people who are on the verge of losing their assets to banks. I thank you very much. 

2.43
THE OPPOSITION CHIEF WHIP (Ms Cecilia Ogwal): Mr Speaker, in the process of traders doing business in South Sudan, they have either lost some of their property or somehow, the business has gone sour and they are the same traders now turning to Government for help.

This matter came before the Committee on Budget. It was very clear that when you enter into a business of any kind with any country or even within, you have to be very careful about the business partner you are dealing with and their credit worthiness. If you are not sure of that person’s credit worthiness, you have to go for collaterals. These are basic business principles, which anyone would know, whether you are in primary one, the university or pursuing a Masters’ degree. We are taught how to do simple business. That is why in Lango, we learn how to do business from the “plotter” level. Our parents were poor so they would open a small window where we could sell paraffin and soap. That is how you learn. If someone you do not know comes at night and says, “Oh, I am badly off, give me paraffin”, and you do not know that person and he does not pay, it is your fault.

Mr Speaker, let people who are not sensitive about the risks involved in doing business with our neighbour be aware that you have to be cautious of who you are dealing with. I am not trying to defend the Government. However, as a Member of this House who also has interests in the money that Government is managing, although managing it badly, I think I can defend that money. That money is not going to be spent on areas where people have not been cautious or sensitive in doing business rightly. 

Mr Speaker - (Interruption)

MR SSEBAGALA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise on a procedural issue. The honourable colleague has brought a complaint from traders who were dealing with South Sudan. As a people’s representative, this is the House where he is supposed to bring that complaint from the traders. When these traders are not paid, it impacts a lot on our economy. I believe that they have documentary evidence to that effect. 

Is hon. Cecilia Ogwal procedurally right to downsize the issue of traders who are suffering and yet it is in the august House where their voices are supposed to be heard? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think the honourable member acknowledges the point that such a situation has existed. However, she was still making a preliminary point, although it is taking a bit long, on why it is necessary for us to understand business principles before we do business. We are waiting for her concluding remarks so that we know whether she was going to support or not, in which case there would have been an issue.  

MS CECILIA OGWAL: As a legislator, sometimes you have to explain before you get to the heart of the matter.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: However, the explanation should not take too long. 

MS CECILIA OGWAL: Yes. Mr Speaker, it is very unfortunate that the Government, through the Ministry of Trade and Industry, did not study the risks involved in doing business with our neighbours, and not only with South Sudan. There are so many Ugandans who have also lost money in trading with DRC and other neighbouring countries. Therefore, for us to stand here as intercessors for the traders and plead their case that they be assisted, I think would be turning ourselves into guarantors- I can right now start business with South Sudan and hope that one day Government will bail me out. 

The most important thing is for us to urge Government to look into those factors, which were probably ignored but which have increased the risks of doing business with those neighbouring countries - I am not targeting South Sudan only – so that we can come up with solutions to those problems.  Otherwise, if we are going to talk in generality and plead for the traders, which traders are we going to leave out and which ones are we going to help? 

In any case, I may also be interested in knowing who those traders involved are? It is important for me to know those traders because there are some small traders who may never be known but those big ones, who are taking advantage of their big businesses, are the ones who want Government to bail them out. We might even go nasty and request for the list of those traders who need to be assisted. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

2.50
MR FELIX OKOT OGONG (NRM, Dokolo County, Dokolo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The matter before us is very serious and should not treat it lightly. Hon. Cecilia Ogwal from Dokolo knows very well that she is a very good Christian and has been praying for those in distress. I am wondering why today she is not helping us to pray for those in distress. I think that people from Dokolo did not treat her lightly and next time when you pray for those in distress, they will not believe in what you say.

The matter being raised is a matter of national interest. When South Sudan got her independence, our leaders in this country encouraged people to engage in business with them. Our people responded to that call. The people of Uganda went there as businessmen and got contracts from Government. They were not contracts from individuals in South Sudan; they were contracts from the Government of South Sudan. Therefore, this is a matter of foreign policy. Why should the Government of South Sudan give our people contracts and fail to pay them? That is why we are appealing to the Government of Uganda to intervene in solving that situation.

Mr Speaker, this is not the first time this matter is coming to Parliament. We have handled this in committees and at various fora. We have discussed this matter even in this House and passed a resolution. It is not a matter we are opening up as a new debate. Members passed a resolution in this Parliament that Government should look into this matter and support it. (Interruption)

THE THIRD DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND MINISTER OF EAST AFRICAN AFFAIRS (Mr Kirunda Kivejinja): Thank you very much for giving way, honourable member –(Interjections)- I am what I am. (Laughter) For Hansard purposes, I am Kirunda Kivejinja, the Minister in charge of East African Affairs. 

You are talking about South Sudan, which is the youngest member of the East African Community. The information I would like to give is that the intention of EAC is to open up markets so that we can be able to have bigger markets than the Dokolo market, where we can buy and sell our goods. Secondly, you know that before we were disturbed by those people who lent us this language – (Interjections) - the people who gave us this language with which we are debating our national issues, these were areas which were a free market for our people. When South Sudan liberated itself from Arab domination, it became a free market and therefore, every African could move there freely and trade in what he or she wanted. 

In normal Government work, there is insurance against risks for people. There are insurances throughout the world. However, because we are just a nascent society and there is a lot of pressure on our part, we have not been able to provide for the insurance coverage to protect our traders against such risks. It is normal, but it should be of interest to this House and our country that this matter is raised at the national level. Thank you very much. 

MR OKOT OGONG: This matter, as I said, is very serious. It was debated in this Parliament earlier and a resolution was passed that Government should pick interest in it and support the traders. This matter has been hanging for very many years. I know committees have been formed by the Government of Uganda and the Government of South Sudan. The verification committee has already done their job. The lists are there and the claims are genuine. There is no one faking, as they have already been verified.

Even in America, when their companies go under they support them. They have been doing it not only in Uganda but even in the UK, in Kenya and everywhere. They have supported their companies and firms. We wonder why a Government of this nature, which claims to be private sector-led, cannot support the private sector. 

Mr Speaker, let me give my own example. I imported 100 containers of sugar and they got stuck in Kenya. I appealed to my Government, I went to all the ministries and nobody came to my aid; nobody completely. I went to the highest office but my sugar was just lying there. I requested them to talk to Kenya to release my sugar but nobody responded. What is this? 

I have found out that these people’s assets have been sold. They are suffering. Why can’t Government come out with a strategy of doing reparation for these people, of supporting them in the process? I think it is only right because this is a people’s Parliament and we are working here on behalf of all Ugandans, including the traders.

I would like to appeal to the inner feelings of the Members of Parliament so that we urge our Government to support these traders. Let them be paid and if they cannot get immediate payment from the Government of South Sudan, the Government of Uganda can come out with a remedy to support these people. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

2.58
COL (RTD) FRED MWESIGYE (NRM, Nyabushozi County, Kiruhura): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to support my colleagues. I would like to add that this is a matter of national importance. Since I came to this House, I have never seen hon. Cecilia Ogwal being as insensitive as she is today. I do not know what happened to her today but I hope that she is serious about this matter. We have discussed this matter at various levels and various committees have been set up to handle it. I do not know what Government is doing about it.

Fortunately, the Minister of State for Trade is here. I expect the minister to give us an answer that should put this matter to rest. Otherwise, I would like to inform this House that most of our traders deal with commercial banks. Commercial banks have never helped indigenous people to develop. Therefore, I call upon this House to support Uganda Development Bank by funding it so that it can support our traders. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

2.59
MS CHRISTINE BAKO (FDC, Woman Representative, Arua): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to begin with the impression that hon. Felix Okot Ogong gave that in the USA there is always a Government bailout. The US Government bails business people out when there is a recession in the country so that they can beef up production in their own country. It will never intervene when there is an external process of trade. 

As Ugandans, we admit that our own businessmen had contracts with the Government of South Sudan but are at the same time asking our own Government to intervene. The Minister for East African Community Affairs has just said that there was no Government insurance. Where do you expect Ugandans to get that money as of now? He has just confirmed that.

Secondly, businesses in a fragile state require a lot of insurance. How many of these businesses were insured and to what extent? It can only be from that point of view that we can ask, “As a country, to what extent can we extend help?” 

When a contract is breached, there is a law that provides for your salvation. Have our traders tried, in any way, to look at the legal segment of these unfortunate situations? That is important because tomorrow, we can decide to go as a cooperative to borrow a big loan and later we say we are stuck so the Ugandan taxpayer should intervene. This country was clearly on the path of progress until we deliberately decided to be a private-sector-driven economy. It did not mean that when the private sector is beyond our borders, we will intervene when they did not insure those businesses. 

My question to the honourable Minister in charge of East African Community Affairs is: if Government did not insure these external businesses and if the business people did not anticipate the risks yet they knew that they were dealing with a very fragile state, what do you expect the Ugandan taxpayer to do at the moment? Do you expect them to pay, or are you also pursuing another option from the World Trade Organisation and your own trade bloc in the community? Are you trying to intervene so that the South Sudan Government pays our traders? 

One thing that you are good at is supplying soldiers to South Sudan. However, when it comes to protecting our business interests, you tell people that there is no insurance for their external trade. Now, what is your interest and how are you intending to solve the situation? Thank you.

3.04
MR EDDIE KWIZERA (NRM, Bufumbira County East, Kisoro): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I appreciate the issues that Members are discussing. However, we should also remember that there are some people who are not paid by the Government of Uganda when they supply goods; what is Government going to do about them? Why should we get concerned with those people who supplied the Government of South Sudan and yet the Government of Uganda has not paid the people who supplied them. Priority should first be given to our people; they should be paid first. 

My other concern is: who has failed in his or her work? That is what we should be asking ourselves. Under the current arrangement, we can make use of our embassies. If we have legal documents, we should make use of the embassies and if the embassies are not working, we should use a joint permanent commission. These countries have bilateral arrangements on how to resolve these issues that do not necessarily affect the state but individuals. Therefore, if we can make a formal report to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs as traders, it can be handled under a joint permanent commission. 

Again, we should not forget that when one is a business person, they must assess the risks they might face or the risks the country might be involved in. When you are doing international trade, you must face international risks. That is why we are affected in our oil exploration and production; it is because of the situation that we have in the great lakes region – people cannot invest their money because they know the risks. If you know you are going to swim in troubled waters and you have no life jacket, you have a problem.

I believe it is not only South Sudan that has not paid us. Even countries like Rwanda, Burundi and DRC have also not paid us. Therefore, I call upon the Government to come up with a policy to that effect so that we can hold them to the implementation of that policy. Otherwise, if you do not make use of consultants who are more knowledgeable in international business – If you do not know how to go about such business, make use of consultants.

Furthermore, in such businesses, one must pay for freight, insurance and costs. Therefore, why didn’t they insure their businesses? We should sensitise our traders to always make use of insurance services. Otherwise, we are not going to appropriate funds for private businesses. That is not even in the law. We can receive it as a matter of public concern but for just creating awareness and giving advice to businessmen not to trade with South Sudan because they are bad business people. Thank you.

3.06
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Serere): Thank you, Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues.

This is not the first time this matter has come to this House and today, I am happy that the Minister of East African Community Affairs is here in the House, given the fact that South Sudan has become part of the EAC. I had expected more than what he offered when he spoke. 

Having said that, I know that at the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and in our embassies, we are supposed to have commercial attachés; do we have any at the Uganda Embassy in South Sudan? If so, what have they done to address this matter? I would not want us to make this a ritual. The Minister for East African Community Affairs should be given a deadline within which to bring a report to this House regarding these issues because this is the fourth time this same matter is being raised in this House. That is what we need from that ministry; it will help us to have a comprehensive debate on this issue. 

There are also a number of other issues and the Committee on Foreign Affairs has handled some of them. I recall at one time we had proposed to build a market in South Sudan. I do not know if it was implemented. We have even had cases where our colleagues in this House have lost money. Mr Speaker, I know one of the Members you helped, who was paid. I do not want to mention names but the Speaker knows that Member. So, it is not only about people out there; even Members of this House have had financial stress as a result of what happened to them in that country.

Some Members are complaining that the Government is not paying, but has the Government of South Sudan just refused to pay or are they broke? What is the problem? There is need to understand that. What has the Government of South Sudan said? Those are issues for which we need answers from the minister. Let us give the minister one week to come back and report to this House on this matter. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, this matter actually came as an urgent matter. It is not a formal motion before the House but I have enlarged the time because the matter is touchy, as you can see from the contributions from Members. I will take two more Members before letting the Frontbench say something as we conclude this matter. Please, make it brief.

3.08
MR STEPHEN MUKITALE (NRM, Buliisa County, Buliisa): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The matter of the latest member state of the East African Community is quite disturbing. Uganda has been very supportive to this young nation called South Sudan in terms of security and many other ways. However, we do not seem to be getting reciprocal treatment from this young sister state and it is a matter of concern. 

I would like the Government to demand that the South Sudan Government treats– Today we are talking about payments to businessmen but we have also had human rights abuses against our people. We have had people killed. There are those who are not even allowed to speak. Small contractors who go and build houses are locked up and thrown in buses with only the bus fare and they cannot even go back to make claims. There are a lot of issues. One time there was the issue of Ugandans doing boda boda business there and they got very many problems. 

We changed our foreign service from traditional diplomacy to having commercial attachés to deal with investment issues. I thought that those who are supervising the officials at Ministry of Foreign Affairs would now be interested in making sure that such business people are paid and our people do not lose money. This is because when our people lose money, it comes back as a net loss to a country.

As a country we need to redefine the role of the state. Liberalisation and privatisation do not mean that the Government washes its hands completely. Government is still responsible for making sure that the private sector has a good environment, it is not ripped off, has long term financing and has good business so that they pay taxes. Otherwise, how will they pay taxes if they are left to suffer? 

The bigger debate then should be, in a private-sector-led economy, what should Government be doing for these other sectors to make sure they continue working? What bilateral agreements should we be looking at in international business? It is a very big debate, which does not seem to be coming through; we are just discussing symptoms –(Interruption)

MS ALASO: Thank you, honourable colleague. I hear this talk of commercial attachés and I thought I should give this House information. I was hoping that somebody from the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, whether the minister or the committee, would rise up to provide this information. Unfortunately, I have not seen anybody do that.

Let me inform this House that those commercial attachés are just titles and people with a desk in those blocks called embassies. They have no facilitation whatsoever to get out of those offices and interact with the communities we are talking about. Take for instance the Embassy in Kinshasa, which is in charge of five other countries; the business between Kinshasa and Uganda takes place here at the border and other countries like Belgium have representatives but we do not have.

The commercial attaché is a miserable human being by definition, sitting at the embassy at a very old desk and receiving all sorts of - they cannot go out. Honourable colleague, if you want to redefine the role of commercial attachés, you better give them money to move out to interface with the business community. We all know what we do in South Sudan. To be honest, all we do is lay down our lives for them. At the end of the day, there is no other business. Nobody cares what happens to Ugandans. I thought I would give you that information. Thank you.

MR MUKITALE: Thank you so much, hon. Alice Alaso, for that information. What you are raising is that both Parliament and Government, the entities responsible for appropriation, should be appropriating money in tandem with the redefined role of a foreign mission, including issues of investment, trade and commercial attachés.

The final point I would like to make is that even if Government wanted to intervene to support private businesses that are hurt - I have just come from the Office of the Prime Minister, following up on matters of disaster and contingency. Officials from the Office of the Prime Minister just told me that they do not know who in this country is spending the contingency money. 

In the new finance law we made, we agreed that we now have three per cent of the budget as a contingency fund and 15 per cent of that should go to disaster-stricken areas. However, I noticed there is no assistance for Karamoja. There is also nothing for Bundibugyo or Buliisa. Who is spending the contingency money in this country? I thank you so much.

3.15
MR HATWIB KATOTO (NRM, Katerera County, Rubirizi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. In dealing with trade, first of all we need to have some principles. There is what is called being faithful to one another, for example. When you consider the issue of South Sudan and Ugandan traders, you notice that some of them supplied air. (Laughter) Therefore, we need to be honest. For those people who supplied real goods, at least Government should come to their rescue because under the Constitution, the Government is supposed to protect Ugandans and their property. However, those people who supplied air should not also masquerade because they are many and they are aware. 

To the Parliament of Uganda, when we represent people here, we represent the genuine and those who are not genuine. Therefore, the onus is on us to sit and rearrange the Ministry of Trade and Industry to make sure that at least those who have genuine documents are assisted to get their money.

Lastly, we are talking of money but there is blood being poured. There are some people who have gone with their little merchandise and have been killed and others have been burnt, but now we are here talking only about money. Let us first talk about those people who have been killed and burnt for nothing. In trade, there are those issues we should follow, and as Parliament of Uganda we need to talk about this new country called South Sudan in regard to our people who are being mistreated there. Thank you very much.

3.16
MS JOY ATIM (Independent, Woman Representative, Lira): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The issue of South Sudan was discussed in this House. We realised that many of our people and their businesses suffered in South Sudan. Many were killed, many ran and left their property behind and nobody accounted for it. They are now without business. Some of them decided not to go back to South Sudan. We are aware of that.

Mr Speaker, I am perturbed by the expectation on Government to compensate them. I do not know whether it is going to be done on a selective basis. What criteria is Government going to use to access those who suffered? I know of people in Lira who also supplied transport and food items to the people of South Sudan but they have not been paid and their businesses have collapsed.

Mr Speaker, when we talk about the East African Common Market, I think it is a little broader. Our people are also suffering in Kenya, let alone South Sudan. They take their maize, which is ready for the market and is of good quality, but Kenyans will say it is not of good quality. Remember they will have transported it and now they have to bring it back with nowhere to store it. Our people are suffering.

When they notice the Ugandan vehicles, they will hold them. The vehicles are held for a long time while the goods go bad. By the time those goods are taken to the market, they have lost their original value.

Has our Government taken trouble to assess the problems Ugandans face in the course of doing business in the East African Common Market? We are suffering. We just opened doors but we do not know how much our people are suffering in Kenya and South Sudan. We have to watch out, as Ugandans, so that we do not talk only but we also walk the talk. The Minister for East African Community Affairs just stays in his office; he has never assessed the problems of our people. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable ministers, may I know who is going to respond to these issues? Let us start with the Minister of State for Trade and Industry, but briefly.

3.20
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TRADE AND INDUSTRY (INDUSTRY) (Mr Michael Werikhe): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I acknowledge the issues that have been raised by colleagues regarding our traders doing business in South Sudan. 

I would like to, first of all, inform the House that it is Government policy to make sure that every businessman or businesswoman is protected, provided he or she does legal business. Therefore, as Government, it is our responsibility to ensure that our people are protected under any circumstances. This must be on record.

Secondly, consultations have been going on between the governments of Uganda and South Sudan. Recently, the Rt Hon. Prime Minister was in South Sudan, together with the Minister of Foreign Affairs, to continue with the negotiations so as to ensure that the traders who were affected are compensated. Therefore, this process is still on-going. 

I would like to request that you give us one week to bring a comprehensive report because the consultations have been concluded. This will enable us to have a full debate on the issue and we shall be able to inform the House about the steps the Government of Uganda has taken.  I pray for one week so that all the issues raised by our colleagues are conclusively handled and responded to.

3.22
THE MINISTER, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (GENERAL DUTIES) (Prof. Trasis Kabwegyere): Thank you, hon. Michael Werikhe, for that clarification. 

I think there is a bottom line that we should work from. A Government worth its name must protect its citizens and more so when they are in business with other countries. When outside the country, it is our obligation, as Government, to protect our citizens and their interests. In any case, international trade is so important to our economy; we cannot do without it. South Sudan has been contributing to our economy. The only problem is that when there is no peace in South Sudan, we cannot do good business. It should be understood that we in Uganda cannot control the insecurity that is taking place in South Sudan and yet it affects both Ugandans and South Sudanese. That is why we have been involved in trying to bring peace in that area because a peaceful South Sudan is good for us.

Secondly, Mr Speaker, the role of Government by law represents the state- There are certain things we can do as Government but others we cannot do. We cannot guarantee the behaviour of traders when they engage in business. We cannot guarantee their payment, in the sense that we cannot pass a budget here to pay for traders who engage in business. However, it is our business to make sure that the legal and legitimate transactions between our traders and other countries are protected and we will do everything possible to do that.

Finally – (Interruption)-

MS ALASO: Thank you very much, honourable minister. The honourable minister is my friend. That is why he normally gives me space and I thank him for that. You said, very emphatically, that Government cannot intervene, but previously on the Floor of this very House we have seen those interventions made. Why can’t you intervene when it comes to those traders and yet on the Floor of this very House, we were able to intervene and approve money for constructing a marina for Speke Resort Munyonyo, which is a private company that has failed to account for the money to date? There is also a hotel in the middle of Entebbe Road in Bwebajja where we put taxpayers’ money, but you are emphatically saying that you cannot intervene. What is the criterion used for those businesses where we can and cannot intervene?

PROF. KABWEGYERE: I have certainly listened to my friend’s contribution, but I do not agree with it. The examples she has chosen to use are to be understood in the context where Government was involved. Government will help anybody in Uganda as long as they are helping that person in national interest. If there was support for investors during the visit of the Pope or the Queen here, that should be understood. 

I was concluding; it is very clear, and nobody should doubt, that we are interested in every aspect of our trade. We actually encourage people to trade in finished products - those who can bring us dollars. When traders go to South Sudan and get us dollars, it is better for us than when we trade underhand. Therefore, we want to ensure that every interest that Ugandans take abroad gets to be productive to all of us. I thank you. 

3.27
THE THIRD DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND MINISTER OF EAST AFRICAN COMMUNITY AFFAIRS (Mr Kirunda Kivejinja): I would like to say that this is an issue, which is legitimate before the House and Ugandans. We are toiling to unite Africa because we want to make big markets. When we have one market, our duty would be to streamline the rules and laws to govern that common market. You are already recruited on my side as we establish an East African market and establish rules and regulations so that we benefit from that common market. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, whatever processes happen outside this House must later on, when faced by the scrutiny and oversight function of this House, meet the test. Therefore, even if we pass resolutions here, they have to be implemented by somebody, but the implementation mechanisms and processes must conform to what can be passed by this House when carrying out its oversight function.

This question of traders in South Sudan- First of all, we have the issue of the parties involved. In every transaction, there are two parties and you know that in South Sudan, there have been issues of transition. Those people who did business in South Sudan between 2005 and 2006 were dealing with the Government of southern Sudan, which was then the Sudan. Those people who did business with South Sudan after 2010 were dealing with Government of South Sudan. So, there is a transition. That can be handled by the lawyers in terms of sovereign inheritance of debts and issues like that. 

However, we need to be very clear about what the Government of Uganda is going to do about this. What is the payment about? Are we paying our traders because they have lost? In that case, it will be like payment without rights - ex gratia; they do not have a right of claim on the Government of Uganda but Uganda is just carrying out its sovereign responsibility to protect its citizens by paying them money. 

Alternatively, are we paying this money on behalf of the Government of South Sudan? If we are paying this money on behalf of the Government of South Sudan, are they borrowing from the Government of Uganda? Is it a grant? Does it meet the constitutional standards set so that when we later ask the fundamental questions in this House, we are okay? If there is an agreement where the Government of South Sudan says, “we cannot pay this debt; pay it for us and we will pay you back” then that becomes a sovereign debt by South Sudan. (Applause)

You need to clarify all these legal issues before you go into negotiations and come back to the House and face fire that is not necessary to be faced, and yet all we are doing is trying to help our own people. We need to proceed on a very clear path so that we know what we are doing. If we are going to pay ex gratia, then we can as well incorporate it in the Budget and pay people off. We can say they have suffered, we recognise the situation and therefore, the Government will pay them. However, if we are paying on behalf of the Government of South Sudan, then there are also other procedures that need to be adopted. I think that we need to be clear on this. The minister says he is coming back in a week’s time to report –

MR WERIKHE: Mr Speaker, after the guidance you have given, I think that a week might not be enough –(Interjections)- Yes! I am submitting, honourable colleagues. We need to take into account some of the critical issues that the Rt Hon. Speaker has mentioned. Therefore, we may request for two weeks, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you.

LAYING OF PAPERS

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the Minister Justice and Constitutional Affairs here, or somebody acting on his behalf? This is the policy statement for the Judicial Service Commission from the Ministry of Justice. Is the document here with the report? Honourable members, this will affect the processes of this House. 

Can we have the Public Service Commission annual report? I know that the documents are already here.

3.33
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PUBLIC SERVICE (Ms Prisca Mbaguta Ssezi): Mr Speaker, I would like to lay on the Table the Public Service Commission annual report of 1 July 2014 to 30 June 2015. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. It stands referred to the appropriate Committee of Public Service and Local Government to look at it and advise us on how the Public Service Commission is doing. Thank you. 

3.34
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (GENERAL DUTIES) (Dr Chris Baryomunsi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. In accordance with the Public Finance Management Act, 2015, I beg to lay on the Table the policy statement for the Judicial Service Commission for the financial year 2016/2017. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Where is the report and why is it coming late?

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to apologise on behalf of the ministry. The law prescribes a timeline when the policy statements should be – (Interruption)

MS CECILIA OGWAL: Mr Speaker, there are some mistakes, which can be forgiven but there are others, which the Catholics would call mortal sins, and they can kill the soul and the spirit. 

We have spent a lot of time explaining to the Executive about the importance of complying with the law which we passed. The law was read and explained here and the whole House agreed that any ministerial statement that is brought to this House and laid on the Table after the 15th of March breaches the law. The law also gives us a window of hope that when such a thing happens, the ministry or minister responsible must provide, in a written form, a report as to why the statement could not be laid on the Table by the 15th of March.

Mr Speaker, I rise on a point of order. Is it in order for the minister to pretend that he has no idea at all about the Public Finance and Management Act, which we passed? Secondly, is it in order for the minister to pretend that he can quietly lay a policy statement on the Table without the accompanying report as required by the law? Is he in order to play with our alertness and intellectual ability? (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I have been trying to check whether there is any rule that regulates the issues of pretence. (Laughter) I have not come across any rule that states that Members are prohibited from pretending. (Laughter) So, what is not prohibited is allowed. I cannot judge whether he is pretending or not; I am not able to judge that.

I think the situation is that a policy statement that is brought after the 15th of March must be accompanied by a report stating why it has happened that way. I guess that is why the responsible minister is not here because there is no such report. Honourable members, this is the Judicial Service Commission; it is not a substantive ministry that we would have had a lot of issues with. Therefore, I would beg your indulgence that we allow this statement but we seek the report to be brought to the House at a later stage.

Honourable minister, you can bring the report tomorrow or as soon as it is ready. For now, let us receive this policy statement so that it can be transmitted to the committee for handling with the others that have already been sent there. 

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for your wise ruling. I just want to – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, it was not a ruling; it was simply guidance. (Laughter)

DR BARYOMUNSI: I just want to re-state that I am not pretending. I am the Minister of State for Health and I stood in for the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs. I will relay this information. I was in the House when it was agreed that beginning today, the policy statements should be accompanied by that explanation. Thank you for your wise guidance. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister. I am advised that we will not be able to handle item No. 3C now. Let us go straight to item No. 4.

QUESTIONS FOR ORAL ANSWER

QUESTION 33/1/09 TO THE FIRST DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND MINISTER OF EAST AFRICAN COMMUNITY AFFAIRS

 “i)	Would the minister brief the House on the progress of integration of the East African Community (EAC)?

ii)	What efforts has the ministry made to domesticate the various protocols/treaties with respect to the EAC integration?

iii)	How are the EAC member states addressing the challenges to the integration process?”

3.39
THE FIRST DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND MINISTER OF EAST AFRICAN COMMUNITY AFFAIRS (Mr Kirunda Kivejinja): Mr Speaker, I beg to offer an oral answer to the questions that were raised by an honourable member regarding the East African Community Affairs department.

The first question was: “Would the Minister brief the House on the progress of integration of the East African Community?” The answer has been prepared in two sections; one is a detailed answer, which was supplied to the House for distribution to the Members and to the particular Member. However, here, I just want to give you the few significant strides that we have made.

Significant strides have been made in driving the regional integration agenda with a view to wealth creation –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, just a moment; is this document uploaded? 

MR KIVEJINJA: It was supplied long time ago. It was sent here on the 18 March.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It is not on the iPads, honourable members. However, this is a brief statement- an oral answer to a question about the East African Community. Wouldn’t we be able to receive it?

MR OKUPA: Mr Speaker, let him give the comprehensive answer to the person who asked the question and let him read it, other than the abridged version, which he is trying to read. This is because there are now two, which we do not have.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: He said he had already submitted it to the Member who asked the question and to the Clerk, but it is not uploaded. Can we allow the minister to give a summary of his response and if there are supplementary questions we can ask them, so that we do not bog down the process? Honourable members, can we receive it? Honourable minister, please proceed.

MR KIVEJINJA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. We sent the answer to question No.33/1/09 on 18 March and we thought that would be done. However, it is only today that I was able to come and answer the question in person.

The first question was: “Would the Minister brief the House on the progress of integration of the East African Community?” I would like to say that significant strides have been made in driving the regional integration agenda with a view to wealth creation, raising the standards of living of all the people of East Africa, and enhancing the international competitiveness of the region through increased production, trade and investment. To this end, the partner states have moved progressively to establish a customs union, a common market and more recently, a monetary union.

The customs union, which was signed in 2005, has achieved the following: 
    a) Intra-regional trade has increased from $1.6 billion in 2005 to $5.5 billion in 2014.
    b) Uganda’s share is approximately 30 per cent. This has been achieved through programmes on an enhanced trade environment comprising implementation of the single customs tariff that has reduced the clearance of goods from Mombasa from 18 to four days.
    c) Harmonisation of customs procedures and legislation.
    d) A regional time-bound Non-Tariff Barriers’ (NTBs) programme has been reduced from 107 days to 22. Uganda has reduced NTBs from 12 to only four as of 2016.
    e) Establishment of a one-stop border post where goods are cleared jointly at first point of entry.
    f) Online cargo tracking systems, single window and authorised economic operators’ system have been put in place.
    g) Integrated border management systems.

In addition, my ministry has established regional integration centres starting with Busia as an interface office to provide timely information to cross-border traders and other communities on regional integration issues, including receiving feedback on challenges.

On the common market, which was signed in 2010, regarding free movement of labour and persons, Uganda has benefited through:
    a) Issuance of national IDs, which has facilitated movement of East Africans, especially Kenyans, Ugandans and Rwandese. The international e-passport has also been approved.
    b) A mutual recognition agreement has facilitated the movement of professionals across the region, for example engineers, accountants and architects. About 1,500 teachers and doctors from Uganda are working in Rwanda because of this agreement. 
    c) There is also harmonisation of education standards and curricula. The region has agreed on a system, which recognises requirements for academic qualifications to facilitate movement of labour. Students are allowed to move with student passes.
    d) A single tourist visa, which was introduced in 2015, is under implementation in Kenya, Rwanda and Uganda.

On the monetary union, which was signed in 2013, a 10-year roadmap for its implementation is in place, that is, from 2013 to 2024. The following key institutions have been established:
    a) The East African Central Bank;
    b) Institutions responsible for financial services
    c) A statistics bureau to harmonise regional statistics;
    d) A surveillance, compliance and enforcement commission; and other relevant institutions.

The next question was: “What efforts has the ministry made to domesticate the various protocols/treaties with respect to the EAC integration?”

A matrix showing the number of protocols ratified and those in the process of ratification is attached to this statement. My ministry is responsible and takes the lead in ensuring that the protocols approved are ratified by working closely with the Cabinet Secretariat and all other relevant Ministries, Departments and Agencies (MDAs).

The domestication is through partnership with relevant MDAs, the private sector and Community Service Organisations (CSOs) – first to raise awareness about the ratified protocols; and secondly, to build the capacity for implementation and mainstreaming sector plans and activities.

The ministry also works closely with Parliament for awareness. Mr Speaker, you are aware that Parliament has a committee, which is permanently monitoring all our activities. There are also reports that are supplied directly. The relationship between East Africa Legislative Assembly (EALA) and our Parliament is also another way through which awareness of what is going on is got. Where amendments of national laws are required, the channel is already established so that the two institutions are kept in place and aware of what is going on in each and every place.

Mr Speaker, more detailed information with all the appendices is available and was supplied to all Members. I wish to tell you that the integration is moving on. I was happy that one of the issues raised was with South Sudan. Once we harmonise, we shall be able to make the rules and laws that will govern our common market and be able to clear the way for safe prosperity for all the people in this big market. I thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I thank you very much. Are there any supplementary questions since the Member who asked the question is not here? It is not a debate but supplementary questions.

3.50
MR GILBERT OLANYA (Independent, Kilak County, Amuru): I thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for his response which has been clear. I would like to find out the timeframe that you are giving for the establishment of the one-stop border market with South Sudan. We all know that South Sudan has just joined the East African Community, so I would like to understand the timeframe. Is it one or two years? The market will ease the business between South Sudan and Uganda. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, you know that there is a limit with supplementary questions.

3.52
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman Representative, Serere): I thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to know from the honourable minister about the single tourist visa. How far have other countries gone with issuance of the single tourist visa? As of now, from the reports that we get from the embassies, we know that it is only Uganda that is dedicated to this single tourist visa while the other states are not. Have you taken time to compare the commitment of the EAC partners to the single tourist visa?

3.53
MR STEPHEN MUKITALE (NRM, Buliisa County, Buliisa): Mr Speaker, our universities have been compelled to charge uniform tuition fees for foreign students and yet you are aware that even on the Government side, the unit cost per student in comparison to the money that Government gives is not enough. Who is going to pay for that deficit?

My second question is related to the monetary union. It is feared by most economists that a monetary union without a political federation would cause us a problem. Have you looked at the challenges that come with the convergence of the monetary union before dealing with the political issues?

3.54
MS CHRISTINE BAKO (FDC, Woman Representative, Arua): I thank you, Mr Speaker. Honourable minister, when it comes to the ratification of protocols like the Protocol on Foreign Policy and Coordination, Protocol on Privileges and Immunities of the East African Community and the Protocol on Cooperation in Defence, Tanzania is immaculately absent. Why could Tanzania be dragging their feet in signing these protocols?   

3.55
MR JACK WAMANGA-WAMAI (FDC, Mbale Municipality, Mbale): I thank you, Mr Speaker. I also want the minister to clarify on the protocol on foreign policy issues and the cooperation in foreign affairs matters with the East African Community countries.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, would you like to deal with those supplementary questions? 

3.55
THE THIRD DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND MINISTER OF EAST AFRICAN COMMUNITY AFFAIRS (Mr Kirunda Kivejinja): First of all, I would like to bring good tidings about this common market. Even in our provisions for the budget, we projected that in 2016, we should be able to have finished the problems of the market. However, there are a number of paraphernalia; for example, South Sudan has to satisfy a number of things so that all these ticklish problems are finished before they fully participate. A system has already been put into place and we think that through this mechanism, we shall be able to solve most of these issues.

Normalisation of trade with South Sudan under markets I think is the proper mechanism to solve the problems that we are trying to grapple with individually. Whether somebody trades publically or privately, – after all, our lives are private because God gave each of us their own life - the Government must be able to guarantee that nobody disturbs our freedom. We think that we shall be able to normalise the question of the markets within this year.

On the single tourist visa, it is good that Uganda always responds to these issues, and we urge other members to ensure that they follow suit. The spirit is there; if it was not, they would not have signed the protocol. I can assure you that in the few days that I been there, I did not find any problem with any Government trying to drag its feet on common interests which are good for all of us.  

On the northern corridor where we have Kenya, Uganda and Rwanda, that alone has plenty of tourist interests. Tanzania is not on that route and maybe that could be the issue. We are going to have a single tourist visa so that people move in the central and northern corridor. So far, we have been able to record better progress together than when we were individuals. Therefore, we have every reason to go by that, because together we have more to gain and individually, we could even lose the little that we have. You said that in Uganda we imposed – (Interruption)

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Don’t you think that if tourists got a single visa, our friends who have better facilities will –(Interjections)– Prof. Kabwegyere, you know very well that Kenyans have got better facilities than Tanzania and Uganda in the tourism sector. Don’t you think a single visa would give more benefit to our friends who can benefit from the sector more than us?

MR KIVEJINJA: This may be in our own heads. I will give you an example. The results of trade when we opened up show that intra-trade actually increased. Here, we do not fear because we have got a common market; whatever is done there, is shared. Even tourism will be for our own benefit. We have a formula on how to balance these things off.

These are historical people; they do not know the construct of the East African nations. These were colonial states; Kenya was supposed to be a white man’s land and the rest were supposed to supply them. You may not be aware because I do not know how much you have read on this. (Interruption)

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Mr Speaker, I stand on a point of order. I would not have liked to raise a point of order against the minister but what he is telling the people is not the facts. 

You know that before President Amin came to power, the East African countries were doing well. Tourists came to Uganda, Kenya and Tanzania and Uganda was doing very well. Therefore, are you right to confuse the House by saying that this is because the British historically settled in Kenya and the other two countries were supposed to supply goods to Kenya, when tourists would go around all these countries before Amin came to power? Are you in order? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think you owe it to this House to accommodate Members properly; you outstep the rules a bit. Please, proceed.

MR KIVEJINJA: I am sorry, Mr Speaker. I apologise to the honourable member if I have stepped on his toes, but we need to read more about the factors that failed the East African Community and why we do not appear to be benefiting from the same. Why, for example, does Uganda have 40 per cent of her trade from Kenya and not the other way round? The facts are there and I would invite the honourable member to access this information. (Interruption)

MS ALASO: Honourable minister, the idea behind that supplementary question was really to see if Government could interest the member states. You say that the facts are there but what are the facts? The facts are that it is Uganda that is very busy issuing the single tourist visa; Rwanda, Kenya and Tanzania are not. 

It is not that we are getting the construct wrong; it is that the other members of the community are rather lukewarm. They still see the dividends from their own visa. What we would be expecting from you who has the facts, you who is arguing scientifically, is that you would whip the rest to get to appreciate; otherwise, what is the point of you being the one to bear the brunt of losing dividends from your visas if you are issuing a visa to somebody who is going the other side and this side? 

Why is it that you want to sacrifice your own dividends and yet, at the end of the day, the other ones are not sacrificing in common interest? That is what we are asking you to do. We are not asking you to portray to us that we do not understand a single tourist visa. We actually do and we imagine the benefits that would accrue, but it can only be meaningful if the rest of the partner states are also on board.

MR KIVEJINJA: Thank you very much. I am very susceptible to knowledge. If the honourable member gives me the facts, then I will use them to enhance the common interests because she has got the will. I will push the issue with more evidence than I have so that we get more benefits. That is my knowledge on the tourist visa; if you have more, I would welcome the actual facts. You will facilitate my work better.

On uniform payment to universities in Uganda, I think we must take advantage of what we have. Uganda was the premier for higher education and we want to retain that. Therefore, it was in the wisdom of the Uganda Government to have uniform visas for the students. It means that we want to encourage people to come here and benefit from the higher education standards in Uganda.  Therefore, we are not losing much. In the long run, you will find that you have got more people from Uganda working elsewhere. So, I think that is okay. 

On the monetary and political union, I have told you that Uganda has been standing for immediate political federation as indeed we are the pioneers of the independence movement and this has gone on. We also formed the community and the political federation is the only thing that has been missing. 

At the last summit, the leaders of the East African countries agreed that we go in for another step towards federation. It was agreed we go in for another midway plan towards a political confederation as a step towards a political union. That has been agreed and the experts have already done research to tell us what we should be able to surrender while we are preparing for the federation.

Protocol commitments - when you declare yourself a Christian, we expect you to be a Christian; we have no cause to think that you are not. We are committed and all countries are committed. I have not detected some states dragging their feet or trying to move out. On the contrary, if they have got other issues then we are there to rejuvenate them using your tactics, which I am sure you will be able to give me, so that we all move together. We either move together and gain together or lose out by moving separately. Thank you very much.

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Mr Speaker, the protocols that have been signed between the member states since 2010 have never been ratified. If you do not ratify and default, then you are not in for that protocol. We see many protocols hanging; they have not been signed and they have not been ratified. These are facts. You find Uganda is very committed to these community issues but protocols are not signed and ratified. (Interjections) Look at them; they are here with us. I do not have to read them for you. They are not ratified. 

MS BAKO: Mr Speaker, the minister needs to get very serious. Looking at trade in the region, I think Uganda as a landlocked country should be more interested in mentioning the behaviour of the other governments. When you look at all those protocols, the ones that are not ratified are those that provide some kind of difficulty with Tanzania in matters of governance. Look at the ones that all partner states have ratified and try to do an objective analysis, as the sitting minister for this country, and see what our next trade benefits are. 

You talked about education; do you know why Tanzanians and Kenyans run here for higher education? It is because the unit cost of training a graduate in Uganda is far less than that in Nairobi. If you look at the unit cost of training postgraduate students in Nairobi University and Makerere University, the difference is immense. 

Therefore, it becomes very difficult, at my age, to try and understand you at your age when you say that you do not have any sufficient reason to actually lobby other governments to ratify these protocols. Honourable minister, this is not the age of joking but a commitment age.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we are really going against the rules now. We are opening this into a debate and that is not proper.

MS CECILIA OGWAL: We are just seeking clarification, Mr Speaker. I thought that the minister would precisely answer the question and I did not want to ask for clarification in the middle of the debate.

Mr Speaker, the question asked the minister to tell the House what efforts the ministry has made to domesticate the various protocols and treaties with respect to the East African integration. That has not been precisely answered and yet this was an eye opener, an opportunity, for the ministry to update the House but it has been avoided. I am putting it mildly. 

The third question was, “How are the East African member states addressing the challenges to the integration process?” Mr Speaker, we are not trying to critic the presentation of the minister but we are saying that we deserve to be informed because it is not every day that we get this kind of question. This was an opportunity for the ministry to give us full information that we needed so that we appreciate where we have come from and where are going. 

If you look at annex 2, page 1, item No.2, on the Protocol on Privileges and Immunities of the East African Community, the deadline for ratification expired in November last year. The minister has not told us the fate of that protocol since the deadline for ratification expired. You have read all these statements and said nothing about that particular one. What is the fate of that protocol because it is very important? 

These are the kinds of things that we wanted from the minister. We are not trying to demand too much. If you really have a functional office, they should have been able to give you this information for you to answer precisely what has been asked. 

MR KIVEJINJA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am encouraged by the enthusiasm the House has for the East African cooperation. I thank you and I think I have got almost a full House behind me. I promise that I will take all your views so that we are able to realise this giant undertaking, which our predecessors were not able to realise because of unfortunate circumstances. 

I, therefore, plead - the omissions I made were because I just wanted to give you a glimpse of the problems and perhaps to expose all these gaps to you. There is no way you can say that you will solve all problems or be able to update them all; in fact, if they are not brought out, then you will not wake up.

I had been given information that Parliament has got four channels that can be used to keep you abreast with what goes on in the East African Community. The first one is that whatever laws are passed by the East African Legislative Assembly are ratified here and there is a mechanism through which that keeps the House and EALA informed. The second one is the direct communication between the EALA Speaker and the Speaker here. The third is through the Committee on East African Community Affairs of this House. 

With those channels, I presumed that you were in touch with each and everything. Otherwise, how can a minister stand here for an hour or 30 minutes and be able to tell you each and everything when you already have a permanent group that keeps you abreast of all the activities? The reports are always available here –(Interruption)- If they are not, then that is homework you have given me. It is good I answered them; I will now be able to go back and get you whatever you want any time. Thank you very much. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable minister, for this answer you have given. Honourable members, this is the point we keep making all the time. This question was asked on 6 July 2012. Many things appearing in the matrix were done after the question was already asked. Of course, we say that there is a system but the letter was only written to the honourable member, who is answering the question now, on 10th March and yet the question had been there for almost four years.

Therefore, honourable ministers, it is important and critical that when these questions are asked, they are answered immediately so that we do not have a backlog and also other issues creep in. Some of the answers then become overtaken by events and you do not know what to do with a question that was asked in 2012 and answered in 2016. There is difficulty. Let us keep the spirit of dealing with questions as soon as they asked so that we can receive answers within the timeframe of the rules. Thank you.

MR MUKITALE: Mr Speaker, this Parliament has only a few weeks to go. In light of the very important point you have raised, wouldn’t it be proper that the many questions that are pending are at least given some time? Some Members asked me about this a few minutes ago. I do not know whether these questions will be relevant in the Tenth Parliament. How can we make sure they are processed in light of what you have just said?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, it is the Business Committee of this House that determines these issues. In the meeting of 3 March 2016, a decision was taken that this particular question be answered. I do not know which other questions on the list are to be answered. 

It is also a process because they needed to see which ones have been overtaken by events, in which case they need not come to the House. There are also those that are still pending and urgent like this one. That is why the communication was given to the minister to come and answer the question orally for Parliament.

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE AND INTERNAL AFFAIRS ON THE PETITION BY THE FORMER PRISONS OFFICERS OF KASESE DISTRICT LOCAL GOVERNMENT

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we will rise before 6 o’clock but in order for us to achieve that, we will receive all the four reports; one from the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs and three from the Committee on Local Government Accounts. We should receive all these reports and set a day when we can have debate on them. Let us get them off the committees and have them in the House. I am going to give 15 minutes for each report’s presentation.

4.20
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE AND INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Ms Benny Namugwanya): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Before I present the report, allow me to lay on the Table a copy of the same and the minutes of the various meetings we held.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture the minutes.

MS NAMUGWANYA: Mr Speaker, allow me to give an introduction to this. On 17 April 2014, Parliament received a petition by the former prisons officers of Kasese District Local Government, alleging that they had been unlawfully relieved of their duties and treated unjustly and unfairly by the Uganda Prisons Service. They claimed that they had served Kasese District Local Government as prisons officers at various ranks and positions until 14 July 2006 when the administration of local government prisons was taken over by the Central Government and brought under the Uganda Prisons Service upon the coming into force of the Prions Act, 2006.

The petition was subsequently referred to the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs for scrutiny, in accordance with rule 29(8) of the Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of Uganda. The committee hereby presents its report on the petition.

The following were the petitioners’ prayers - the petitioners prayed that Parliament would:
a) 	Summon the administration of Uganda Prisons Service to show cause as to why the petitioners and the entire group of the affected prisons officers whom they represented should not be granted the following relief:
i. 	Payment of outstanding salary arrears and emoluments plus interest for the past six years.
ii. 	Reinstatement into their former positions in the Uganda Prisons Service.
iii. 	Compensation for the inconvenience and embarrassment suffered.

b) 	Quickly investigate the complaints of the petitioners and hold the perpetrators of the injustice liable.

Mr Speaker, let me give a quick background to this. The Public Service review and re-organisation report of 1989 to 1990, among other things, recommended the rationalisation of Government structures and reduction of the size of the Public Service. Following the report, the structures of local governments were rationalised and streamlined from 1993 to 1995 to prepare the local governments for the implementation of the decentralisation policy. Through a circular letter from the Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Local Government, Ref.No.PSC/C/90, dated 5 May 1995, addressed to the district executive secretaries and secretaries of district service commissions, it was recommended that the local government administrative units in each sub-county and county be manned by 20 local administration prisons staff. 

In Kasese District Local Government, the district service commission did not release the results of those prisons officers who had been interviewed since their number was far below the required number stipulated in the circular letter and therefore could be maintained intact. This resulted into appointments originating from individual officers instead of the authorised appointing authority. Therefore, at the restructuring of 1995, Kasese District Local Government took over from Kasese District Administration a group of prisons staff that were untrained and unknown in number.

In 2006, when the administration of local government prisons was transferred to the Uganda Prisons Service upon the coming into force of the Prisons Act, your petitioners alleged that they were unduly relieved of their duties by the new prisons administration.

Mr Speaker, I request to skip the methodology in the interest of time. I also request to skip the literature review because Members can go through this privately. Let me go to the committee findings.

1. 	The Petitioners

The committee met with the petitioners who spoke to their prayers. They informed the committee that:
a) 	In May 2007, a headcount exercise was carried out by the Uganda Prisons Service at the former local government prisons stations of Rukoi, Maliba, Ibuga, Muhokya, Nyabirango, Bwera, Lake Katwe Prisons and the district prisons headquarters at Rukoi.

b) 	Subsequently, the petitioners and the entire group of affected prisons officers whom they represented were arbitrarily relieved of their duties and sent home on various dates between July 2007 and February 2008 without being informed of any reason for this action.

c) 	None of the petitioners or any affected prisons officers whom they represented was given a written pass, leave or discharge certificate before they were sent home.

d) 	The petitioners were ordered to immediately vacate their respective duty stations together with their families and belongings until further orders. They were still in possession of their service uniforms, warrant cards and other Government instruments which had not been recalled by the Uganda Prisons Service.

e) 	Until the petition date, the petitioners neither had received their outstanding salaries and other emoluments due to them nor had they been called back to service. They further contended that their duties had been transferred to a new cadre of officers yet none of the petitioners had even been given chance to hand over office in accordance with the established procedures.

f) 	The petitioners contended that they were still in the service of the Uganda Prisons Service and thus protected by law from the mistreatment complained of above.

g) 	The living conditions of the petitioners were very depressing since they had been unlawfully and unjustly denied their salaries and other emoluments for over six years then. Their future looked bleak and they lived in squalor and grappled with exigent family duties without any assistance from their employers.

h) 	The petitioners were, therefore, aggrieved by the conduct of Uganda Prisons Service which clearly contravenes the Constitution and the law. The petitioners had been denied the right to a fair and speedy hearing before punitive action was arbitrarily taken against them by their state employers. They had been denied the right to a just and fair treatment in administrative decisions; and they had been unjustifiably victimised, discriminated against and subjected to a life without dignity.

2. 	The then Chief Administrative Officer of Kasese District Local Government

The committee met with the Chief Administrative Officer (CAO) of Kasese District Local Government, Mr Kihika Giles, and sought his clarification of the following:
i) 	Whether the petitioners had ever been in recognised service of Uganda Prisons Service.

ii) 	Whether the appointment letters possessed by the petitioners were genuine.
iii) 	The circumstances under which the petitioners were relieved of their duties.

iv) 	Whether any internal measures had been undertaken to address the petitioners’ claims.

In his response, Mr Kahika Giles informed the committee of the following:
On whether the petitioners had ever been in recognised service of the Uganda Prisons Service:
a) 	In Kasese District Local Government, the circular letter from the Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Local Government, was widely misinterpreted. This resulted into failures to release the results of those prisons officers who had been interviewed since the total number of applicants was far below the required number stipulated in the circular and therefore could be maintained intact.

b) 	This resulted into appointments originating from individual officers instead of the authorised appointing authority. Therefore, at the restructuring in 1995, Kasese District Local Government took over from Kasese District administration a group of prisons staff who were untrained and unknown in number.

c) 	That the then officer in charge of prisons in Kasese District Local Government, Mr Charles Mwanja, abused the law, the standing guidelines on the restructuring of local government structures, and his office by irregularly recruiting the petitioners as prisons officers into the Kasese District Local Government.

On whether the appointment letters possessed by the petitioners were genuine:
All official appointment letters issued by his office bore security marks as well as his signature. In contrast, all the appointment letters possessed by the petitioners bore a forged signature purported to be his and were without security marks.

On the circumstances under which the petitioners were relieved of their duties:
a) 	There was an IGG investigation which confirmed that there had been gross graft in the recruitment of prisons staff in Kasese District Local Government. This investigation report was copied to him and the Commissioner General, Uganda Prisons Service.

b) 	In view of the above irregularity, the Commissioner General of Uganda Prisons Service carried out a headcount exercise of prisons staff in the district on 11 May 2007, which further revealed that the district had a number of irregularly recruited prisons staff. Following a verification exercise by the Commissioner General of Uganda Prisons Service in December 2007, the Prisons Council summarily dismissed all irregularly recruited officers.

On whether any internal measures had been taken to address the petitioners’ claims:
Following the IGG’s recommendation to have Mr Mwanja and four others prosecuted for the illegal recruitment of prisons officers into the service, there was a court ruling which found Mr Mwanja culpable. On realisation of this, the petitioners, who had earlier tried to seek redress from various concerned authorities, disappeared because of the fear of the repercussion that this court ruling would have on them.

3. 	The Commissioner General of Uganda Prisons Service

The committee met and interacted with the Commissioner General of Uganda Prisons Service seeking his clarity on the following: 

i) 	Whether the Uganda Prisons Service has ever recognised the petitioners as their staff.

ii) 	Whether a prisons staff verification exercise had ever been carried out in Kasese District Local Government.

iii) 	The circumstances under which the petitioners were relieved of their duties.

iv) 	Why some of the petitioners were still in possession of service uniforms, warrant cards and other service instruments, yet they claimed to have been relieved of their duties.

In his response, the Commissioner General of Uganda Prisons Service informed the committee of the following: 

i) On whether the Uganda Prisons Service has ever recognised the petitioners as their staff:
a) A countrywide rapid assessment of the newly integrated local administration prisons was carried out by the Uganda Prisons Service from August to December 2006, which exercise found out that Kasese District Local Government had more prisons staff than prisoners; that is, 214 uniformed officers against an average prison population of 170 prisoners.

ii) 	On whether a prisons staff verification exercise had ever been carried out in Kasese District Local Government: 

a) 	Following the results of the rapid assessment of the newly integrated local administration prison, a staff verification exercise on the former local administration prison was conducted between April and July 2007. It was discovered that some prisons’ staff had been irregularly recruited into the service in Kasese with no appropriate letters of appointment from the district service commission. There was also no minute to support these appointments.

b) 	The above finding was also corroborated by a letter to the CAO of Kasese District Local Government and to the Permanent Secretary of Ministry of Local Government on 1 June 2007 under reference CER156/2, of which the Commissioner General obtained a copy during the verification exercise on 4 December 2007.

iii) 	The circumstances under which the petitioners were relieved of their duties:
a) 	Following the rapid assessment exercise and on learning of the findings of the Kasese CAO, this forced the Commissioner General in 2007 to carry out an investigation into the alleged illegal recruitment. It was established that indeed 113 of the 214 officers of Kasese District Local Administration Prisons had been irregularly recruited.

b) 	Consequently, the investigation report was presented to the Third Prisons Council of 3rd to 4th July 2008. Under minute 23/3/2008, all the irregularly recruited staff were summarily dismissed. This was communicated in Service Orders Part II No.7/2008, issued on 7 August 2008 and the directives to the Regional Prisons Commander, Western Region on 8 August 2008.

On why some of the petitioners were still in possession of service instruments like uniforms and warrant cards:
a) 	Following the restructuring of the prisons administration, the petitioners remained in possession of service instruments such as uniforms and warrant cards. He further informed the committee that the current uniforms worn by the current prisons officers were quite different from those held by the petitioners; the former bear name tags and the Uganda flag.

Observations and Recommendations

The committee noted that: 
a) 	When the petitioners appeared before the committee, some of them were still in possession of service uniforms, warrant cards and other Government instruments.

b) 	The IGG carried out an investigation which found the petitioners and Mr Mwanja culpable. The IGG’s report indicated that Mr Mwanja had been involved in irregular recruitment of the petitioners into the Kasese District Local Administration. The report further recommended that Mr Mwanja and four others be prosecuted.

c) 	The committee also learnt that it was upon the basis of this recommendation that Mr Mwanja was consequently prosecuted, found guilty and sentenced to prison.

The committee, after a thorough analysis and interacting with various stakeholders, now makes the following observations and recommendations concerning the prayers of the petition:

1. 	Appointment Letters 

According to the Public Service Act of 1964 and the Public Service Regulations and Guidelines on Appointment, it is stipulated that whenever there is an appointment within the Public Service, a minute must be quoted by the appointing authority through an instrument, which is a letter.

The committee, however, observed that the appointment letters which the petitioners submitted to the committee did not have any minute cited anywhere in their body or at the bottom of their appointment letter as is usually or formally done.

Recommendation

The committee observes that in the absence of this minute, the commission could not have sat to consider their appointment. This, therefore, affirms the nullity of the petitioners’ alleged appointments.

2. 	Granting the petitioners relief of payment of outstanding salary arrears and emoluments plus interest for the past six years: The committee observed that the petitioners are not legally entitled to any such claims because they have never been duly recruited into the Uganda Prisons Service nor have their services, in any way, been officially acknowledged by the same service.

Recommendation

The committee, therefore, recommends that the decision by the Uganda Prisons Service to dismiss the petitioners without any payment be upheld.

3. 	Reinstatement into their former positions in the Uganda Prisons Service: The committee observed that there has never been any due commissioning of the petitioners into the Uganda Prisons Service nor their services officially recognised. Absence of which, their call for reinstatement cannot fundamentally hold.

Recommendations

The committee, therefore, recommends that there be no reinstatement of the petitioners into the Uganda Prisons Service. The committee also recommends that the Uganda Prisons Service takes all measures to have its service instruments recovered from the petitioners.

4. 	Compensation for the inconveniences and embarrassment suffered: Much as the committee acknowledges the plight of the petitioners, the committee observed that the petitioners had only been irregularly recruited into the Uganda Prisons Service; hence, there was no violation of the law in sending them out of the same prisons service. 

However, the committee observed a breach of procedure in their recruitment, abuse of office and forgery of appointment letters by the then OC Kasese Prisons, Mr Mwanja. The committee further observed that any inconvenience and embarrassment suffered by the petitioners has happened because of Mr Mwanja’s disregard of the law.

Recommendation

The committee, therefore, recommends that the petitioners should not be compensated for any alleged inconvenience or embarrassment.

The committee also commends the then CAO of Kasese District, Mr Giles Kahika, and the Commissioner General of Prisons for conducting their duties professionally, which led to the apprehending of Mr Mwanja for abuse of the latter’s office. Mr Speaker, I beg to report. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable chairperson and honourable members. The question that I now propose for your debate is for a motion for adoption of the report of the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs on the petition by the former prisons officers of Kasese District Local Government. 

However, honourable members, listening to the findings of the committee and the recommendations the committee has made, does this particular report require debate or postponement? If it does not, can I put the question and we take a decision on this matter? If it requires debate, then we can defer the debate because I had said we were going to receive only the report. However, listening to the presentation and the findings of the committee, I thought we could take a decision.

MS ALASO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. From your earlier guidance that you gave to the chairperson, alongside those other reports to be presented you said we would make our comments at a later time, which will be assigned by the House. In which case, to be honest, I was just listening and did not really think that I needed to concentrate. 

If we are to follow your earlier word, we should probably make that decision after we have looked through this report very seriously. Otherwise, in my opinion, it was just a normal presentation knowing that the Speaker has already given his guidance. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have sat in this House and we have listened. That was my earlier ruling before I read the report. However, I have listened to this report and its findings on a petition by people who thought they were aggrieved but now the committee has found that these people have no basis for being aggrieved. That is what the committee has presented. 

However, if it is in the interest of the House that we find another day to debate this motion, it is okay with the chairperson. I thought this matter would not be one of those that would be pending so that the petitioners can also have their matters finalised. 

MS ALASO: Mr Speaker, I heard something about irregular recruitment. If you keep me in your service irregularly all this time, is there no room for me to petition? This is especially if you are just chasing me away and you have kept me all this time. Those are some of the things we would want to ask. Also, those who brought me irregularly, what are you going to do with them? 

I thought I would have an opportunity to try and understand all these things and make a submission. However, if the House feels otherwise - I just wanted to submit that it would have been good if we read through the report and considered it.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: In that case, we do not take a decision on this report. 

MR KYANJO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The grievances which were laid down in the petition have clearly been sorted out by the same report. Given the time we have, I do not think it is necessary to labour on this report again. I advise that you put the question and we clear it. 

MS JOY ATIM: Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. I listened carefully. This is integration - taking from Local Administrative Prisons (LAPs) to the central prison - and it is a process. Some of them did not have clear appointments in the sense that some of them were absorbed as a result of races; when they run, they were admitted in the LAPs. In some instances, they did not even have the appointment letters. They are saying that the appointment letters were not supported. 

I think we have to read through this report because we have some questions to ask before we can really dispose of this. Mr Speaker, I ask for your indulgence; give us time so that we receive these other reports and then we discuss this one before we can dispose of it. Thank you.

MR MULONGO: Mr Speaker, I am from the wise end in Bubulo East. From the report, the committee did a lot of background checks in terms of documentation, watching the processes of recruitment and they discovered flaws which the chairperson has correctly and ably presented. 

The question that hon. Joy Atim asked is indeed part of the questions that the committee handled in its investigations to the core. Given the constraint of time we have as Parliament, it will only be right and fitting that we adopt this report and then we proceed to other work that awaits us. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we would like to proceed in harmony. If there are Members who feel that this motion actually needs to be debated, then we will defer this report to a date when it will be scheduled and debated. It is so ordered.      

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE LOCAL GOVERNMENT ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE ON THE AUDITOR-GENERAL’S REPORT FOR FINANCIAL YEARS 2008/2009 AND 2009/2010 ON LOCAL GOVERNMENTS UNDER KAMPALA AUDIT REGION

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Chairperson Committee on Local Government Accounts, you have 15 minutes to present this report. 

4.45
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON LOCAL GOVERNMENT ACCOUNTS (Ms Angelline Osegge): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. Allow me to lay on the Table copies of the same report and minutes of the meeting that culminated. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is it one report? This is the first one on local governments under Kampala audit region. Let the records capture that and the minutes for that report. Proceed.

MS OSEGGE: Thank you. This is a report of the Committee on Local Government Accounts on the Auditor-General’s reports for the financial years 2008/2009 and 2009/2010 on local governments under Kampala region. I beg to lay. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. 

MS OSEGGE: Mr Speaker, allow me to read to the House the executive summary of the same report and then I will go to the findings of the committee, observations and recommendations. 

This report highlights findings, observations and recommendations by the Committee on Local Government Accounts during consideration of the Auditor-General’s report for financial years 2008/2009 and 2009/2010 on local governments including: Mpigi, Mukono, Nakaseke, Nakasongola, Wakiso and Buikwe under Kampala region. The salient features of this report include but are not limited to the following: 

1. Understaffing

The committee noted that understaffing in the local governments posed challenges to service delivery and has not improved over the years. It was observed that the limited wage bill as well as the ban on staff recruitment by the Ministry of Public Service is responsible for low staffing levels in the local governments.  

It was further observed that this challenge can only be addressed with support from the central Government through express permission to recruit and allocation of funds to finance the wage bill.  

The committee recommends that in order to enhance service delivery, the central Government should lift the ban on recruitment of staff as well as allocate sufficient funds to local governments to enable them enhance their staff strengths.
 
2. Funds not accounted for 

The committee established that a total of Shs 26,502,251 as administrative and personal advances remained unaccounted for by the accounting officers of Mukono and Nakasongola. Whereas accountabilities were retired, they were done so long after the close of the financial years in question, indicating that there was breach of regulation 43 of the Local Government Finance and Accounting Regulations, 2007.  

The committee recommends that the accounting officers endeavour to enforce adherence to regulations and to recover funds from the concerned officers in time. 

3. Management of Fixed Assets 

The committee observed a general lack of vigilance by accounting officers in the management of fixed assets. The committee established that the accounting officers of Mukono and Nakasongola did not have certificates of title in respect of land occupied by the districts’ administrative units as well as community projects.  

Without certificates of title, local governments risk losing land to encroachers and/or could be dragged to court on accusations of encroachment on land. The committee further established that there was failure by accounting officers of Nakasongola, Nakaseke, Mukono and Wakiso to update their assets register, with assets like land and buildings among others.  This rendered the assets vulnerable to misuse and theft.  

The committee observed that the accounting officer of Wakiso District Local Government demonstrated reluctance in securing certificates of title on which a water supply system is situated at Namayumba and Buwamba health centres, yet Government had invested enormous amounts of money in them. The committee was informed that the aforementioned projects were situated on land belonging to Buganda Kingdom and that the accounting officer had  endeavoured to enter into a memorandum of understanding between the Government of Uganda and Buganda Kingdom to regularise tenancy by the former.

The committee recommends that in order to safeguard or secure tenancy of occupancy, accounting officers needed to have in place district land boards to commence the process of acquiring certificates of title for land occupied by administrative units of their entities. 

The committee further recommends that accounting officers should adhere to regulations regarding management of assets, with particular emphasis to periodical reviews and updates of their respective assets registers.  

4. Audit of the Health Sector

The committee observed that Government is solely responsible for ensuring a healthy Ugandan population without which healthcare delivery would be compromised, leading to a weak and unproductive population. 

The committee further observed that whereas the health sector is of paramount importance, it has not received the necessary support from Government to enable it deliver services to the expected standards. The committee noted that the push system by the National Medical Stores was unfortunate, as it caused great losses to Government in terms of drug expiries.  

The committee, therefore, recommends that Government should prioritise the health sector, among others, with a view of ensuring a healthy Ugandan population. Emphasis should be placed on allocating sufficient funds to carry out civil works to refurbish all hospitals and health centres and to enable recruitment and retention of health workers.  

5. Local Revenue Management 

The committee noted with concern that at the close of the FY 2009/2010, the accounting officer of Mpigi District Local Government had not yet received Shs 71,303,000 as funds from contracted-out revenue sources. 

The committee observes that non-remittance of the collections was not only a violation of contractual obligations but also put the funds at risk of abuse and corruption. The committee further observed that the accounting officer lacked capacity and enforcement mechanisms to collect the revenue.

In a bid to enhance local revenue collections, Mpigi District Local Government levied a two per cent development tax on each contract awarded. The committee observed that the tax was illegal in nature as it compromised service delivery and could breed corruption among contractors and interested persons in the local government.  

The committee, therefore, recommends that mechanisms should be instituted to ensure prompt collection and remittance of taxes; and for management to enforce adherence to the provisions of contractual agreements, with a view of avoiding losses and mismanagement of local revenue. 

The committee further recommends that levying of the two per cent development tax on each contract awarded should be stopped forthwith, as it compromised service delivery.

Observations and Recommendations 

1. Staff Shortage

Out of an approved establishment of 1,134 positions in Mpigi District, only 690 posts were filled, leaving 444 posts vacant. The committee observed that understaffing undermines service delivery.

Management, in their response, stated that the administration is not in position to fill up all the vacant posts due to inadequate funding to meet the wage bill. 

The committee observed that the matter of recruitment of staff in local governments can only be greatly determined by relevant central Government ministries. Local governments by themselves have little or no say on recruitment of human resources.  

The committee was informed that the creation of Butambala and Gomba districts greatly contributed to staff shortages in Mpigi District, as staff was shared with the new districts. The committee was further informed that shortly before 2010 there was a ban by the centre on recruitment of staff for district local governments.

The committee recommends that the centre should endeavour to identify and allocate financial resources towards recruitment of staff for local governments. It is only through enhanced budgetary allocations to local governments that the matter of staff shortages would be addressed.

2. Non Registration and/or Lease of Land

The committee observes that the centre has not entirely devolved powers to district local governments to manage affairs within their jurisdictions. The committee was informed that matters to do with land titling and registration were conducted by the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development and that Mpigi, together with Kampala and Wakiso, were clustered under Kampala region. 

The committee was informed that the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development had committed itself to establish a land registry but this is not forthcoming.

The committee recommends that the centre should fully relinquish powers of land management, that is, registration and titling, to Mpigi District Local Government. The committee, therefore, recommends that the query should be dropped.

3. Irregular Charges of Value Added Tax (VAT)

The committee observed that the accounting officer authorised the issuance of a local purchase order totalling to Shs 44 million but there was no evidence that the contractor’s bid price was Shs 44 million. The committee tasked the accounting officer to produce evidence that the bid price was Shs 44 million but this was not forthcoming. The committee could not rule out falsified payments of Shs 6,711,864 in respect of VAT on consultancy services.

The committee recommends that the query should be sustained until the accounting officer substantiates the Auditors-General’s findings.

4. Maddu Health Centre IV 

The committee observed that most district local governments are faced with challenges of recruitment and retention of critical human resource. The committee was informed that whereas Mpigi District Service Commission advertised for career opportunities in the health sector, it failed to attract medical staff to work in Maddu Health Centre IV. This resulted in non-recruitment of staff to manage theatre operations at the health centre.

The committee, therefore, recommends that Ministry of Health should endeavour to fully operationalise Government policy on health centres at county level.  The committee further recommends that Government puts in place allowances for hard-to-reach areas, with the view of attracting and retaining health personnel to work in hard-to-reach areas.

Inadequate Maintenance of Buildings

The committee observed that the health department of the district local government did not have in place a maintenance plan.  The meeting was informed that funds received for capital development did not have provision for maintenance.

The committee recommends that Government should allocate sufficient capital development funds to Maddu Health Centre IV, with the view of ensuring habitable staff quarters and ideal operating theatres.

Expired Drugs

The committee observed that the push system by the National Medical Stores was responsible for increased stocks of expired drugs in most local governments.  The committee was informed that the push system involved dispatch of drugs consignments to health centres regardless of the health needs and requirements of the local population. The committee was further informed that at times National Medical Stores could dispatch drugs that were due for expiry.

The committee, therefore, recommends that National Medical Stores together with other relevant Government institutions should conduct a nationwide health needs assessment with a view of ensuring that the right drug stocks for the right ailments are procured. The committee further recommends that the push system by the National Medical Stores be reviewed to avoid wastages.

Gombe Hospital

Non-Disposal of Idle Medical Equipment 

The committee observed that all general hospitals, Gombe inclusive, were semi-autonomous in nature and mandated to carry out functions such as disposal of non-functional medical equipment in accordance with the Government policy on disposal of idle medical equipment. The committee was informed that Mpigi District Local Government did not dispose of any idle medical equipment since it handed over the hospital to Butambala District Local Government.

The committee, therefore, recommends that Butambala District Local Government should budget for and dispose the idle equipment in accordance with the Government policy on disposal of idle medical equipment.

Inadequate Maintenance of Buildings 

The committee observed that whereas there was a maintenance plan, the accounting officer did not endeavour to cause its implementation at the time Gombe Hospital was under Mpigi District. This revealed laxity on the part of the accounting officer to execute district council plans.  

The committee, therefore, recommends that the accounting officer for Mpigi District Local Government should take up the matter with his counterpart in Butambala with a view of ensuring that plans are expeditiously executed.

Kyabadaza Health Sub District

Lack of Security/Arrangements and other Essential Facilities 

The committee observed that acute budgetary constraints were responsible for inability of the health sub district to finance essential needs such as security, water and sanitary facilities and accommodation facilities.

The committee, therefore, recommends that the centre should allocate sufficient capital development budgets to all health sub districts with a view of ensuring that they meet their essential requirements.

Buwama Health Centre III

The committee observed that insufficient budgetary allocations were responsible for non-provision of essential needs at the health centre. By implication, the health centre risked theft or vandalism of its property.

The committee, therefore, recommends that adequate budgetary provisions should be allocated to the district local government to ensure that essential needs are made available at the health centre.  

Mukono District Local Government Revenue Performance
The committee observed that revenue shortfalls were attributed to causes like uncollected taxes, unrealistic budgeting, poor revenue mobilisation, lack of remittances from the subcounties and uncollected fees.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, the 15 minutes are up. Would you like to wind up?

MS OSEGGE: Mr Speaker, two of the reports are quite small but this is the biggest and so it will take more time. I am sure the other reports will take less than 15 minutes.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: How long do you still have to go?

MS OSEGGE: Since it is quite big, probably I could -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You need to go to the recommendations now for five minutes. Members will have enough time to read the whole report since we are not debating it today.

MS OSEGGE:  On revenue performance, the committee recommends that: 
a)	Management should ensure realistic budgeting if the shortfall to address ills associated with unrealistic budgeting are to be met.
b) 	The accounting officer should ensure proper management of records especially those relevant to revenue collection and maintained as required by the LGFA manual and other regulations. 
c)	The accounting officer should ensure that the district formulates and acts on a revenue mobilisation enhancement plan.

On personal advances, the committee recommends that the accounting officers should desist from authorising such advances as it proves to be a challenge to recover or cause recoveries to be made from the affected staff.

On poor management of district assets, the committee recommends that the query be sustained.

Unfilled Posts

The committee recommends that Government, through the relevant ministries of finance, planning and economic development; public service; and local government should devise mechanisms of assisting local governments recruit the required human resources with a view of ensuring effective and efficient service delivery at local levels.

On uncertified motor vehicle repairs, the committee recommends that the accounting officer should declare vacant the post of mechanical engineers and cause adverts to be placed in the media.

Nakaseke District Local Government

Staffing  

The committee recommends that the accounting officer should conduct a detailed human resource needs assessment and present a report thereon to the centre for consideration.

The committee also recommends that the accounting officer should take stock of fixed assets and conduct periodic updates of the register. This concerns assets not being recorded in the register

Mukono District Revenue Performance 

The committee recommends that management should ensure realistic budgeting if the shortfall ills associated with unrealistic budgeting are to be addressed.

The accounting officer should ensure proper management of records, especially those relevant to revenue collection and maintenance, as required by the Local Government Finance Act manual and other regulations. 

The accounting officer should also ensure that the district formulates and acts on a revenue mobilisation enhancement plan.

Personal Advances 

The committee recommends that the accounting officer should desist from authorising such advances as it proves to be a challenge to recover or cause recovery to be made from the affected staff.

Lack of Establishment Registers
The committee recommends that the query be sustained as they observed that there was laxity by the accounting officer to secure district assets registers.

Uncertified Motor Vehicle Repairs

The committee recommends that the accounting officer should declare vacant the post of mechanical engineers and cause adverts to be placed in the media. Mr Speaker, I have observed that some of these are similar in the different local governments; so, I do not know whether I should continue with it.

Nakaseke District Local Government-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, please conclude. The recommendations are very similar.

MS OSEGGE: The report highlighted understaffing, unavailability of funds, management of fixed assets, audit of the health sector and local revenue management as the salient features to which there is call for plausible solutions as highlighted in the recommendations. 

Having deduced the findings, observations and recommendations from the queries and responses by the accounting officers of Mpigi, Mukono Nakaseke, Nakasongola, Wakiso and Buikwe district local governments under Kampala region on the Auditor-General’s reports for financial years 2008/2009 and 2009/2010, the Committee on Local Government Accounts is of the view that fiscal transfers to local governments, human resources and other assets should be managed in accordance with established laws, policies, guidelines and proper accountability by those responsible. In the event of failure to adhere to the advice of Parliament, which is the oversight arm of Government, appropriate punitive measures should be taken against offending persons as provided by the law. Mr Speaker, I beg to report.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, the motion that I now propose for your debate is for adoption of the report of the Committee on Local Government Accounts on the Auditor-General’s report for the financial years 2008/2009 and 2009/2010, on the local governments under Kampala audit region. That is the motion for your debate and debate is deferred to a date to be set.

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON LOCAL GOVERNEMNT ACCOUNTS ON THE VALUE FOR MONEY AUDIT REPORTS OF THE AUDITOR-GENERAL FOR REHABILITATION AND MAINTENANCE OF FEEDER ROADS IN UGANDA: A CASE STUDY OF HOIMA, KUMI AND MASINDI DISTRICTS

5.12
MS ANGELLINE OSEGGE (FDC, Woman Representative, Soroti): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Allow me to lay a copy of the same report on the Table.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture a copy of the report.

MS OSEGGE: Mr Speaker, I will present to this House the executive summary just like I did for the first one and the recommendations of the committee if you allow me.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Proceed.

MS OSEGGE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The audit focused on whether the rehabilitation and maintenance of feeder roads by the district authorities in Uganda was adequately planned or budgeted for.

A total of Shs 10,807,148,453 was spent on the maintenance and rehabilitation of feeder roads in the three districts selected, namely Hoima, Masindi and Kumi, for the financial years covering the period 2007/2008 to 2010/2011. In addition, the quality of works attained in the four financial years from 2007/2008 to 2010/2011 was examined. 

Despite substantial investment by Government, the status of the feeder roads in the districts remains undesirable. Many roads have potholes, overgrown grass on the road shoulders, broken culverts and clogged drainage systems. The attainment of development indicators such as Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) of ending poverty and hunger, universal education for all by 2015, gender equality, child health, maternal health, combating HIV/AIDS and environmental sustainability is greatly hampered by lack of feeder roads in the local communities.

Mr Speaker, this was a value for money audit. The key findings by the committee included the following:
Use of Rehabilitation and Maintenance Planning System (RAMPS)

The committee observed that all the three districts visited did not have monitoring and evaluation work plans showing scheduled monitoring and evaluation visits being carried out. Consequently, quarterly monitoring and evaluation visits pertaining to rehabilitation and maintenance of feeder roads were not conducted as expected. Only 21 out of 80, representing 26 per cent of expected reports for technical monitoring, and seven out of 80, representing nine per cent of expected reports of political monitoring teams, were available for audit.

The quality of the roadworks executed were neither monitored nor evaluated and as a result, no immediate corrective actions were taken thus affecting the attainment of satisfactory work.

Recommendations
1. 	The committee recommends that in order to attain proper planning in accordance with district roadworks planning manuals, the districts under review in conjunction with Uganda Road Fund and Ministry of Works and Transport, should encourage continuous use of scientific methods to determine the cost of rehabilitation and maintenance of feeder roads. The district engineers who lack knowledge and skills in the use of scientific methods of determining rehabilitation and maintenance costs should be trained on implementation of roadworks as per plan schedule.

2. 	The district roads committee should strengthen their supervision to ensure effective maintenance of roads. 

3. 	Uganda Road Fund should also ensure that the funds released to districts for the rehabilitation and maintenance of feeder roads should include operational costs. This is to enable districts to plan and budget for those activities effectively.
	
4. 	The districts should harmonise the requirements of RAMPS with those of the programming tables to ensure that the two complement each other for proper planning and communication of results.

5. 	Uganda Road Fund, Uganda National Roads Authority, Ministry of Works and Transport, Ministry of Local Government and other key stakeholders in the road sector should establish a roads register, which would enable planning budgeting, implementation and reporting of roadworks in the sector.

6. 	The accounting officers and the district engineers should be held accountable for possible loss arising from non-adherence to RAMPS estimates.

Preparation of Work Plans for Rehabilitation and Maintenance of Feeder Roads 

The committee recommends that:
1. The district planning committees should ensure that work plans for the rehabilitation and maintenance of roads are prepared from detailed activities supporting the budget provisions.

2. 	The district planning committees should ensure that notes to the budget are prepared and attached to the budgets, clearly indicating the intervention and activities to be carried out.

3. 	The accounting officers and district engineers should be cautioned for failing to adhere to the regulations.

Use of District Roadwork Plans in the Execution of Works 
The committee recommends that: 
1. 	Implementation of the rehabilitation of the district feeder roads should be according to the work plan so as to ensure timely delivery of intended services.

2. 	The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and Uganda Road Fund should ensure that funds meant for rehabilitation are put to the right use.

Adherence to Procurement Laws, Regulations and Guidelines 

The committee recommends that: 
1. 	The accounting officers and district engineers should fully comply with all the provisions in the PPDA Act and the local governments’ regulations and guidelines to ensure proper identification, planning, budgeting and execution of rehabilitation and maintenance activities.

2. 	The district Procurement and Disposal Units (PDUs) should give proper procurement guidance in accordance with the PPDA Act to district engineering departments on matters concerning the procurement of road contractors.

3. 	The district engineering departments should always follow guidelines given to them and prepare and submit their procurement plans in time to allow the district PDUs to initiate procurement plans in time.

4. 	The accounting officers and the engineers in the district who did not follow procurement procedures should be cautioned.

Funding of District Feeder Roads- Rehabilitation and Maintenance Works 

The committee recommends that: 
1. 	The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should ensure timely release of funds, with cash release details, to the districts to enable them rehabilitate and maintain their feeder roads as per their work plans.

2. 	District accounting officers should ensure timely transfer of funds to the works departmental accounts.

3. 	The accounting officers and district engineers should strictly observe their work plans in the execution of the rehabilitation and maintenance of road works to avoid funds lying idle in district accounts.

4. 	The district PDUs should improve their staffing levels and ensure that the procurement process is streamlined to eliminate delays.

5. 	The district contracts committees should ensure that competent firms or contractors with outstanding capacity to handle district roadworks are awarded contracts.

Availability of Essential Road Equipment 

The committee recommends that:
1. 	The district engineering departments should always conduct timely repair assessment reviews of their road equipment and communicate their repair needs to the regional mechanical workshops in a timely manner.

2. 	The regional mechanical workshops should in turn ensure that the district road equipment sent to them for repairs are repaired in time.

3. 	The Government should prioritise funding of the budgetary requirement of mechanical workshops to enable them support districts in their effort to rehabilitate and maintain feeder roads in their areas of jurisdiction.

Inspection, Supervision, Monitoring and Evaluation of Roadworks

The committee recommends that: 
1. 	The accounting officers and the district works departments should ensure that the supervision and inspection of roadworks activities are carried out as per the work plan, implementation and monitoring manual.

2. 	The accounting officers and district engineers should ensure that the findings of supervision and inspections are properly documented and recommendations are implemented to ensure that corrective measures are taken.

3. 	The district service commissions should consider reviewing person specifications for district engineers with a view of reducing the 10 years’ experience to at least three years’ experience as a requirement.

Monitoring and Evaluation of the Rehabilitation and Maintenance of Roadworks
The committee recommends that:

1. 	The accounting officers should ensure that monitoring and evaluation activities are planned, budgeted for and implemented as per work plans.

2. 	The accounting officers and district engineering departments should ensure that the recommendations by the monitoring and evaluation teams are implemented and follow-ups made to attain satisfactory road works.

Mr Speaker, I beg to report on the said report.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable member, for the report. Honourable members, the motion that I now propose for your debate is for the report of the Committee on Local Government Accounts on the value for money audit reports of the Auditor-General on rehabilitation and maintenance of feeder roads in Uganda: a case study of Hoima, Kumi and Masindi districts. That is the motion I propose for your debate and debate on this matter is suspended until a later date.

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON LOCAL GOVERNMENT ACCOUNTS ON THE VALUE FOR MONEY AUDIT REPORTS OF THE AUDITOR-GENERAL FOR:
    a) NATIONAL AGRICULTURAL AND ADVISORY SERVICES PROGRAMMES (ADVISORY AND INFORMATION SERVICES COMPONENT)
    b) MANAGEMENT OF NATIONAL AGRICULTURAL AND ADVISORY SERVICES (IN KABAROLE, KASESE, LIRA AND MUBENDE)

5.24
MS ANGELLINE OSEGGE (FDC, Woman Representative, Soroti): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I will follow the same procedure as with the previous reports - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Would you like to lay a copy of the report on the Table?

MS OSEGGE: Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table a copy of the report of the Committee on Local Government Accounts on the value for money audit reports of the Auditor-General for National Agricultural and Advisory Services programmes and management of National Agricultural and Advisory Services in Kabarole, Kasese, Lira and Mubende. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. Proceed.

MS OSEGGE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Uganda’s population is predominantly rural based with the majority of the rural populace engaged in subsistence farming for livelihood. Over 70 per cent of Uganda’s working population is employed in the agricultural sector.

In order to increase productivity and commercialisation of the agricultural sector, Government of Uganda with the assistance of development partners, started the National Agricultural and Advisory Services (NAADS), a programme geared towards increasing the efficiency and effectiveness of agricultural extension services. The programme has evolved to include the distribution of agricultural technologies to farmers geared towards increasing household incomes and rural livelihoods. 

However, the programme has raised public concern and is yielding less tangible benefits to participating farmers despite the substantial amounts spent on the programme. It is against this background that an independent assessment of the performance of the NAADS programmes was undertaken by the office of the Auditor-General, focusing on the implementation of agricultural technologies, development of market linkages, and monitoring and evaluation of the programme, so as to ascertain the challenges and suggest recommendations for improvement.

The committee examined the Auditor-General’s value-for-money reports on National Agricultural and Advisory Services (NAADS) and here are the summary findings:

1. Information Services Component of NAADS

The hearings revealed that the advisory services have not been as effective as it was set out to be. This has been mainly attributed to delays of funds to the districts and subcounties. The districts visited reported that there were delays in disbursing funds to them. This greatly affected their work plans and implementation of activities like farmer trainings and technology developments. This has negatively affected the effectiveness of the advisory services.

The committee, therefore, recommends that the project should speed up the process of disbursing funds from the central Government to the local governments, to the subcounties and then to the implementers to avoid any further delay. Efforts should be made by the secretariat to ensure that approved work plans are financed during the planning period.

2. Co-funding

The hearings conducted revealed that the farmers as well as some local governments were not able to provide counterpart funding. This affected the implementation of the programme. 

The committee, therefore, recommends that the central Government should ensure the local governments’ budget for co-funding and this should be reflected in their budget. Districts that are reluctant to co-fund should be penalised. Government should also come up with a programme of assisting the poor and vulnerable farmers who cannot afford to co-fund programme activities.

3. Identification and Prioritisation of Enterprises 

The committee recommends that the secretariat should provide farmers with well researched information to guide them in selecting enterprises that have ready market.

4. Technology Development Sites 

The secretariat together with the local governments should identify lead farmers who should house technology development sites and be responsible for their maintenance and the benefits accruing therefrom.

5. Quality of Advisory Services 

The committee recommends that the secretariat should make experience a condition for one to provide advisory services. A system to identify good service providers and blacklist those that are poor performers should be put in place. The programme should also provide some training in extension services.

6. Reporting 

The committee recommends that the secretariat should come up with a standard format of writing advisory services progress reports to ensure uniformity.

7. Poor Attendance of Trainings by Farmers 

The committee recommends that the secretariat should identify a time acceptable to the farmers of each area when trainings should be carried out. It should also come up with a training manual that emphasises practical training and less of theoretical classroom teaching.

8. Monitoring and Supervision 

The committee recommends that the secretariat should come up with a standard monitoring checklist to improve the implementation of the programme.

Mr Speaker, some achievements were also noted, especially in Kabarole District. The bottom-up planning process which involved farmers is commendable. The regular monitoring by district officials and staff is also commendable.

Management of NAADS in Kabarole, Kasese, Lira and Mubende 
Status of Agricultural Technologies

The committee recommends that: 
1. 	District NAADS officers should ensure that the selection of market-oriented farmers by farmer groups is based on a NAADS agreed upon selection criteria.

2. 	The district NAADS officers should continuously sensitise and train farmers on the benefits of the programme so as to change their attitude towards the programme.

3. 	Preparatory periods should be accorded to farmers to put in place some benchmarks, like structures, before they are given technologies.

Co-funding 

The committee recommends that:
1. 	Districts and subcounties should prioritise co-funding NAADS activities so as to enable successful implementation of all planned programme activities.

2. 	The NAADS secretariat should device a reward and sanctions system, which would encourage districts and subcounties to co-fund.

Tagging Technologies 

The committee recommends that NAADS management should consider prioritising the activity of branding/tagging its animals for easy identification and also to enhance accountability and transparency.

Support to Technology Promotion, Agro-business and Market Linkages. 
The committee recommends that the secretariat carries out commodity and market studies, and avails all districts with market information, which farmers can use in determining where and at what price to sell their produce.

Monitoring and Evaluation 

The committee recommends that:

1. 	The district should ensure that monitoring and evaluation is carried out by only the stakeholders enumerated in the NAADS implementation guidelines in order to avoid blowing up M&E budgets.

2. 	The secretariat should also enforce the use of the monitoring and evaluation guidelines by districts during monitoring and evaluation to ensure that data collected by the districts is uniform and complete.

Record Keeping by Farmers 

The committee recommends that the NAADS officers in general and service providers in particular should continuously sensitise farmers on the benefits of record keeping.

Conclusion 

Mr Speaker, the committee discussed and observed that delayed disbursements have in some instances resulted into planned activities not being implemented in time. It was noted, for example, that sometimes funds are received and farmers are trained after the planting season. This denies them the opportunity to practice what they have learnt. The seeds that are procured after the planting season do not benefit the farmers as they cannot utilise them immediately, and sometimes they end up getting spoilt before the next planting season due to lack of or poor storage facilities. 

The committee, therefore, recommends that the process of disbursing funds to the implementers be reviewed to avoid any delays; and where possible, administrative bureaucracy should be relaxed. The programme should look at the possibility of releasing funds according to seasons rather than quarterly, based on the financial year. This would ensure that funds are received just in time for the activities to take place.	

Local Governments not providing Counterpart Funding

The committee recommends that: 
1. 	To ensure the local governments’ budget for programme activities, the districts that are reluctant to co-fund should be penalised. The programme should also come up with an arrangement of assisting poor and vulnerable farmers who cannot afford to co-fund the programme activities. 

2. 	Farmers, through their existing farmers groups, should be encouraged to form Savings and Credit Cooperative Societies (SACCOs) that can assist them to save and be at hand to provide credit to the farmers when they need funding.

Poor Identification and Prioritisation of Enterprises

The committee recommends that the NAADS Secretariat should carry out commodity and market studies – Mr Speaker, I think this is a repetition; allow me to go straight to the other points.

Concerning the issue of reports produced by service providers, the committee recommends that the programme should come up with a standard format - That is also a repetition; I am sorry.

Mr Speaker, I think what has already been presented is part of this summary and, therefore, I beg to stop here. I beg to report. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Chairperson and members of the committee, for this elaborate coverage of these particular reports 6, 7 and 8.

Honourable members, the question I now propose for your debate is for the adoption of the report of the Committee on Local Government Accounts on the value for money audit reports of the Auditor-General for:

a) 	National Agricultural and Advisory Services Programmes (Advisory and Information Services component).

b) 	Management of National Agricultural and Advisory Services (in Kabarole, Kasese, Lira and Mubende).

That is the motion for your debate and it is hereby deferred until another date is found.

MS CECILIA OGWAL: Mr Speaker, the last report which has been read to us is supposed to be based on a value for money audit report of the Auditor-General, but the period has not been indicated. We would like to know which period has been covered by this audit because it is very important for us to understand this report. Thank you.

MS OSEGGE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. All these reports cover the period beginning 2008 to 2011. Thank you. 

Allow me to correct the title of this report. It is the report of the Committee on Local Government Accounts on the value for money audits for the Auditor-General on the National Agricultural and Advisory Services Programmes (Advisory and Information Services Component) and management of National Agricultural and Advisory Services (in Kabarole, Kasese, Lira and Mubende) for the period 2008 to 2011. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. That is the motion and it is accordingly amended to put the period of the report covering the years 2008 to 2011. That is the motion for your debate and the debate, as was already been communicated earlier, has been deferred.

Honourable members, as I said earlier in my communication from the Chair, because of the circumstances which I explained I hereby suspend the plenary sittings of this august House to allow sectoral committees focus on the proposed annual budget, policy statements and the revenue Bills and report back to the House in accordance with the following programme:

From tomorrow, 30 March to 15 April, committees will scrutinise the annual budget policy statements, alternative policy statements and the revenue Bills. From 18 to 22 April 2016, committees will report to the Committee on Budget to facilitate the harmonisation of the figures for supply. 

On 25th and 26th, we expect the Committee on Budget to present its report to the House and recommend the figures for supply. We expect that if all this is done, on 28th of April, this Parliament should be able to approve the Appropriation Bill, 2016.

That is the proposed programme; it can be changed based on the circumstances that may arise. However, for now, that is what we will go by. This House is therefore adjourned up to 15th or should I say sine die. However, I think for practical purposes, it should be 25 April when the Committee on Budget reports to the House. This House is, therefore, adjourned to 25 April 2016. Thank you.

(The House rose at 5.40 p.m. and was adjourned until Monday, 25 April 2016 at 2.00p.m.) 
