Thursday, 3 March 2016
Parliament met at 2.40 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the Deputy Prime Minister and Members of the House, I welcome you to this afternoon’s sitting. I would like to remind the members of the Appointments Committee that we shall convene on 9 March 2016 at 9.30 a.m. to consider nomination for appointment of the new High Court judges. 

I would also like to indicate that next week will be a short one because we have the International Women’s Day on Tuesday. We shall, therefore, work on Wednesday and Thursday. 

The Business Committee convened this morning and we agreed as follows: First, we shall prioritise the budget process so that the Appropriation Act is enacted within the provisions of the Public Finance Management Act- that is to say it must be completed on or before 28 April 2016. Therefore, I would like to appeal to the Government to submit the policy statements. I have seen one or two, but I think the rest of the ministries have still not presented their policy statements. We need time for our committees to scrutinise the statements. We also need to give time to the shadow Cabinet to make their comments on the budget process. 

We have also agreed in the Business Committee as follows: One, that all the ready business should be put on the Order Paper starting from today. Starting from next Wednesday, two questions for oral answer will be placed on the Order Paper because many are pending. There are 56 outstanding questions for oral answer; so, the ministries are warned to be ready to answer two questions a day. We also request the committees to convene meetings to design a roadmap to dispose of the remaining business so that by the 15 to 16 of May, the pending work will have been done. 

Honourable members, we also agreed that this time we shall not have the normal Easter recess of two weeks because of time constraints. We shall break off on Thursday, 24 March 2016 for Good Friday up to Easter Monday and reconvene on Tuesday, 29 March 2016 to enable us dispose of as much work as possible. We also want to maintain the timetable for approving the national budget. Therefore, let us all apply ourselves. Thank you so much, honourable members.

2.45
MS ANNE AURU (NRM, Woman Representative, Moyo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance. Moyo District was one of the districts that was considered among the 11 districts to benefit from the hepatitis B vaccination. I am glad to inform the House that the vaccination has started but it has come with a lot of challenges.

Madam Speaker, sensitisation has not been conducted amongst the community as well as the health workers. Right now when people are tested and are found positive, especially children aged 15 and above, some of them drop out of school. This is because they are found positive and their parents are unable to afford further examination for them. This is a very big challenge.

This morning I was called and informed that some of the health workers are charging a fee of Shs 5,000 and some health centres are also charging Shs 3000 for carrying out those tests. I would like to know from the Government whether the community is supposed to be charged or the tests are supposed to be done free of charge? The information I received is that the charges are made without receipts. 

There is need for the Government to go on the ground. Although the vaccinations are now available for the community, those who are diagnosed positive are traumatised and they need help – (Interruption)

MS ANYWAR: Thank you, honourable colleague, for giving way. The information I would like to give is that Kitgum District was also among those that were supposed to have benefited from the hepatitis B vaccine. However, - I have just discussed this with the minister - we are still waiting for their response. They have not yet delivered. 

I also want to add that right now in the Parliament of Uganda, there is a vaccination exercise going on. We are paying Shs 15,000 to have it done. We just need information about the arrangement of this vaccine within the premises of Parliament and how much it costs.

MR PETER OGWANG: Madam Speaker, I am happy that our colleague has raised this issue. I have got a new constituency and I would like to address myself to my village. I lost five people in one week from my own village due to hepatitis B. I have asked the Minister of Health what criteria they used to select or identify those districts, which are among the 11 benefiting from the treatment or vaccine. 

Madam Speaker, I would like to implore the Minister of Health to help our people. In my own district, out of 10 deaths at least eight or nine are from hepatitis B. Therefore, I do not know where the people of Katakwi are in this arrangement? I have walked to the ministry as well as National Medical Stores (NMS) but there is nothing forthcoming. Therefore, if you are talking about charging money, some of us even do not know where to go. Thank you.

MR WADRI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I wish to thank my colleague for allowing me to put this on record by way of information. 

Much as the selected districts for immunisation do not cover the whole country, it is even more painful to realise that this immunisation is being done at only selected health centres III. I wonder why the Ministry of Health has not adopted the approach they used in immunising children against the other killer diseases, where medical and health workers went as far as health centres II to access patients. This would help them to make an impact by having as many people as possible immunised against this killer disease. Can’t they spread? 

Even in the few health centres that they are engaged in, the number of people they are able to test and immunise per day is insufficient as far as the widespread nature of this disease is concerned. I wish the Ministry of Health could broaden this exercise so that many people can benefit from this immunisation exercise. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

MS AURU: Thank you very much, my colleagues, for giving all that information. Madam Speaker, you can see the challenges the hepatitis B vaccination has come with. 

In conclusion, therefore, I would like the Government to clarify on payment that is being charged by those who are testing and also to organise and sensitise the community. It is possible to find a whole family where four people are positive yet they are too poor to afford further testing and they get traumatised. It is a very serious issue. Thank you, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity.

THE SPEAKER: I can see the Minister of Health is here. This subject has come up so many times; I do not know whether you are in position to respond to the Members’ questions.

2.54
THR MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (GENERAL DUTIES) (Dr Chris Baryomunsi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would also like to thank my colleague, hon. Anne Auru, for raising the matter together with the other Members of Parliament.

I spoke about this condition sometime back before we broke off for elections. As we have been discussing this issue in Parliament, hepatitis B is a big challenge in this country, especially in northern Uganda and parts of eastern Uganda. When we were considering the budget for this financial year, the Ministry of Health had made a request of Shs 39 billion to cover the hepatitis B epidemic in northern Uganda. However, because of the shortage of resources, Parliament was able to raise Shs 10 billion, which was insufficient to cover the high prevalence districts in northern Uganda and parts of eastern Uganda. Our wish as a ministry would be to cover the entire country. 

Since 2002, immunisation against hepatitis B has been integrated into the routine immunisation. Therefore, Ugandans who are 14 years and below have already been immunised especially those children who have been taken for routine immunisation. The challenge remains for adults of 15 years and above.

When we received Shs 10 billion, the first challenge was that the Ministry of Finance would release the money on quarterly basis; we did not get the money frontloaded. So, we got those delays in the beginning but eventually, we got the money and procured vaccines and antiviral drugs. However, due to the inadequacy of the resources, we could not cover all the districts, which we thought we would – (Interjections) - Can I first make this comment and then I give you a chance later?

As a ministry, like I said last time, we selected districts with high prevalence rates in West Nile, northern Uganda and parts of eastern Uganda where we sent the vaccines and also antiviral drugs. Those who were tested and found positive should receive antiviral treatment. However, at an appropriate time, I could bring a comprehensive statement showing the districts, the number of doses sent and the people who have been treated and give comprehensive information. I can get your clarification and proceed. 

MR WADRI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I also wish to thank the honourable minister for accepting me to seek this clarification from him. 

I think your crime has been that this was an emergency situation and you had not adequately provided for it in your budgeting system. Now that we are in the budgeting process, can you assure this House that you have taken into account the dire need for us to have enough vaccines to cover this country in this forthcoming financial year? Have you taken care of that, now that it has spread all over the country and it is taking lives? 

Can you assure this House that in this forthcoming financial year, you have adequately provided for procurement of vaccines and antiviral drugs to cater for those who have been identified to be negative and those who are positive and need treatment? Can you assure us?

MS ANYWAR: Thank you, honourable minister. I seek further clarification. We are aware that the vaccine is not a single dose affair. After one month, one has to get a second dose and then after six months, they go for the third one. From the onset, Government is saying that they do not have money for the people of Uganda; now that you have selected a few to receive the vaccine, can you assure this country that those who will start the vaccine will finish the dose?

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you very much, honourable members, for raising those points seeking clarification. Let me continue with my submission and then I will respond to those issues you have raised.

Initially, we had two treatment centres in the country, Mulago National Referral Hospital and Arua Regional Referral Hospital. Using the resources which we got with the support of Parliament, we have opened other treatment centres in those districts and we have started the programme. Like I said the last time, we have capacity in the country to test for hepatitis B from the lower level to the level of health centres III. Once one is tested and they are found to be negative, then they should receive vaccination. 

For the selected districts, we computed and sent enough doses to cover the three doses, which one should get once they begin vaccination. If one tests positive for hepatitis B, then they should be given a dose of antiviral drugs. These drugs, which have been sent by Government, are free. I am, therefore, surprised that in Moyo District they are charging Shs 3,000. Now that there is no receipt given, it means somebody is illegally charging the patients. If it were Government charging you, then a receipt should have been given. If somebody is charging the patients and no receipt is given, it means that somebody is irregularly and illegally charging the patients, which is unfortunate. I will follow it up with the authorities and remedial measures will be taken. Nobody should be charged for that free service by the Government. 

Hon. Beatrice Anywar had earlier asked whether we are the ones vaccinating the Members of Parliament here. I would like to say that as Ministry of Health, we agreed that we shall provide a free service to the Members of Parliament but I think we had not liaised with the Parliamentary Commission. Hon. Beatrice Anywar said that the service providers here are charging Shs 15,000. They are not from the Ministry of Health. I think these are private providers, but we can liaise with Parliamentary Commission and finalise that arrangement, which we had initiated from the Ministry of Health, to see how we can provide that service to Members of Parliament and possibly the staff of the Parliamentary Commission.

To hon. Kassiano Wadri, yes we are in the process of – (Interjections) – No; on the dose I said that once you are initiated on the vaccination, you should get the three doses. Where we have sent vaccines in northern and eastern Uganda, we have made sufficient provisions that whoever starts on vaccination should get the three doses. 

It is unfortunate that some of the districts are not yet included but we began with high prevalence districts. Some of the districts in West Nile posted a prevalence rate of between 20 and 23 per cent.  Kitgum, according to the health officer whom I just talked to using your phone, has a prevalence rate of 11.6 per cent. I do not have the statics here. However, with resources becoming available, our intention as the Ministry of Health is to cover the entire country so that we protect all Ugandans. Hon. Cecilia Ogwal, I will crosscheck on the prevalence.

Madam Speaker, with your permission, I could prepare a comprehensive statement giving details of the prevalence rates in parts of the country, as much as we have the data, and also provide information on where we have sent the vaccines and drugs. Finally, I will also provide the response in those districts so that we can be able to get a comprehensive picture of what is going on.

Hon. Kassiano Wadri, yes, we have put provisions in the budget but as you know, the final budget will come from the House. Therefore, our request is that when the proposals come to the Floor of the House, we receive the support of the House.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, a comprehensive statement will come and we shall have time to discuss it. Let us go to item three.

LAYING OF PAPERS

3.03
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I beg to lay on the Table a request by Government to borrow US$ 200 million from the Eastern and Southern African Trade and Development Bank (PTA) for a revolving foreign exchange facility to stabilise the exchange rates.

THE SPEAKER: The request is sent to the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development for perusal and report back. 

3.05
MR WILLIAM NOKRACH (NRM, PWD Representative, Northern): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table reports of the Auditor-General on the financial statements for the year ended 30 June 2014 for the following town councils: Alebtong, Bukomero, Amuria, Patongo, Anaka, Amuru, Ayer, Kitgum, Lamwo, Oyam, Aduku, Apac, Kihihi, Agago, Butogota, Kalongo, Amolatar, Kyegegwa, Kyazanga and Rubaale.

I also beg to lay on the Table reports of the Auditor-General on the financial statements for the year ended 30 June 2014 for the following district local governments: Kaabong, Kole, Buyende, Kitgum, Bukomansimbi, Oyam, Amolatar, Ibanda, Apac, Gulu, Nwoya, Pader, Alebtong, Kisoro, Serere, Katakwi, Lamwo, Otuke, Dokolo, Lira, and Amudat. Thank you for listening to me.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Commissioner Nokrach. Those are sent to the Public Accounts Committee for expeditious perusal and report back.

MR BAHATI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. A small correction - the US$200 million loan request that we have laid on the Table is to finance development expenditure imports and replace part of the high interest domestic borrowing. I thought I should correct that description for record purposes. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: The Committee on National Economy will peruse through the request and give a report as quickly as possible.

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE UGANDA DEVELOPMENT CORPORATION BILL, 2014

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, as you recall, we had considered the Bill almost entirely; what was remaining was the schedule. There was information that the honourable members wanted from the Minister of Trade and Industry. Let me invite him to make a presentation.

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TRADE AND INDUSTRY (INDUSTRY) (Mr Michael Werikhe): As the Chairperson has indicated, last time we had gone through the entire Bill. The only item that the House wanted was a comprehensive list of properties that were divested by Uganda Development Company Limited (UDCL).

Madam Chairperson, I believe honourable colleagues now have that list, which has just been passed on, detailing all the properties that were divested - those which are currently being held by UDCL. The percentages of interest held are indicated under parts (a) and (b) in the document that has been distributed; and also there is a divestiture transaction as at June 2011. That is the list, which was missing and that is what the House wanted. Madam Chairperson, I so present.

MR KWIZERA: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. I would like to thank the minister for availing this document. However, when you look at divestiture, you also have to look at the figures and yet we do not see figures in most of this document. The values of these assets are not given. If you are talking about a divestiture, what came out is also not provided.

We would suggest that instead of bringing it to the Floor of the House, we refer this document to the Committee of Finance to look into the matter and at least have some more explanations made. Thank you, Madam Chairperson.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Are you suggesting that we do not complete the Bill?

MR KWIZERA: If this information is necessary to conclude the Bill then we cannot conclude it because this is not complete information that has been given.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, this information was first brought before we went for recess in October. It was then that you asked for part II and it has been brought. If Members have issues, let us raise those issues but to continue back and forth – 

MR KWIZERA: Madam Chairperson, when you look at the cover page, there is Kigezi Highlands Limited - the equipment leasing. This is in my constituency and at least I know there is nothing there. When you go to page 12, there is the Lira Hotel and we know who the proprietors were, and with Mt Elgon Hotel we know what happened. It is not good to make dirty things appear clean here for the purposes of passing a law. I thank you.

MR FUNGAROO: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. I share the same opinion with my brother, hon. Kwizera. When you look at part (b) - undertakings in which it is proposed for the corporation to acquire the interest of Government - the interest of Government must be measured against a certain value. What are we talking about in terms of value? This document is incomplete without the value.

Two, Madam Chairperson, not all these companies had the same origin in terms of time, and therefore the value should also include the background in terms of when these companies started and where they stand as of now. We should, therefore, send back this document to be completed so that we can proceed properly, Madam Chairperson. Thank you.

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. I was in the House when this matter was raised while we were considering this Bill. The request was that the honourable minister provides the list of the institutions, which he has done.

I think our Rules of Procedure adequately provide modalities on how one can get information when they want it in the House. It would be unfair now to raise new questions. Since the minister has brought the list, I would think it is sufficient. If Members want additional information, they can either use questions for oral answer or other mechanisms, which are provided for. Otherwise, for you to introduce new things, which were not the issue when we asked the minister to bring the list, is unfair.

MR WERIKHE: Madam Chairperson, I remember at one time there was a select committee set up to investigate the performance of the Privatisation Unit of the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. We have this item on business to follow. I think that is the unit that is going to provide us with all these details. 

However, as my colleague has just said, at the time the House tasked the ministry, the issue was to provide a list. Since we have the select committee, which is going to investigate and come up with a comprehensive report that will include all the issues that colleagues are raising, that will be the appropriate time for these issues to be handled.

MS CECILIA OGWAL: Madam Chairperson, I was in the House on that day. I think the issue, which was of grave concern to the House, was specifically what properties the new UDC is acquiring and the status of those companies. One of the companies which was mentioned was Soroti Foods Limited. I volunteered information to the House that I happened to know Soroti Foods Company, which is made up of a plot and a fence; there is nothing inside. 

Therefore, we would like to know what UDC is actually inheriting because they must then state that it is just a plot and a fence but not an industry and also state its value because we had no information. That is why we are trying to say, can we know exactly what has been divested. How much did we get out of it? Where was it invested? We want to know because we are the owners and we are doing this on behalf of the people. The ministry did not have that information. Yes, we would like to revive UDC but may we know the status of the property we are giving to the new UDC? I think that is specifically the issue.

What I am seeing here does not answer the question, Madam Chairperson. We can say “the ayes have it” but we would have handed over an empty entity to the new UDC and we will be stuck with it. We are the same Parliament that will be brought to question as to what we created and for what. That is why we want you to tell us the value of this company. We even volunteered some information when we said we knew of some company which should belong to UDC; may we know what has happened to it? Has it been divested? If so, to whom? Where are the assets, which have been sold? Where is the revenue? Where have they been either invested or banked? We have no idea, Madam Chairperson.

To tell you the truth, most of these properties have been sold to individuals who are known to the ministry and they do not want the people of Uganda to know about it. That is the problem. We would like to know which people bought these properties and at how much. Where is the revenue banked and the money? That is important because this money was supposed to be reinvested. So, where did they reinvest the money? Those are the specific questions we are asking, Madam Chairperson. Thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I would like to propose that before the close of next week, we debate item No.5 on the Order Paper and set up the select committee to investigate the performance of the Privatisation Unit at the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. This is because they have not talked about UDC alone; there are more things. Let us finish with this Bill and then on Thursday next week we debate this motion and set up a committee because what we need is bigger than this UDC.

MR WERIKHE: Madam Chairperson, when you look at the recommendation of the committee, it says that it is the Ministry of Finance that is supposed to give us all this information. Since we are the ones – (Interjection) - That means we need the Ministry of Finance to give us all this information because they are the ones who have all the information. That is what I wanted clarification on.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable minister, are you saying that we leave this and wait for the Ministry of Finance? I am happy to do that! 

Let me finish with the schedule and as I have said, next Thursday we shall debate this motion and include all the things we want because they are more than UDC alone and that has been the demand of this House for some time. (Applause) Honourable members, the question is that schedule 2 do stand as part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Schedule 2, agreed to.

The Title, agreed to.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

3.24
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TRADE AND INDUSTRY (INDUSTRY) (Mr Michael Werikhe): Madam Chairperson, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the motion is that the House do resume and the committee of the whole House reports thereto. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding.)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE 

3.25
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TRADE AND INDUSTRY (INDUSTRY) (Mr Michael Werikhe): Madam Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled, “The Uganda Development Corporation Bill, 2014” and passed it with amendments.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE
OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

3.25
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TRADE AND INDUSTRY (INDUSTRY) (Mr Michael Werikhe): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion is that the report of the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted.)

BILLS 
THIRD READING

THE UGANDA DEVELOPMENT CORPORATION BILL, 2014

3.26
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TRADE AND INDUSTRY (INDUSTRY) (Mr Michael Werikhe): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Uganda Development Corporation Bill, 2014” be read for the third time and do pass.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion is that the Uganda Development Corporation Bill, 2014 be read for the third time and do pass. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

 A BILL FOR AN ACT ENTITLED “THE UGANDA DEVELOPMENT CORPORATION ACT, 2016.”

THE SPEAKER: Title settled and Bill passed into law. (Applause)

MR WERIKHE: Madam Speaker, I would like to take this opportunity to thank you first for having conducted the business of the House to consider this Bill. I would also like to thank my colleagues for having participated in shaping this Bill. Thank you, colleagues, for having supported this Bill. Thank you.

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE     COMMITTEE ON COMMISSIONS, STATUTORY AUTHORITIES AND STATE ENTERPRISES ON THE AUDITED ACCOUNTS FOR PUBLIC ENTERPRISES

THE SPEAKER: If you could use 20 minutes to just present the executive summary.

3.27
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON COMMISSIONS, STATUTORY AUTHORITIES AND STATE ENTERPRISES (Mr Ibrahim Nganda): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I will try my best, but this is a bulky report. It is a report on 28 entities; I think the first of its kind from the committee. I will try my level best.

Madam Speaker, Government, through the Public Enterprises Reform and Divestiture Act, 1993 (PERD) privatised several public enterprises, dissolved and liquidated others. The Government maintained a stake in enterprises, which were considered strategic for service delivery.

The main objective of these reforms was to relieve the Government of the financial drain and burden of their administration as well as raise revenue. The reforms also aimed at the promotion of institutional arrangements, policies and procedures to ensure efficient and successful management, financial accounting and budgetary discipline of public enterprises.

Parliament should also note that privatisation resulted in the need for regulation, necessitating the formation of several regulatory bodies. These bodies have been and remain fundamental in driving economic growth, service delivery as well as regulating performances in critical sectors.

The Auditor-General, in accordance with Article 163 of the Constitution and the National Audit Act, 2008, is mandated to annually audit all entities that are fully owned by Government or where Government has a limited stake. The Committee on Commissions, Statutory Authorities and State Enterprises (COSASE) is mandated, under rule 169 of the Parliamentary Rules of Procedure, to examine these audited accounts and to look into their performance and report to Parliament.

In order for the committee to report on all entities as the Auditor-General does, the committee, guided by rule 169 (2), has revised its approach and will now annually report on all entities in one or two reports. This will help reduce and eventually clear the backlog of audited reports before Parliament. However, individual reports will be presented, with the permission of the Speaker and this House, only for special investigations conducted by the Office of the Auditor-General. 

In the opinion of the committee, not every opinion in the report of the Auditor-General should attract a fresh and lengthy investigation as this has been the major cause of delayed reporting on several audits by COSASE. In Kenya, the Public Investments Committee is able to report on over 80 entities in a single year. 

Madam Speaker, I will summarize before I guide the House on the rest of the entities. Due to the huge backlog of audited reports before Parliament, we have combined the Auditor-General’s findings for the three years (2011-2013) into one report. 

The committee noted that part of the reason COSASE has to engage in lengthy investigations is because the Auditor-General has since changed his method of reporting. Whereas in earlier reports, the Auditor-General was able to point out an error in specific terms and name the officer(s) responsible for misuse and/or loss of public funds, currently the Auditor-General simply reports about noncompliance without revealing the responsible officer(s). 

Whereas, the Auditor-General had indicated that revealing names in the report could result into possibility of litigations against the Office of the Auditor-General, the committee noted that the Auditor-General’s report was a privileged document and as such cannot be made the basis for any civil liability. In addition, section 38 of the National Audit Act, 2008 guarantees absolute immunity to the Office of the Auditor-General. Besides, section 39 protects the Auditor-General and staff of the Office of Auditor-General from any liability.

The committee strongly recommends that the Auditor-General should point out the errors and omissions in specific terms and the name of the officer or officers responsible for misuse and/or loss of public funds to ease the work of Parliament while considering the audited reports.

The Auditor-General’s Key Findings 

In the financial year ending 2013, a total of 76 statutory corporations, councils and institutes were audited; 45 of these had unqualified opinions, 26 qualified and one entity with a disclaimer. Members are familiar with the definitions of the above terms.

In the financial year ending June 2012, out of the 77 entities audited, 42 had unqualified opinions, 25 qualified and four had disclaimer opinions. Entities with disclaimers are Mandela Stadium, Uganda Post Limited, Uganda Broadcasting Corporation and Uganda Development Bank.

In the financial year ending June 2011, a total of 66 statutory corporations were audited; 42 had unqualified opinions issued, 25 qualified and two disclaimers. 

Madam Speaker, reports of the Auditor-General show improvement in accountability by many enterprises. In 2010, for example, a total of nine disclaimer opinions were expressed, which reduced to two in 2011, four in 2012 and one in 2013. One adverse opinion was expressed in 2010 and the subsequent years have registered zero.

Findings for Financial Year Ending June 2013

Corporate Governance

Public enterprises are required to have functional governing bodies as well as structures to ensure good stewardship of resources. During the period under review, many of the entities audited were found to have no boards and/or councils while some were found to be involved in the day-to-day management of the entities’ work. The table provides a summary of the key findings related to availability of boards and the interference in day-to-day management duties by the boards. I do not have to go through the summary but as you can see, there are 27 entities that are listed here and many of them have been functioning without boards.

Problems with Boards and Councils

Madam Speaker, one of the key principal tools in corporate governance is a professional and dedicated board of directors. As stated by some scholars, the board of directors has got two most vital functions - advising and monitoring the work of the management. This is just to emphasise the importance of the board.

Madam Speaker, hon. Patrick Amuriat, who I succeeded, commissioned a study done by a Makerere University professor and a report was produced with the following key findings, which are very important as far as boards are concerned. I do not think I need to go through them but the most important are about the average board size and the issue of gender balance.

I will now go to the issue on delays in appointment of boards. I think this is self-explanatory. There are boards that have expired and two years later, there is no board functioning.

As for remuneration of boards, Madam Speaker, we have a big problem. You will find some board members earn up to Shs 3.5 million as a retainer and yet in some boards there is no allowance at all and some will earn half a million shillings. So we do not seem to have a policy as a government on how we should remunerate boards in various Government enterprises. The Auditor-General points out that some of the boards do not even have a board charter. So they just operate the way they like.

I will now go to staffing levels; the Auditor-General found out and listed the gaps in most of the Government enterprises. The list is provided. There is the example of Uganda National Bureau of Standards; their approved structure is 457 members of staff but they have a staffing gap of 223, and this is in a country where the percentage of the youth who are unemployed is 83 per cent. The rest of the figures are listed; I do not have to go through them.

Madam Speaker, now I will go to salary disparities; we have provided an addendum to illustrate that point. As a committee, we were concerned with the glaring huge salary disparities existing across all parastatals, authorities and commissions in the country. It appears that salaries and remuneration are not guided by any policy. As such, officers in some entities are paid half or a quarter of what their colleagues in other entities are getting. 

As a committee, we did a study and we asked all the entities to submit a list of their staff, showing their qualification, the date of appointment, their district of origin and gender. We highlight the problems that we found out. We discovered that the Governor Bank of Uganda, for example, earns Shs 53 million a month, the URA boss earns Shs 40 million and the NSSF boss earns Shs 30 million and yet there are entities, for example the Uganda Investment Authority, where the Managing Director (MD) earns Shs 17 million. In entities like the Civil Aviation Authority, the MD earns Shs 33 million. You do not understand why an MD of one authority earns Shs 33 million while another earns Shs 16 million and another one earns Shs 4 million, all working for the same government. 

We made proposals because as a committee, we are fatigued by the creation of authorities and entities, including the proposal to create a remunerations board. We think that policies should be able to serve that purpose; we do not have to create another entity or authority now responsible for remunerations.

In some entities, personal assistants - The personal assistant of the Governor Bank of Uganda, for example, earns Shs 25 million while an MD responsible for a big entity earns Shs 14 million. Probably, the Government will justify that before this committee. We have the same problem with boards and also with staff as they are not guided by any policy.

Madam Speaker, as a committee, we did a study and I would like to give some explanation to this study on the staff. We looked at the regional balance or imbalance in recruitment of staff and we discovered that most of the staff in public enterprises – 34.7 per cent are from western Uganda; 26.7 per cent are from central; 23 per cent from east; and 14.5 per cent from northern Uganda. This is how the distribution of jobs is in public enterprises, and this report is attached to the main report as an addendum for Parliament to consider.

Shortfalls in Revenue

Examination of revenue performance in 14 entities revealed that out of the total approved budgets of Shs 110 billion, only Shs 91.2 billion was realised resulting in shortfalls totalling to Shs 19.7 billion. This has the effect of constraining the implementation of the planned activities. The list is provided.

We have funds that are unaccounted for and a list showing those entities is also provided. We also have a summary of entities with incomplete registers and fixed assets– non-revaluation of assets. The table lists them, from Nakivubo War Memorial Stadium to Dairy Development Authority.

Under receivables, the list is also provided, from Bank of Uganda to National Environment Management Authority. The Auditor-General also summarised procurement anomalies in these entities and unremitted statutory deductions.

Unpaid Dividends 

The organisations that have not paid dividends are listed, including National Housing & Construction Company, Uganda Property Holdings Ltd for two years, and the New Vision Printing and Publishing Corporation. 

We have unaccounted for expenditure across entities amounting to Shs132 million.

Wasteful Expenditure
The organisations that are concerned are listed. We also have a report from the Auditor-General on the loan from the finance ministry to Kilembe Mines Ltd. The details are provided.

Encroachment on Government land: The details of which land has been encroached upon by what entity are provided in the list.

Madam Speaker, that is the summary of this report given by the Auditor-General on Government enterprises for the years 2011, 2012, 2013. Let me now go entity by entity starting with the Uganda Investment Authority, which is on page 1 of the main report. 

Uganda Investment Authority

As this Parliament is aware, the Uganda Investment Authority was created by an Act of Parliament in 1992 with the view of promoting and facilitating investment by provision of serviced land and a competitive business environment. The authority is mandated to provide first-hand information on investment opportunities in Uganda, issue investment licences, assist in securing other licences and secondary approval for investors, assist in acquisition of industrial land, help investors and their expatriate staff process work permits and propose policies to Government among others.

The Auditor-General in the year ending June 2013 found out the following:

Governance

Audit noted that despite its central role in promoting trade through facilitation to investors, this organisation stayed without a board from July 2013 to July 2015. So for two years, the Uganda Investment Authority operated without a board and certainly, there were problems. As a result, the finance minister acted for two years as the board of Uganda Investment Authority. 

Part of what the Uganda Investment Authority was supposed to do was approval of applications for land and since there was no board for two years, the committee learnt that the Minister of State for Investment now became the board of the Uganda Investment Authority. Within those two years, the minister sometimes intentionally refused or delayed some approvals and hastened others. He has also given investors more land than what is applied for and directed management to comply. The minister has also given away land already allocated to investors of his choice, exposing the authority to possible litigation and attendant consequences of court awards.

The committee noted that the continued absence of a board for the Uganda Investment Authority has not only caused confusion but is also likely to cost the Government money in form of court awards, which would otherwise have been averted. 

Below are examples of land allocations made by hon. Gabriel Ajedra, the Minister of State for Investment, without following set regulations. I do not know if I have to go through them. We have Allied Graphic Systems and M/s Picfare where land had been given to one organisation but the minister had become the board and upon his directive, the allocation was cancelled and another investor given the land. The details are given in the report.

When we met the minister, he said that it was true and that Picfare had been initially allocated 10 acres of land in Namanve. He said that when they went to survey, there was a small piece of land measuring 1.6 acres at the corner which the company requested for so that the factory can be set in one location. This request was reasonable according to the minister and an additional allocation of 1.6 acres was made on that basis.

Prior to the allocation, a meeting was held in the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development with the Managing Director of Allied Graphic Systems Ltd. Moreover, Allied Graphic Systems Ltd had defaulted in payment of lease premium. It was subsequently agreed that Allied Graphic Systems Ltd would be allocated three acres in Luzira or Bweyogerere industrial parks because these two companies were conflicting over land. For land cancelled by the minister, additional land was given. 

Tian Tang Group Ltd 

In another scenario, this Chinese company interested in setting up a furniture plant applied for land and was allocated 20 acres in Namanve. Again, hon. Ajedra waived premium for this company despite advice from management against it. Moreover, the Solicitor-General also advised against this exemption.

When the Solicitor-General advised, the minister wrote back lecturing the former that making furniture is agro-processing. This Chinese company had actually expressed willingness to pay premium to Uganda Investment Authority until the minister intervened.

In his submission, hon. Ajedra argued that he discussed the matter with some Uganda Investment Authority workers on May 5, 2014 in his office at the finance ministry and communicated the outcome of the meeting to the executive director the following day.

In a May 6, 2014 letter to the UIA managing director titled, “Policy guidance on agro-processing with respect to land allocation at industrial parks”, the disagreement was that while the expert said that making of furniture is not agro-processing, the minister said it was. In the letter, hon. Ajedra stated, “According to the Food and Agricultural Organisation (FAO) 1997, the agro-processing industry is a subset of manufacturing that processes raw materials and intermediate products derived from the agricultural sector. Agro processing thus means transforming products that originate from agriculture, forestry and fisheries”.

He further stated, “The UN International Standard Industrial Classification also categorises the following 11 divisions under agro-processing industry: food, beverages, paper and paper products, wood and wood products, textile, wearing apparel, furniture …” He added, “…this letter is to provide this policy guidance on what constitutes ‘agro-processing’”.
 
NEC versus Plasnet

The committee learnt that hon. Ajedra directed that land allocated to another company, M/s NEC (UPDF), be given away to M/s Plasnet Ltd. After this confusion, he then ordered that NEC be allocated alternative land at a subsidised rate but NEC has since declined this offer in South C Estate. The committee learnt that the minister is now coercing Uganda Investment Authority management to give NEC land which is already allocated to another company, M/s Norbrook. 

In his response when he met the committee, hon. Ajedra stated that the allocation of land to Plasnet was based on a directive of H.E the President. Subsequently, the company was allocated 30 acres but later reduced to 20 by the previous Uganda Investment Authority board. The 10 acres were then allocated to NEC. However, the company appealed, saying that it needs the original 30 acres allocated to them. A meeting was held in the finance ministry and the minister said that he informed them about the presidential directives. It was agreed that alternative land would be allocated to NEC. “That is the truth and the whole truth about it”, the minister told the committee.

Mabros Ltd

The Uganda Land Commission irregularly allocated industrial park land in Namanve to M/s Mabros Ltd. The Uganda Investment Authority, who are the owners of that land, resisted this irregular allocation and evicted Mabros. Mabros went to court. The Uganda Investment Authority told the committee that they went to court because they thought they had a good case.

The minister, however, directed that this case be withdrawn. He summoned Uganda Investment Authority management to his office and reminded them that his decision should never be questioned by anyone and should be implemented without delay since he enjoys delegated powers from the President. The minister advised Uganda Investment Authority management that they should not get concerned about how private people obtain titles for land in the industrial park from the Uganda Land Commission or from any other district land boards such as Mukono. 

In his written submission to COSASE, hon. Ajedra stated that, “The land in question was not part of degazetted land to be available to the Uganda Investment Authority as an industrial park. That is the reason why the matter ended up in court in the first place, way before I became the minister in charge of investment.”

Bugembe Real Estate Developers

Hon. Ajedra instructed that Bugembe Real Estate Developers be allocated land previously reserved for waste management and that no premium should be paid.

In his written submission, hon. Ajedra told COSASE that Bugembe Real Estate Developers were issued a land title in the area by Mukono District Land Board through Uganda Land Commission, well aware that this was Uganda Investment Authority land. He said that the Mukono District Land Board was the one to answer.

In his August 26, 2014 letter to the Uganda Investment Authority executive director, hon. Ajedra wrote, “We have studied the application and wish to confirm the following: The land comprised in FHRVMK 031 Folio 13 Kyaggwe Block 113 Plot 711 falls within the Kampala Industrial and Business Park Namanve. The land title for the land referred to above has been duly issued by Mukono District Land Board, the land previously reserved for waste management. The rent and premium have been duly paid for by Bugembe Estate Developers Ltd to Mukono District.

Since the developer wishes to utilise the land for an agro-processing plant and in order to avoid litigation, you are hereby directed to regularise the allocation of the said land to Bugembe Real Estate Developers Ltd. By copy of this letter, the planner is also requested to adjust the master plans accordingly.”

Committee Observation

The committee observes that the minister literally took over both management and board functions of the authority during the period when there was no board. This was contrary to the purpose for which the authority was made an autonomous body. Such action by the minister was ultra vires and illegal as there is no express provision in the UIA Act granting him power to perform board functions. Even if he had performed board functions well, it would still be illegal. However, for his case, he even flouted regulations.

Again, the committee observes that it was irregular for hon. Ajedra to take it upon himself to begin expanding the definition of the word “agro-processing” so as to help companies escape payment of premium. Why would a minister go to the extent of googling so that he can overturn the expert recommendation from the Solicitor-General and UIA management? By doing so, the minister acted suspiciously. Take the case of Picfare; their application was approved according to plans submitted, why did hon. Ajedra give them an extra 1.62 acres when they had not asked for it in their original application?

The committee notes that the directive to give A-Z Plasnet more land rested with the former UIA CEO and not hon. Ajedra. In her wisdom, Dr Maggie Kigozi did not allocate the extra land and there is no follow-up letter or directive to hon. Ajedra to give the land. What was his motivation in reactivating this directive that UIA had declined to implement? The minister acted irregularly and caused financial loss to the authority.

As for Bugembe, this is a real estate company vending in land and houses. By the minister’s action, this company now has 3.6 acres of land which it wants to parcel and sell. The minister admits that the land allocated to Bugembe is Uganda Investment Authority land. Why did he direct management to regularise an illegality committed by another entity? Since when did real estate become agro-processing? When you add all the acres given out for free following directives of the minister, it totals to over 30 acres. The value of 30 acres is US$ 80,000x 30, which comes to $240,000 – this is over Shs 700 million.

The committee recommends that hon. Ajedra should make good the loss he caused by his numerous directives. He should immediately resign or be relieved of his duties by the appointing authority for acting outside the law and for abuse of office.     
 
Recruitment of a Director for SMEs

According to the UIA Act, the Minister of Finance appoints the board. The board then appoints the CEO and directors and the top management recruits lower staff.

The director for Small and Medium Enterprises, Mr Albert Ouma, resigned. As had been the norm, the Executive Director of UIA, Mr Frank Ssebowa, consulted hon. Ajedra who had become the authority’s board in a May 26, 2014 letter.

In a May 28, 2014 letter to the UIA CEO, hon. Ajedra, the Minister of State for Investment, wrote thus: “Permission is hereby granted to constitute an interview panel from the following institutions: Enterprise Uganda, UWEAL, Makerere University, MUBS, Microfinance Support Centre, Small Scale Enterprises Association, Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development.”

Consequently, the panel comprised of Daniel Ssubi, USSIA Chairman; Joseph Kiggundu, Ag Director R&D Ministry of Public Service; Peninah Ngategize, Director of Finance UWEAL; Rose Mutyabule, Director Business Advisory, Enterprise Uganda; Sarah Kyejjusa, Deputy Director MUBS; Max Ochai, Assistant Commissioner MoFPED; and Mr Samuel Ssekungu, Director MTIC. Mr Tebandeke Richard, Director of Finance in UIA, was also in attendance.

Six candidates were interviewed but two - Ajer Basil with 70.5 per cent and Charles Omusana with 70.1 per cent- emerged the best.  Mr Basil Ajer worked with DANIDA in West Nile and Acholi areas while Mr Charles Omusana had been the assistant director in charge of SMEs. In fact, because the difference between the two was a negligible 0.4 per cent, the panel of experts recommended a second interview. The panel noted that Charles Omusana had been involved in the original set up of the SMEs division, has long experience of working with SMEs and wide knowledge in Uganda Investment Authority dynamics compared to other applicants. They also noted that Mr Ajer had skills and would benefit the organisation more after deep orientation to redirect his biasness in the one sector of agriculture.

The UIA Executive Director wrote to hon. Ajedra on June 20 2014 proposing that he, hon. Ajedra, UIA ED Ssebowa and the Commissioner for Investment should “interact with the two candidates before final selection.” Indeed, on July 4th, hon. Ajedra, Dr Frank Sebbowa and Mrs Percy Washeba (Principal Economist in Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, sat as a panel and gave the job to Mr Ajer.

Hon. Ajedra, according to the minutes, was the expert on management skills and style. The minister, in his written response to the committee, stated that the interview for the position of Director SMEs was done by a panel consisting of various individuals from many institutions namely, Uganda Enterprise, UWEAL, Makerere University, MUBS, Microfinance Support Centre, Small Scale Enterprises Association, Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development; and that the results of the interview were forwarded to his office for approval - there was no UIA board.

He said that the Executive Director, Dr Frank Sebbowa, advised that since the marks were too close - about 0.4 per cent difference - they needed to conduct one additional interview for Mr Basil Ajer and Mr Charles Omusana, the two best candidates.

Hon. Ajedra adds that after the interview conducted in the Ministry of Finance, comprising a panel of three - Ajedra, Sebbowa and Percy Washeba, the principal economist - Mr Basil Ajer emerged the better candidate, consistent with previous assessment, hence he was appointed Director for SMEs.

Observation

By constituting himself into panels to interview and award jobs, the minister, hon. Ajedra, overstepped his mandate. There is nowhere in the UIA Act where a minister is mandated to involve himself in recruitment. In fact, in other entities, work such as recruitment and submission of financial statements has stalled due to the absence of the board. Other ministers have desisted from carrying out responsibilities that are not theirs. In this particular case, the staff of UIA were concerned because in a similar case (resignation), the next senior person in line has always been automatically promoted by the board. Even after being described as a key person in setting up the SME division, it did not please the minister to appoint Omusana. Matters were made worse because the person appointed by the minister is from his region.

The committee recommends that hon. Ajedra should be relieved of his duties for influence peddling and abuse of his office. 

For the rest of the issues, I will be going straight to the recommendations. The committee recommends that the engineer concerned should be held responsible for non-submission of accountability. 

For unaccounted for funds for workshops, the recommendation of the committee is that the responsible officials should be held responsible for these unaccounted for funds and accordingly refund the whole total.

Unacknowledged Remittances to URA 

The committee recommends that the ED, Sebbowa, should within three months submit receipts or any acknowledgement from URA to the Auditor-General for verification. If he fails, he should be made to refund this whole amount.

Staffing Gaps 

The committee recommends that the UIA board should set a policy on interns and make their recruitment competitive. Mr Sebbowa should be investigated by the new board and if it is found that he indeed recruited his relatives and children of his friends, he should be relieved of his duties. 

Absence of a Board of Directors 

The committee recommends that this query should be dropped because the board is now in place.

Absence of a Corporate Strategic Plan 

The committee notes that by approving the strategic plan, the minister went beyond his power. The new board should therefore study it and approve it as the law requires. Hon. Ajedra should be reprimanded according to the law.

Mbarara Industrial Park Rent Arrears and Unutilized Workspace

The problem with this park as reported by the Auditor-General is that it was acquired in 2009 at Shs 2,500,000,000 from Gatsby Club purposely to develop it into an ultra-modern park for small and medium enterprises.

The committee observed that due to its location, the area was not suitable for an industrial park. In addition, the committee noted that there was laxity on the part of UIA management because despite having a tenancy agreement in place, management had failed to evict the defaulters yet a lot of money was invested (Shs 2.5 billion). The committee is concerned that for such a huge investment, there was no value for money realised to date.

Kampala Industrial and Business Park Namanve 

The committee notes that UIA is not managing and allocating land in the park based on transparent and best business principles as required by the existing regulations and guide.

Assets Due for Disposal 

The committee recommends that a clear policy regarding disposal of assets should be put in place and adhered to, to avoid this scenario in future.

Inconsistencies in Implementation of Budgetary Activities
 
The committee remains sceptical about the Twed Towers rent bill. This matter has been before this Parliament before; the UIA sold their headquarters and then went on to rent. 

The committee was concerned that the business centre which we are talking about has not taken off and yet they are now spending Shs600 million annually on rent at Twed Towers. In addition, UIA had acquired land in Kololo at a cost of Shs 1.5 billion but it is not building, which was the reason behind the sale of their former office block on Kampala Road. The committee remains sceptical, as I said, about this deal- sell your headquarters and go and rent and then say that you are building!

The Auditor-General’s Report (on the same entity) for the Year Ended June 30 2012

There was a shortfall in Non-Tax Revenue (NTR) and the recommendation of the committee is that this query should be dropped.

Management of Debtors’ Policy not followed 

The committee recommends that UIA should always follow guidelines on debt management as listed in the accounting manuals. Heads of department concerned should be given targets and should have their contracts terminated on failure to meet the targets without satisfactory reasons

Lack of Investor Monitoring and Aftercare Services 

When the committee demanded for an updated list of investors who are licensed, the accounting officer did not have it neither did he have the figures. This confirmed that actually monitoring is still very poor.

Recommendation: The reason licences are issued is to ensure compliance. The UIA should within six months publish and submit to Parliament a list of investors licensed and the status of their compliance. 

Budget Performance 

The committee recommends that the Ministry of Finance should make realistic budgetary forecasts to enable entities plan adequately. Promising or allocating money to entities makes them incur costs in planning yet all of that money is never released.   

Non-Compliance with the Payment Terms in the Lease Agreements

The committee recommends that the UIA management should enforce terms of agreement it concludes with investors. All money due to the authority should be collected within six months. Land should be withdrawn from defaulters.

Irregular Land Allocation in Luzira Industrial Park 

There is a very big problem in Uganda Land Commission. This commission has made similar allocations in Namanve and elsewhere. The problem is that Uganda Land Commission, even where it has no mandate, goes on allocating land; for example, you can go and apply for land meant for Uganda Investment Authority and they will give you a title. The commission has given away National Forestry Authority (NFA) land in Bugolobi, including the entity’s headquarters. It appears no due diligence is done before land is given out.

Recommendation: The leadership of Uganda Land Commission should be thoroughly investigated by the IGG and the Police and made to pay for this confusion. Where public land has been irregularly given out, it should be recovered and no compensation should be made. Uganda Land Commission officers involved in giving away land of other entities should be relieved of their duties.     

Overpayment on Land Purchase 

Audit noted that UIA purchased 50 acres of land in Bweyogerere from an individual at a cost of Shs 675,000,000 on 18 December 1998. The committee learnt that a report by the Department of Surveys and Mapping showed that the actual size of the land was only 44.75 acres and not 50 acres. Audit noted that there was no evidence that UIA undertook to establish the actual size of the land before effecting the payments. As a result, there was an overpayment of Shs 70,875,000 since the land was less by 5.25 acres.

Management explained that UIA had not lost the land but instead the surveyor wanted to connive with private individuals to mutate part of the land in Bweyogerere. This was discovered well in time before it was cut off. The ED presented the land title to the committee as evidence and the committee was satisfied with the presentation. That is the reason why the committee is proposing that this query should be dropped.

Failure to Recover the Outstanding Balance on Land Sale 

The committee recommends that the query should be dropped because it was satisfied with the explanation from the accounting officer.

National Forestry Authority (NFA)

Background

The National Forestry Authority (NFA) is a creation of section 52 of the National Forestry and Tree Planting Act, 2004. The NFA Act also established the district forestry services to manage local forest reserves and to advise private land owners on how to sustainably manage their forests. The local forest reserves account for about 85 per cent of the country’s total forest cover.

Currently, Uganda has about 1.3 million hectares of forest cover with 12 per cent of it encroached upon. On average, a total of 9,000 hectares of forest cover is lost per year yet NFA is replanting only about 3,000 hectares.

The NFA annual budget amounts to Shs 20 billion and it is financed through the sale of trees, issuance of licences to tree growers and harvesters, sale of seeds as well as Government of Uganda financing amounting to Shs 5.4 billion specifically for the wage and non-wage budget. The committee was informed that NFA would require at least Shs 60 billion to enhance its performance; for example, a total of Shs 4 billion compared to the current Shs 1 billion s required to enhance seed management. In addition, a total of Shs 32 billion is required to open up 3,000 km of forest land.

Findings of the Auditor-General

Non-Submission of Financial Statements 

The committee was concerned about the delay in constituting the board. The committee learnt that the minister has since appointed the board and the mandatory financial statements have been submitted. The committee recommends that this query should be dropped.

Physical Performance 

The committee recommends that NFA management should be strengthened through increased political supervision. In addition, NFA should strengthen their accounting system to ensure compliance just like NWSC, URA and other entities have done.

Court cases, Legal Fees and Court Awards 

The Auditor-General noted that the status report showed that NFA had 45 cases in the courts of law as at 3 May 2013. The committee observes that PAC dealt with the issue of Beachside Development Services in its May 2013 report in greater detail. The report was debated and passed by this Parliament.

The committee recommends that NFA management should adhere to their contractual obligations to avoid litigation. In addition, NFA should strengthen their legal department through staffing and retooling.

Procurement Anomalies 

The committee observed that the accounting officer, legal counsel and field officers did not act responsibly while executing their roles. The committee demanded for the list of these officers but by the time of compiling this report, this information had not been availed.

The committee recommends that the accounting officer, legal officer and the responsible field officers should be held responsible for any loss of public funds that may have resulted from this non-compliance and for the procurement anomalies. The Auditor-General should follow up on this matter and report to Parliament in subsequent reports.

Private Tree Planting in Central Forest Reserves

The Auditor-General noted that NFA offered land to private tree farmers in line with the NFA Act, which encourages public participation in the management and conservation of forests and trees. The review of the tree licences revealed the following:
    a) Out of a total of 3,610 private tree farmers offered land by NFA for tree planting, 2,242 are active while 1,368 are not. Only a total of 52,675 hectares out of 111,056.6 hectares of land is currently planted, leaving 58,381.1 hectares unplanted.
    b) The NFA had not been issuing demand notes to farmers to pay ground rent since 2008. 
    c) A total of 135 farmers who were allocated less or no land ended up planting and encroaching on NFA land.
    d) The land allocated by NFA to tree planters has no clear boundaries and this has resulted into conflicts. 
    e) Annual land licence fees were supposed to be reviewed every after five years but this has never been done.

The accounting officer’s explanation is on page 23. In addition to the Auditor-General’s finding, the committee notes that the land allocated for tree planting had instead been put to different uses not provided for in the contracts such as commercial tree planting with no element of forest conservation originally perceived, yet NFA was not vibrant enough to effectively manage the forests and reserves as mandated under the NFA Act. The committee thinks giving out forest land to private planters is a policy that was not well thought out and was not properly supervised. It has in the end contributed to the depletion of forests in the country. 

The recommendation of the committee is that NFA should strictly adhere to the lease agreements and where the terms and conditions of the lease agreement are found to have been violated, the leases should be terminated. In addition, NFA should ensure that all forest reserve boundaries are properly demarcated to avoid conflicts.

Unaccounted for Funds 

The committee observed that at the time of scrutiny, the committee requested the Auditor-General to verify receipts submitted. The committee awaits this verification. 

Administrative Advances not accounted for 

The observation of the committee is that the accounting officer negated his responsibility by not effecting recoveries within the timeframe provided for under the law. The accounting officer should be personally held liable for not enforcing accounting standards. He should, therefore, make good any loss that may accrue as a result.

Doubtful Fuel Expenditure 

The recommendation of the committee on page 25 is that the Auditor-General was requested to verify the register and list of cardholders provided to the committee. Results from this verification are awaited.

The Auditor-General’s Report for the Year Ended 30 June 2012 on National Forestry Authority

Fraudulent acquisition of NFA Land

The Auditor-General noted that NFA signed a licence agreement with a company called M/s VIRCO on 21 July 2008 for one hectare of Nakawa Central Forest Reserve for the establishment of a timber drying plant and a modern artisan training centre for a period of 49 years, at a premium of Shs 400 million with an annual rent of Shs 10 million. However, it was noted that after signing the licence agreement, M/s VIRCO fraudulently processed and acquired a lease title from Uganda Land Commission without clearance from the NFA board. In addition, the company defaulted on all terms and conditions of the agreement and instead constructed a supermarket, shops and offices for rent. We are talking about Bugolobi here.

Management explained that M/s VIRCO Holdings Ltd paid a premium of Shs 320 million and remained with a balance of Shs 80 million. It is after this payment that M/s VIRCO Holdings Ltd fraudulently approached Uganda Land Commission to process a title. The committee was informed that NFA has sued M/s VIRCO and the matter is currently before Nakawa High Court.

The committee observed that there was laxity on the part of NFA management at the time, since M/s VIRCO was allowed to develop the land outside the terms and conditions of the lease entered into in 2008 without any action till recently, after the Auditor-General raised the query.

The committee, therefore, recommends that NFA enforces the terms and conditions of the lease agreement with M/s VIRCO as the outcome of the court case is being awaited. Further still, the Minister for Environment should keep Parliament updated on this matter.

Doubtful Acquisition of Plots 4 and 5 
The Auditor-General noted that plots 4 and 5 belonging to NFA headquarters have had their titles transferred to an individual and a firm by the Uganda Land Commission. The Auditor-General noted that although land titles were issued to the occupants, this land is located within a gazetted area – the same area where NFA headquarters are located in Bugolobi. The accounting officer told the committee that NFA filed a case in court. 

Committee observation: The NFA management is not vigilant enough in protecting its land and other assets. That is the reason its headquarters is being claimed by RARA Info Tech Ltd owned by, among others, Rajan, a moneylender along Parliamentary Avenue. This Parliament wants the headquarters of NFA.

Recommendation: The NFA should increase their vigilance in protecting all assets under its jurisdiction. In addition, Uganda Land Commission should urgently cancel the land title for plots 4 and 5 in Bugolobi, which were fraudulently transferred without the authorisation of NFA management. In addition, individuals from Uganda Land Commission who were involved in these fraudulent transitions should be held personally liable and disciplinary action be taken against them by the appointing authority.

Budget Performance 

The budget performance is illustrated on page 27. The recommendation of the committee is that NFA management and board should set realistic non-tax revenue targets. Officers responsible for collection of non-tax revenue should be subjected to performance contracts as well. 

Management of Forest Plantations 

The recommendation of the committee is that this query should be dropped.

Non-Implementation of Board Decisions 

The committee noted that NFA management did not have a clear strategic plan to guide it in its implementation and enforcement of board decisions.

Cash Payment of Shs 19,692,500 

The recommendation of the committee is that the accounting officer should be held personally liable for this procurement anomaly and for the breach of PPDA guidelines.

Encroachment of Forest Reserves
 
The committee recommends that disciplinary action should be taken against all officers responsible for not protecting the forest reserves.

Uganda Property Holdings Limited 

Background 

This entity was established in 1999 to manage properties in and outside the country that formerly belonged to disbanded or privatised corporations. The defunct Uganda Coffee Marketing Board, for example, owned a lot of property in the country, in Mombasa and London. Other bodies with valuable properties included Lint Marketing Board and Transocean Uganda Limited.

Auditor-General’s Report for the Year Ended 30 June 2013

The issue of the bank loan is covered on pages 30-31. The committee visited the port and found it operational. The loan is being serviced. The only concern is the revision of rent from Kshs 5.2 million to Kshs 4.4 million.

Non-Coding of Payments Prior to Posting to Ledgers 

The committee acknowledged the acceptance of the error by Uganda Property Holdings Limited management and consequently, recommends adherence to sound financial reporting standards to avoid doubtful accountability.

Revenue Performance 

The recommendation of the committee is that UPHL should aggressively collect all NTR in order to finance their budget.

Lack of Performance Plans 

The recommendation of the committee is that a staff performance management tool be considered by the board and approved within three months. 

Report of the Auditor-General on Uganda Property Holdings Limited for the Year Ended 30 June 2012

Idle Carport Facility 

We have dealt with that in the earlier report and our recommendation is that it should be dropped.

Loan Interest of Kshs 134,152,306.80 

The committee recommends prioritisation of servicing of this loan to avoid further accumulation and additional costs in form of penalties and/or interest. 

Inadequate Staffing 

The committee recommends that management should fill the vacant positions critical to the proper functioning of the entity.

Auditor-General’s Report for the Year Ended 30 June 2011

Debtors’ Management 

The recommendation of the committee is that Government urgently pays the outstanding debt to clear UPHL’s balance sheet without any further delays. This debt should be settled in the 2015/2016 financial year. Maybe this should now be 2016/2017 financial year.

Unpaid Dividends 

Recommendation: Treasury receipts were presented to the committee and the Auditor-General was requested to verify the receipts. 
 
Unpaid Corporation Tax 

The recommendation of the committee is that this should be dropped.

Budget Performance 

The committee recommends that this query be dropped.
 
Vacant Key Positions 

The recommendation of the committee is that critical positions identified by the Auditor-General should be filled within six months.

Unplanned Procurements
 
The committee recommends that the accounting officer should be held responsible for this anomaly. Management should ensure that the PPDA regulations are followed in all procurements.

Uganda Electricity Transmission Company Limited 

Madam Speaker, you are familiar with the background of this entity. It is one of the successor companies to the Uganda Electricity Board, which is a creation of the Electricity Act.

Irregular recruitment of Kateera & Kagumire Advocates 

The committee found out privately - not from the Auditor-General’s report - that UETCL had fraudulently contracted a law firm called Kateera & Kagumire Advocates without following PPDA regulations. The law firm was contracted to provide secretarial services to the board and to represent UETCL in court from time to time. Accordingly, the law firm seconded one of its lawyers, Denis Wamala, to UETCL who got appointed as Company Secretary. 

One of the big contracts given to this law firm, which also sits on UETCL board, was to represent the company when the former UEB workers took it to court together with other successor companies for non-payment of terminal benefits. The UEB successor companies lost the case and were ordered by court to pay the terminal benefits amounting to Shs 47 billion. The money was divided among the three companies. I will not go through the whole story of this company. I will go to page 40 where we have the recommendations of the committee.

The committee noted that Kateera & Kagumire Advocates was not pre-qualified when the PPDA Act came into force in 2003 and no corrective measures were put in place to rectify this anomaly. The committee recommends that the irregular contract with Kateera & Kagumire Advocates should be terminated immediately. All money spent on the training of Denis Wamala and any other Kateera staff should be recovered within three months. The UETCL board should be disbanded for abetting these procurement irregularities. The accounting officer should be reprimanded for failure to advise the board and for implementing irregular decisions of the board.

The Auditor-General’s Report for the Year Ended 30 December 2012

Amounts Due to Related Parties 

The committee recommends that Government finalises the decision on this matter and has it concluded to avoid it reoccurring in subsequent audit reports.

Disparity in Power Purchase and Sales Agreements 

The committee recommends that the unfairness in these agreements will continue affecting the taxpayer. Termination of the Umeme contract as recommended by this Parliament was the most viable option. In the event that these contracts are not terminated, they must immediately be revised not to continue disadvantaging government companies. The UEDCL told the committee, for example, that for every investment Umeme makes, it recovers total costs and a 20 per cent interest on it. 

Non-Remittance of VAT on Power Purchases
 
The committee recommends that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should meet the obligation to pay VAT on the subsidy since UETCL does not have enough cash flows to have it offset, to avoid this query reoccurring in subsequent audit reports.

Fixed Assets not Adequately Insured 

The recommendation is that they should be subsequently insured.

Fleet Management System

The committee recommends that this query should be dropped.

Pension Settlement of Former UEB Employees 

The recommendation of the committee is that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should provide for this debt in the next budget. 

Lack of Emergency Equipment 

The recommendation of the committee is that this should be dropped.

Inadequate Training Policy 

The committee recommends that this as well should be dropped.

Uganda Electricity Generation Company Limited

The background about the company has been given. 

Unfair Dismissal of Top Staff 

The committee received information of unfair treatment and dismissal of the company’s CEO, Mr John Mugyenzi, and the finance manager, Mr Lubandi, by the new board chaired by Dr Stephen Robert Isabalija. The committee was told that the board ordered the CEO to suspend the finance manager, which he declined to do after consulting the Solicitor-General. The board reportedly accused him of insubordination and consequently fired him. It also suspended the finance manager, creating fear among the rest of the staff.

The board met the committee. This is the UETCL board’s response: In a written submission to COSASE on 4 March 2015, the board chairman explained that the two officers were sacked due to incompetence, poor and improper management of financial records, failure to apply proper accounting standards and mismanagement of funds resulting into a loss of Shs 103 million as a result of retiring fixed deposits prematurely. The board did not approve the fixed deposit retirement.

Recommendation: This matter is being investigated by the IGG. The committee is concerned about the highhandedness of some board members not only in UEGCL but also in other entities. The outcome of the IGG’s investigations is still awaited. 

The Auditor-General’s Report for the Year Ended 31 December 2012

Impairment of Assets 

The committee recommends that UEGCL management expedites the process of procuring a firm to undertake the impairment exercise before close of this financial year.

Service and Depreciation Fee Components 

The committee’s recommendation is that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is agreeable to converting the debt into equity. This should be finalised in six months.

Government of Uganda Loans 

The recommendation is that this query should be dropped.

Unaccounted for Tax Withheld or Interest of Fixed Deposits

The committee observed that it was irregular not to recognise taxes in the books of accounts and the company should be obtaining tax certificates from URA. The continued reliance on bank certificates was not enough. 

Non-Reconciliation of VAT Returns 

The committee recommends that management should be vigilant and ensure that staff adhere to sound financial management practices. The Auditor-General should follow up this matter to ensure that the claims made by the accounting officer are verified. The findings of the Auditor-General should be reported to Parliament in subsequent reports.

Unsupported Balance 

The committee’s recommendation is that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development has proposed conversion of these debts into equity. This should be processed within six months.
 
Long Outstanding Payables and Receivables 

The committee’s recommendation is on page 54. The UEGCL should advertise as proposed and have this matter settled within six months.

Delayed Submission of Performance Reports 

The recommendation is that UEGCL should revoke provisions of this contract whenever Eskom is not complying.

Weakness in the Management of Journal Entries 

The committee recommends that management should expedite the process to avoid future queries around the same matter.

Fixed Assets not engraved 

The committee recommends that management should be proactive in securing the company’s assets without any laxity.

Incorrect Computation of the Staff Loan Benefits 

The recommendation on page 56 is that this query should be dropped.

The general recommendation we make on this entity, Madam Speaker, is that the parliamentary ad hoc committee on energy recommended, on page 130 of its report, the termination of the Eskom power generation concession. This was because the generation capacity of Kiira and Nalubaale has reduced from 280 megawatts to 140 megawatts during their reign. Also, part of the reason the electricity tariff remains high is because of the numerous overhead costs. The generation company’s budget is factored into the tariff as well as Eskom to do the same thing. We have two companies overseeing generation. The COSASE concurs with the findings and recommendations contained in the ad hoc committee report. 

Uganda Revenue Authority (URA) 

The background of the authority has been given. We will go to page 58 where there are findings of the Auditor-General.

Bank Balances on Inactive Bank Accounts 

The recommendation is that this query should be dropped.

Revenue Receipts not Traceable to the Bank Statement 
The committee recommends that the Auditor-General follows up this matter and reports to Parliament in subsequent reports.

Unallocated Revenue Collection 

The committee recommends that URA strengthens the online tax system to ensure that money is matched to taxpayers to ease reconciliation going forward. In addition, the Auditor-General should follow up this matter to establish how much of the money from Barclays Bank has been recovered and report back to Parliament in subsequent reports.

Uncleared Outstanding Arrears to NSSF amounting to Shs 7.4 billion 

The committee recommends that URA prioritises payment of these outstanding arrears, which are due to staff members, some of whom may have even left the organisation. This money must be cleared as per the agreement with NSSF without further delay.

Unregistered Business in Respect to Gaming and Pool Betting
The accounting officer explained that URA used to work differently but had since changed its method; URA currently works closely with the gaming board. To ensure compliance, before the board licenses any company, they have to write to URA for clearance. In addition, the procedures relating to gaming were weak but were since revised and strengthened. 

The committee recommends that the process of legislation should be expedited. Government should put in place a law to govern betting within six months from the date of adoption of this report. 

Undeclared Income Earned from Ministries, Agencies and Local Governments 
The committee recommends that Government should implement a public procurement and disposal computer tracking system, which should be linked and shared with URA. This will enable URA to track and assess withholding tax and track VAT registration information to avoid loss of tax, a challenge currently experienced. This measure will also increase revenue mobilisation efforts by URA.

Unaccounted For Income Inclusive of VAT 

The committee recommends that Government should implement a public procurement and disposal computer tracking system- a recommendation made earlier.

Unfiled Returns 

The committee recommends that URA management should ensure that the directors of M/s God’s Will Engineering Company are established and be held liable instead of concentrating on the company as an entity. In addition, the Auditor-General should follow up this matter and report to Parliament in subsequent reports.

Implementation of Tax Investigation Findings

Accounting officer’s response: Management explained that this was income earned by someone who passed away and there was difficulty in enforcing payment from the managers of the estate. However, by the time of death, Shs 70.9 million had been paid, leaving Shs 48 million as outstanding. The committee was informed that arrangements were being made to have the balance cleared in April 2016. 

Tax Evasion

Uganda Revenue Authority should, in collaboration with the Police and other security organs, trace the defaulters and identify their bank accounts in an effort to have them attached.

Failure to Trace the Taxpayer (We Do Hardware Limited) 


Audit noted that this case had been forwarded from the domestic taxes department with claims that the taxpayer could no longer be traced and yet they continued to charge output VAT that was being claimed by a number of unidentified taxpayers. In addition, this company was not making any VAT returns. A total of input VAT totalling to Shs 1.2 billion had been claimed by various clients but was never declared by the taxpayer. Audit noted that there is a risk that the outstanding balance of Shs 3.4 billion from the assessments done using the client information filed in the VAT returns may not be recovered.

Recommendation: The URA management should liaise with security agencies and trace the defaulters in order to recover the money. Possibilities of identifying their bank accounts and/or assets of M/s Krishna should be explored to have them attached.

Unserved Assessment of Shs 900 million 

The committee recommends that for purposes of withholding tax, Sheila Investments should pay. For other taxes, URA should vigilantly follow up the matter with Sheila Investments director, Hassan Basajjabalaba.

Customs Department 

Outstanding Government taxes: The committee observed that the accounting officer was asked to provide a disaggregated list of all the goods that benefited from the waiver.

Delays in Submission of Commitment Letters for Payment 
The committee recommends that the accounting officer should liaise with Ministry of Finance to have this matter settled within six months.

Unknown Status of Tax Payments Commitment Forms (TPCF)

Management explained that with new changes in expenditure, commitment letters are no longer required to clear the goods and any Government department importing must pay tax upfront.

Uncollected Taxes from Imports 

The explanation from the accounting officer is that management explained that with new changes in expenditure, commitment letters are no longer required to clear the goods and any Government department importing must pay tax upfront. 

Individual Tax Arrears 

The concerned companies are listed. The committee recommends that URA management should intensify its efforts to have these tax arrears settled. Clear realistic payment plans should be agreed upon under a MoU to ensure that the debts are cleared not later than 2017/2018. The Auditor-General should follow up on this matter and report to Parliament in subsequent reports.

Uganda Railways Corporation

A background of the corporation is given on page 70. 

Sale of URA Assets Halted 

The committee was informed that sale of URA assets had been halted and consequently, this saved majority of the assets in Jinja, Tororo, Gulu and Masindi originally planned for sale in the second phase. The committee learnt that Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development (Privatisation Unit) was responsible for the sale and URC only got involved after the sale to process the title. In order to monitor the performance of the concession, a joint railway commission comprising Ministry of Works and Transport, Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and the Attorney-General was constituted.

Performance of Rift Valley Railways (RVR) Concession 

The committee was informed that RVR has been operating with challenges. Many of the provisions in the concession have been contravened, dating as far back as after as the first year of operation (2006/07). Some of the requirements in the concession include rehabilitation of wagons, procurement of new locomotives and rehabilitation of existing ones. In addition, although RVR was to repair the track between Jinja and Kampala to enable locomotives to efficiently operate between Mombasa and Kampala, it was not done until March 2013. 

Another deliverable was to increase freight volumes up to 217.3 metric tons as a baseline and to reach a level of 275 million metric tons within a period of two years after the date of signing the concession. The committee learnt that RVR has not met the baseline and the deadline had been extended to December 2014. 

The committee recommends that Government should consider termination of the RVR contract since they are not meeting their part of the bargain.

Absence of a Board and Staffing 

The committee was concerned about the absence of a board. As a result, most of the top managers were serving in acting capacities. The committee was informed that the current CEO has served in acting capacity for the last 20 months while his predecessor, Mr Emmanuel Lyamulemye, had served in acting capacity from 2008 to 2011. In addition, Mr Noel Muhangi had also served as CEO in acting capacity before Mr Lyamulemye. It should be recalled that the first managing director, Mr Robert Motenson, had served as interim MD for four months. Therefore, since 2007, every MD in URC is an acting MD. Once an acting MD leaves, another one comes in. 

Auditor-General’s Report for the Year Ending 30 June 2011 

Non-Compliance with International Financial Reporting Standards (IFRS) 

The committee recommends that URC management should comply with international accounting standards going forward.

Non–Compliance with International Accounting Standards (IAS)

The committee recommends that valuation of URC assets is completed within six months after the adoption of this report.
 
Non-Impairment of Assets 

The committee recommends that the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and the Minister of Works and Transport should ensure that the Privatisation Unit and URC management conclude the process of disposing of these boats to avoid further depreciation.

Improper Recognition of Investment in Subsidiary
The committee noted the accounting officer’s explanation; however, the committee recommended that the Uganda Registration Services Bureau should expedite the liquidation process and provide a report within six months after approval of this report. 

Long-Term Loans

The committee recommends that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and URC trace these agreements and submit them to Parliament together with clear plans to have the debts cleared within three months after adoption of this report. 

Accounting for Government Grants

The committee recommends that the accounting officer should meet with the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development (MoFPED) so that the funds are considered as subsidies and avoid the matter appearing again in subsequent audit reports.

Revaluation Reserve

Management acknowledged the error and explained that the revaluation process had commenced and they would rectify the anomaly.

Corporation Losses and Liabilities

The committee recommends that URC should budget for valuation of its assets next financial year, 2015/2016, to avoid this query re-occurring in subsequent audit reports.

Inadequate Skills to Use Sun Systems

The committee recommends that the process of upgrading the software should be treated as a priority in the financial year 2015/2016. In addition, retooling of staff should be undertaken continuously to enhance staff skills.

Lack of Full Board Committees

The committee recommends that the Minister for Works and Transport urgently constitutes the board to facilitate quick decision-making as well as providing strategic direction to URC.

Bank of Uganda 
The background is given on page 79.  
Findings of the Auditor-General
We will start with investigations into the misuse of funds in the Prime Minister’s Office. The committee recommends that Bank of Uganda needs to put in place a system to track all payments made to Government agencies with ease of trailing, to ease investigations of such cases in the future. 

Capitalisation of the Bank of Uganda

The committee recommends that the bank needs to urgently review its operational environment and put in place both short and long-term measures to enhance its revenue while cutting costs to have a balance in income and expenditure in the medium term. 

Board Appointments 

The committee recommends that the President should always have the board appointed as per Article 161 of the Constitution. In addition, we recommend the amendment of section 7 of the Act and any other such provisions in the Act to bring it in harmony with the Constitution. 

Disclosure of Financial Instruments 

The committee recommends that this matter should be followed up by the Office of the Auditor-General to verify the information reported by the accounting officer.  An update on the matter should be provided in subsequent audit reports on the entity.

Outstanding Leave Provision 

It is recommended that the transition to an automated system be completed before the end of this financial year and the Auditor-General verifies this in their next audit report.

Review of Fixed Asset Register– expired land leases 

The committee recommends that the status of this property should be investigated by the relevant authorities for further action. The bank should obtain land titles for all its properties and any changes to the terms of ownership should be updated in a timely manner.  

Long Outstanding Reconciling Items 

The committee recommends that the bank should clear all the suspense accounts by the end of this financial year. In addition, investigations should be carried out on all reconciling items for any wrongdoing on the part of the accounts department of the bank and appropriate action be taken. 

Disclosure of Software Costs 

The committee took note of the explanation and recommends that the House keeps this as an outstanding query pending audit verification in subsequent audit reports.  

Monitoring of Loans

The committee recommends that this query remains outstanding, pending the verification of the new system in the next audit report to Parliament.

Records of Surveillance on Restricted Areas 

The committee recommends that given the claim that the matter was being addressed by the bank, this query should remain outstanding pending audit verification.  

Review of Exchange Rates

The accounting officer told the committee that the entry into the system of an already approved exchange rate did not require two people as everyone on the network was able to see. 

The committee makes an observation on page 89 about delays in posting of deals into the general ledger

Review of the Human Resource Function

The committee recommends that the Auditor-General should verify the authenticity of the sample files and report back to Parliament in subsequent audits.

Reputation Risk 

The committee observed that it was a case of negligence on the part of the bank to make payments before verification. This kind of laxity could have been responsible for transactions like payments to bicycle suppliers before the bicycles were actually delivered to the beneficiaries. Government should put strict measures in place so that confirmation is sought on delivery of goods before letters of credit are issued and payments made.

Auditor-General’s Report on Bank of Uganda for the Year Ended 30 June 2012

Financial Control and Compliance Issues

The committee recommends that the authenticity of the bank’s books of accounts be verified on the basis of international accounting standards with a view of prosecuting the chief accountant of the Bank of Uganda for false accounting.

Clearing Cheques Denominated in Foreign Currency 

The committee recommends that the bank should maintain a policy of constant reviews and update of its IT systems and software to avoid vulnerability to hackers and effectively respond to user requirements and operational demands.

Central Depository System (CDS) 

The committee was concerned with the inability by the technical officials at the bank to project the growing size of the transactions over time. The committee further observed that while the bank claimed to have rectified the anomaly, it was necessary to verify the efficacy of the system in providing security of data while managing and upholding the integrity of the CDS.

Staff Loans 

The committee recommends that with evidence of updated reconciliations on staff loans, this issue should be a subject of investigation and appropriate action should be taken.

Compliance with Bank of Uganda Act and Public Finance and Accountability Act, 2003

The committee recommends that Bank of Uganda management should adhere to the existing legal framework and stick to the principle of independence as enshrined in the Constitution. The Governor, Mr Emmanuel Tumusiime Mutebile, is accordingly held responsible for flouting sections 29 and 33 of the Bank of Uganda Act, 1993 and section 20 of the Public Finance and Accountability Act, 2003.

Bank of Uganda Reserves

The bank has to reassess its investment policy with a view of diversifying its portfolio and controlling the increasing operating and capital expenditure. In addition, the law needs to be amended to ensure that Parliament exercises some level of scrutiny of the financial expenditure of the bank other than only being laid before Parliament as the case is under the current legal framework.

Further, the bank should comply with the provisions of section 16 of the Bank of Uganda Act and ensure that measures are taken to minimise the impact of its operating results on the bank‘s operations.

Loans to Basajjabalaba Hides and Skins Limited 

The committee recommends that the Governor Bank of Uganda, Mr Tumusiime Mutebile, takes personal responsibility for acting outside the law in giving financial guarantees to a private person without parliamentary approval. He should resign or be relieved of his duties.

National Social Security Fund (NSSF) and Taxation Issues 
The committee recommends that Bank of Uganda (BoU) management should endeavour to adhere to meet all its tax obligations to avoid penalties which can lead to unnecessary expenditure.

NSSF on Staff Bonus

The committee took note of the action claimed to have been taken but recommends that this query is maintained until verified by auditors.

Some other issues raised included:
    a) Password settings.
    b) EFT interface module.	
    c) Monitoring user access.
    d) Lack of regular review of audit trails - internal audit function. 	

The recommendation of the committee is that the bank should pay special attention to its IT systems and ensure their integrity to mitigate the risk of losing vital information and funds to hackers. The bank needs to put in place a strong risk management unit to take care of this issue. While the bank claims to have addressed all the said concerns, the committee recommends that the query remains outstanding until it has been verified by the auditors.

Bank of Uganda Audit Report for the year ending 30 June 2013

Classification of Government Securities prior to 1 July 2012

The committee recommends that the Auditor-General should investigate this matter to ensure that action was taken as per the explanation of the accounting officer. An update should be provided in the subsequent audit reports on Bank of Uganda.

Temporary Advances to Government

The recommendation of the committee is that BoU management should comply with the provisions of the BoU Act regarding honouring of securities to avoid penalties and possible litigation which could result into unnecessary expenditure.

Unrecovered Drawdown from Government 
 
The committee recommends that Government pays back this money without any further delay or else pays it with market interest.

Declining Performance of the Bank 

The committee demanded that the accounting officer provides evidence of the undertakings with Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development.

Generic Super-user A/C to Complete Central Depository System Transactions 

The committee recommends that the Auditor-General follows up this matter to verify whether the explanation of the accounting officer is valid.

Government payments from Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development
The committee recommends that Bank of Uganda management ensures that all payment processes loaded onto the Real Time Gross Settlement (RTGS) are automated to allow automatic upload of batches and avoid manual approval of over 400 transactions.

Inadequate Review of Benchmark Performance 

The committee appreciated the update by management but strongly recommends that the Auditor-General should verify the information.

Foreign Exchange Reserve Management Policy Committee

The committee recommends that the accounting officer should be cautioned never to deny the Auditor-General information required to aid in audit exercises as required by section 20 of the National Audit Act. However, the committee recommended that the query should be dropped.

Withholding Tax Charges on Interest Paid by Non-Residents

The committee recommends that URA should stick to the provision in the Income Tax Act. The possibility of refunding the extra charges should also be explored. The Minister for Finance, Planning and Economic Development should provide an update to Parliament regarding the refund within three months after adoption of this report.

Unutilised Funds on the Collateral Account

The committee recommends that the accounting officer needs to be seriously cautioned against the practice. 

Long Outstanding Reconciling Items on Suspense Accounts

The committee recommends that Bank of Uganda management should endeavour to regularly reconcile accounts to avoid long outstanding balances and avoid possible associated risks such as unauthorised transactions. In addition, the Auditor-General should verify whether reconciliations have been automated as explained by the accounting officer and report to Parliament in subsequent audit reports.

Dormant Accounts 

The committee recommends that all dormant accounts should be closed in line with existing regulations.

Delayed implementation and completion of projects: The committee tasked the Auditor-General to verify and report during the subsequent audit.

Administrator activities not regularly reviewed: The committee recommends that Bank of Uganda management should upgrade the system to avoid intrusion.

Inadequate Incident Management Procedures

The committee recommends that Bank of Uganda management should remain vigilant and ensure that all systems operated have up-to-date service level agreements, which clearly define acceptable levels of service.

National Housing and Construction Company Limited (NHCCL) 

The background of this company is given. It is a 50-year-old entity established by the National Housing Corporation Act, 1964. The committee also gave the background of the performance of National Housing and Construction Company Limited. Madam Speaker and honourable members, you will note the following:
    a) In the period 1964-1974, National Housing and Construction Company Limited was able to construct 2,384 housing units.
    b) In the period 1974-1990, there was virtually no work done.
    c) In the period 1990–2002, 819 housing units were constructed.
    d) In the period 2002-2004, only 371 housing units were constructed.
    e) In the period 2005-to date, only 688 housing units have been constructed. 

That has been the performance over the years. There were 2,385 housing units constructed in 1964 to 1974 and now in the subsequent years, you can see that we have dropped to only 371.

Issues Related to Libyan Staff

As a result of the divesture with the Libyan African Investment Company (LAICO), holding 49 per cent shares in NHCC on behalf of Libya, NHCCL board decided that LAICO should contribute two top management staff. Since this is the Auditor-General reporting, the story is that the Chief Finance Officer (CFO) and Chief Operations Officer (COO) - the two staff - are entitled to an official vehicle, $500 annual medical cover, Shs 180,000 monthly airtime, 25 working days annual leave, annual return air ticket including for a spouse and four children, and a fully furnished house located in a place of their preference. 

Audit, in a special report dated June 2014, noted the following: Some of the persons who benefited from the air tickets were above the required age of 18 years hence rendering them ineligible according to the Human Resource Manual. In addition, $25,862 was improperly paid to Mr Mohamed Elabani and $9,226 to Mr Mohamed Benomran. 

The Chief Finance Officer, Mr Muhammad Elabani, contrary to the Human Resource Manual, had been paid money to travel for his leave before completion of the mandatory six months’ probation. In addition, Mr Muhammad Elabani does not have the stipulated postgraduate qualifications to hold this job.

Libyan staff are paid a higher salary and other benefits compared to Ugandans at the same or even higher rank. While Libyans earn $6,800 as gross salary, for example, their Ugandan counterparts earn only $2,200.

Accounting officer’s response: In a written response on 5 March 2015, the Chief Executive Officer, Parity Twinomujuni, told COSASE that non-Ugandan staff represent the interest of LAICO shareholders. Like in all companies that employ expatriates, their emoluments are “usually above those of local staff. It is also difficult to get congruence of qualifications with local staff.” Therefore, the Libyans can be without qualifications yet the local staff are required to have qualifications.

He said management has raised the issue of qualifications with LAICO and a solution is being sought. To manage the risk that would affect productivity, qualified local staff deputise the expatriates, like the Chief Finance Officer who supervises local chartered accountants. Madam Speaker and members, kindly note that point; Libyans without qualifications cover up by getting a Ugandan with qualifications to be their deputy and this person earns $2,000 while the Libyan without qualifications earns $6,000.

The committee recommends that the former Libyan CEO, Mr Benomran, who fled should be pursued through Interpol if he has a case to answer. The Libyan Chief Finance Officer, Mr Elabani, who does not have the requisite qualifications, should immediately be fired. In addition, $25,862 improperly paid to Mr Mohamed Elabani should be recovered. Also $9,226 improperly given to Mr Mohamed Benomran should be recovered.

Salaries for the staff should be determined according to positions they hold and not country of origin. 

Madam Speaker, let me read the recommendations; I will leave the details for Members to read.

General Recommendations

1. 	The committee recommends that the Auditor-General should verify whether National Housing and Construction Company Limited has an approved disaster recovery plan in place and report to Parliament. 

2. 	Government departments such as State House and Ministry of Defence should pay outstanding debts within six months to remedy the financial constraints faced by National Housing and Construction Company Limited. 

3. 	In an effort to alleviate the current housing shortages, Government should, as a policy, prioritise and promote housing for low and middle income earners.

The possibility of Government agencies such as UNRA, Umeme, National Water and Sewerage Corporation partnering with National Housing and Construction Company Limited through the provision of free connection and road network services in a bid to lower the cost of housing should be explored.

4. 	The accounting officer should recover the amount of money - $25,862 - paid to Mr Elabani.

5. 	The National Housing and Construction Company Limited board and LAICO should, within three months after the adoption of this report, replace Mr Elabani who does not have the requisite postgraduate qualifications.

6. 	There should be a review of the mortgage and construction financing to ensure that the construction firms and buyers can afford it.

7. 	Government should consider recapitalising National Housing and Construction Company Limited in an effort to increase its financial base to meet the increasing demand for housing services in Uganda.

8. 	National Housing and Construction Company Limited shareholders should be more vigilant and ensure that the company is run on sound management principles.

9. 	The former MD, Mr Benomran, who fled on a weekend abandoning the official vehicle at Entebbe International Airport, should be traced by police with the help of Interpol to explain his role in the illegal payment of Shs 13 billion to Kireka Estate, whose reversionary interest had lapsed with the coming into force of the 1995 Constitution and the Land Act.

I will try to summarise. 

National Environment Management Authority (NEMA) 

Members can read the background. The committee recommends that management and the board of NEMA should be more vigilant and increase their surveillance in enforcing the NEMA Act. 

In addition, management should recruit all critical staff spread across the country in order to remain visible and effective in managing and conserving the environment. 

The committee further recommends that the duration of processing of the Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) certificate should be shortened in order to reduce on non-compliance and increase on NTR collection.

The Minister of Water and Environment should periodically update Parliament on the number of EIA applications and NEMA performance in terms of applications processed both in numbers and NTR collected.

The committee recommends that the Minister of Water and Environment should within one month table to Parliament the list of all developers who were stopped from effecting developments before EIA reports were prepared and submitted.

There are other recommendations but lastly, the committee recommends that Kampala City Council Authority (KCCA) should improve waste management in the city. Kampala City Council Authority should identify another suitable place for garbage processing and vacate Kiteezi, which NEMA has declared unsuitable.

The Uganda Export Promotions Board is covered up to page 155. The background is also provided and various recommendations made on the findings of the Auditor-General, which Members should be able to read.

The Uganda Wildlife Authority is covered on page 156. The background is given and various recommendations are made -

MS CECILIA OGWAL: Madam Speaker, this is a very well written report. I wish to propose that the presenter reads the final recommendation and you give us time to go through the document and give our input. 

It is a very well written report but we do not have time for the presenter to read through the whole report. It would be wise for us to allow the presenter to go through the final recommendations so that we can take time to study and then give us time to discuss it. I beg to propose.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Chairman, I do not know whether the recommendations for 2011, 2012 and 2013 are the same because you could address those directly and we close. In fact, I was hoping the clerk would give you some water; you have been speaking for several hours. (Laughter)

MR SSEMUJJU NGANDA: Madam Speaker, I think Members can read the report. We have general recommendations at the end of the report but there are specific recommendations. I can actually go to the general recommendations on page 407; the rest are entity by entity and Members can read them. 

General Recommendations

1. 	The committee strongly recommends that the Auditor-General names officers responsible for commission or omission and/or loss of public funds to ease the work of Parliament. Parliament should not unnecessarily be made to carry out fresh and lengthy inquires.  

2. 	The Parastatal Monitoring Unit (PMU) should be transformed into an autonomous body and assigned the responsibility of enforcing standards among authorities, commissions, corporations, boards and councils. Similar entities should not operate on different standards; for example, retiring of fixed deposits will attract a sack in one organisation but a caution in another.

3. 	Boards: Government should harmonise the size of boards. The committee recommends not more than seven members. Appointment of boards should be staggered to allow continuity. No person should serve on two boards. Permanent secretaries and senior ministry officials should not be appointed on boards.

Ministers should concentrate on appointment of boards as stipulated in various statutes and desist from acting as boards when their term expires.

4. 	The Accountant-General should issue general guidelines on use of Non-Tax Revenue (NTR).

5. 	The Privatisation Unit should be wound up. The unfinished business under the Privatisation Unit can be performed by the Parastatal Monitoring Unit.   

6. 	Uganda Property Holdings Limited (UPHL) should be made a semi-autonomous body and given more responsibility. Instead of selling land and buildings that are considered noncore assets in various entities such as Uganda Railways Corporation (URC), they should be transferred to UPHL. Houses under UCDA which it has failed to renovate should be transferred to UPHL.

7. 	Government should introduce performance contracts in parastatals like it is in Kenya and elsewhere. Senior staff members should sign performance contracts that set realistic targets. Staff should then be relieved of their duties on failure to meet these targets.

8. 	Vacant positions should be filled in accordance with the approved structures of each entity. There is a relationship between performance and human resource strength.

9. 	Cabinet should set salary and remuneration ceilings for entities to guide the boards when determining salaries for their employees. A ceiling for the boards’ retainer fees and sitting allowances should also be set by Cabinet.

10. 	The various Acts that set up these entities mandate them to collect certain fees. Many do not collect the fees and instead ask Parliament to force Ministry of Finance to allocate them more money. Accounting officers who fail to collect revenue (NTR) stipulated in their respective Acts should be relieved of their duties.

11. 	Gender balance: Government should address the gender imbalance in appointment of staff and board members of public entities. At least 30 per cent of employees should be female.

12. 	Regional balance: Government should address the glaring regional imbalance in appointment of staff in public entities.

Those are the general recommendations. I beg to present. (Applause)

Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the signed copy of the report, the two sets of minutes and the signed report on boards and staff of public enterprises. The copies we have distributed to Members are not signed but we submitted a signed copy to the Office of the Speaker and the Office of the Clerk with the help of the Leader of the Opposition. We thought this being a very big report, it would help Members to have those additional copies. Otherwise, the signed report is on the iPad and every Member of Parliament can access it. These copies were made to facilitate Members internalise and debate this report. Madam Speaker, thank you very much. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable chairman of the Committee on Commissions, Statutory Authorities and State Enterprises together with your members for this voluminous and very detailed report. Some of the information is shocking but I am sure it is due to laxity and poor coordination. I do hope it will help us pull up our socks. 

I hope that at some stage we shall debate this but also get the Treasury Memorandum from the Government on the recommendations made. Otherwise, we invite Members to read and then we shall find time before we close to debate the contents.

MR KABAJO: Madam Speaker, first of all, I would like to join you in thanking my chair of COSASE for presenting this report in a summarised way. However, I would like to find out whether it is possible to get more hard copies of this report because reading it online is not as easy since it is a voluminous report.

THE SPEAKER: Owing to the importance of the report, in case the copies are not sufficient, Parliament will arrange to produce more copies for you so that every Member has their own copy to study.

MR MULONGO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also would like to thank the chairman for the good report. I would like to request that since we were not able to capture his presentation in detail, the Hansard captures the entire report as it is so that it could be of importance in future.

THE SPEAKER: The Clerk is directed to ensure that the full text is reflected in the Hansard. 

Honourable members, I would like to thank you very much for the work done – (Mr Bahati rose_) Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, do you have some good news for us?

5.14
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I do not know, with your guidance, if it would be appropriate for me to make a comment on item No. 6. I would also like to join the rest of the Parliament to thank the chairman for a good report. The research that went into these organisations will help the country look at things in a different manner.

I had a comment on item No. 6 before we move on. It is on the Retirement Benefits Sector Liberalisation Bill, 2011. We came here, Madam Speaker, and requested for more time to tie the loose ends that were remaining with the different stakeholders. Consultations are ongoing. We are committed to making sure that this Bill is debated in this House but we request again for more time so that we can do a good job. When we come to this House, we should have built consensus and it helps to smoothen the process. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: The Retirement Benefits Sector Liberalisation Bill, 2011 is your Bill; when you are ready, you will come back to us. 

Honourable minister, you promised to make a statement on money; if you could do it very quickly. Honourable members, there was the other issue of the court judgment on the issue of our allowances. The Attorney-General filed a notice of appeal and we are meeting on Monday to see whether we can file an injunction or just complete the appeal process. We shall update you by Wednesday when we reconvene. (Applause)

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

5.16
THE MINISTER OF GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL AFFAIRS (Mr Wilson Muruli Mukasa): Madam Speaker, yesterday the august House directed me to make some clarification on the Women Entrepreneurship Programme. I am glad that the clarification is ready and I will move forward to make it. 

You recall that on the International Women’s Day last year, His Excellency the President announced a women’s programme and this has come to be known as the Uganda Women Entrepreneurship Programme (UWEP). On 3 February 2016, Cabinet approved this programme and on 10 February 2016, it was launched by the Rt Hon. Prime Minister.

This is a five-year rolling programme which began this financial year, 2015/2016. It is aimed at improving access to financial services for women and equipping them with skills for enterprise growth, value addition and marketing of their products and services. It is intended to empower Ugandan women for economic development.

It is also designed to address challenges that women face in an attempt to start and grow their own enterprises. They face difficulties in accessing financing due to collateral requirements, limited control and ownership of productive resources such as land, limited access to information and affordable technical training among others. Limited education also limits the scope of women’s enterprise activity. If these challenges are not addressed, Government efforts towards gender equality, human resource productivity and competitiveness are likely to be curtailed.

Madam Speaker, women form the majority, in fact 86.2 per cent, of actors in the informal sector characterised by exclusion from formal financial services. This limits their capacity to grow and expand their businesses. Women entrepreneurs are constrained by limited access to finance as they attempt to start and grow their own enterprises.  Thirty-one per cent of women are financially excluded as compared to 28 per cent of men. I am quoting FinScope, 2013. 

Available statistics indicate that the unemployment rate of women increased over the years from 2.2 per cent in 2005 to 4.5 per cent in 2009. Although women comprise 53 per cent of Uganda’s labour force, 42 per cent are taken on as unpaid family workers.  When you look at the wage gap between the male and female, it is about 39 per cent and this is quoted from the State of the Uganda’s Population Report, 2013. This gap in productivity between males and females is of meaningful concern both to GDP growth and to the distribution of income between men and women. 

In order to achieve higher development programmes, Uganda’s economy has to transform to a higher productivity level, integrate men, women and youth in the development process and invest in human capital for productive employment creation. This is the advice which has been given by the International Labour Organisation. 

Honourable members, the goal of UWEP is to empower women to improve their income levels and their contribution to economic development. Specific objectives of this programme include:
    a) To strengthen the capacity of women for entrepreneurship development.
    b) To provide affordable credit and support access to other financial services to enable women establish and grow their business enterprises.

    c) To facilitate women’s access to markets for their products and services.

    d) To promote access to appropriate technologies for production and value addition.

    e) To strengthen programme management and coordination.

The programme has three components namely:

    a) Capacity and skills development, that is, to upgrade needs–based skills for women and to enable them initiate and manage their enterprises.

    b) The Women Entrepreneurship Fund to facilitate women groups with bankable proposals to access financial resources. Improving access to financial resources will enable women groups to start and manage profitable businesses, acquire long-term technical and financial stability, create employment and wealth and ultimately improve their quality of life. 

    c) Institutional support to enhance the technical, administrative and managerial capacity of key programme implementers. This component will promote transparency and good governance. 

Honourable members, the primary target beneficiaries of the programme are women within the age bracket of 18 to 65 years. The assumption is that those beyond 65 years will be catered for under the Social Assistance Grants for Empowerment (SAGE) Programme. Since the Youth Livelihood Programme targets young women aged 18 to 30 years, and the programme guidelines stipulate that 30 per cent of the youth interest group members should be female, the female youth already benefiting from the Youth Livelihood Programme will not be considered as beneficiaries under UWEP. 

The target beneficiaries shall be identified and selected through community based approaches in close collaboration with the district and local leaders. The district and subcounty technical planning committee will carry out the selection of target beneficiaries. 

Honourable members, the size of the loan under the programme will take into consideration the different needs of women with regard to the loan amount they require. The design of the programme provides for different sizes of loans depending on the nature of the activities, the maturity of the enterprise and the turnover. The interest-free revolving fund shall be up to the tune of Shs 12.5 million. However, any women’s group that has a unique enterprise that has the ability to employ and impart skills to more women will be considered as a special project and can be given funds up to the tune of Shs 25 million.  

Repayment Period

The revolving fund is interest free. However, payments made after one year will attract a five per cent service fee on the remaining balance to specifically cater for inflation. 

Implementation Structures

The programme is implemented through existing Government structures in order to minimise costs and maximise on the funds available for these women groups.

Madam Speaker, starting next financial year, 2016/2017, the programme will cover all the 111 districts in the country, Kampala Capital City Authority and the 22 municipalities over the five years of implementation.

This programme started in 19 district local governments and KCCA. The 19 pilot districts are Moroto, Katakwi, Otuke, Kole, Kitgum, Koboko, Nebbi, Nakasongola, Kisoro, Ntungamo, Kalangala, Kaliro, Kiruhura, Mayuge, Kayunga, Kamuli, Wakiso, Bundibugyo and Kibaale. These districts were selected based on three indicators: population of women, poverty count and the land area of the district.

His Excellency the President of Uganda during his campaign trail informed the country that the women’s programme would be allocated Shs 234 billion. For the financial year 2016/2017, Government has committed Shs 53 billion and the rest of the funds will be realised over the Medium Term Expenditure Framework (MTEF). This financial year, 2015/2016, the programme was allocated Shs 3 billion to kick-start the implementation of the programme. 

The programme is expected to benefit at least 11,200 women groups and each group is expected to comprise 10 members. Therefore, we expect approximately 112,000 women to benefit in the first five years of the programme implementation.

To-date the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development has established systems needed for the effective and efficient implementation of the programme, namely:
    a) Developed guidelines for accessing funds including forms for expressing interest, applying for the funds, financing agreements and business plans.

    b) Signed MoUs between the ministry and the district local governments.

    c) Conducted two consultative meetings with 168 district key stakeholders and 40 national level stakeholders on the design and implementation arrangements of the programme.

    d) Conducted training of trainers for 100 technical staff from 19 district local governments and KCCA.

    e) Established a technical support unit.

The Ministry has gone further to draft comprehensive documents for the programme namely:
    a) Communication Strategy.
    b) Monitoring and Evaluation Strategy.
    c) Recovery Strategy.
    d) Training packs.

Madam Speaker, the ministry has put in place work plans for institutional support funds for the 19 districts and KCCA and is in the process of transferring these funds to enable them kick-start the programme implementation. The ministry is working closely with transparency, accountability and anti-corruption institutions to ensure the transparent, effective and efficient utilisation of the programme funds. 

In conclusion, I call upon you to engage actively in monitoring this programme and supporting it so that it is successful. Thank you.

5.29
MR STEPHEN MUKITALE (NRM, Buliisa County, Buliisa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I welcome everybody back from the just concluded exercise. Thank you very much, honourable minister, for this statement.

First of all, I have a concern with programmes which leave out remote and peripheral places like Buliisa, which are actually more poverty stricken than many places. Now I have seen another programme which is not being piloted in Buliisa. I would like us to really consider, in the interest of entitlement, reaching as many places as possible. I have heard of some districts which seem to be already moving faster than others. I think you need to consider, not only in this programme but also others, those that still lag behind.

The other issue is the delivery mechanism. After divestiture, I see Government delving more into what should be done by other partners and stakeholders. Some of these programmes would be better placed with faith based institutions and cooperatives. Government is now creating noncore function areas. I would like to request Government to do some audit in terms of what should be their core function. Otherwise, very soon you will hear about some corruption; that is how NAADS ended up doing everything- doing procurement and many other roles. 

How I wish we would use the existing structures and where possible, Government should stop competing with others who would do better. What about thinking of a bank that specialises in rural development dealing with women and youth so that today, you do not have a youth livelihood programme and the other day a women’s programme? This is not a good management practice. We really need to look at how we can build institutions, which are here to stay beyond just the excitement of some demands. The cause is good – (Member timed out.)

5.32
MR EDDIE KWIZERA (NRM, Bufumbira County East, Kisoro): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank the minister for the information provided. However, I would wish for the minister to clarify on where we can find this information. Is it a policy programme? For policy programmes, after collecting the views, they are documented and can be supplied to the Members without the minister coming to read a document here. 

These policy programmes would explain the relationships and qualifications and what criteria is used to select who comes first. Short of that, it becomes reliant on the whims of the ministry or the minister and they would not have a basis on where to start or end. To me, that is mismanagement of the programme because we would now be looking at the structure. 

Even when you come to the Floor of the House and say that this is a women’s fund, you know that funds are created by law and not by a policy because a policy would graduate into an Act of Parliament. I do not know whether you have decided to start with the policy or the views or wishes that the President would want included. Not everything that the President proclaims must be implemented without following due process. If the President says that he is going to have money in the next five years, you cannot rush and say “today, we are picking Shs 50 billion” because the President has said so. You must have a law to guide you.

The other issue is about the multiplicity of programmes doing the same thing. You have the Uganda Micro Finance Support Centre who are experts in handling money and then there is another handling the youth development fund. You then have the elderly people having these problems because the elderly fund should have been managed by the Micro Finance Support Centre. When you come to the money for teachers, you do not want to send the money to where the teachers will be comfortable. So, honourable minister – (Member timed out.)

5.35
MS ROSE MUTONYI (NRM, Bubulo County West, Manafwa): I thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to seek clarification from the minister. 

It is not quite clear to me because he started with Shs 234 billion, which the President pledged, and then he went to the Shs 53 billion which has been earmarked for the following financial year and then the Shs 3 billion. I am not sure whether the Shs 53 billion is going to overlap the Shs 3 billion, which he said is going to kick-start the whole programme. Is the Shs 3 billion a separate entity or it is part of the Shs 53 billion, which you said is going to kick-start the programme? I am not quite sure, honourable minister. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

5.36
MS LILLY ADONG (NRM, Woman Representative, Nwoya): I thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for the statement that he has issued to the House.  

I am concerned that the Uganda Women Entrepreneurship Programme they are talking about has been given to only 19 pilot districts. We are all aware, because we have just returned from the campaigns, that the President promised every woman in the village this money throughout five years. Therefore, the women are aware that from 1 July, every district will get the money. Now, if they pilot in a district every year, this means that some districts will be cheated because they will only get for one year and then it will be time for another election. 

I would like to tell the minister that that is how most of the funds have been mismanaged. Up to this moment, we still have the elders’ money in only a few piloted districts and yet seven years have gone by.

If you calculate the Shs 53 billion that the minister has talked about, it means that each of the 112 districts will receive Shs 473 million. Even if we were only giving Shs 100 million per district, that is okay. It should be done per district.

We have spoken time and again about all the monies that Government gives for programmes for youth and women – over 80 per cent of it is spent on trainings in hotels in Kampala, Gulu and other places. The actual targeted population does not get this money. Why can’t they handle it like other programmes? 

Who are the targeted women to benefit from this money? If it is the real village women, then they do not need the training but the money. We already have them handling other enterprises through those groups. I believe that the President before and during the campaigns gave some money to groups, which do not even need training – (Member timed out.)

5.38
MS SYDA BBUMBA (NRM, Nakaseke County North, Nakaseke): I thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for the very good presentation. 

My concern is about the lack of synergy between the different empowerment funds. We have the Youth Livelihood Programme, the Disability Fund and we now have the Uganda Women Entrepreneurship Programme. The interconnection between these funds is lacking. What is going to happen under this arrangement is that we are going to have the same groups disguising themselves to access the money. The minister should, therefore, come up with a way of harmonising these different funds.

Secondly, these funds are very good but I think these people need to be assisted to be able to apply these funds properly. We ad experiences of the entandikwa fund, the restocking programme, among other programmes that were very good but because of lack of clear implementation modalities, they all failed. Therefore, this time round, we should not fail on the women. The women, as we all know, are committed, and hardworking and would like to succeed. For them to achieve what they want, the ministry should come up with clear modalities of implementation. 

Madam Speaker, as I said yesterday, they talk about training but we need to ring-fence this Shs 234 billion to go for actual project implementation. Training is a bottomless pit. We shall come down here and get a report detailing that much of the money went to training and what was left was very little for implementation. So, can we find money for training away from - (Member timed out.)      
     
5.40
MS OLIVIA KABAALE (NRM, Woman Representative, Iganga): I thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister.

I will continue from where hon. Syda Bbumba has stopped. We are dealing with funds in ministries where people are already trained. We should not allow them to encroach on the Uganda Women Entrepreneurship Programme because these people in those ministries are already trained in such specialities like children, youth and the women. 

Honourable minister, they should not tell you lies that they need to go to Munyonyo for two months as the women are suffering. They are already trained and that is why you gave them those jobs. So, we should just know that at least, we are using that advantage because they have been trained in CDD, the Youth Livelihood Programme and in fact, when they come on board in those departments they are already trained people. We feel that the Shs 234 billion plus this Shs 53 billion earmarked for the women should directly trickle down to the rural woman. We have seen programmes right from the districts where part of the money is not disbursed halfway through the financial year because people are still training.

Madam Speaker, the other time we looked at the Youth Livelihood Programme and it was promised that all districts in two years would be covered but up to now, only few districts are covered; the next time I heard of this, some of the youth who had been given the money were being arrested. Women should not fall into such a trap. Give them that money. We appreciate the few districts, which have been piloted but it should not be like the fund for the elderly because we do not know when it will reach districts like Iganga. All these people will die before they access that money.

5.43
MS GRACE KWIYUCHWINY (NRM, Woman Representative, Zombo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I thank the minister for this information. 

The far we have gone in Uganda now, I do not know whether we really still need programmes to have pilots. We have had enough experience and we do not need to waste time with pilot programmes.

I just want to add to what hon. Kabaale said. We already have trained people. What we should pick from the recent programmes is the challenges encountered and how they are going to affect this particular fund. Apart from calling it the Uganda Women Entrepreneurship Programme fund, it is actually the same implementation strategy. What we should be picking are the challenges and we should be looking forward to the impact and influence it will give to the women’s life rather than putting it in pilot districts.

If I may ask, what lessons do we have to learn now from these 19 local governments you have chosen? I do not see any relevance. I would rather have 111 planned for next financial year. We should be coming up with a strategy on how to implement this programme in those districts. I thank you.

5.44
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman Representative, Serere): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like the minister to make some clarifications. When you talk about poverty as a criteria, how much poverty were you looking for in those pilot districts? When you talk about the land area, what size of land area were you looking for? When you talk about population, how many women? The criteria should be scientific enough to convince me that this district has to miss out at the pilot level because it did not fit into the criteria.

The other thing is the delivery mechanism; have you thought about the sustainability of this fund, honourable minister? We have already failed on criteria because when I look at the districts, they are the same that have piloted this elderly fund. It looks like the criteria for piloting in the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development is some individuals within the ministry who determine the same districts every other day. 

I am wondering, if you fail on criteria how you will pass the sustainability test for that fund.  That capacity building is just going to waste our money. If there is any money, - the women have already formed their groups without your capacity building - just give them the money and they will rotate it or pay back.

5.46
MR KENNETH LUBOGO (Independent, Bulamogi County, Kaliro): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. There is something I have found very unconvincing in the minister’s statement; on page 4, the minister says that this fund will be focused on women below the age of 65. He says that those above 65 are covered under SAGE. 

I think this is very unserious, Mr Minister. You know how many districts are covered under SAGE; if you do not know then I can tell you that there is no district in Busoga benefiting from SAGE. You are saying those women above 65 years are already covered under SAGE. So what are you trying to say to the nation? Are you saying that you are simply ignoring the women above the age of 65, because we barely have 14 or 15 districts that are under SAGE? I think this statement is very unserious.

Madam Speaker, there is the Shs 3 billion that was earmarked to kick-start this programme and Kaliro was supposed to be benefiting; in fact, you have reported that 19 districts have already started benefiting. You went on to say that you are in the process of transferring the money, but we are reaching the end of the financial year! We are saying 19 districts have already started benefiting but you are in the process of transferring the money. I am sure Kaliro people do not know where this money is and yet we are on the list of the 19 districts you are talking about. There is need for you to come out and tell us what has so far been done out of this Shs 3 billion, if it is still there anyway. Maybe it is not there.

Madam Speaker, this money is supposed to be disbursed to groups and in the ministry the criterion is that a group must be from one village. A question came to my mind; the issue is that SAGE caused problems to many of us during the campaigns because people knew that some districts were benefiting and others were not. When you look at this money, little as it is, they say it is going to go to groups in a particular village. However, when I looked at the amount of money, which was earmarked for Kaliro, it is going to benefit about four out of 413 villages. I wondered how efficient and effective it is going to be. I think there is a lot we have to improve on in the implementation of this programme to make sure that it benefits our people.

5.48
MS FRANCA AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Agago): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to request that the proposals made by MPs on issues of money for training must be taken as the first to be implemented. We do not want even a coin of this money to be spent on training. If you want to do training, let the money come from outside the Shs 234 billion.

I would like to say that Shs 234 billion is not too much for us to avail this coming financial year. Therefore, instead of us beginning with Shs 53 billion next financial year, let us find money and provide for all the districts to begin at the same pace. You have already programmed it, the guidelines are there; let us all begin at the same pace such that by the end of the five years, all the districts have testimonies instead of giving them bit by bit. (Applause)

Secondly, Madam Speaker, my issue is on the interest. The minister said the money will be revolving and interest free but in a subsequent statement, he said that money that will be paid back after a year will attract an interest of five per cent. I really do not know what contradiction that would be because you are saying whatever bit of money that would be paid after a year will have to attract a fee of five per cent.

Madam Speaker, I honestly do not know what kind of business one is talking about, unless you do not come from the village like some of us do. Most of the groups that would benefit from this money we thought would be rural women’s groups. There will be no miracle that these women in villages will start making money such that they are able to pay off Shs 12.5 million within a year. I can bet in this House that it will not happen. What are you telling the rural women - that you get the money and fail to pay the Shs 12 million after a year and start paying interest of five per cent? What will we have done? I would like the minister to revisit this very seriously, if we want to sincerely help the women groups.

Lastly, I thought this money was for women and mostly rural women. However, the way the guidelines seem to appear - it is not far different from the Youth Livelihood Fund - I see that this money is going to benefit the middle class women. (Member timed out.)

5.52
MR JULIUS MAGANDA (Independent, Samia Bugwe County South, Busia): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to appreciate the report from the minister. This is one of the reports that have tried to really capture the manifesto that the President has been preaching to the population. 

One thing that I would like the minister to know is that we anticipate that this programme is going to run across the whole country at the same time. There is a fear because we already did piloting in 14 districts under SAGE and it is still stuck within those 14 districts. While we are still talking about piloting or beginning with 19 districts, we are worried that again it may not move out of those districts.

Let us begin with the little money that is there within the ministry - if we cannot put more money there - and we spread it across the whole country. Let us give an indicator that across the whole country, at least within every district we automatically have a group benefiting. When the budget increases, then there can also be funding to those districts.

The other thing that the minister hinted on is that money is already being dispatched to the districts. Under which department within the district is this money being managed? Are we putting in money before we begin mobilising groups, which will be benefiting from this programme? Aren’t we first supposed to begin establishing these groups before we distribute the money just like we did with the Youth Livelihood Fund? This will keep money on the district account and later, we shall find it coming back to the ministry and the recovery will be a process. I suggest that we first organise the groups that are going to benefit and then the money comes and within one week, this money is dispersed to these beneficiary groups.

The other issue where I want clarification from the minister is when SAGE will now spread across the whole country. My grandmother is now 95 years old and she has been asking when she is getting this money. She is aging and soon departing. We want to know because we now have another programme that has come on board, meaning we are now forgetting programmes which were being piloted. When are we rolling out SAGE across the whole country?  Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

5.55
MS ROSEMARY NYAKIKONGORO (Independent, Woman Representative, Sheema): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to start where hon. Maganda stopped. Discriminating those above 65 year old is unfortunate. You are basing yourself on the SAGE programme, which has not been rolled out to many districts, and yet these women are struggling with their grandchildren, looking after families, paying school fees. Therefore, just merely saying that they are 65 years old and they will benefit from SAGE is kind of discrimination.

Madam Speaker, I would also like clarification from the minister. Basing on the guidelines that you gave like poverty, land area, etcetera, was there any survey that was conducted? Feminized poverty cuts across the country. In fact, you talk of KCCA as a district, but I think it should be left out because most vulnerable women are in the countryside. When you say that you are basing yourself on land, which woman owns land? They are crying everywhere because they do not have land. Therefore, basing on land - I do not know whether it is land acreage or what but I think this needs to be re-studied so that the women can benefit.

I also see a problem of rural women not benefiting from this fund if you begin using this theory of making proposals. The youth are already suffering with making proposals. The Community Development Officers (CDOs) are charging these groups money for making proposals - Shs 80,000 or Shs 100,000. How much are they getting from this fund? Therefore, putting in these criteria of making a proposal is doing a disservice to the rural women who are supposed to be benefiting from this fund. I believe the district knows where women groups are and how they can benefit from this funding. 

I was reading in the newspapers recently, and it was said that less than nine per cent of the women access credit. Why don’t we create a credit facility for any woman in the district to access this money? They are willing to work, have their small businesses but they cannot access funding to do their own businesses.

Again, we know that Government has created many programmes especially with regards to Operation Wealth Creation. What I have found out is that women have not benefited from these programmes. Therefore, when you generalise that there are many programmes going on in such areas and you expect women to be benefiting – When we came up with this proposal of the Uganda Women Entrepreneurship Programme as Parliament, we thought it would strictly help to uplift women out of poverty rather than generalise that there are other programmes that are taking place in the country and yet our women keep on struggling. They have many things they look after. You people who have been campaigning know it very well.

Finally, I think there is need to find out from the districts who is going to manage this fund- (Member timed out.)

5.58
DR MICHAEL LULUME BAYIGGA (DP, Buikwe County South, Buikwe): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I have been listening very carefully especially to the minister. The minister ought to have given us results of a feasibility study so that we know that when this fund is implemented, the quality of life and livelihood of women is going to improve in a certain way. We have got history in running Government as a business; many funds have been implemented, some of them without profit requirements, and they have died a natural death.

While campaigning in my constituency, I saw youth being rounded up and taken to prison because they ate the pigs that they had procured from the Youth Livelihood Fund. Because they did not have food to feed the pigs, they ate them. This is really enough information for the minister to rethink, in my view. 

This Government has a lot of experience having been here for the last 30 years. Lying to the population is not a good thing. In my constituency, they peddled a lie that all women in groups in the villages are going to get Shs 2 billion. That was the basis on which women ran away from me. (Laughter) This is because NRM was the provider. 

Incidentally, what are these structures of Government that the minister is talking about? Structures of Government are NRM structures; NRM women groups were convened in order to discuss how they were going to utilise the Shs 2 billion in each of the villages. Can you imagine, after dividing Shs 234 billion by 112 districts each district is going to get about Shs 2 billion! If I went on to divide to the village level, which is represented by one group, it would get about Shs 328,000 only. The lie was that each of the village women groups is going to get Shs 2 billion. That is a lie. 

The minister must confirm to this Parliament that such lies were impossibilities so that in future – (Interjections) - This is what your people were telling us in the villages and the people are waiting for that money. You should confirm to this Parliament that this was a lie - through the structures of NRM and not even the structures of Government.

Madam Speaker, I have two proposals to the Government and I hope that they will listen. You have a chance to withdraw this fund and consolidate it with other funds so that you establish a policy, rethink and find a holistic way of improving women’s livelihood. 

We have other funds, including CDD, which is given without retrieving it. This one is a fund that is going to be given to the people and you are expecting it to come back. If you are insisting on giving out this money, let it be free money that each village will get - Shs 328,000 - so that they buy saucepans, plates, tarpaulin etcetera. After all, these are the things, which they were demanding from us when we were campaigning - munno mukabi. 

Let it be free money so that we do away with these kinds of lies, pretending that the state is going to provide to women a development fund, which is going to empower them. Those are the two proposals and I want to repeat that you either withdraw and establish a holistic mechanism of empowering women or integrate the fund and see how you can help them. 

If you are insisting on giving it, give it for free and then we know that the President said Shs 234 billion is going to be spent on empowering women and we are giving it for free as a one-off. The women in each of the villages will use it for buying saucepans, drums, tarpaulin, plates and cups in terms of munno mukabi and then you would have made a point. 

Without a feasibility study to show that there is going to be a qualitative improvement, you are wasting our time and I move that this document be withdrawn. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

6.04
MS SANTA ALUM (UPC, Woman Representative, Oyam): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I also want to thank the minister for the statement that he has made to Parliament.

I would like to start by asking the minister whether he has learnt something from the SAGE programme. This is because we started with very few districts and up to now, the ministry has failed to reach as many districts as possible. As Members who sit in this Parliament, we have been faced with very many difficult questions to answer regarding SAGE.

Madam Speaker, the minister mentioned the criteria for choosing some of these beneficiary districts. I would like to get some clarification because he talked about population, poverty and land. I would like to give an example of Lango subregion. Oyam is not one of the beneficiary districts of SAGE and yet in the whole of Lango subregion, Oyam has 1,650 villages followed by Lira, which has 760 villages. However, to the minister, Oyam could not benefit from this kind of project.

Secondly, we suffered during the insurgency. Up to 95 per cent of Oyam District was affected by the LRA insurgency and our people were in camps, but the minister could not see the necessity of making Oyam part of the beneficiary districts in SAGE as well as in this women’s fund.

Madam Speaker, regarding land, we have too much land. I do not know what he meant by land. I also have a problem when he talked about the beneficiary groups being between 18 and 65 years old while leaving out the other groups of women and yet there are some districts, which are not benefiting from SAGE. Where will these women be catered for? Maybe he will have to clarify on that.

Madam Speaker, I would like to know which category of women will benefit. The minister talked about 86.2 per cent of women who are in the informal sector. He went ahead to say that the women will be required to fill in forms as well as give business plans.

Madam Speaker, I would like to inform the honourable minister that most of these women are not educated; how will they manage to come up with the excellent business plans that the minister is talking about? Maybe there are some categories of educated women that exist in some districts. He will have to explain this to us.

Finally, about training, is this training meant for the beneficiary groups or it is going to the – (Member timed out.)

6.07
MS ANGELLINE OSEGGE (FDC, Woman Representative, Soroti): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to point out a syndrome that is seemingly in this country, where we keep bringing up projects but they never mature. Before we conclude one project, we give birth to another. It is like a woman being pregnant and never being able to give birth but she is always pregnant. There are very many programmes that come up in the name of “piloting” and we have not seen their conclusion or results. When we keep piloting, what is it that we are looking for that we have not studied in the previous programmes?

Madam Speaker, I think that this is a waste of money. This is something that has not been well thought out and like my colleague, Dr Bayigga, said, I think we still have an opportunity to rethink this and make sure that it comes out and performs to expectations.

Madam Speaker, I would also like to know for how long this programme is going to run. If it is going to be rolled out through the five years, we know that after five years there will be another election - actually four years. Therefore, those districts which will not have benefitted after four years will not be expected to benefit. Is it just targeted for the next election? 

When I look at this, I think it is not conclusive in nature. When is it supposed to end? What do we expect to see before we conclude this programme? What state do we expect the women of Uganda to be in before we close this and probably graduate into something else? Where are they at and where do you want to take them to? What next after this programme? I think we need to see all this before we go ahead.

Madam Speaker, we need assurance from the minister whether we are not repeating these programmes in the same districts, for example SAGE and this one coming. Are we sure that the districts that have been pointed out are not benefiting from SAGE? Even if they are, Shs 25,000 compared to what these women are going to get cannot be a reason – (Interruption)

MS FRANCA AKELLO: Thank you, honourable colleague, for giving way. From the districts that are benefitting from this programme, I know of two that are under SAGE. There is Nakasongola, which is benefitting from SAGE, and the Woman MP of Nakasongola is the chairperson of the committee so you know what is happening. 

MS OSEGGE: Thank you for the information. Madam Speaker, when we started mooting this idea of SACCOs for the rural people, especially women, we came out with a number and said each group must have 25 to 30 women. Now we are coming up with another criterion targeting the same population but with a different number of members per group. What do we intend to do? What are we going to do with these groups of 25 to 30 people that were already created? 

I think we need to be consistent even as we develop this. Let us not be in a hurry to please the public with something that is not going to enable them benefit. I would request the honourable minister to go back and consolidate this like all Members have said and we come out with something reasonable for this country. I thank you.

6.10
MS LUCY AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Amuru): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would also like to thank the minister for the statement. 

There are so many issues that have been raised. I would like to start with the issue of synergy that was already raised. How I wish you could learn from the different programmes. That reminds me of my 10 years’ experience working with NGOs. When you were in a hurry to write reports, you would copy and paste, and that is the same mistake that we are trying to make here. 

In the Youth Livelihood Programme, for example, I have cases of young people, like my colleague said earlier, who are running away from the police because they cannot repay this money. What criteria have we come up with? What is our plan for repayment in case the women do not make it? We are talking of five per cent; will they really make it? What have you learnt from the three different programmes that we have, which are very similar? Like I have said, it is copy and paste and it is just the names that are different.

I also want to emphasise the issue of the structures. The biggest problem we had in Amuru District was that for every Government programme that came, they would talk of following the Government structures but the actual structures they were referring to were the NRM structures, starting with the district chairman coming down to the subcounty chairman and targeting specifically NRM people. How are we going to avoid this because this is something that has been happening?

I would also like to emphasise the issues of the groups. I must inform you, honourable minister, that these women groups of 20 to 25 members are there. Dividing them into groups of 10 members will actually make them more divided and actually hamper their work. Let us maintain what is already there. I must assure you that they are just waiting to receive this money, like some people have said. They do not need extra training. Some of us who lived in northern Uganda were blessed because during and after the war, so many NGOs trained these groups; all that is lacking is the resources for them to move ahead and continue with their work. These are the things that I thought I should share. Thank you.

6.13
MS CECILIA OGWAL (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Madam Speaker, the document presented to us by the minister does not conclusively answer the questions we raised yesterday on the Floor of Parliament. We wanted to establish the following: One, is the Shs 234 billion available or not? Two, is the Shs 53 billion for all the districts in Uganda or not? The consensus was that if there is Shs 53 billion, it must go to all the districts in Uganda. That does not come out in this paper. 

We specifically want these answers so that when we face our women on the 8th of this month, we will be telling them exactly what they should expect from this promise of Shs 234 billion. It will be a good story if we told them, yes, we are aware that Shs 234 billion was promised but today we are going to get Shs 100 million or Shs 200 million per district in this financial year instead of Shs 2 billion per district as was promised. This is what we wanted for this particular session. That is why some of us have sat up to now waiting to confirm what is available or not.

Secondly, Madam Speaker, reading the minister’s document, I get mixed up as to what the minister is talking about in terms of Shs 53 billion and Shs 3 billion and the 19 pilot districts. When did you get the money for the 19 districts and who designed that programme? The factors you raised insult the ministry. It means that there is something lacking in the ministry and you do not have the capacity to research. This is because you cannot say that the list of the districts you have given and the three factors you raised do apply.

Let me give you one example. When we passed NUSAF III, this Parliament noted that the poverty level in Karamoja had deepened beyond what had ever been experienced in Uganda. Are you telling me that the poverty levels in Kamuli or Ntungamo are better than the one in Karamoja? None of the Karamoja districts are represented here. Therefore, the factors which qualify these 19 districts are very important. You have put us in a mess. What are we going to tell our people? Am I going to say that Dokolo has not been considered because its poverty level is better than the one of Ntungamo? That is not fair.

Madam Speaker, I would also want the minister to tell us whether this is a grant or a low interest loan. If it is a grant, by the English Dictionary it is not refundable or repayable; it is a donation. What is it? Is it a loan so that we go and tell our women that they will be given a revolving loan and they will repay it with low interest and then other people borrow the same fund? Can you please define this fund? Can you give a specific description of what it is?

Madam Speaker, when you look at page 6 - (Interruption)- Provided the Speaker does not take my -

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have some other activities; we would like to close this one.

MS KABAALE: Thank you for giving way. This is a bit relevant because you were querying the minister as to why he excluded Karamoja. You will find very many affirmative action activities targeted particularly for that subregion. Therefore, when we are arguing, we should encourage the inclusion of the other regions which are not being catered for. Thank you.

MS CECILIA OGWAL: Honourable member, when you are giving me information, you must check your facts and know who you are giving information to. (Laughter) Madam Speaker, we are talking about women funds. You must know what you are saying. 

When you look at page 6, the minister is talking about 11,200 women groups. Who has specifically said that if women are to be in a group, they must be 10? Suppose they have chosen to be 50 or a 100 in a group? Why are you curtailing them to be 10 only? This is a women-driven programme and if it is so, we must go by their interests and that would be the best way of helping them. You are actually prescribing the number per group, which is not tenable. 

Madam Speaker, I have a different view to this. Unless the minister can tell us that all the districts in Uganda are going to benefit from this fund, it is better that we wait until they are ready. Even the Speaker who is presiding over this Parliament cannot go and tell her people in Kamuli that they got the money because she is the Speaker. What if the Kamuli people say, “Supposing she was not the Speaker, would we have got that money?”

We want an answer. We want to tell the people of Uganda that it does not matter where you come from, you deserve that money. We must have this Parliament speak in one voice. We do not want to discriminate any district for whatever reason. I deserve to have Dokolo on the list as one of the districts. Dokolo must be part of it. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

6.21
MS ELIZABETH KARUNGI (NRM, Woman Representative, Kanungu): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I also want to thank the minister for the report. I would love to say that the experience we got from the Youth Livelihood Fund should be a big lesson as we plan for this money. I will not repeat what my colleagues have already said. 

In most cases, politicians have not been trusted to carry this money and take it to the right people. However, I have seen it work compared to when we channel it through the ministry then to the district through the CAO and the office of Ministry of Gender.  Therefore, I would like to suggest to this House that we trust politicians for the first time and channel this money through the Members of Parliament together with the local leaders. This money will reach very well without any officer swindling even Shs 100. This is because we have tested this theory. We have got some little money through other channels and we have seen ourselves achieving our interests and aims. Madam Speaker, I would beg that I am supported on this, that we channel this money through the political leadership and achieve what we are aiming at, which is to see that our women benefit. 

Secondly, much as I have heard many colleagues saying that the women are already trained, there are some districts where the women do not have the training that we are talking about. They do not know how they can use this money and yet they are going to get it. 

Therefore, I suggest that before the ministry sends this money using whatever channel, they should first train these women. This is because some of them do not know what to do with the money and yet they want it. At the end of the day, when they receive it, they misuse it and it does not do much for them. I want to thank you.

6.24
MR ANTHONY OKELLO (NRM, Kioga County, Amolatar): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Allow me to join the rest of my colleagues in appreciating Government for this affirmative action to emancipate women out of poverty. In most of our societies, women bear the highest burden of poverty. It is common knowledge that when you emancipate a woman, you will have emancipated the entire family. I am glad that in the debate that I have heard in this House this evening, no one is in dispute of the fact that this fund is absolutely necessary. 

Madam Speaker, I think the honourable minister will help me to understand whether the assessment to determine real needs was undertaken. This is because if it was, it would help us to determine the scope of intervention that we would undertake and therefore the amount of money that would be necessary for this programme. 

I am wondering about the formula that was derived to get us to Shs 53 million for the next financial year and the extent to which this will create an impact among the women in the rural areas and therefore reduce on the poverty levels. When shall we get the Shs 2, 3 or 4 billion that is hyped about so much and why not now? 

Most rural women engage in agricultural productivity. Consider a rural woman in Amolatar or a group of women in Amolatar wanting to invest in agricultural productivity; they are looking at piggery, poultry or probably value addition on agricultural products. How do you relate this to Operation Wealth Creation that we are currently looking at? In addition, considering this is a business, like was stated by a colleague, is there a possibility of creating exceptions for rural women so that the conditions for accessing these funds are not so strict and we would probably make it easier for them to access? 

Madam Speaker, this is a five-year programme. I wonder whether there will be midterm evaluation of this programme to determine the progress and see whether the emancipation objective has been achieved. This is because we have to be conscious of the gender economic balance between men and women. At what level shall we have a contingency plan, as a Government, in the event that women’s economic power has been over emancipated and now men are probably down? Don’t you see us thinking, probably midterm the project, that we shall need some funds to cater for men? I think these are some of the contingency plans that Government has to think about. It is just food for thought. Thank you very much. 

6.26
MR TERENCE ACHIA (NRM, Bokora County, Napak): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the minister for the statement. There is an area in the statement, which requires more clarification. There is a point on the Shs 12.5 million per group. I would like to know if this money will be meant for the groups in the pilot districts or it will continue for the other districts when this project is extended to other districts. That must come out clearly so that when we go and talk to the women on the 8th, we are able to give them a correct message. This is in order for them to expect something that will come to reality. 

The minister also talked about 11,000 groups. I do not know if these groups have been decided in such a way that when you calculate Shs 12.5 million over the 11,000 groups, it fits into that amount of money. That also needs to come out clearly.

It would also be appropriate for our Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development to identify some of the challenges that have been experienced in the Youth Livelihood Programme, which we need to address in order not to jeopardise this programme. We need this to come out clearly so that we make this women’s programme very successful. Thank you very much. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable minister, please use five minutes because we have other activities. However, I just want to say that when I had just become Speaker, I went to Zambia to inaugurate the new Parliament. While I was there, I found something called the Citizens Economic Empowerment Programme. I got so excited, I came back with it and I told you about it and I laid it on the Table. 

I also wrote to the President and the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. I was really excited but it seemed there were no takers. After two years, I decided to send our committee. I thought to myself that if they could not listen to me, probably they would listen to the committee. 

It now seems that we are gambling here with the Youth Livelihood Programme, with the disability fund - We are talking about very little money that you do not know whether you should talk about it.  

6.29
THE MINISTER OF GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL AFFAIRS (Mr Wilson Muruli Mukasa): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and honourable members. The contributions have been mainly advisory and indeed well intentioned advice. Certainly, this advice has been noted.

However, let me just clarify one thing. Beginning the next financial year, this fund of Shs 53 billion is going to roll out to all the districts of this country, including Kampala. The money is not just going to be for the 19 pilot districts but for all the districts of this country. I think that point is clear and we can go with it. 

The Shs 234 billion is what was pledged by the President. Like I said yesterday, we have other areas in the budget. The budget of the next financial year can only accommodate Shs 53 billion and we are going to start with that. In subsequent years, we shall have more and it will roll out to all the districts until we cover the Shs 234 billion. That is what I know regarding how it has been planned.

Honourable members, let us be rest assured that this money will roll out to all the districts come next financial year beginning July this year for the 111 districts plus Kampala Capital City Authority, which makes it 112. I am speaking here in Parliament before the Rt Hon. Speaker and before all of you, honourable Members of Parliament. That is how it has been planned and it will roll out come next financial year.

Obviously, this fund is specifically for women and it takes into account – We are aware that there are other interventions, which are taking place like NAADS and Operation Wealth Creation. In spite of those, this one is also there to cater for women’s needs.

When it comes to groups, we felt that 10 people should be the minimum. In fact if there are 10 women, they can form a group. However, it does not limit them to 10; they could be 20 or 30 or 50 in a particular group. However, we think that 10 is a reasonable number. These women can come together, form an economic group and access this money.

Regarding the issue of training, I would not like us to look at training the way we look at it here as learned people from universities. That will alarm you and you will think that a lot of the money is going into training and there will be very little left for the women groups. Training in this instance really involves things like how the money is going to be used, how you are going to access the money - these are simple things and are flexible. It will be tailored to the needs of these groups and, therefore, very little money is going to be spent on training. That is the reason why we are relying on Government structures like CDOs and not NRM. That is propaganda. The policy is empowerment of all the women of Uganda regardless of their party affiliation, education – (Interruption)

MS FRANCA AKELLO: Thank you, honourable minister, for giving me way to seek clarification. From the experience of the Youth Livelihood Programme and how the funds were disbursed, part of this is administrative. What you have told us and what is in your ministerial policy statement are different. However, we are going to follow it up to make sure that what you have said works. 

I have calculated that this money is going to be Shs 473 million per district. I would like to know whether that is the actual amount of money that will reach the women groups, not part of it being for administrative costs for the CDOs, the CAO and for those who will assist the subcounty chiefs. We would like to get assurance from you as that will be a Government assurance, that it will not be spent on other costs other than the women’s cause.

DR LULUME BAYIGGA: Honourable minister, you have repeatedly mentioned formal Government structures. In explicit terms, will you tell this Parliament which Government structures these are that are going to be accessed by a woman or women groups from village “V” in parish “P” in subcounty “S”?

MR MURULI MUKASA: Well, we have local governments like the subcounty government and the district government and in those governments, there are officers who deal with people directly like the CDOs, the chiefs, the parish and subcounty chiefs. These are Government structures and they will be assisted by the ministry to ensure that information reaches the women and they do – (Interruption)

MS KARUNGI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. We have talked about how we did not benefit from the Youth Livelihood Fund. In my district of Kanungu, for example, a group would request for Shs 12 million and they are given Shs 5 million. In the actual signing, they sign for Shs 12 million but they are given Shs 5 million.

Is it procedurally right to use the same method, through the same officers who ate the other money given to them previously? The minister, the ministry and everybody is aware of this. Members of Parliament can take that money directly to our women.

MR KWIZERA: Madam Speaker and honourable members, I think it is very important for the minster to know that a policy is a point of reference; a Member of Parliament who is not in the House can access this information that is not in the minister’s mind. Therefore, why can’t the minister have a policy document where even stakeholders and other interested parties can read all those qualifications and disqualifications? 

We are not sure that the minister will not forget all the information he is giving before he gets out of this place. Therefore, if there is a policy document, it should be accessed by everybody. Can we have that policy document laid on the Table instead of hearing it verbally? Isn’t it better to proceed by having that policy laid on the Table? I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I think that we do not want to be associated with supplying “air”. As I told you yesterday, during the campaigns I told these people that this money will be available every year- Shs 234 million per year because that is what the President told me.

In addition, you know we had a battle here over the Youth Venture Capital Fund- its structure, how the young people could not reach the banks, how they sold their goats to try and open bank accounts. Now nobody is talking about it. 

I really wanted to support that programme and I wrote to your ministry requesting them to give me a list of the young people who had received this money. They gave me a booklet but one day, I was embarrassed by the youth in broad daylight. I said, “You have received this much” and they said, “bbe”. I said, “What do you mean; this is from the ministry. The PS has written to me and given this information.” They said, “Madam, we did not get that money. It was not Shs 8 million; we got Shs 5 million.” 

Therefore, Minister, if we really want to deliver to these people, why don’t we sit and organise better so that we actually take the money home? (Applause) 

COL (RTD) RWAMIRAMA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the honourable member from Kanungu and also appreciate your guidance on the matter.

Madam Speaker, the minister should help us because a similar case happened in my constituency. I moved with the RDC and we arrested the people and recovered the money. However, Members of Parliament taking money is also not a good channel. I think we should stand up and fight any problem in the system to make sure that the money reaches its destination. 

I think the minister should say something about this because officers took advantage but where people were very active, money was recovered. Where people feared because during campaigns, some members feared to talk – (Interjection) - Yes, we need to identify these people and fix them so that we can move forward. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Let the minister wind up.

MR MURULI MUKASA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Yes, there have been these cases and we have learnt a few lessons from the Youth Livelihood Programme about criminal activities like the ones that have been reported. Somebody gets Shs 5 million cash but has signed for Shs 12 million; this is outright corruption and in any case, the beneficiary group should not accept to engage - (Interjections) ­- Let me tell you that this is part of the training. Even if you are weak and vulnerable, if you are going to refund Shs 12 million and you have only taken Shs 5 million then one would rather not touch that money but make a report immediately.

We have got cooperation in a few of these instances from the RDCs and the police. Some of the youth who misused the money have been able to pay. We can even later on bring a report about the Youth Livelihood Programme detailing some of the challenges, where we have scored successes and what steps we have taken to make sure that the bad effects of these challenges are mitigated.

Madam Speaker, I agree with hon. Kwizera that there should have been a bigger write-up but since this was just a statement in Parliament, we could not make it very big. However, the write-up is there and at an appropriate moment, we shall share it with Members of Parliament to show that it is not ad hocism. We are not just moving at the spur of the moment but it is a programme that has been well thought out and it is likely to achieve its intended goal of emancipating the women.

I would like to request that we politicians should not be involved in delivering this money. Let other people do it; we can only monitor and popularise it. In case things go wrong, we do not want to get entangled in whatever things have gone wrong.

MS ALASO: I thank you, Madam Speaker. When you were giving us guidance, you pointed out the need to refocus this whole issue. The minister has confirmed that they have a write-up.
Madam Speaker, you remember when we were handling PRDP, a lot was left out in the first implementation document. When it came to this House, we got occasion to make an input. 

As far as the vulnerable women in Uganda are concerned, this is a very important intervention; wouldn’t it be procedurally right, now that implementation has not yet begun, to task the minister to assign a team of three or four people who can apply their brains to that document so that the issues that we have raised here are captured to improve the implementation mechanisms for that programme? That way, we are sure that the deliverables and the mechanisms are clear. It is from that point of view that I am asking for your guidance.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I was telling the minister that we do not like being associated with “air supply”. For the women, this is very important. First of all, they are going to be asked to open bank accounts, go and look for a bank, and that is spending money. Honourable minister, that document may be big but we also read big documents. Please, come and present the document here so that we can have a small debate about it and formulate a way forward. I do not want to be part of “air supply”. (Applause)

MR MURULI MUKASA: Much obliged, Madam Speaker. Just like you, we do not want “air supply”. We are honourable members and even after Parliament, we are going to be here as Ugandans. We do not want to be associated with “air supply”. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, as I indicated, Tuesday is International Women’s Day so the House will reconvene on Wednesday, the 9th - [Members: “Elections”] - Honourable members, do you want us to close this House for Gombolola elections? No! Individuals can go but the House will continue.

Honourable members, there is a Women’s Day celebration run by the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development at 4.00 p.m. tomorrow starting from the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development. Put on your shoes and go and support the minister. House is adjourned to Wednesday at 2.00 p.m.

(The House rose at 6.47 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 9 March 2016 at 2.00 p.m.) 
