Wednesday, 23 March 2016 
  
Parliament met at 2.06 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala. 
  
PRAYERS 

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.) 
  
The House was called to order. 

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this sitting. I have been notified that Prime Minister’s Question Time, which is supposed to be handled today, will not be possible because the Prime Minister is heavily engaged in another activity of Government. We shall, therefore, have the opportunity next Wednesday when that time comes up. We have a lot of business to finish and I do urge you to come in time so that we can finish these matters in time. 

I have been briefed that the debate had ensued on the ministerial statement on item No. 6 on the inland port at Bukasa. The issue raised was on the question of a feasibility study and also the status of land acquisitions for the construction of that inland port.

I am advised that all these documents have been submitted and the minister is going to make a statement. The proper way is to proceed and handle this matter to conclusion so that the people in charge of this particular matter can finish the work. I thank you.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

2.09
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (PRIMARY HEALTHCARE) (Ms Sarah Opendi): I thank you, Mr Speaker.  I am just opening my iPad. We did send a copy of this ministerial statement to the Clerk and she acknowledged receipt, but I do not see it here. I request for some two minutes so that I can try to find it. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But you have your statement.

MS OPENDI: The hard copy is being brought to me because I do not see the soft copy on my iPad.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Oh, so you do not have a statement?

MS OPENDI: We have the statement -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: With you now?

MS OPENDI: It is not with me here but it is on the way. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: In other words, you cannot proceed.

MS OPENDI: Yes, for now.

THE DEPUY SPEAKER: Okay. Next item.

THE DEPUY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I see a series of five other statements to be made and I do not see the ministers responsible for these statements; even on the laying of papers, I do not see the finance minister. I also do see the minister who should lay the ministerial policy statement for the Law Reform Commission. Can we proceed since the other ministers are here?

Learned Attorney-General, there is no particular statement for you here but there is a ministerial statement on item No. 3 (VI). Please call the item and we deal with it.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

2.12
THE MINISTER OF WORKS AND TRANSPORT (Mr John Byabagambi): Mr Speaker, I would like to seek your indulgence because this paper went through the committee and was tabled and debated and Members demanded for some documents such as copies of the feasibility studies. I do not know whether I should proceed to lay those on the Table or make the statement on what the House required.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, if you have a statement under item No. 3 (VI), make the statement. As you make reference to the debate, you can then proceed to lay the documents requested by Parliament on the Table.

MR BYABAGAMBI: Much obliged, Mr Speaker. This is a statement to Parliament on the land at Bukasa Port. The proposed land is currently a forest reserve managed by the National Forestry Authority (NFA) under the National Forestry and Tree Planting Act, 2003.

Subject to Article 237 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda (1995) and the Forest Act CAP 146, an area declared a central forest reserve shall be held in trust, managed and controlled by the Government on behalf of the people of Uganda for the common good of all citizens.

The Forest Reserve Declaration Order S1.146/1 under paragraph two, subparagraph one provides that the area of land specified in the first schedule of the order is declared to be central forest reserves. The land at Bukasa, which will be used for the port, is described under this first schedule to the order as MP/42 Namanve BP1587 PL2640A in Kyadondo County.

Why Bukasa was selected over Port Bell and other locations?
Bukasa is on the shores of Lake Victoria at the end of Murchison Bay about three kilometres from the Kampala Industrial Business Park.

The area is strategically located as it links the Kampala-Malaba railway being upgraded to standard gauge. Its location is also very close to the Kampala Northern Bypass, the planned the Kampala-Jinja Expressway as well as the Kampala Southern Bypass.  

It has a large physical area for expansion. The total required area for the Port Bukasa will be 400 hectares, which is about 1.5 square miles. This land is available under the current Namanve Central Forest Reserve and the wetland fronting the lake. This land will be adequate for the planned port and development of the associated light industries and other infrastructure. 

Bukasa’s close proximity to Kampala Industrial Business Park, the proposed free trade zone, including the dry port in Namanve and the Northern Bypass, indeed makes it an ideal location for the port.

Mr Speaker, alternative locations for a new port were explored but ruled out due to a number of key shortcomings. These included expanding Port Bell, but there was no land for expansion as we could not get one and half square miles. Jinja is too distant from Kampala and Katosi is far from infrastructure linkages. 

In particular, Port Bell is surrounded by established developments like industries, a prison and residential properties. It is not possible to expand it to the capacity required to service the central corridor route traffic, which is expected to reach over seven million tonnes annually in 10 years to come.

Acquisition of Alternative Land

The law requires that alternative land for exchange with the land proposed for the port is identified. Land has been identified in Kyankwanzi District under ranch No.16. The process of documenting this land has commenced. The Ministry of Works and Transport is working with stakeholders, including the Ministry of Water and Environment, the Ministry of Lands and Urban Development, the National Environment Management Authority, Kyankwanzi Local Government, the National Forestry Authority and other interrelated agencies to complete de-gazettement and have a land title issued. 

This process will be carried out parallel to a desk study that will develop the port master plan, which study will begin upon approval of the project by the Parliament.

The Current Status

The following is the current status of the process: 
    1. The proposed project land at Bukasa has been surveyed; 400 hectares of land were surveyed, of which 120 hectares belong to NFA as shown in the survey attached in appendix F and 280 hectares are in the wetland.

    2. A resettlement action plan is being undertaken to identify all current occupants on the project land for the purposes of compensation and relocation. There are two categories of occupants on this land:
    a) Tree planters who occupy the land legally under the National Forestry Authority Tree Planting Project. This is contained in the Act of 2003. These will either be compensated or relocated to alternative land at the conclusion of the Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) process.

    b) Encroachers; these will be compensated appropriately either by land owners or the project according to the law without unduly disadvantaging them. 

    c) A comprehensive environmental and social impact assessment report has been prepared to identify the full range of mitigation measures required.

    d) Change of Land Use: This will follow the degazettement procedures as enshrined in the provisions of the National Forestry and Tree Planting Act, 2003. This process is on-going and to date, the following steps have been taken:
i) 	The National Forest Authorit Board passed a resolution in 2015 giving approval to the change of land use for the Namanve Central Forest Reserve.

ii) 	The Ministry of Water and Environment has written to the Ministry of Works and Transport requesting them to provide alternative land as required under the law.

iii) 	The Ministry of Works and Transport has written to the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development requesting for information regarding the exchange land Ranch No. 16 in Kyankwanzi. Mr Speaker, the coordinates of this land are well laid out in this document.

My ministry will work with the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development in the acquisition process leading to the securing and degazetting of this alternative land.

In order to ensure effective coordination of the entire process, the inter-ministerial coordination committee was set up under the direction of the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. This committee met several times chaired by the Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Works and Transport and the minutes of the committee meetings have been provided in an appendix to the final report that I am going to submit to Parliament today.

The Way Forward

Mr Speaker, it is worth noting that while the implementation of the physical port works - that is dredging, surcharging, access roads, fencing and others - it can only start after titling the project area to the Uganda Land Commission for use by the Ministry of Works and Transport.

The preliminary project activities will involve mainly desk studies leading to the production of the master plan and detailed engineering designs.

The process of acquiring the land and undertaking the preliminary project activities will, therefore, take place in parallel with the pending steps outlined above.

Approval of the loan will save crucial time and will enable commencement of this crucial infrastructure to commence without undue delay. I thank you, Mr Speaker and honourable members.

Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the feasibility study to construct a new port at Bukasa, Kampala, dated November 2015, this being the final report.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture the feasibility studies.

MR BYABAGAMBI: Mr Speaker, I would also like to lay on the Table the full detailed statement of the Ministry of Works and Transport to the Parliament of Uganda on the status of land acquisition for the proposed inland port at Bukasa.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that as well. Thank you, honourable minister. Honourable members, this ministerial statement arose from a request from the Government to borrow some money for this particular purpose to build an inland port at Bukasa and at the conclusion of the debate, this issue of the feasibility study and the status of land acquisition for the project arose. 

A request was made that this particular statement be made to facilitate this process. Therefore, if there is need to debate the minister’s statement, because the rules give us latitude to have a debate on it, we can do so. But if there is no debate, then we can consider the outstanding matter about the conclusion of that loan request. How do we proceed with that? Debate can now open on the ministerial statement. 

2.25
MS ROSEMARY SENINDE (NRM, Woman Representative, Wakiso): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to seek clarification in regard to the minister’s statement. I appreciate that development and as Ugandans, we all want development. However, my question is about the residents in that area, which is in Wakiso District. I would like to know from the minister what the fate of the people residing in that area will be.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is from the Member of Parliament for Wakiso District. You can answer that but Members might have other issues to raise.

MR BYABAGAMBI: Mr Speaker, I would like to thank hon. Seninde for the question seeking clarification. I stated in the statement that the exercise to identify these people is on-going and we are going to resettle them. This time we may not give them cash as such but we are going to build them houses. We want to put a block of flats to give to these people who are now on the land, which is better than giving them cash, which they usually eat within seconds.

However, that will be by choice. Those who would like to be accommodated will be accommodated and those who want to get cash and go away will get compensated. However, we are giving them an alternative this time.

MS SENINDE: Thank you very much, honourable minister, for that clarification. We do appreciate that as leaders in that area. However, if you are to put up flats - I know it is not a week or a month’s construction; how soon do you intend to put up this port vis-à-vis the eviction of these people? Even if you are going to give them money, we need to know how soon, or when you are going to start this port so that we can prepare our people.

MR BYABAGAMBI: Mr Speaker, as I said, most of the work that is going to be done now is mostly desk work to produce that master plan and a detailed engineering design of the port and this takes time. It will move concurrently with the construction of those flats that I talked about. Therefore, by the time we embark on real physical construction works, those flats would be ready for occupation.

2.27
MR FELIX OKOT OGONG (NRM, Dokolo County, Dokolo): Mr Speaker, this project is very important to our economy and to ease transportation of our goods. However, there are many questions to be asked to the minister. One, you must make a commitment to this Parliament that you will not evict residents who are in that area before adequate compensation because those people already reside there. Therefore, you need to speed up their compensation before you embark on that project. Otherwise, that will inflict pain and anguish to the people who are living there.

Secondly, there are people who are rightly staying on land that originally belonged to the National Forest Authority (NFA) and as per our Constitution, they are bona fide occupants and so, their interest is equally important. Are you going to consider them as bona fide occupants of that area? 

MR BYABAGAMBI: Mr Speaker, first and foremost, I said that what we are going to embark on is desk work. As we do desk work, we shall be putting up flats. I want to state clearly that we shall not start earth work construction before we fully compensate everybody according to the law. 

The National Forest Authority (NFA) bona fide occupants of that land shall also be compensated according to the law. In other words, my commitment is that we are not evicting anybody from that land without full compensation according to the law.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Attorney-General, can you have a bona fide occupant on a forest reserve? We need the record to be clear on what we are talking about. I take the silence to mean it is okay. (Laughter)

2.30
THE ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Fred Ruhindi): Mr Speaker, it is not a question to answer in a hurried manner because there may be so many varying circumstances to look at. From a purely technical point of view, one would say in a forest reserve, you cannot. But you do not know when the forest was declared. There are many circumstances to look at and appropriately answer that question, which we can do in due course of implementation of the project.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Is there any other matter on the minister’s statement? If there is none, can I now alter the Order Paper to accommodate the debate on the motion itself and see if we can conclude the debate and also establish whether we can take a decision on it or not. We at least need to conclude debate on this matter. If we cannot take a decision, then we will defer it; however if we can, then we will go ahead and take that decision.

Honourable minister, would you like to update us? The Order Paper is accordingly amended to accommodate that motion for a request for borrowing the money for Bukasa inland port.

2.31
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PRIVATISATION) (Mr Aston Kajara): Thank you, Mr Speaker. This motion was debated on 8 January 2016. There was a committee report which was debated at length but towards the closure of the debate, the issue of the status of land acquisition for the proposed inland port of Bukasa and also the feasibility study to construct a new port at Bukasa were required by this Parliament.

Since the minister has presented the feasibility study to Parliament and he has also issued a status of land acquisition for the proposed inland port at Bukasa, I request that the Members do pass the proposal to borrow up to Euro 42,500,000 from a German Bank Consortium aka Ausfuhrkredit-Gesellschaft MBH and Commerzbank AG for the development of an inland port at Bukasa on the shores of Lake Victoria. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the question for debate of this motion was proposed to you and the debate was actually conducted. If there is additional debate that we need to conduct before we conclude, this would be the appropriate time for us to do that.

3.34
MR FELIX OKOT OGONG (NRM, Dokolo County, Dokolo): Mr Speaker, if I may recall, this loan request was adequately debated by the Members of Parliament. Most Members were in support that this project should begin. However, there were only two reservations before they could approve. The first one was that the feasibility study should be availed to Members of Parliament and secondly, that the minister brings the land acquisition policy.

Now that the minister has availed to Parliament the feasibility study and a statement on how they are going to do the land acquisition. I, therefore, propose that if there are no other questions, that the question be put.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, that was the status as provided. The Order Paper has been altered to accommodate this. If we are able to take this decision, I will put the question now. Any other Member contributing on this subject?

Honourable members, there being no other matter to be raised on this subject, I now put the question to the motion for a resolution of Parliament on the proposal by Government to borrow Euros 42.5 million from the German Bank Consortium for the development of an inland port at Bukasa on the shores of Lake Victoria.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

2.37
THE MINISTER OF HEALTH (Dr Elioda Tumwesigye): Mr Speaker, allow me to present a ministerial statement on the progress of the control of Hepatitis B virus in Uganda. This document is already uploaded on our system.

The magnitude of the burden of Hepatitis B disease came into light following the 2005 HIV sero-behavioural indicative survey carried out by the Ministry of Health in collaboration with the US Centre for Disease Control, in which samples were also tested for Hepatitis B. This was further reinforced by data generated from the health management information systems submitted by districts and complaints from civil society organisations and politicians. 

By this time, Mr Speaker, the Government of Uganda had already launched and introduced the vaccination of infants against Hepatitis B, with the pentavalent vaccine which started in 2002. To date, all children aged 14 and below are vaccinated against Hepatitis B. The country, therefore, needed guidance from the World Health Organisation on how to proceed regarding adults. 

In 2009, the World Health Organisation issued guidelines on the global control of Hepatitis B to guide member countries to develop their country action plans. There was also a call on member states to intensify programmes to control Hepatitis B and advocacy to UN agencies to include Hepatitis B in their action plans. 

In 2010, the World Health Assembly recognised viral Hepatitis as a global public health problem and the need for governments and populations to take actions to prevent, diagnose and treat viral Hepatitis and called upon the World Health Organisation to develop and implement a comprehensive global strategy to support these efforts. 

Recognising the risk of Hepatitis B infection among health workers, the Government of Uganda started immunising all health workers in public health facilities in 2012. In 2014, The World Health Assembly passed a resolution urging member states to develop and implement co-ordinated multi-sectoral national strategies for preventing, diagnosing and treating viral Hepatitis based on local epidemiological context, enhance actions related to health promotion and prevention and put in place adequate surveillance systems for viral Hepatitis. 

Following the above resolution, the Ministry of Health in November 2014 set up a Hepatitis B multi-sectoral committee composed of members from various ministries such as education, agriculture, gender and labour as well as development partners, including the World Health Organisation and the Centre for Disease Control. It also included the academia, the UPDF, Uganda Police Force, civil society organisations, selected districts and implementing partners. 

The committee began work immediately and to date we have achieved the following: 
    a) We have developed a strategy for the control of Hepatitis B in Uganda. The committee is, however, set back by the fact that it needs current data generated from a current survey to complete its work. 
    b) We also developed statutory instruments No. 104 of 2014, declaring Hepatitis B a public health threat in Uganda and statutory instrument No. 105 which makes vaccination of health workers against Hepatitis B mandatory. These were gazetted and officially launched by the Minister of Health in 2015. 
    c) We also developed a plan to vaccinate adolescents and adults, which is currently being used.  
    d) We developed and to a limited degree, disseminated messages on prevention and control.
    e) We also started the screening of adolescents and adults in health facilities in a campaign mode. 
    f) Recently, we acquired 200 point of care machines from South Korea that can be used to screen patients for Hepatitis B, determine eligibility for treatment and monitor progression of liver disease. 

In addition to screening for Hepatitis B, we can use the same instrument to test for HIV, Hepatitis C, syphilis, thyroid disease, some cardiac markers and other markers for cancer. These machines are to be distributed to all health centres IV in the country. 

Mr Speaker, it is estimated that in Uganda, we have about 3.5 million people out of the total population of 35 million that are infected with the Hepatitis B virus. A total of 30 per cent of those infected are chronically ill. It is also worth noting that the population aged 14 years and above, who test negative on screening, will require vaccination. By mathematical modelling, out of the population of about 35 million people, we find that we need to vaccinate about 16 million Ugandans. 

Mr Speaker, it is also important for Members to note that Hepatitis B is transmitted almost like HIV/AIDS. It is transmitted through blood and infected body fluids. This can occur direct from blood-to-blood like in the case of blood transfusion. It can occur through unprotected sex with an infected person, use of contaminated skin-piercing instrument like needles and also from an infected woman to her unborn baby during the delivery process.

Other possible routes of infections include sharing sharp instruments such as razors, toothbrushes or even earrings; body piercing, tattooing and acupuncture using contaminated sharp instruments are also possible routes of infection unless we use sterile needles. 

It is important to note that Hepatitis B is not transmitted casually. It cannot be spread through sneezing, coughing or hugging or eating food prepared by someone who is infected with Hepatitis B, as we have heard some people being discriminated against and stigmatised in some areas.

Everyone is at some risk for Hepatitis infections. However, some groups are at higher risk because of their occupation life choices. High risk groups in Uganda include: 
    1. Health care workers as they do surgeries and look after patients and emergency personnel who handle blood for example after an accident.
    2. Infants born to infected mothers at the time of delivery 
    3. Individuals who have multiple sex partners; past or present.
    4. Individuals who have been diagnosed with a sexually transmitted disease. If you are infected with syphilis or gonorrhoea, it is possible that you could have been infected with Hepatitis B.
    5. Illicit drug users like those who inject themselves with drugs and even those who sniff them. This sometimes affects their ability to make decisions and they can engage in risky sexual behaviour. 
    6. Men who have sex with fellow men are also at high risk.
    7. Individuals who get tattoos and body piercings.
    8.  Residents and staff of collection facilities like prisons and group homes.

It is also worth noting that in many parts of the country, people still use traditional medicine. They share razors while administering medicine into their bodies. Sharing sharp instruments in traditional medicine or healing or cultural practices puts these people at high risk.

Mr Speaker, the only countrywide survey that we carried out was in 2005 and this clearly showed prevalence rates across the country. The highest prevalence rates were recorded in Karamoja and Teso sub-regions where nearly one in four adults was infected, which is 23.9. 

In Northern Uganda, one in five people aged 15 and above would be infected; in West Nile it was 18.5 per cent, in the western region, 10 per cent and the lowest infection rates were in the central and south-western regions. We have attached a map which clearly shows the different infection rates per region as per 2005. 

It is worth noting that the Ministry of Health is in the process of preparing another national survey and this will give us the current state. By early next year, we shall have the latest figures from all over the country, along with the HIV rates.

In addition to those surveys, the ministry has also carried out spotted screening across the country, totalling to about 33,875 people, with a total of 3,130 found infected. We found out that about 9.2 per cent were positive, almost verifying the figures that we already had. This information, however, cannot be generalised to the entire country and we still need to carry out a survey, as I alluded to earlier.

Hepatitis B specialised clinics have been set up. One is in Mulago Hospital - the Hepatitis STI Clinic, where about 686 cases are registered and complicated cases are referred to a specialist. Co-infected people with HIV are referred to HIV clinics. Arua Regional Referral Hospital also has a special clinic and Adjumani Hospital will also be opening up a specialised clinic soon.

Screening is free of charge in all public health facilities and campaigns organised by Government. It is worth noting that nobody should be asked for money for Hepatitis B testing where that testing has been organised by the Government of Uganda.

Based on cost of the vaccines test kits and other logistics, for the 16 million people to be vaccinated and those who are found eligible for treatment treated, we have an estimate of about Shs 1,143 billion that is required for the whole country and it is broken down as follows:
    1. Vaccines 
    2. Laboratory reagents 
    3. Programme activities
    4. Medical clinic equipment
    5. Antiviral drugs

Mr Speaker, the Ministry of Health has started the vaccination of adolescents and adults against Hepatitis B disease. The vaccination was officially launched by His Excellency, Yoweri Kaguta Museveni, on 26 July 2015, in Ngora while marking last year’s World Hepatitis B.

The vaccination plan has been phased into four, starting with 39 districts from West Nile, Acholi, Lango, Karamoja and Teso sub-regions based on the high prevalence that I mentioned earlier.

I am including selected districts like Tororo where Mass screening had taken place.

The districts to be targeted include Adjumani, Arua, Koboko, Maracha, Moyo, Nebbi, Yumbe, Zombo, Agago, Amuru, Gulu, Kitgum, Lamwo, Nwoya, Pader, Alebtong, Amolatar, Apac, Dokolo, Lira, Kole, Otuke, Oyam, Abim, Amudat, Kaabong, Kotido, Moroto, Nakapiripirit, Napak, Tororo, Kumi, Ngora, Katakwi, Amuria, Bukedea, Soroti and Serere with an eligible population of four million.

I have a table which shows the number of people who are targeted and the test kits required and syringes. I do not have to go through that. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, the list you have read is wider than what is in the document that I have. Is that the one that is uploaded on the iPads?

DR TUMWESIGYE: There has been an update in the last one hour -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: For purposes of the record, you need to state that these are now additions so that we know where the original text is, and where the departure is but proceed from there.

DR TUMWESIGYE: After the discussions with the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, we have been able to add Katakwi, Amuria, Bukedea, Soroti and Serere, in addition to the districts that had been earlier on uploaded in the system.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you.

DR TUMWESIGYE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. It is worth noting that the total cost for this is estimated to about Shs 48 billion. The allocated money for this financial year is Shs 10 billion. I would like to thank the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and Cabinet for considering a supplementary of Shs 11 billion. I hope we shall be updated on that shortly.

When we got the Shs 10 billion, 12 districts had been selected, mainly those where mass testing had begun. Vaccination has started in the following districts: Adjumani, Gulu, Dokolo, Moroto, Tororo, Ngora, Lira, Moyo, Napak, Koboko, Kumi and Arua.

Shs 10 billion was, by and large, used to procure vaccines, laboratory reagents and antiviral drugs for the treatment of Hepatitis B. 

The Ministry of Health and actually Ugandans appreciate the roles played by the Parliament of Uganda in ensuring that these funds become available. This money is released by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development on quarterly basis. The funds released and received in quarter one , two and three were, consequently, remitted to the National Medical Stores for the procurement of vaccines and test kits and to the Ministry of Health for some few programme activities.

The National Medical Stores received Shs 2.3 billion in quarter one, Shs 2.5 billion in quarter two and Shs 2.431 billion in the third quarter. We are still hoping for Shs 2.5 from the Shs 10 billion from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development for the fourth quarter. 

Out of the entire Shs 10 billion, the Ministry of Health was allocated Shs 358 million with the current expenditure of Shs 268.8 million so far, with a balance of Shs 89 million for the fourth quarter which is still pending.

In these 12 districts, we are targeting to vaccinate about 1.57 million people and with the current funding, the National Medical Stores will be able to procure 3.44 million dosages of vaccines. However, each person requires three doses, which brings the total vaccine requirement for this population to 5.139974 doses. This, therefore, means that there was a deficiency of 1.699974 doses for these districts. 

It is also worth noting that districts like Adjumani, Moyo and Arua have got refugee camps; there is an increasing number of people in them who were not counted during the 2014 population census on which estimates were based. This has caused shortage in the vaccines that these districts received. We also have to vaccinate the refugees because they interact with the local population and it is also in the Pan-African spirit. 

The shortage however will be catered for in the supplementary and also the budget for 2016/2017. The vaccine so far received has been distributed as follows: there is a table which shows the vials that have been taken or distributed to each district totalling to 176,804 vials nearly for 1.76 doses. 

The eligible population in these districts has received one dose per person; for those who have been reached, except Ngora, where the second dose has started to be supplied. The vaccine itself is efficacious and free of charge. The efficacy of the vaccine is 80 per cent. It will protect eight out of 10 people that are vaccinated which is a very high efficacy compared to some of the other vaccines. 

It is administered in three doses at different intervals. The first dose is given at zero months. The second dose is given after one month of the first dose and the third dose is given after six months from the first dose. 

Before an individual is either vaccinated or referred for treatment, screening is carried out to establish their Hepatitis B status. If he or she is tested negative, the person qualifies for vaccination. However, if the person tests positive, he or she is subjected to more biochemical liver function tests. This is in order to determine whether the person is eligible for treatment or should just be monitored on a regular basis. Many of the people are able to overcome the infection and manage without need for treatment. 

Vaccination is available in health facilities up to the level of health centres III. To ensure their potency, the cold chain for the vaccines must be maintained. Hence the vaccines are to be stored in the District Expanded Programme for Immunisation Vaccine Stores. 

Mr Speaker, in March 2015, the World Health Organisation issued guidelines for the first time to member states for the prevention, care and treatment of Chronic Hepatitis B virus infection, which Uganda has now adapted. The Ugandan Government is nearly the first Government in the region or in Africa to be able to have massive vaccination of adults at that scale that we are planning. 

Until these guidelines were issued by World Health Organisation, there was no universal guidance on the management of Chronic Hepatitis B infection. 

Regarding treatment with antiviral drugs, not all persons with a positive test are eligible. Only those with the following conditions are eligible: 
    i) Liver Cirrhosis; that is when the liver gets fibrosed. 
    ii) HIV/Hepatitis B co-infection; we treat them with antiretroviral treatment for HIV as well. 
    iii) Evidence of decompensated liver function by testing for liver enzymes, low platelet counts and abdominal scans showing liver disease. 
    iv) High Hepatitis B viral load of greater than 2000 international units plus elevated liver enzymes. 

Antiviral drugs for treatment of these cases are procured by National Medical Stores and will be procured when the funds from the fourth quarter are released. 

Challenges and Recommendations

There are a number of challenges and recommendations for the future that I would like to share: 
    1. Inadequate funds for procuring vaccines to cover the country or the districts in the country. 
    2. Likewise, there are inadequate funds for laboratory reagents. 
    3. We shall also need more funds to procure antiviral drugs. 
    4. Inadequate funds for printing information, education and communication materials, brochures, self-management provision system tools and vaccination cards. 
    5. Funds for the support of supervision of districts. 
    6. Funds for coordination with rural society organisations and private sector.
    7. Funds for training of health workers especially in the new guidelines as well as behavioural change in communication being able to educate people as well as community mobilisation activities. 

The future plans include:
    1. Rolling out the vaccination plan to cover the entire country; 
    2. Intensive sensitisation and awareness creation;
    3.  Training of all health workers; 
    4. Another Hepatitis B sero survey and more research; 
    5. Plans to use the recent launched constituency health task forces which involve Members of Parliament, the local community, the local councillors, the NGOs, village health teams and others as well as community structures for community mobilisation sensitisation; and 
    6. Enabling health centres IV in the entire country even where we have not reached with the vaccination programme to carry out routine Hepatitis B screening and management.

In conclusion, Mr Speaker, due to the increasing prevalence of the infection in the country, the Minister of Health requests for additional support to complete the vaccination in the remaining districts in Northern and Eastern Uganda and complete the entire country.

Once again, I thank the President, Cabinet, Members of Parliament, the general public and civil society for raising awareness on Hepatitis B and for the support so far provided. I beg to submit. Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister. Honourable members, this statement attracts a short debate. Issues of Hepatitis B have been on the Floor of this House for a long time. The issue now is how do we move forward from where we are? How do we get more money to solve the problem that we are facing? The minister said that there are still funding gaps. Can we open debate now?

3.05
MS LUCY AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Amuru): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for giving this statement. It has been long overdue. 

In the statement, I heard about the vaccination of the public workers. My biggest concern is the Village Health Teams (VHT). Are they also considered? This is because these people move every day. They interface with different people each day and if they are not considered, then they are actually a very high risk group.

On the screening for hepatitis B; I am told that it will start in health centres IV and it is free of charge. In Amuru, there is only one health centre IV which is in Atiak. In most schools these days, vaccination is mandatory. 

In schools like seminaries, they were sending away children if they did not have vaccination. It is quite expensive for most of the parents and yet it is still not available. How best can these parents be helped? 

I am happy that we are planning to have the sensitisation rolled out. I might tell you that most people do not know about this disease. They actually think it is some sort of witchcraft. 

Unfortunately, by the time they are diagnosed, it is too late and they cannot be helped. There are so many of them who are dying because they do not know what is happening to them. Therefore, I would request that the programme for sensitisation be fast tracked so that people are helped. 

The specialised clinics are only in three places: Mulago, Arua and Adjumani, which will be opening soon. What about other places like Gulu? How can these people be helped? When will the other areas get these specialised clinics so that the people who are sick are able to get the help that is needed? I thank you, Mr Speaker.

3.07
MS MARGARET BABA DIRI (NRM, Woman Representative, Koboko): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for bringing this statement. 

Hepatitis B. has been there for a very long time. It has actually reached its climax. I learnt about it when I was still young; then, you would see a person with a protruding stomach and yellow eyes; the person would later die.

However, I am now happy that we have identified the cause of the sickness and immunisation is in progress. Before Government came in, many NGOs – some doctors were parading around, trying to screen and vaccinate. I remember in Koboko, a certain organisation came and screened school children but in the end, it was discovered that they administered a fake drug.

Therefore, as Government comes in force to screen and vaccinate against this disease, it is important to stop these quack doctors who are parading themselves as vaccinators and extort money from the people. Let me pray that Government will move very fast to all other parts of Uganda.

So far, the minister said that they have only started in nine districts, what about the others? It is important that we look for money so that everybody is vaccinated. This is similar to HIV/AIDS and what is surprising is that, it is very common in children. Is it because of the injections they used? I thought that if it was transmitted through sexual intercourse, it would affect adults more than the young ones. Maybe the minister will explain why it is affecting more children than adults.

I would also like to know the incubation period of Hepatitis B. One can move for a very long time before realising that is sick. May be if we could know the first signs, then one would seek medical attention immediately the symptoms show. However, I beg that we look for money and immunise everybody. I thank the minister for starting from Koboko.

I have also learnt that taking care of the drugs matters a lot. If the drugs are not properly protected, they may get spoilt. I, therefore, think it is important to note that, so that we are not vaccinated with spoilt drugs. Thank you very much.

3.10
MS HELEN KAHUNDE (NRM, Woman Representative, Kiryandongo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for the elaborate statement and all the efforts put in place in order to fight hepatitis B. I am seeking clarification about the criteria they used to select the districts, because if it were based on where cases of Hepatitis B have occurred, Kiryandongo District is one of the districts that have so many cases of Hepatitis and very many people have died.

I think the minister must be aware. You cannot talk about Hepatitis B in Gulu, Adjumani, Moyo and all those other districts and fail to talk about Kiryandongo District, which has all sorts of people from all these districts mentioned above.

I, therefore, would like to request the minister to pick some information from his staff; if he is not aware, Kiryandongo District is actually highly affected and has so many cases of people suffering from Hepatitis B. People are struggling to get the vaccines. They are not easily available and they are very expensive. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

3.12
MR SAMUEL SSEMUGABA (NRM, Kiboga County West, Kyankwanzi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for giving us his report – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please keep you remarks short.

MR SSEMUGABA: First and foremost, I would like to inform the minister and the House that Hepatitis B. is widespread throughout Uganda. Each year in Kyankwanzi, I lose hundreds of people who die of it. It is really widespread. 

I, therefore, suggest that as we are considering the budget for the forthcoming financial year, let us add in more money so that vaccination can spread throughout the whole country. Another measure that I would like to suggest is that they can put drugs at health centres III in all districts where they have not gone for mass immunisation. We could also provide testing kits at health centres III, so that people go there and get those services. That is my request.

In addition, there is a time we were talking about health facilities in health centres. We do not have necessary reagents, especially for Brucella, Typhoid and Yellow fever. When one seeks medical attention at health centres, they cannot test and treat you. For instance, in Kyankwanzi, I would be referred to Hoima. Some of my people find it very difficult to go there in order to test for Brucella, whereas there is a health centre III in their area. 

Honourable minister, you were not around, but we requested the  Government to provide these essential reagents or testing materials to health centres III and help our people on the ground to receive the required services. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

3.15
MS STELLA NAMOE (NRM, Woman Representative, Napak): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I would like to thank the minister for the statement. However, the programme on Hepatitis has not been effective, especially in Napak. In Napak we do not have a Government hospital. We only have a maternity hospital and it is private.

I would have loved the vaccination of the people to take place in a health centre III and not health centre IV. We do not have any operational health centre IV, which can help our people.

Another thing is about treatment; we are aware that this percentage of 23.9 is as a result of those who are already sick. They are already infected and the treatment plan is not clear, according to the statement of the minister. Vaccination and treatment should have gone a long way together in order to solve the infection rate, which is already high and also to save those who are already sick.

The other issue is about the specialised clinic. If you were fair as the Ministry of Health, you should have established a specialised clinic in Karamoja, to cater for all these five districts; there are so many districts in Karamoja. How can you have two specialised clinics in one region; this is unfair, honourable minster. I pray that you consider having a specialised clinic in either Moroto Regional Referral Hospital or in any other part of Karamoja. This is to help the community to be able to access treatment and vaccination.

The vaccines are not enough for the whole region and yet you have talked about two districts only. In your submission, it looks like it covers the whole of Karamoja. We still do not have funds to cover the remaing districts in the plan.

It is important to know that our people are pastoralists. They move from one district to another. The prevalence is already high in Katakwi, because our people move up to Amuria; they interact a lot. I think affirmative action needs to be done for these districts where prevalence is very high. Most of our people are already sick and need treatment. Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

3.17
MS ROSE MUTONYI (NRM, Bubulo County West, Manafwa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for the statement. However, I have one point on which I would like to seek clarification. I do not know if there are certain conditions that have caused the high prevalence rate in the Northern Region. Was this disease imported from South Sudan? Has there been any study done to find out the causes that lead to the quick spread and the high prevalence rate of Hepatitis B.

Secondly, in the minister’s submission, he slightly talked about the future plans of sensitisation and mobilisation of the public. I can see that the Eastern Region has lowest prevalence rate of Hepatitis B. However, I would like to inform the minister that the eastern people are also frightened by Hepatitis because a few of them, who have gone to the hospitals and have been diagnosed with the disease, are being told to get the anti-retroviral drugs. This drug is scaring people and they fear to go for testing.

Therefore, I would like to request that the ministry puts effort in sensitising the public instead of making it as a future plan, because by the time we wake up, even the areas that have low prevalence rate will be covered. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

3.19
MR KENNETH LUBOGO (Independent. Bulamogi County, Kaliro): Thank you, Mr Speaker and thank you, hon. Minister for the statement. Mr Speaker, if you look at the figures which have been given to us; 10 percent of the population is sick of hepatitis B. In Northern Uganda, 20 percent of the people suffer from the same disease. As a nation, we need to give this disease the concern it deserves.

Mr Speaker, according to the minister’s statement, children of 14 years above who are infected with the disease shall be considered for vaccination. I would like to get clarification from the minister as to why they are considering 14 years and above; you said that those above 14 who are found negative shall be vaccinated. Now, what about the children who are below that age? What is the ministry’s plan for them?

In your conclusion, you seek for funding so that the vaccination can take place at a faster pace. However, on page 6, you have given us the amount of money that the ministry needs. I find that this figure does not match - you are requesting for Shs 1,143,828,017,548 and that is about Shs 1.1 trillion for the vaccination of 16 million people. You also broke down these figures and they give Shs 151 billion. The figure and the grand total do not agree with the break down and yet, usually, it is the break down that is correct and not the figures. So, how comes that the break down gives us Shs 151 billion yet you are asking for Shs 1,143,828,017,548? Honourable members, that is on page 6 of the statement. I seek clarification on these two issues. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

3.21
MS MARIAM NALUBEGA (INDEP. Woman Representative, Butambala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for the statement and I would also like to thank the ministry for taking the multi-sectoral approach to tackle this dangerous disease. I am also happy that Government has decided to procure multipurpose machines which are going to be used for screening – because the HIV equipment are not enough in the country so these ones are going to supplement them.

I would like to seek clarification; just like hon. Kenneth has pointed out; you are screening people from the age of 9-19 years and also vaccinating them. Supposing a child goes to the clinic, and is found to have Hepatitis B and is below 14 years, what will happen to that child?

I have been interacting with some of the people in these specialised clinics and especially the one in Mulago; because I am a champion for health. I have been advocating and mobilising young girls to go for Hepatitis B vaccination. According to the report, there are only three specialised centres in the whole country; there is none in the east and the west. If we isolate these areas and Hepatitis B also attacks these places, what will happen? Why don’t we spread out in the entire country?

I am also concerned about hon. Baba Diri’s question; why is it common among children? Have we done enough research? I do not even see the budget for research. We need to do more research other than depending on what WHO has found. As a country, we should study our own environment and find what the problem is.

I would like to argue that the screening should be lowered down to health centres III. We are targeting 15 million young people who cannot even afford transport to a health centre IV. We are also targeting school going children who cannot afford to be at a health centre. So, can we do mobile clinics so that we can reach out to a greater population? Those are some of the issues I wanted the minister to clarify. 

I am happy that the ministry is not sleeping because this is another war just like we have been fighting HIV. This might again hinder our struggle to eradicate HIV in our country. Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

3.23
MR WILLIAM NZOGHU (FDC, Busongora County North, Kasese): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to seek clarification from the minister – in his statement, he put it very clearly that Western Uganda is one of the regions that have high infections, yet he did not tell us the direction Western Uganda should take. With such a kind of disease, you cannot wait.

I would like to inform this House that in January this year, I raised this issue of Hepatitis B in Kasese; people are dying in Kasese. Again, on 28 January, Ministry of Health produced a list of 12 districts, which were going to be supplied with vaccines and also test the people in those districts. Kasese was among the 12 districts.  Therefore, the clarification I would like the minister to give this House is; does the ministry know that people are dying in Western Uganda? And having mentioned that Western Uganda is one of the regions that have high infections, why do we wait yet people are dying? 

3.24
THE OPPOSITION CHIEF WHIP (Ms Cecilia Ogwal): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Sometimes, we do not look at our diaries of Members of Parliament for the date of birth of our colleagues and their ages. I am very mindful about that although, I do not make it public. This Parliament takes note that today is the birthday of the Deputy Speaker – (Applause) – and I would like to wish him a happy birth day. Well, we can stand up and sing.

(Members rose and sung ‘Happy birthday’ for the Deputy Speaker)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, honourable member, you are ruled out of order. (Laughter)


MS OGWAL: Mr Speaker, I would like to tell this Parliament that I am rather disappointed with the Ministry of Health which has just read the statement on hepatitis B. Mr Speaker, I have so many reasons for that disappointment: one is that the same ministry has been giving very alarming reports of the prevalence of hepatitis B in the country, and Parliament has positively responded by giving the Ministry of Health more money than what was budgeted for.

Mr Speaker, I do remember that as Members of the Budget Committee, we were able to increase the budget of Ministry of Health, specifically for hepatitis B ,up-scaling it from Shs 5 to Shs 10 billion.

I would have expected the minister to come back to this House because that Shs 10 billion was ring-fenced to deal with emergencies, which had been highlighted in the reports. The minister should have come back to tell us how that money has been utilised and what has been the effect of the intervention which was supposed to be an emergency.

I was amazed that among the 12 districts which have been highlighted as most affected and needed emergency operation; according to the minister’s statement, Dokolo is included.

The minister has forgotten that earlier on a list of the districts most affected was already given to us and Dokolo was missing, and I inquired why this was so. When I was the strongest lobbyist who ensured that the budget was up-scaled from Shs 5 to 10 billion.

Today, because of that, the minister has positively responded by including Dokolo, but that is by default and this Parliament stands to condemn it.

Mr Speaker, I would like to raise a few matters of concern. According to WHO Hepatitis B prevalence infection in sub-Saharan Africa is in between five to 10 per cent. 

The Ministry of Health has confirmed to this House several times that about 3.5 million Ugandans are already confirmed affected. This means, 10 per cent of our population is already affected which means according to the WHO report that Uganda is the most affected country in the Sub Saharan Africa and that is a very serious scenario.

Mr Speaker, if Uganda therefore is the most affected country in the sub Saharan Africa, I would like to find out what the ministry has done to deal with that. 

It means that it must be dealt with not only nationally but even internationally to alert the world that Uganda now stands at a very critical state in as far as the hepatitis B prevalence is concerned. I see that the minister is taking it as a norm.

Two, Uganda has been praised for positive intervention in the decrease of the spread of HIV. You are aware, Mr Speaker, and again I am basing my argument on the reports frequently brought to this House by the ministry that HIV prevalence is about 7.5 per cent, compared to Hepatitis B which is 10 per cent.

This means hepatitis B has superseded HIV in terms of prevalence rates, which creates an emergency and a crisis situation in the health sector in this country. 

Mr Speaker, the minister should not be diplomatic about the seriousness of Hepatitis B and if I was not in Parliament, I would say that somebody is playing tribalism - (Interjection) - let me finish with this statement.

Mr Speaker, the Member of Parliament from Adjumani, way back in 2014 raised a serious issue that in Adjumani Hospital, already the hospital had registered 121 cases and that was then. The minister has not told us what the ministry has done about Adjumani and the neighbouring districts which are seriously affected.

Mr Speaker, from the minister’s report, Northern Uganda has registered a prevalence of over 20 percent; specifically Karamoja alone has 23.9 per cent prevalence.

Acholi and Lango, 20 per cent of our population is already affected by Hepatitis B. West Nile 18.5 per cent is already affected by Hepatitis B. and Western Uganda is following the north with about 10 per cent.

Therefore, as a legislator from the north where the prevalence probably now has gone beyond 25 per cent - maybe we are now at 30 per cent. I am legislating for my people, who have just overwhelmingly voted for me. I am hurt to see that 30 per cent of my population and voters die because they cannot afford to pay for vaccination. Mr Speaker, shame on all of us who are here, particularly northerners, including you -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Were you referring to the Speaker?

MS OGWAL: I am referring to whoever comes from the north. (Laughter) At this junction can I get information from the minister and then followed by hon. Wamanga-Wamai, but please be brief. (Laughter)

MS OPENDI: Thank you, hon. Cecilia Ogwal. Mr Speaker, I would like to inform hon. Cecilia Ogwal that initially, in this country, we were not commemorating a World Hepatitis Day. But the first district that we went to commemorate this day was Adjumani and that was in the year 2014. 

And I recall, I did officiate at that function and when we were there, we provided free testing and medical services to the population. We did not do this in one static place, but in most of the sub counties, especially where we had many people from the statistics affected by this disease.

Therefore, specifically in Adjumani, there was sensitisation that was done and also in the neighbouring districts. So, the people were sensitised. As said previously, people did not know what to do when infected with this disease. That is the information I want to provide. Thank you very much.

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Thank you very much, hon. Ogwal, for giving way. We see that the situation is alarming when it comes to about 10 per cent of our people being infected. The Ministry of Health has professionals, hon. Tumwesigye and hon. Baryomunsi are doctors; and there is a department that monitors the prevalence of diseases in this country. However, when I look at the statement, it is just about how much money is needed to go and educate the people. What did you do with the budget appropriation? I thought when you come to Parliament to ask for a budget for a ministry, you include all these unforeseen circumstances.

Secondly, if there is a serious problem that has come up, come to the House and ask for a supplementary budget. You do not wait for the situation to affect 10 per cent of the population and then you come here and start talking of how much money is required. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are you debating, honourable member? 

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: That is the information I wanted to give. (Laughter)  The information I would like to give is that the situation is so bad and the ministry with all its professionals has done nothing to help this country. The Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is here; Parliament approved Shs 10 billion for the ministry and now you are coming to tell us about the alarming situation. You have not done much to help the people of Uganda. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

MS CECILIA OGWAL: Thank you, honourable Minister of Health and shadow minister, for the information you have given. Unfortunately, the ministers should have advised their colleague to include the report in this particular statement so that it is comprehensive – tell us about the actions which have been taken so far. Do not keep such valuable information in your handbag, honourable minister.

Mr Speaker, on the 18 March 2016, the people of Dokolo celebrated the International Women’s Day. We could not celebrate it on 8 March due to the voting on 9 March in Dokolo South, where hon. Okot Ogong comes from. For those of you who have not heard, he got re-elected. Since we could not celebrate on that day, we celebrated on 18 March 2016.

On that day, I wanted to surprise the Minister of Health. I talked to my son, hon. Chris Baryomunsi, and I wanted him to be in Dokolo and see for himself the problems facing the people of Dokolo in as far as hepatitis B is concerned. We also tried to contact some partners in the health sector to help us vaccinate and carry out testing for cervical cancer and many more diseases. The minister tactfully switched off his phone and could not make it to Dokolo, although the women are still waiting for him. 

Right now in Dokolo - you can call and talk to the district health officer - there are no test kits. There are vaccinations but no test kits, and that is the scenario in Lango sub region. I took trouble to contact other centres as well to confirm my information before I could come and share on the Floor of Parliament.

Secondly, what was the criterion used in selecting the 33 and the 12 districts? Karamoja should have been priority number one in its own category, and Lango and Acholi should have followed. However, that was taken as ordinary in the selection. When you go through the 33 districts, not all the districts of Karamoja have been included; in the 12 districts, not all the districts of Karamoja have been included and yet it is affected by 23.9 per cent.

Not all the districts in Acholi and Lango are included in category one among the 12 districts. Not all the districts of West Nile are among the 12 districts. That means somebody somewhere has evil motives towards the people of Lango, Acholi, West Nile and Karamoja. I cannot stand here and represent my people when they are being unfairly treated. My people are dying; 30 per cent of my voters are already infected. I would like to say that the minister must explain the criteria used to select the priority districts.

I would like to reaffirm that in Dokolo – The Minister can take trouble right now and call Dokolo before he comes up to reply to my statement. Let him call the district health officer and confirm whether there are test kits and then he will realise that there are no test kits in Dokolo. I had to come back and get vaccinated in Kampala and yet I had wanted to be vaccinated alongside other rural women on that day. 

We were not vaccinated because there were no test kits. I agree the vaccines are available, but definitely we cannot do vaccination without test kits, and yet we gave you Shs 10 billion to deal with emergency issues. If it meant flying in those kits, you should have flown in with some kits to save the people of Karamoja, Lango, Acholi and Uganda at large. I thank you.

3.43
THE MINISTER OF HEALTH (Dr Elioda Tumwesigye): Thank very much, Mr Speaker, and happy birthday indeed. I would like to thank Members of Parliament for the questions and comments. I will attempt to answer many of them; however, my colleagues, Dr Baryomunsi and hon. Sarah Opendi, have been heavily involved in this and they will be able to supplement.

The first comment came from hon. Lucy Akello. She wanted to know whether the village health teams will be included in the exercise. If we go to a community, we shall for sure immunise all adults aged 15 and above, who are eligible, including village health teams. Initially, we started with health workers, but I believe that now there is an increased use of village health teams to do some testing and, therefore, they could be at a slightly higher risk. Surely, we shall be able to give them priority.

With respect to screening being done up to health centres IV, particularly in Atiak, and sending a way patients or children who are not vaccinated, as I said in my statement, we are endeavouring to screen people at health centres III. It would have been our desire to go up to health centres IV and we will work this out and also check on what is needed. Ideally, we would like to go door to door because then you would know that you have systematically covered everybody, but this has huge financial implications. 

As we roll out community health extension workers, this should be something that we can target in future. For the time being, the screening will be at health centres III and we are also going to organise outreaches.

With respect to sending away children from school because they have not been vaccinated, I think that is illegal and not warranted. It has no scientific merit. Therefore, whoever is doing that is doing it outside expected norms and should be punished; nobody should allow that, not even you, as Members of Parliament. 

On the need for more sensitisation because people think it is witchcraft, that is okay; we need to sensitise more people. Of course, as you know, when the Shs 10 billion was given there was a big rider that this money should not go into sensitisation or awareness creation. However, I do believe that as we go on, we shall use whatever means available to ensure that people are educated and informed.

Many Members of Parliament were concerned about the specialised clinics being only three. I need to share with you that concern. These were mainly started not as a big programme but rather spontaneously. The STI clinic in Mulago, for example, had the capacity and they started taking on hepatitis B patients. 

Somebody said we have not done much for Adjumani and later another person complained and asked why we started with Adjumani. I must say that there are plans to ensure that every health centre IV, where there is a doctor, has capacity to treat and manage hepatitis B patients. 

As I said earlier, we have acquired machines that will be taken to every health centre IV. They can measure progression of the disease within the liver and be able to indicate other markers that are indispensable for making eligibility assessments for the patients.

Hon. Baba Diri from Koboko did mention that hepatitis has been there for a long time and that there are doctors using fake reagents and that we need to stop them.  We need to liaise with the district health officers and ensure that quack doctors have no place in Koboko. We have the Allied Health Workers Council which accredits those who are supposed to practice laboratory work in Uganda. There are even sanctions and penalties for people who pretend to be laboratory technologists and there are also measures to crack down on quack doctors. 

There were questions about why it is common among children while these children are not expected to have had sex. As I said earlier, if you have one in five people with hepatitis B, there are also high possibilities that some of those are women in reproductive age who are likely to pass on the infection to the children. The infection could possibly have come from the parents. 

However, I agree with you because some of the areas which have high rates of hepatitis B have, to the contrary, lower rates of HIV. This means we need to do more research to see whether there are other factors that perpetuate the transmission, which possibly do not play a big role in the transmission or probability of transmission with respect to HIV; more research will certainly be carried out.

Somebody did ask about the incubation period of hepatitis B. I have consulted my colleague and we have confirmed that it is about 30 to 180 days; we thought it was about 75 days but the range is quite big. The honourable member from Koboko appreciated us for starting from Koboko. However, we would have liked to start from every part of the country given the resources.

Hon. Kahunde asked about the criteria for selecting the districts and why Kiryandongo was not included on the list well knowing that Kiryandongo borders many of those districts and has a significant population from the affected districts. 

On the criteria, as I said earlier, when you have little money, even if you had wanted to start everywhere it becomes difficult, and wherever you may start there are challenges. 

We tried to consider districts that had high prevalence rates, but certainly we also took into consideration districts where there had been screening and therefore, we had people on the waiting list and they needed to be vaccinated. All these were taken into consideration. However, I am happy that now we are talking about screening, testing and treatment in at least 39 districts of northern Uganda and north-eastern Uganda.

Hon. Ssemugaba from Kyankwanzi was talking about the many deaths in his area. Hepatitis B is associated with a low fatality rate. We are yet to do research on people who are alleged to have been killed by hepatitis B, to find out whether it was actually hepatitis B that caused their deaths. Research all over the world shows that many people survive hepatitis B; people who die from hepatitis B are very few in proportion to those who are infected.

An honourable member said that the budget for next financial year needs to provide for this in the entire country. We have phased it and we are looking at phasing the vaccination over a period of three years. As I said, the figure that is required would be about Shs 1.14 billion. I know there was debate on the calculations, but when you calculate Shs 980 billion and add to what is indicated - Shs 43,871,912 - you would come to about that figure. However, these are estimates and I am sure as we launch the programme, we shall have figures that are more accurate. 

On the need to put test kits in the health centres III, I have already answered that. Hon. Ssemugaba talked about Brucella and typhoid and this is yet another huge challenge. Many witchdoctors and other practitioners try to get a lot of money from people on account of Brucella and typhoid infection. We did indicate that we had a budget shortfall of Shs 50 billion that was needed to ensure that all our health facilities get test reagents. Currently, it is partly an unfunded priority, but we are trying our best and soon bringing a Bill to establish a national health laboratory service, which will be able to generate resources even from outside and within the country, to ensure that all our laboratory services are well funded.

The woman representative for Napak District also had concerns about health centres IV and why we do not go to health centres III. We appreciate the work being done by Matany Hospital. There are plans to ensure that we have health centres IV in each constituency throughout the country even where there are hospitals. I am sure Napak is on the agenda. However, for the time being, the health centres III, which are there should have test kits and should test for hepatitis B.

She was also concerned about the need for a specialised clinic in Karamoja. As I said earlier, once we have capacity at every health centre IV, the entire country will be catered for, including Karamoja. She also mentioned that vaccines are not enough for the whole of Karamoja, Amuria and Katakwi. 

As I said, we have been able to work with Ministry of Finance Planning and Economic Development and I would like to thank this ministry for providing additional resources. We have, therefore, included all these districts in Teso region including Amuria and Katakwi, which share borders and other things with the people of Karamoja as the woman MP said.

The Member for Bubulo West was and asked, “Why northern Uganda?” Certainly, as I said, the problem is countrywide. There are higher rates in Karamoja, north-central Uganda, West Nile and western Uganda. For sure, more research is needed, particularly to ascertain why districts with a high prevalence of HIV are not necessarily the ones with a high prevalence of hepatitis B.

What is crucial now, as we are doing that research – it is like when a snake has entered your house and you want to go and research to find out where it has come from; it is important that you deal with that snake as you do that research. Therefore, we are working to ensure that more people do not get infected as we treat those who are eligible and conduct research as well. Research costs a lot of money, so as you put in more money into research, people might also question why you do not first vaccinate once you know that there is a solution.

On future plans for sensitisation, mobilisation for eastern region – (Mr Wamanga-Wamai rose_) - Why don’t I finish? (Interruption)

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like the minister to tell us something. Recently, malaria prevalence in the north has been alarming. Even before malaria came in, there was the nodding disease in northern Uganda and now we have hepatitis B. Can you tell us why these particular epidemics are coming up in that part of the world and what the ministry is doing about it?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, please try to roll it up quickly so that we can have time for other matters.

DR TUMWESIGYE: Thank you, Member of Parliament for Mbale Municipality. Certainly, each of these diseases has its own epidemiology and we are yet to find out if there is any link. 

However, certainly malaria is everywhere. Malaria has now become an epidemic because there was indoor residual spraying and people lost their immunity. When you do not get any attack of malaria, you lose immunity; so when malaria comes it affects very many people, but we are handling that. 

The nodding syndrome was discovered to be associated with river blindness and good enough, with the river dousing and other interventions, nodding syndrome is significantly being reduced.

Regarding future plans for eastern Uganda and other areas, sensitisation will go on. I think the major question here was about the people aged 14 and below –(Mr Nzoghu rose_)- I think in the interest of time I am not going to take the clarification, if you do not mind. Let me first finish. You never know as we go along, your question could be answered. What are the plans for those aged 14 years and below? (Mr Nzoghu rose_) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, you had risen on a point of clarification and now is it a point of order?

MR NZOGHU: No, I had to first sit down, Mr Speaker, and then I realised that the minister needed to be put to order.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, point of order.

MR NZOGHU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I was very clear regarding the issue, which I wanted clarification on. I said that Kasese District was placed among the 12 districts, which should be benefitting from testing and vaccination against hepatitis B. That is the clarification, which I wanted him to give. Is the minister, therefore, in order to jump and rotate on the issue without specifying what his ministry promised to undertake for the people of Kasese?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I am not able to rule on that because the minister had not finished. If he had finished, we would have known whether he had “jumped” but let the minister finish.

DR TUMWESIGYE: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for your wise ruling. Actually, after Bulamogi, I was coming to Busongora North to answer your question and then Butambala.

The MP for Bulamogi was interested in knowing what we do for people aged 14 years and below and why we are only planning for those above 15 years. As the statement clearly indicates, the NRM Government started to immunise against hepatitis B in 2002 as part of the routine vaccination programme. Therefore, all those children who had routine immunisation are protected against hepatitis B as part of the Pentavac that has been given since that time. Therefore, for those aged 14 years and below, they are catered for if they were immunised.

The major interest for Butambala had to do with children. We are basically screening all those aged 15 years and above. For those below 14 years old who are infected, there are treatment guidelines that doctors follow. 

A question was asked as to why it is common among children. I think it is certainly common among all age groups and, of course, there is need for research. The honourable member also asked about mobile clinics and asked if they could go beyond health centres III. As we fully operationalise the constituency health taskforces, where Members of Parliament together with the health workers and community leaders will be meeting routinely, it will be up to you; you will be deciding and helping us to make decisions on how best we can handle situations in each of your constituencies. I think that will help us more than what we are currently doing.

Regarding Busongora North, the prevalence in western Uganda and the direction that we need to take, The 12 districts that we came out with at the beginning, to my recollection, did not include Kasese. However, in case there are some documents which included Kasese at that time, I sincerely apologise. The 12 districts have always been Adjumani, Gulu, Dokolo, Moroto, Tororo, Ngora, Lira, Moyo, Napak, Koboko, Kumi and Arua. 

I want to reassure you that after the first phase and as we get more resources next year, we shall come to western Uganda. However, even before we do mass vaccination, your health centre IV will have capacity to test for and treat hepatitis B because we already have the machines in the country.

Hon. Cecilia Ogwal, the Opposition Chief Whip, had a number of questions –(Interjection)– I am not taking any information. Let me complete my submission. She had a lot of concerns and I thank her for the support she gave towards the allocation of the money; she played a big role. 

I also thank her for the support that she has always given to this effort. It is worth noting that the Ministry of Health put in Shs 5 billion and the budget committee, with her support, put in an additional Shs 5 billion, which was ring-fenced for emergencies. However, the process of procurement took longer than we had expected. This was the first time that we were going to conduct mass testing and vaccination for adults, therefore it took longer. However, I am happy that we have started and I am convinced that we shall be able to cover all the 39 districts before the end of this year. The World Health Organisation (WHO) comments are taken in good faith and, of course, Uganda is heavily affected. 

What has the ministry done to immunise people below 14 years? I have already indicated that we started in 2002 and we should encourage all our children to be immunised against all diseases, including this. 

Regarding the reference to HIV, certainly hepatitis B now has a higher prevalence - 10 per cent more than HIV. However, both are diseases that we have to handle. We do not have to say this against that; we have to handle them. Actually, all patients who have HIV and also have hepatitis B will be treated irrespective of their CD4 count.

There was a comment that the minister needs to be more diplomatic. Certainly, as doctors we have to be diplomatic. However, we take it with the seriousness that it deserves.

On the issue of tribalism, I think this does not arise. It is just unfortunate. Actually, we are trying to ensure that we provide the best that we can, given the resources.

On the issue of northern Uganda and Karamoja, as a legislator from northern Uganda, you are right. However, as the Leader of the Opposition, I am sure that you also talk for the whole country; you do not limit yourself to northern Uganda because there are Opposition supporters in other parts of the country. Of course, as MP for Dokolo, you also have a right to talk to your voters. The issue of about 30 per cent of the voters dying due to lack of vaccination will not arise because the fatality rate is so low. Out of the people who get hepatitis B, there are very few who die - as a proportion.

From Mbale Municipality, the question was on the money and what the Department of Epidemiology and Surveillance is doing. The Member was also concerned that the two professional doctors in the ministry were doing nothing. It was tough but you need to take heart because at the time that these two doctors went to this ministry, that is when we started receiving the money specifically for hepatitis B and we started seeing these programmes coming up and yet hepatitis B had been around for centuries. Therefore, it is worth noting that these professionals are doing a good job with respect to hepatitis B.

On the need for action points, we have certainly indicated to them in our statement. Hon. Chris Baryomunsi will be given an opportunity to defend himself as to why he switched off his phone when he was expected in Dokolo.

About the absence of test kits, as I said, when we started testing, the demand for test kits became overwhelming but we have now told the National Medical Stores to import more test kits. With increased resources from the Ministry of Finance Planning and Economic Development, we shall be able to provide enough test kits.

I have already alluded to the criteria for selecting the 12 districts and then the 30. We are now planning for all the districts in West Nile, Acholi, Lango, Karamoja and Teso. From now on, all these will be taken as a bloc and we are going to ensure that we comb all those areas, screen and treat people. We shall also prevent the spread to ensure that people do not die needlessly because of hepatitis B. This is already starting as we will get money – (Interruption) 

MR OLANYA: I thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the honourable minister for giving way. 

In your statement, you made a very important point that children below the age of 14 years have been immunised. However, in my district, medical personnel have diagnosed children aged between nine and 10 years with hepatitis B. I have failed to understand that linkage. How come children below 14 years have already been immunised and yet children aged eight, nine and 10 have hepatitis B? I need an explanation, honourable minister. I thank you.

MS CECILIA OGWAL: The minister will recall that on page 6, he identified 33 districts although he has now amended it to 39 districts. From the statement you are making when you talk about all the districts of West Nile, Acholi, Lango and Karamoja, does it imply that they will all be incorporated in this group; in other words, it will now go beyond 39? Can the minister confirm that it is no longer 39 districts but all the districts of Lango, Acholi, Karamoja and West Nile? I thank you.

DR TUMWESIGYE: I thank you. I would like to reiterate and confirm that our target is all the districts of West Nile, Acholi, Lango, Karamoja and Teso. There could have been a mistake while counting and this statement here was written by our technical staff, but that is the plan.

In respect to the children, it is possible that those children were not immunised. You know, sometimes parents do not take their children for routine immunisation. There were even religious sects that barred people from going for routine immunisation. It is, therefore, possible that some of those children were not immunised and consequently, they have got hepatitis B. 

When you are infected by hepatitis B as a child, there are higher chances of developing hepatocellular carcinoma or cancer of the liver and liver cirrhosis than when you are infected as an adult. Therefore, it is unfortunate that they were not immunised. It is, therefore, important that we find out, in our programme, the children who are not immunised so that we are able to immunise them as well, although the programme is meant for adults. I thank you. 

MS OSEGGE: I thank you, Mr Speaker. I think that at certain times, the newly born babies may be due for vaccination but the vaccine has run out. I would like to request the ministry to ensure that there is a constant supply of this vaccine in the health centres. I think that would be the best way to handle this because you cannot rule out the fact that there are those who were not vaccinated. I thank you.

DR TUMWESIGYE: I think that is a fair comment. We are stepping up the immunisation programmes in the country. We have reached or immunised over 97 per cent of all children. We are taking more fridges and recently, we gave out about 56 more vehicles to districts to aid the immunisation exercise. We are also building immunisation stores and other things. Therefore, we are certainly going to increase on our ability to immunise, including introduce new vaccines like those against diarrhoea and pneumonia. 

I think that it is up to Members of Parliament to encourage people to come for immunisation. I would like to thank Parliament for passing the Immunisation Bill, which will be an additional tool to ensure that parents take their children for immunisation. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I thank you, honourable members. This was an important matter and that is why we extended the time well outside what the rules provide. Hon. Chris Baryomunsi has something to say but not on hepatitis B. Use one minute.   

4.12
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (GENERAL DUTIES) (Dr Chris Baryomunsi): I thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to clarify and respond to the remarks made by my senior sister, hon. Cecilia Ogwal, who is like my mother.

I am a professional doctor and I cannot run away from clients or patients. It, therefore, cannot be true that I switched off my phone to avoid travelling to Dokolo. It is true that I discussed with hon. Cecilia Ogwal and she extended an invitation to me. However, we were proceeding to Kyankwanzi because my party had invited us for a retreat. I assured her that I would look at the programme and see if I would be able to travel. 

While I was at the retreat, I received an urgent task to travel out of the country to participate in a meeting in Beijing where we were negotiating some of the programmes funded by the UN that are coming to Uganda. Therefore, I interrupted my stay and travelled out of the country. I tried to get in touch with her but I could not. I requested my office to notify her but her phone was also switched off. (Laughter) I would like to assure her that I will travel to Dokolo after discussing with her the appropriate time and be able to assess the situation on the ground. 

I also wanted to say that more than 90 per cent of the people who get infected with hepatitis B naturally recover from the illness. It, therefore, cannot be true that the mortality rate is very high. I just want to clarify that.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Now that both of you are switching off your phones, we cannot make it a matter for debate in the House. (Laughter) Can we handle the next item?   

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I would like you to combine both statements in (II) and (V); so make both statements and then we will have a summary of debate on both.

4.15
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WATER AND ENVIRONMENT (ENVIRONMENT) (Ms Flavia Munaaba): Mr Speaker, this is an information paper on the International Day of Forests, World Water Day and World Meteorological Day celebrations that were held on 22 March 2016. I will start with the International Day of Forests, World Water Day and World Meteorological Day and then I will go to the other paper.

Mr Speaker, on Tuesday 22 March 2016, Uganda joined the international community to commemorate the World Forest Day, World Water Day and World Meteorological Day. These three important celebrations are usually held on 21, 22 and 23 of March every year as declared by the United Nations. However, the celebrations in Uganda were jointly held on 22 March in Serere District in eastern Uganda. They were preceded by a sanitation week, which started on 14 to 18 March, and the Weather and Climate Week, which started on 14 to 22 March 2016. The paper should have been presented on Thursday but the House did not sit. 

The background to this paper: In 1992, the first proposal for the establishment of a world water day was made during the UN Conference on Environment and Development. World Water Day was officially assigned 22 March in 1993 by the UN General Assembly. The event includes official and milestone events as well as many other events organised by various stakeholders around the world.

Forests and trees are known as the key to the planet’s supply of fresh water, which is essential for life and therefore sustains and protects us. The UN General Assembly adopted a resolution on 21 December 2012, which declared that starting in 2013, 21 March of each year is observed as International Day of Forests. The resolution encourages all member states to organise activities relating to all types of forests and trees such as tree planting campaigns.

The World Meteorological Day is celebrated worldwide in commemoration of the coming into force on 23 March 1950 of the Convention of the World Meteorological Organisation. World Meteorological Day is an annual event commemorated yearly by meteorological organisation members as well as world meteorological communities to commemorate the establishment of the World Meteorological Organisation to keep constant watch on weather and climate for a better life and future. 

It is, therefore, a privilege that Uganda, as a member of the UN, is obliged to put in place strategies to achieve the broad aim of halting the worldwide effects of climate change, loss of water, forests and environmental resources in general and to conserve these resources through increasing public awareness, wise use and management in order to reduce the effects of climate change. The occurrence of extreme weather events has become more severe and more frequent. 

Why do we commemorate these days? The main objective of the commemoration is to-
    a) Raise awareness about the benefits, values and functions of forests and water and to demonstrate wise use practices that can help users to sustain resources for their wellbeing; 

    b) increase stakeholder participation and awareness about the services, functions, benefits and products of forests and water, their relationship and importance in climate change mitigation on which agriculture greatly depends to support peoples’ livelihood in Uganda;

    c) take stock and publicise the achievements of the Ministry of Water and Environment in meeting its obligations as the lead ministry in safeguarding water and environment resources; 

    d) enhance knowledge about water, environment and climate change among the public and create a linkage between Ministry of Water and Environment staff, members of NGOs, district forests, environment and water officials and the media, so that the threats to forests, water and climate change can be addressed collectively;

    e) expose stakeholders to the role of forests and water in climate change and agriculture, and their contribution to livelihoods and the national economy, so that they participate in awareness creation on the dangers of degrading forests and water using different media, for example radio and TV programmes, music, dance, drama, presentations, public debates and exhibitions. 

    f) strengthen synergies in climate change mitigation, forests and water management in Uganda, particularly with institutions involved in forests, water and climate change related activities.

Theme for the Celebrations 

Each year, each of the three days highlights a specific theme. “Forests and Climate Change” was for the World Forest Day; “Water and Jobs” for the World Water Day; and “Hotter, Drier, Wetter: Face the Future” for the World Meteorological Day. These themes were aimed at highlighting the importance of these resources and the adverse climate change effects of missing them. 

This year, the theme for the Sanitation Week was, “Good Sanitation: How is your leader?” This is aimed at promoting exemplary leadership in sanitation and hygiene as many community members always look up to their leaders. An exemplary leader with all the required sanitation and hygiene facilities in place motivates his or her followers to improve their status quo. 

The themes above draw attention to the urgent need for climate change mitigation through actions that will slow down, stop and reverse forest and water resource degradation for survival and livelihood. 

Uganda’s forest cover is estimated to be 3.6 million hectares, of which 17 per cent consists of central forest reserves managed by the National Forestry Authority (NFA), 18 per cent consists of national parks and wildlife reserves managed by Uganda Wildlife Authority(UWA) and 0.85 per cent is jointly managed by National Forestry Authority  and Uganda Wildlife Authority . About 70 per cent is managed by local governments in collaboration with private and local community forest owners.

Over 2.7 million people living in communities adjacent to forest reserves are particularly dependent on forests for energy and construction materials, food security, clean water and even their livelihoods. For these people, forest products contribute about 20 per cent to household incomes. 

Today, almost half of the world’s workers - 1.5 billion people - work in water related sectors and nearly all jobs depend on water and those that ensure its safe delivery. In Uganda, the close link between water and the economy makes the case that investing in water management and services are absolutely essential for the eradication of poverty and the necessary conditions for enabling sustainable economic growth. This is because when a water supply system is constructed in an area, the people in that area are involved from the start as artisans during construction and are eventually employed as staff to operate and maintain the systems.

Uganda appreciates the role of the meteorological services in order to combat the climate change challenge. The Climate Change Unit became a department and Uganda Meteorological Department was upgraded to an authority.

A total of 50 community rain gauge stations were installed in the western and northern parts of the country with a view of involving the communities in appreciating the weather and climate services provided by Uganda National Meteorological Authority (UNMA). 

A total of 23 automatic weather stations have been installed in the Kyoga basin. Automation of the Uganda National Meteorological Authority (UNMA) rainfall observation network is in line with the current National Development Plan II (NDP II) recommendation of overhauling and automating the weather observation system in the country. The upper air sounding station in Entebbe was also reactivated.

The Venue for the Celebrations 

Every year, the celebrations rotate within the different districts in Uganda since our services are delivered to everyone. This year, the International Day of Forests, World Water Day and the World Meteorological Day celebrations were held at Serere District headquarters as an open day to highlight the role of water, forests, weather and climate in sustainable development and to increase visibility and promotion of this key sector.

As we celebrated the International Day of Forests, World Water Day and World Meteorological Day, 2016, the Ministry of Water and Environment urges all Ugandans to take note of the interlinkages between water, forests, weather and climate as these issues can achieve greater economic and social impact and hence sustainable development.

I would like to invite all of you who are here to continually participate in activities that celebrate these international days wherever you are. For God and my country. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister. Can you now deal with the other statement as well so that we can have a debate on both? We have another statement on forests; so I want her to make her statement and then we debate them.

4.28
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WATER AND ENVIRONMENT (ENVIRONMENT) (Ms Flavia Munaaba): Mr Speaker, the second statement is short. It is a brief on a matter that arose last week on the alleged destruction of Nyimbwa Forest Reserve in Luweero District. It has several attachments, which I have not been able to download but I will read the statement and then present the attachments during the next session tomorrow.

On 10 December 2013, the Minister of Water and Environment received reports from the district forest officer for Luweero District forest services that three local forest reserves were threatened with disappearance following district officials’ move to change their land use without due legal procedures. This is indicated in a letter, which is annexed to this statement as annex 1. 

The affected local forest reserves were Bombo-Nyimbwa Local Forest Reserve, which is 65 hectares and is located in Nyimbwa Subcounty; Bowa Local Forest Reserve, which is 10 hectares and is located in Makulubiita Subcounty; Kalagala (Busakwa), a local forest reserve in Kalagala Subcounty, which is 17 hectares.

Since that time, the Environment Protection Police Unit (EPPU) started investigating the matter. Later in December 2014, the Forestry Support Services Department (FSSD) secured some funding to start backstopping the Forest Adjacent Communities (FACs) of priority districts on enforcement of the National Forestry and Tree Planting Act, 2003 in order to secure the integrity of the forest reserves. 

The team for the task was comprised of the Forestry Support Services Department, National Forestry Authority (NFA), the Environment Protection Police Unit and district forest services. The following were the team members: 
1. 	Charles Byaruhanga, PFO, Ministry of Water and Environment, Forestry Support Services Department;
2. 	Issa Katwesige, forest officer, Forestry Support Services Department;
3. 	Arinaitwe Reuben, coordinator, NFA;
4. 	Robert Atuko, supervisor, NFA;
5. 	Mubokisa Robert, a law enforcement officer from NFA;
6. 	Twinomugisha John, forest liaison officer, Environment Protection Police Unit;
7. 	Okoch Simon Peter, deputy commandant, EPPU.

Objectives for the Activities:
    a) To sensitise local leaders on the policy, laws and management issues pertaining to local forest reserves;
    b) To discuss the processes of opening and demarcating boundaries of local reserves in Luweero District;
    c) To discuss the process of evicting encroachers;
    d) To discuss security for the officers carrying out the boundary opening and demarcation of forest reserves;
    e) To discuss future forest management plans for the local forest reserves in Luweero.

The first batch of districts visited were Bududa, Bukigai Local Forest Reserve; Wakiso, Gunda Local Forest Reserve; Luweero, Bombo-Nyimbwa Local Forest Reserve; and in Jinja, Busegula, Kamigo and Matete local forest reserves. Sensitisation of local government leaders in all the four districts was concluded. To date, Gunda Local Forest Reserve has been secured and all illegal land titles cancelled and forest reserve boundaries re-demarcated - also accomplished.

Activities in Luweero

The team held meetings with the Deputy CAO, Mr Christopher Oketta; the LC V chairperson, Al Hajj Abdul Nadduli; and the former RDC, Mr Henry Kamya Makumbi. The team discussed issues concerning the anomalies taking place in the local forest reserves under their stewardship. Later in the afternoon, a meeting with district officials, especially councillors, was held at Bombo Town Council hall after the inspection of Bombo-Nyimbwa Local Forest Reserve.

The team explained the whole procedure leading to the de-gazettment of any state owned forest reserve; there must be- 
    a) alternative land for swapping with the land title that is free from encumbrances;
    b) district council minute resolutions requesting for the de-gazettment;
    c) consultation reports of the local communities surrounding the local forest reserves to be de-gazetted;
    d) consultation reports of the local community surrounding the proposed area to be gazetted for swapping;
    e) approved environmental impact assessment by NEMA for both areas for swapping;
    f) the structural plan for the area de-gazetted that complies with environment laws;
    g) Forest Management Plan for the reserve to be gazetted;
    h) formal request application to the minister to allow de-gazettment;
    i) legal advice from the Solicitor-General;
    j) The minister seeking approval from Parliament;
    k) Final declaration where there is reduction of part of the forest reserve in whole or part. 

An area at least equivalent in size to the removal or reduction shall be simultaneously declared central or local forest reserve by the minister responsible for forestry.

Field Observations

During the meeting with the LC V chairman, the meeting observed that not even a single step in the procedures for forest de-gazettement was done and we reiterated our position that all structures built within the local forest reserves were illegal. 

The LC V chairman was not even aware of the National Forestry and Tree Planting Act yet there were correspondences from the district forestry officer advising the local government leadership against the move. After educating him about the laws pertaining to the management of natural forest resources, he said he had some other land that could be used to swap with Bombo-Nyimbwa Local Forest Reserve.

During the interaction with the councillors, they seemed not to have been part of the move to de-gazette the local forest reserve and were against it. Letters by the Luweero LC V chairman to the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development and the one from the Minister of Lands to H.E the President were deliberately not copied to the Ministry of Water and Environment. These letters are available as annex 2. 

The district forestry officer had written letters to the Ministry of Water and Environment and Luweero local government leadership against encroachment of Bombo-Nyimbwa Local Forest Reserve. However, he was fighting a losing battle since some of his bosses, especially the LC V chairman, were interested in changing the land use and were not even aware of the laws pertaining to the management of natural forests.

A cocktail of various encroachment activities were all congested in the local forest reserve and a pine plantation was being destroyed. The following illegal activities, in contravention of the National Forestry and Tree Planting Act, were observed: There was an abattoir being constructed partly inside the local forest reserve. There was a grain milling factory, flour mill, poultry farm, goat farm, fish ponds and Ruma factory which extracts industrial oil from used tyres. This firm was polluting the wetland and atmosphere.

The team received information that there are people behind the grabbing of forest reserves using fraudulent land titles in Bombo-Nyimbwa Local Forest Reserve. Some of the names mentioned were Mr Jamil Kizito Kikomeko, LC I; Mr Alex Male, Bufumbanswa LC I; the chairperson of Umoja War Veterans Association; the owners of Egypt-Uganda Food Security Company Limited; the owners of Aya Group of Companies; and the chairperson of Nyimbwa Subcounty Area Land Committee.

Conclusions/Recommendations

The activities by various firms in Bombo-Nyimbwa Local Forest Reserve are all regarded as illegal.
Plans are still underway to reopen the reserve’s boundaries, re-demarcate and evict encroachers with the assistance of Government and replant the area in accordance with the Forest Management Plan.  Impunity will not be tolerated. 

The minister and permanent secretary will write a circular to all local government political leaders and chief administrative officers respectively, warning them of rampant encroachment and proposals to change land use of gazetted forest reserves. There is a letter attached as annex 3.

There is need to reopen all the boundaries of the local forest reserves in Luweero. The National Forestry Authority is in the process of doing this. 

The district land boards should also be compelled to cancel all land titles issued in local forest reserves as provided for under the Land Act, sections 76 and 91- special powers of the registrar. Likewise, the Uganda Land Commission will also be appealed to, asking them to cancel those land titles and to bring to book all the surveyors involved in the scam.

Investigations in other districts will be carried out involving parcelling out of land to themselves and those affected will be brought to face the law. That is the statement.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, these are two statements but they relate to the same subject, International Forest Day and the way we are treating our forests in some parts of this country. I will start with the Member for Butambala County. Can we limit our remarks to three minutes and keep it to a few Members?

4.40
MR MUHAMMAD MUWANGA KIVUMBI (DP, Butambala County, Butambala): Mr Speaker, I thank you for this opportunity. I also thank the minister for the two statements. 

I am disheartened because she was telling us that as we commemorate this day, she will take stock and publicise the achievements of the ministry in meeting its obligations as a lead ministry in safeguarding water and environment resources. However, I have carefully looked at this statement and there is nothing to that effect and yet it is core. Therefore, she was just giving a general academic statement. 

We would have expected her to give us the true status of what is going on in as far as forest reserves are concerned. This is because there is a scandal and disaster more akin to terrorism going on in the National Forestry Authority in regard to the safety of forests in this country.

I have gone through the central region and indeed the entire country and all that you see is one forest after another being depleted– trees being cut or burnt - and given away by the National Forestry Authority. They are not even being de-gazetted as far as I am concerned. All that is going on is encroachment. They are using an exercise called tree planting and reforestation by private people conniving with local governments and National Forestry Authority and using the military to protect the giveaway of forests.

In my constituency, as I speak, four forests are under attack; they are being burnt and cut down. It is not only in my constituency; I am also aware of what is happening in Mukono in the Kyagwe area – (Interruption)

MS FLORENCE NAMAYANJA: Thank you very much, MP for Butambala, for giving way. The information I would like to give is that it does not stop at encroachment alone but land is being carved out and titles are being given out in those forest reserves. I will give an example of Masaka where it is happening. I think it is important for the minister to come out boldly and tell Ugandans what is happening to the forests.

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: Mr Speaker, I would like the minister to be very clear and bold. There is nothing in this statement to help this Parliament and there is no day to celebrate. We should actually mourn. Without forest cover, you cannot talk about sustainability of water supply and you cannot talk about any environment.

I have heard a dangerous statement of the so-called “swapping”. This is where we destroy a natural forest and swap it with a plan to plant another forest. What is happening is that people are not even planting new forests; they are actually planting gardens of trees where there were natural forests. They are planting two categories of trees that are very dangerous - eucalyptus and pine. 

Pine is dangerous because when you plant and harvest it, it goes once and for all. For eucalyptus, once you plant it, the natural forest will never come back. What is happening in this country is that it is only those two types of trees that are being planted. Our natural forests have got other types of trees that are very rich in medicinal and other purposes. All these are being cut down and burnt. 

What we are seeing is the minister coming here with a statement that is not clear. I think it should be rejected. We need a strong resolution of Parliament to protect the forests. In my constituency, - (Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, you can see there are many Members who want to contribute and we have three other statements to be received. You are the shadow minister and I should have given you the last slot but you have started and you have said enough. Let me have Mitooma.

4.45
MS JOVAH KAMATEEKA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mitooma): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for the statement and the Ministry of Water and Environment for their honest efforts in trying to provide safe water to as many Ugandans as possible. A lot still remains to be done but there are honest efforts and steady progress. 

I would also like to thank the Ministry of Water and Environment for the district celebrations that created awareness. Although the national venue was in Serere District, I know that our district also celebrated and this was a good thing.

Mr Speaker, we talk of forest cover and say it is very important. When this nation decided that it was very important to encourage Ugandans to plant coffee, the Government made sure that there were coffee seedlings.  Up to now, there is no Ugandan who wants to plant coffee and there are no seedlings. The Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industries and Fisheries, working with Uganda Coffee Development Authority (UCDA), made sure that our people got seedlings. However, with trees, we are just telling people that it is important to plant trees. Therefore, my question to the minister is, what strategy have you put in place to ensure that the many Ugandans who want to plant trees get seedlings?

Mr Speaker, I think the theme for sanitation is disastrous - “Good Sanitation: How is your leader?” This will have a negative impact of shifting responsibility and blame from me to my leader. For as long as my leader is okay with sanitation, I am okay and everything is okay. I think that it was not a well-thought-out theme and the ministry will have to do a lot to ensure that we raise more awareness in the populace - Yes, your leader has good sanitation but as an individual, you also need sanitation. That is where salvation lies; it lies in the fact that every Ugandan is aware of the need for good sanitation.

On the types of trees that we plant, as hon. Kivumbi has said, it is surprising that we encourage the planting of eucalyptus when it is the worst of the tree species because it sucks more water from the ground than any other tree on the face of this world. I do not have the scientific evidence, but eucalyptus trees use a lot of water –(Member timed out.)

4.48
MR JACK WAMANGA-WAMAI (FDC, Mbale Municipality, Mbale): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for her statement. However, when you look at her statement and you try to analyse what the ministry has been doing, you will find that the ministry has not done much at all in the three sectors. 

Look at the forests, which preserve the environment and clean the air; one of the forests – Mabira - was going until the whole world rose up. I got messages from my Scandinavian friends who were wondering how Uganda could get rid of that forest. You can imagine Uganda trying to get rid of a forest that was preserving its environment and the clean air and avoiding a hole in the Ozone layer. Look at the old vehicles the country imports and their gas emissions; I have never seen the ministry coming out to speak against them and the gases they emit in the atmosphere.

Even when the European Union gave money for this country to plant forests, the exercise was taken up by people from the Ministry of Water and Environment. They are the ones who got these forests. They have not gone out to sensitise Ugandans that there is money to help them plant forests to preserve this country.

The rainy season is about to come. There is a time I talked to the minister and told him that we could harvest water. Rainwater in this country is wasted. The minister could have gone on an exercise to tell Ugandans about rainwater harvesting and even given out tanks so that they can harvest water and use it. Look at the water wasted in Karamoja; we could use this water to irrigate our land and harvest the whole year round. However, the ministry does nothing. 

Why are people cutting down trees? This is something this Parliament and Ugandans should look at. We cut down trees because we want fuel. People have got to cook. God gave us River Nile and the British, in 1952 before they left this country, built Owen Falls Dam. God gave us free water and the British gave us the machinery and then UEB went away and now most Ugandans cannot even afford to use cookers. 

What this Government should have done was to give people free electric cookers so that we preserve our forests. The forests are being cut because people have got to cook. Therefore, these are the - (Member timed out.)

4.51
COL (RTD). FRED MWESIGYE (NRM, Nyabushozi County, Kiruhura): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to join my colleagues to thank the minister for this statement although it lacks a lot of stuff.

Mr Speaker, Article 245 of the Constitution provides for the protection and preservation of the environment. The Constitution mandates this Parliament to make laws and provide for measures to protect and preserve the environment from abuse and pollution. 

Mr Speaker, next time the minister appears before this house, I would like her to give us a thorough report on what measures she has taken to make laws that protect the environment. She should give us an accountability of the rate of destruction of our forests since Independence to date.

I agree with my comrade, hon. Kivumbi, that it is total terrorism on our forests. There is an entire ministry and Parliament but we are watching and lamenting. It is very absurd. What country are we leaving for our children in future?

Mr Speaker, we are called upon to make laws. If the laws are lacking, why can’t we make laws that protect our environment and enable us to reclaim what has been encroached upon? Why can’t we make laws that will severely punish those who have encroached on our forests? We are here lamenting yet we have the capacity to make laws and take away this land from those people who are- You all know that it is these forests that can protect River Nile and Lake Victoria. We can even make laws to make electricity cheaper so that we can minimise the cutting of trees for fuel.

Honourable minister, if you want a budget to make nursery beds at every subcounty or parish so that we can provide for tree planting every time there is tree planting, let us have it. Let us provide a budget so that every subcounty and parish can have a nursery bed. This will enable us provide seedlings for all the types of trees - medicinal, shade trees and animal fodder. All these trees are available. Why can’t we provide for these nursery beds? 

You know that when we were in Kyankwanzi, we passed a resolution that we must have a nursery bed at every parish; why haven’t you implemented it? Thank you.

4.55
MS DOROTHY NSHAIJA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kamwenge): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also stand to thank our dear honourable minister for the statement she has made. If we do not thank her, we would not have got a chance to contribute something towards our country. 

It is true that in 2007, Parliament passed a resolution here to create the Uganda National Forestry Authority (NFA). However, it is so unfortunate that most of the national forests we have are not being protected at all. In Kabarole region, for example, you may think the forest exists when you are at the roadside, but when you go deeper, people have cut all the trees, built houses and even burnt charcoal; they have done everything to destroy it. I have failed to understand the role of National Forestry Authority in this. What is shameful is the fact that the people who are leading National Forestry Authority come from that region. It is very painful. 

Secondly, we need to begin from where we are. Yes, our minister is here but in 2011 here at Lubigi, people cried for that place because it was almost being taken over by war veterans and they were chased away seriously with teargas. However, if you go there now - Can he give us a statement on what has happened to our Lubigi swamp? It is important for us to know what happened; now there is even a taxi park in that place. It is very shameful. If we cannot even protect these places when our Cabinet ministers and National Forestry Authority are within Kampala, how are we going to protect those in Karamoja and south-western Uganda? I think we should begin with where we are staying in Kampala before we go upcountry. 

It is true that we have also been advocating for tree planting. However, I would like to add my voice to that of hon. Fred Mwesigye and say that we are not giving out seedlings. We are also not advising our people on where and what type of trees they are supposed to plant. I was an advocate for planting pine trees for purposes of the carbon cycle, but that is too dangerous. Because people know that pine trees are very expensive, they have now reached the extent of planting the pine trees in banana and coffee plantations, which is very unfortunate. Therefore, we need to advise our people. We have district forestry officers who are seated in offices enjoying money and they do not go out to advise our people. 

We have valleys that have high water tables. However, in all those valleys, people have planted eucalyptus trees. This means we are lowering our water table. This affects the boreholes that we construct for the people. We usually say that our catchment area for water coverage is at this level but when we go down, all those boreholes that have been drilled no longer function because the water table has lowered.

Therefore, I request our honourable minister and the department concerned with water, environment and  forests to combine efforts to make sure we rescue our country from – (Member timed out.) 

4.59
MS SANTA ALUM (UPC, Woman Representative, Oyam): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. I receive this statement by the honourable minister with a lot of pain. 

First of all, we are a signatory to the UN meetings which are always held in many places. We are a signatory to the Paris Agreement, which is about climate change. Our leaders normally go to these meetings and append their signatures but when they come back, they fail to draw up strategies and activities to implement what they have signed. 

When the minister read this document to us, I was trying to look at the activities and strategies that the ministry has put forward to avert the issue of climate change. However, as I continued reading it, I did not see any deliberate effort made by this ministry to avert the effect of climate change. When you look at all the Government departments, you do not see any activity being done towards averting the effect of climate change and yet this is real. It is a real threat to us and even to the future generation. 

I know that we have a responsibility to do this for the future generation. I would like, therefore, to say that we should not be seen to be seated here not making decisions and yet the indecisiveness we exhibit today has a very big impact on the future generation. We inherited a very good climate and forests, but we are not doing anything to preserve them for the future generations. 

I would like to advise the minister; if we want to move forward, let us involve the lower local governments in this. In your second submission, you said that even the LC V was not aware. Honourable minister, which stakeholders are you talking about in terms of awareness? Who are the biggest stakeholders in this game? I think there should be a deliberate effort for you to reach the local people in tree planting because people are cutting down trees in a bid to look for energy as a source of – (Member timed out.)      

5.02
MR LATIF SSEBAGALA (DP, Kawempe Division North, Kampala): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Let us not bury our heads in the sand. However much we talk about or appeal to our people not to destroy forests and we do not put in place mechanisms to stop them from doing so- We must ask ourselves why we have that kind of pressure on our forests. I believe that one of the reasons is that the people are looking for what they can use for cooking. 

Mr Speaker, Kawempe North is a gateway to many lorries ferrying charcoal, especially from Bombo Road. If you count the number of vehicles doing this on a daily basis, during day and night, you may really wonder whether we still have any forests along that road. Unless we come up to ensure that the policy on rural electrification is implemented to the fullest and also the power tariffs - 95 per cent of the people living in Kampala use charcoal as their source of energy – (Interjections) – It is 95 per cent; in fact, it may even be 99 per cent. Even Members of Parliament who are here cannot afford to use electricity - Yaka or Umeme - to prepare both lunch and supper. The alternative is charcoal. Where does it come from? It comes from our forests and trees.

Mr Speaker, I believe that before we attack the National Forestry Authority and the ministry, let us remember that as Members of Parliament here we said “no” to Umeme but up to now, it still goes on with business. As long as Umeme continues with business, many people will not afford to use alternatives besides charcoal. (Interruption)

MR OLANYA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank my colleague for giving way. Most of those trucks of charcoal that my brother is talking about come from northern Uganda. As I talk, most trees are being destroyed. You will find officials from National Forestry Authority with their own companies and they are the ones supporting and encouraging charcoal burning. Whenever the district leaders rise up and take cases to the National Forestry Authority, they simply sit on those cases. 

The case of cutting trees for charcoal is really very serious and rampant. That is why we – (Interruption)

MR SSEBAGALA: Thank you very much for that information. Unless we come out boldly, we will continue exerting pressure on our forests. It is good we have some Members of Parliament who are tree growers like hon. Ruth Nankabirwa. The question is: what type of trees are they growing? That is food for thought. (Laughter)

Lastly, Mr Speaker – (Member timed out.)

5.08
MS HUDA OLERU (NRM, Woman Representative, Yumbe): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also would like to appreciate the minister for bringing this statement to the House. I just have some few comments to make. 

One, I would like to know from the minister what linkage they have with the Ministry of Education and Sports. I am asking this question because I know that the Ministry of Water and Environment is trying to provide safe water for our people but we have a challenge in so many primary schools. We have our children in schools but we have no boreholes to provide safe water for them. You see children leaving the premises of the school, going to look for safe water, which is very risky for them. Therefore, I would like to know if there is any linkage between the Ministry of Water and Environment and the Ministry of Education and Sports in providing safe water for our children. 

The other concern I would have loved to see in the minister’s statement is either intensive or even some little information about the meteorological department of this country. We have a very big challenge due to climate change. People do not know when the planting season starts. When people begin to prepare, thinking it is time for planting, there is a prolonged dry spell. The rains come at a time when they are not expecting them and are not ready to plant. People are not getting any information to guide them. People plant but the seedlings dry or are washed away by floods. This is an indicator that the meteorological department is doing nothing.

I thought we would use some of these days to give information and educate our people, so that they begin to adjust to change. Whether we want it or not, change is now inevitable given these issues with climate change. However, I did not see anything to that effect in the minister’s statement.

Let me say something about National Forestry Authority. I thought, honourable minister, this is one of the authorities under your department or ministry, which you are supposed to supervise and monitor. I would like to tell you about Kei Forest Reserve in West Nile. Honourable minister, the local people have become victims of that forest. When they make a mistake of going to the forest, they are arrested, tortured and taken to court. However, every day you see trucks leaving that forest reserve loaded with timber. When you follow that up, you realise it is your staff at National Forestry Authority doing this. Are they there to get all the benefits from the forests for themselves or the forests are there to be reserved for the whole community? 

It was a very big challenge that we faced when we were looking for votes. The people of Yumbe – (Member timed out.)

5.10
MR GILBERT OLANYA (Independent, Kilak County, Amuru):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for presenting a very good statement. 

The minister clearly mentioned that forests and trees are key to the planet, that they supply fresh water and air. Honourable minister, just like I gave information to my colleague, I would like to find out about the intervention your ministry is coming up with as far as controlling the rampant tree cutting is concerned. I gave the example of my district, Amuru, but even in Nwoya and Gulu districts, as I speak there is rampant cutting down of trees for charcoal. The lorries that my brother was talking about all come from Amuru District.

If this continues the way it is, I think that in 10 to 15 years to come, we shall have a desert. Unfortunately, our district borders South Sudan and right now Amuru, Kitgum and Gulu are becoming extremely hot. We have never experienced this before – (Interruption)

MR KIWANDA: I would like to give some information to my brother. When I went home, I tried to turn on my tap to get cold water but it took over 10 minutes to have cold water flow from my tap. At that rate, we are in for a disaster.

Secondly, there is the issue of burning bushes. We can talk about tree planting but what about the law about bush burning. All the bushes around have been burnt. When you go the west, north, central and Karamoja regions, bush burning is at its highest. At that rate, we cannot have trees. We, therefore, would like to get some information about that as well. 

MR OLANYA: Thank you, my colleague. Honourable minister, let your ministry come out with alternatives to replace charcoal. If not, I really feel our country is going to be plunged into a total mess, given the level and rate at which trees are being felled.

Let the ministry also come out with ways of controlling the National Forestry Authority officials. (Member timed out.)

MS MUTONYI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for presenting the statement. I have risen on a point of clarification. 

Can the minister tell us whether the distribution of seedlings by NFA is for all MPs or it was just for a few of us? This is because when I had just come here in 2014, I was told by some MPs that I could apply to NFA for seeds. I applied and they gave me some seeds and equipment but when I went back for the ploythene bags, I was told that they had stopped issuing seeds and equipment and that I had to apply through an NGO. 

However, when I did that, the NGO also referred me to the district. Now, if everything goes to the district – I would like to inform the minister, that the forest officers at the districts get these seeds but do not distribute them to the people, instead they sell them.

Therefore, Madam Speaker – (Laughter) – sorry, Mr Speaker, I would also like to get another clarification from the Minister. For instance, if I go to National Forest Authority (NFA) now, will I be able to get the seeds and equipment to plant more trees and distribute the seedlings to the “Wana inchi”?

5.14
MR WILBERFORCE YAGUMA (NRM, Kashari County, Mbarara): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to congratulate the minister for celebrating the International Day of Forests, World Water Day and the World Meteorological Day. However, my expectation for these important days is that – this is the day the minister should be making accountability about their performance. 

Mr Speaker, I would like to talk about the involvement of local governments in environmental issues and protecting wetlands. Most of the money we appropriate remains with the ministry. When you look at the budget that is sent to the districts for environmental related issues, you just wonder. 
Therefore, I would like the minister to tell us how the ministry is involving local governments in the work of protecting the environment because this work is so huge that the central government cannot manage it alone.

 Mr Speaker, this is not actually a statement. It is just information. It was not well prepared with the seriousness it deserves to - (Member timed out.)

5.16
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Phillip Wafula Oguttu): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Honourable minister, thank you very much for the two reports although they lack a lot.

Mr Speaker, we know the issues we are raising to the minister and the minister also knows them. We have many challenges of environment and we know them. How I wish in this country, we worked more than we talked. We always know the disease, diagnose it properly but we never find the medicine for it. That is the biggest problem for Uganda, and particularly over the last 30 years – because we are celebrating a day but what is it for? What are we celebrating?
When you celebrate, you celebrate good things. We should have spent it thinking and reflecting on what we have not done and thanking ourselves for what we have done. Where is the minister’s set targets on water and forests? 
On such a day, the minister is supposed to tell us what we have achieved for example, how many trees have we planted and how many have we destroyed, by acreage, hectares or whatever?  That is when we would know we are going somewhere.

Mr Speaker, when I was young, I would see forest everywhere around our home. Whenever I travelled for about 10 kilometers, I would cross rivers and streams and now, they are no longer there. The issue of environment and global warming is real. It is not about just talking. Government should have a plan, which is presentable, approved, funded and measurable not just talking about them. That does not make sense.

The peasants and especially those in Busoga have known that the trees are very precious and so they would like to plant trees but they have no seedlings. You cannot go to someone’s land and cut a single tree or even the roots. The peasants now preserve the roots because they sell them; they know that it is fuel.

The peasants of Busoga are ready to plant trees. So, give them the seedlings. We can even make by- laws that every land will be demarcated by trees and the peasants will plant those trees. 
Let us plant trees along the roads. All these things can be done. Kankungulu in Mbale and Teso, many years ago planted many mangoes. I remember, when I went to Teso College for high school, I passed through forests of mango trees and during that time, mangoes in Teso were not bought because they were free - (Interruption)

MR ALEX BYARUGABA: Thank you, Mr Speaker and thank you, hon. Wafula. The information I would like to give is that this thing is doable. If I can recollect, some time back, we had proposed that we as a country should have a national tree planting day but it was never implemented. However, I would like to suggest that if it is acceptable, that at every national celebrations, tree planting is done. That can make a day for you as a minister. I honestly think this thing is doable. Four million people die every year not because of malaria but because of the use of dirty energy - fire wood, yet we continue to destroy firewood. I think let us encourage people to plant more trees.

MR WAFULA-OGUTTU: Thank you very much, hon. Byarugaba – (Interruption) 

MR KIWANDA: I would like to give more information about tree planting. I grew up planting trees yet we had no seedlings. We were using the cuttings of the Mutuba tree. The issue now about planting trees, hon. Minister, is about moblising the community. We should bring back the spirit of planting trees because if you talk about seedlings – okay, you might think that we do not have seedlings in every village but what policy is in place to re-organise and re-mobilise the populace to plant trees? Thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and the honourable Leader of the Opposition. The information I would like to give you is that even the Mvule trees that Kakungulu planted in Mbale have been cut down by the LC I officials who have been serving for years because one can never hear of an election of LC I officials. They have cut and sold them off.

MR WAFULA-OGUTTU: Thank you very much. You can see an illiterate man like Kakungulu planted Mvule and mango trees, which were destroyed yet we have not replanted them. We should talk less and do more.

Concerning the reason why we cut trees - we shall continue to cut trees as long as we do not find solutions to charcoal usage, paraffin and the tadooba lamps. We need to find a solution and Government should be planning for such things.

Hon. Wamai talked about cookers. In this House, most of us are a problem to the environment; we also do not use cookers because we cannot afford them. 
We should, as a country and as Government, be planning. Parliament does not plan; we just approve. 

I have taken a lot of interest in the issue of water, especially in the Busoga area. Busoga is an island that is surrounded by water from three lakes and two big rivers. This is fresh water but Busoga is water stressed. It can only be poor planning that such a situation should happen.

Our school going children are like camels. They stay the whole day without water when it is there. Honourable minister, it is all about planning. We can have solar water pump these days. A solar pump can serve several areas. It is easy and it costs little money; it is just about planning.  Thank you, very much.

5.30
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WATER AND ENVIRONMENT (ENVIRONMENT) (Ms Flavia Munaaba): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to appreciate all the Members who have contributed to this debate.


The statement on the World Day of the Forests, Water and Meteorology was simply to inform you that the celebrations took place. The details on the achievements, for those who attended the function, were given out during the celebrations. There was also information about the activities that we have been carrying out and how far we have gone and the responsibility of every one of us to ensure that we keep - (Interruption)

MS OSEGGE: Mr Speaker, we are here debating not for our own purposes but for the purpose and good intent of the whole of Uganda as a nation. 

When the minister says those who attended the function got the information - I do not know whether she means that it is only Members of Parliament who should be having this information or the whole of Uganda. We are talking about a looming environmental disaster to which we should all pay attention as Ugandans. 

Is the minister, therefore, in order to insinuate that it is only Members of Parliament who should have this information when we need all Ugandans to be responsible to take the responsibility of informing Ugandans of what they are supposed to do?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, this is a statement on the International Day of Forests, World Water Day and World Meteorology celebrations. It was about that day and the minister is saying that the details were said at the venue of the celebrations.  But that was just her opening statement. We do not know what she is going to say next. (Laughter)

MS MUNAABA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Actually, what I was going to say next is that we aired a lot of information via the media in the week running up to these celebrations. 

However, from the discussion today, the ministry is going to come up with a statement detailing what has been done, what plans are in place and what has been achieved. We shall especially communicate on what we have on readiness preparedness; community tree planting; the project - we shall be able to bring all this to you and – (Interruption)

MS CECILIA OGWAL: Mr Speaker, the honourable minister in-charge of this sector is supposed to be making a substantive statement on the subject we are discussing right now. But she is still giving us a promise that she is going to come with details on what has been done and what the ministry plans to do. 

Mr Speaker, this honourable minister and the senior minister at that, every year attends international conferences on climate change. And Uganda is supposed to be making substantive contribution towards that discussion. However, Members of Parliament have never been informed about what was achieved in the Conference of the Parties (COP 15), COP 17, COP 19, COP 20 and COP 21. Nobody knows and even now - Mr Speaker, even as I talk about COP, some people think I am talking about police. (Laughter)

I would like clarification. She wants to come to Parliament to give this update but as Members of Parliament, we want to be educated on how Uganda is prepared for adaptation and all these other activities which would make us circumvent the disaster arising from climate change.

Can the minister then be holistic in briefing Parliament not only about forestry - and even the senior minister, hon. Prof. Ephraim Kamuntu, who led the delegation has been quietly sitting in this House. I was a member of that delegation and I contributed greatly to that debate but he is hiding; he does not even want to sit at the Frontbench. (Laughter) We really need that clarification.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we seem to have a problem with the housing of this particular debate. The housing of this debate is on a statement on the day of forests, water and world meteorology. When you look at the statement, you realise it gives the background, the theme for the celebration, the venue and why the days are commemorated.

It is a very restricted statement but what the debate is showing is that we now need something deeper than an international day commemoration thing. 

This is how we can proceed. We can either proceed by making this matter something to be examined by a committee and we bring a comprehensive report or we bring a substantive motion, which will be debated and the resolutions passed on how we proceed. But the housing of this one is neither here nor there because the statement on the international day of meteorology, water, forests is just for information. That is what I am seeking to guide so that we can move properly, and as a Parliament, take a decision in a structured way that can help this country move forward on these issues.

5.34
THE MINISTER OF WATER AND ENVIRONMENT (Prof. Ephraim Kamuntu): Mr Speaker, thank you very much for this opportunity. I begin with a clarification. When I came into the House, the Frontbench was full. That is why I sat there. It is not because I was hiding. Mr Speaker - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It is very difficult to hide in the House.
(Laughter)

PROF. KAMUNTU: There were two things I picked as I listened. Clearly the sentiments of the Members are shared. I can share with Members the centrality of water for our lives.

The intrinsic linkage between water, forestry and environment is also central to our transformation. This statement was simply to inform Members that these days are celebrated and the purpose for the celebration, in a way, is achieved by providing a platform to increase awareness about the value of these assets we have. And actually, the debate in this House shows that indeed it has achieved its purpose because you have subjected this matter to discussion, and for us who are mandated to respond were listening. 
All I would like to add is that we have ministerial policy statements that are coming. I can assure you that most of these issues are covered in the explanation – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yours has not yet come to the House, honourable minister? 

PROF. KAMUNTU: Well, we will be laying it at the Table tomorrow. However, clearly, I am very pleased with the concerns expressed by the Members on this matter. It underscores the importance we attach to the very foundation of our economic development on these three interrelated issues - water, environment and weather. I was listening and weather forecasts to millions of people to make the decision to plant are very central.

Secondly, forestry central reserves – you only need to appreciate that forestry managed by the National Forestry Authority is only 17 per cent of the total forest coverage. The rest of it is in the hands of local governments and individuals. Sometimes when you see trees being cut, you blame it on National Forestry Authority but it concerns all of us. 

Consequently – (Interruption)

MR WAFULA-OGUTTU: Mr Speaker, the honourable minister is a minister for Uganda. The policies we draw here are drawn for Uganda. If you separate central government from local government, then there is something wrong. Is the minister in order to say that the planning for forests in local governments is not under the central government in anyway?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Leader of the opposition, what I heard the minister say was that the central reserve forests are under the management of the National Forestry Authority.  The other forests are not. So, we might be assigning responsibility to National Forestry Authority, which by law is not their responsibility. That is what the minister said.

However, the mandate of the National Forestry Authority is not the mandate of Government. There is a difference.

PROF. KAMUNTU: Mr Speaker, I would like to thank you. Cicero never spoke better. That what I really intended - I only wanted to show Members that the responsibilities and ownership and consequently, who cuts what and when, must be understood in the context that National Forestry Authority only controls 17 per cent. Eighteen per cent is national parks; 0.5 per cent is for the Uganda Wildlife Authority and 70 per cent is managed by local governments and private individuals. Now – (Interjections) – this is the point – (Interjections) - I take responsibility as a minister of the whole country although I take responsibility, this categorisation is very important. That is what I am saying. 

I am also mentioning that – (Interruption)

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Mr Speaker, Uganda is a member of the United Nations and of the global village. When these days are passed at the United Nations to be celebrated by countries, the United Nations expects you as a country and as a minister to follow through and carryout these activities. Are you selective because I understand that sometimes you come up with statements that, “Nobody should come and direct us?” However, you are a member of an international community and you must follow international laws and what the United Nations says.

Therefore, when the United Nations tells you to obey days and must plant trees and preserve the environment, you must do these things. Saying that 80 per cent falls under local governments and, therefore, you do not take responsibility is not correct.

PROF. KAMUNTU: Who said I do not take responsibility? I did not say that.

MR JAMES BABA: Mr Speaker, who says the United Nations, gives instructions? The United Nations is you and I. The United Nations is Uganda, Kenya, Tanzania, Miami and everybody. The United Nations cannot give instructions to anybody; it is us to give instructions to the United Nations. We sign agreements for us to comply not the United Nations. Please do not mislead the House. The UN is us. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is it now a debate between Ambassadors? 

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Uganda signs and you must comply. So, if you are at the United Nations and you sign an agreement, you must comply with international laws; we signed international regulations. Why are you at the United Nations? You are there and you must comply with what the United Nations says. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think we need another debate from the diplomats in another forum. (Laughter) 

PROF. KAMUNTU: Mr Speaker, these are former Ambassadors and their diplomatic fortification can even be shown on this House. However, what is true is that under the laws of Uganda - the Tree Planting Act and the Act establishing National Forestry Authority are also in place. The Acts define the functions of this body. 

Similarly, all these others are regulated under the general framework of the national mandate of the ministry, which separates responsibilities. This is the point I am mentioning.

However, to answer the issues raised, Mr Speaker, is to share information with Members that we will, as a ministry, respond to the concerns raised in a more substantive form. Part of these concerns are going to be contained in the ministerial policy statement forthcoming.  I can also assure you that we will not shy away from the responsibility because what choice do we have? The Constitution here - I can read it from the principles of National Objective  and State Policy. The National Objective XIII reads: “The State shall protect important natural resources, including land, water, wetlands, minerals, oil, fauna and flora on behalf of the people of Uganda.”

We must also do this for us and the future generations. This is a command and we will do everything to fulfil the requirements of the Constitution.

5.44
MR MUHAMMAD MUWANGA KIVUMBI (DP, Butambala County, Butambala): Motion, Mr Speaker. In accordance with rule 50 (1) (k), I beg to move a motion without notice. Because of the importance of the matter at hand, we cannot just leave it on a mere commitment of Government, for a time unlimited, that it will be in the ministerial statement. That is too general to Parliament, given the –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Would you like to propose the motion before you speak to it if it is accepted?

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: Okay. Mr Speaker, I would like to propose a motion that Parliament resolves that a moratorium be put on any further licence issuing by the National Forestry Authority (NFA) – (Interjections) - you know we have forest reserves where the National Forestry Authority is giving licences to private tree planters who have been using that excuse to go out their way and destroy our forests.
First, that for the meantime, a moratorium be placed on NFA to stop forthwith any further issuing of those licenses until proper rules and procedures are laid before this Parliament.

Secondly, the Minister of Water and Environment presents a status report of all forest reserves in this country. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Wouldn’t it have been the other way round? 

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: It can be amended.

Third, a law against bush burning is presented to this Parliament. Fourth, there should be a National Tree Planting Day. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, that is the motion; is it seconded? Who is rising to second the motion? (Members rose_) Members for Mityana North, Busongora North and Nyabushozi have seconded the motion. Would you like to speak to your motion?

MR MUWANGA: I will be very brief and precise. Mr Speaker, I think from the earlier debate we have had in this Parliament, we all noted that this issue of forest protection is now a question of emergency in this country. Under our watch, thousands of hectares of forest reserves are being destroyed every single day and this is affecting the environment.

Many swamps and wetlands are being given away, especially in the central and all parts of Uganda to forest and flower growers. I witnessed it on Entebbe Road where a large chunk of a swamp is being given away in Wakiso.

In addition, we note that the National Forest Authority (NFA) has not adequately done its duty. It was well equipped with military to do the protection but instead all we see is that more forests are being destroyed every day.

I cannot further explain but to only urge Parliament to adopt this motion.

MR BYABAGAMBI: Mr Speaker, prior to his motion; you had guided the House that we can proceed in two ways, either by a comprehensive motion that the minister should – (Interjections) - by bringing a motion to be debated and then resolutions be done; that was one way of how to proceed.

The second one was, I cannot recall correctly –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I said it can go to the committee or a substantive motion is brought and a proper debate is done and a decision taken that way. 

MR BYABAGAMBI: I do not know whether it is procedurally right to continue with a motion when the Speaker has guided on how to move, which would be a more organised and civilised way of conducting the debate?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the matter we are debating is a very serious matter and we need to take it seriously. Like I said, the housing under which this came would not be the proper housing for us to take substantive decisions on this. 

However, as a way of concluding the debate, the rules allow for motions that can lead the House to take a decision even when the matter did not require a decision. (Applause)

I would like to seek the indulgence of the Members that even by the structure of the motion and prayers might need to be debated properly. We might not have sufficient time to debate that motion and come to a fairly argued position on how we adopt this.

I propose that the Member accepts to give this as notice and then prepare a substantive motion on the issue of forestry in the country. He can either bring it tomorrow or any other day and then, it would be put on the Order Paper and debated substantially and a fair decision taken.

Now, we might not be able to have a debate on it. That is what I suggest to the Member, if that could help. Then we would have a proper restructured debate on this matter and take a decision on it.

PROF. KAMUNTU: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to say, in addition to your guidance, that at the moment, there is an executive ban on forestry licensing by NFA to any private individuals.

Secondly, there is also Tree Planting Day within the calendar of the ministry. It is only that the motion was given without notice but if there was notice, I would bring all this information to supply to the Members because I know it is there.

Your guidance is not improper because it would also give us a chance –(Interjections)- we are not shying away from taking responsibility. It would give us a chance to give full information to the Members so that these concerns you have raised, which are shared; are not a blame game.

The questions of water, forestry and environment are so central to our survival as individual beings and the economic development of this country.

Indeed, as hon. Cecilia Ogwal has mentioned, we have information on Conference of Parties (COP) 19, 20, 21 and this information has been given to the press but it had also been supplied to the members of this House.

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. There is no doubt that the debate so far has underlined the importance of the subject matter under debate. 

Given that we are entering a season when different committees will discuss policy statements of ministries and come to Parliament with suggestions and recommendations, your guidance is the most appropriate; with what is now recorded in our Hansard, the minister and committee while discussing the subject will delve deeper. The debates that will follow the presentation of the policy statement will bring out the importance as the debate has shown.

Mr Speaker, I would prefer that the honourable member, having shown this interest and given notice to us, he prepares to contribute when the policy statements are being discussed. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We need harmony in the way we are going to proceed with this because there is nobody opposing this. However, what I was saying is that we do it in a smart way. We could have a properly drafted and presented motion and debate it fairly with resolutions proposed properly.

We would then debate here on whether to reduce, expand, amend, adjust and we adopt it as a resolution of this House.

Therefore, I was asking the honourable member for Butambala whether the House should take this as notice of his intention to move a substantive motion, in which case, we will either schedule it for tomorrow or any day of his convenience and we debate it properly. That is what I propose – so that the minister has the time to respond and everybody has time to debate. All the documents that are there can be brought out and the House knows what is there and then, we proceed from there.

MS CECILIA OGWAL: Mr Speaker, we from this side sincerely appreciate your guidance and definitely would like to give notice considering the general interest in this particular debate. We give notice for moving a substantive motion tomorrow because you have also noticed that we have been discussing some of these touching issues and the minister stands here to say: “Actually there is a ban on giving licences to private tree planters,” and yet, we have all been lamenting about the same issue. Nobody in this Parliament has been officially informed about that. We have not been informed about the national day of tree planting – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are you now debating – 

MS CECILIA OGWAL: No, I am just trying to justify the fact that there is still need for moving a substantive motion. I, therefore, stand here to confirm that notice is hereby given for moving a substantive motion on this subject to give us time to have an in-depth discussion before we take an appropriate action, which can lead to implementation of some of the decisions that will be taken.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Should the House take it that the Opposition Chief Whip now speaks for the Member of Butambala County?

MS OGWAL: When the boss speaks, the rest keep quiet. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay. I would like a confirmation from the Member who raised this matter that the boss has spoken and so he concurs with that position so that we move forward.

MR MUWANGA-KIVUMBI: Mr Speaker, I think we are in total agreement and tomorrow, we will come here and move a substantive motion, which will be thoroughly debated.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No. Just say that you confirm that notice has been given and then, it will be scheduled – most probably tomorrow – then we can have a debate tomorrow afternoon. That is okay.

MR MUWANGA-KIVUMBI: I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: And that means we do all the preparation for this debate and then, we come to conclude it in a short time. Is that okay? Thank you, honourable members. Next item.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I had intended to rise at 6 o’clock but there is a statement that has been pending about the issues of Kasese – the police actions leading to the deaths in Kasese, which I thought the minister could present. And also, there is another statement on the delayed gazettement from the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs. And then, I also have policy statements that should be laid as we adopted this procedure of laying these documents - 

MS CECILIA OGWAL: Mr Speaker, I should have raised this earlier but this was brought to the notice of the House much earlier on – concerning the legal requirement for the laying of policy statements. Mr Speaker, if you would allow me to highlight some of the key sections of the law that should guide us in taking a decision.

First of all, section 13(13) of the Public Finance Management Act, 2015, specifically requires that the ministerial policy statement be laid by 15th of March – that is mandatory; it is legal. But the same Act goes further in section 78(1) to say: “Where any institution or department of Government, which receives public money does not meet the requirement of this Act or contravenes this Act, Parliament may request the minister responsible for the institution or department to make a report to Parliament with an explanation on the matter.”

Mr Speaker, it goes further to say in section 79(1)(c) and (e), “A person or accounting officer who fails to adhere to the provision of the Public Finance Management Act, 2015 without lawful authority commits an offence.”

Mr Speaker, ministerial policy statements for Ministry of Public Service, Ministry of Defence, Ministry of Internal Affairs, Ministry of Works and Transport and now, Ministry of Water and Environment were actually submitted on the 16th of March, which was outside the 15th of March deadline and we have now been informed that the one for Ministry of Water and Environment will be submitted tomorrow, hopefully. 

Mr Speaker, my concern – which should be the concern of the institution of Parliament – is to know whether we can continue to receive the policy statements without the requisite explanation, letter or report, as it is required by law, tabled to this Parliament.

The point of procedure is this: Should Parliament, therefore, consider ministerial policy statements submitted after the 15th of March deadline without a specific report from the responsible ministers as required by the Public Finance Management Act, 2015. I beg to raise this matter of procedure so that we do not proceed with matters, which are premised on illegality. I am just raising this so that we move fully aware of the legal requirements as I have stated.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, on this same issue of the ministerial policy statements? Honourable members, the provision and timelines given for laying of ministerial policy statements do not start with this law, which we passed last year – the Public Finance Management Act, 2015. It was even there in the Budget Act. But we have been moving like this.

You will recall that in the past, ministerial policy statements were just put in the pigeonholes without a date. I then ordered that in order for this House to know and to have a clear record of when a particular ministry has tabled a statement to the House, it should be laid at the Table because we had no way of tracking when a ministerial policy statement was brought; some were brought earlier while others were brought way beyond the time and we had no way of telling. But that was the practice, which we changed.

The timeline now provided in the new law is not a new timeline because it was there before – and it has always been handled the way it has – and I had already called upon the Executive that when they propose these laws and we approve them, we expect them to play by the rules they have set for themselves. And the rules are made before the game – not during the game or after the game. The rules that you set for yourselves state that by 15th of March, ministerial policy statements will be in Parliament. And these were proposed by the Executive – those particular clauses were not amended by Parliament. Now you are the ones who are the chief architects of those rules’ violation; it does not augur well. And the honourable minister comes here and admits that he is bringing his tomorrow, which will be the 24th of March.  Maybe tomorrow, on the 24th – (Laughter) - and I have seen on the Order Paper those are supposed to be laid today on the 23rd of March, which is way beyond the deadline. I think let us – in order that we support this House and considering that this Parliament is a transition Parliament, this particular sitting is a transition sitting of this House. We have to approve this budget, if possible before this House is prorogued, reason being that the new Parliament may not be able to handle this budget for this financial year properly. 

We actually needed to bring forward those time lines by a clear two weeks or even 21 days so that we can finish. Instead of finishing on the 31st, we could probably finish and pass the budget by 14 May. If we leave it to the new Parliament, there may be challenges.   

Cooperation from the ministers, as the Opposition Chief Whip has stated – you need to be clear to follow the procedures. The ministerial policy statements that are there will be received today but we expect them to be accompanied by explanation as to why they came late.

Furthermore, I have asked this before; does an alternative policy statement mean that you first study the policy statement of the minister and then give your own alternative? Or does this mean that as a Government in waiting, you also prepare your own policy statements and file them at the same time? That is the debate that I threw to the House but I was not able to get a good answer.

What it now looks like is that it is a criticism. The alternative policy statement is a critique of the ministerial policy statement, which would not be right in my opinion. As a waiting Government, they should be able to prepare all these things and present. The policy statements are then tabled at the same time and then they go to the committee where they are discussed. But we have not reached there, Leader of the Opposition. This debate is still on-going. I can see you –

When we reach to that point, it will be very appropriate. We are not yet there and so at the moment, you give benefit to the Opposition when you bring these policy statements early so that they can respond to them and then also have these matters go to the committees. These timelines are important so that we can have orderly transaction of business.

I do not know what the Leader of Government Business would like to say about this. These are violations and we would start with an apology that we will very well receive.

6.08
THE MINISTER, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (GENERAL DUTIES) Prof. Tarsis Kabwegyere): I thank you, Mr Speaker. If this can help; the permanent secretaries were instructed to deliver soft copies to the Clerk to Parliament because of the absence of most ministers during this period before the 15th. I think I am properly informed that the soft copies were actually delivered to the Clerk. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We will need to cross check that.

MR OKUPA: Last week, when the other ministries started laying policy statements here and because I belong to the Committee on Physical Infrastructure, I took interest. I also wanted the policy statement for the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and some other ministries in which I had interest. 
However, the only soft copy that I found was for the Ministry of Works and Transport. So, it is not true that all soft copies were submitted.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: My point is that if you started with an apology, it would soften the hearts of the Members and then we see how to proceed because there are lapses that we do not want to put on the record.

6.10
THE MINISTER OF WORKS AND TRANSPORT (Mr John Byabagambi): Mr Speaker, it is true that the permanent secretaries were directed to bring the soft copies but at the same time, we had just come back from that hectic exercise and immediately thereafter, some of us went to Kyankwanzi and when we returned, we went into the retreat. 

In light of that, I do apologise to the House for having delayed to lay the policy statement at the Table but the information was already with Parliament. I do apologise and wish to say that it was due to unavoidable circumstances that we all went through and also transiting. In case I remain there, I will never do it again. I will be doing it on time. (Laughter)

MR NZOGHU: I thank you, Mr Speaker. When you were giving guidance on how we can proceed, you asked the Leader of Government Business to come and give Government’s position concerning the submission of ministerial policy statements in either soft or hard copy. The Leader of Government Business, Prof. Kabwegyere said all permanent secretaries had submitted soft copies to the Clerk to Parliament. It would be unfair for that statement to just be swept under the carpet and therefore, putting the position and integrity of the Clerk in question.

I would like to ask if it would not be procedurally right for two things; one, that the Leader of Government Business withdraws his statement and two, apologises to this Parliament that this statement was baseless. I thank you, Mr Speaker. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Honourable members, we did not want to go this way and that is why I had said we start with an apology and then we can move forward.

Every document that has been brought to the attention of the Clerk is posted on the intranet, especially if it is for all Members of Parliament to view. This is why I did not want the Prime Minister to take that line because it was not a proper line to take.

What this House deserves is a clear apology about the lapses in the procedure like the attempt that has been made by the Minister for Works and Transport. 

I think we should take it in that spirit – that there have been some difficulties and we admit the documents that have been laid and then we give the extension of time to the Opposition within which to submit so that we can take everybody’s opinion and all other aspects to the committees and we can have this debate properly. This is a transition Parliament and there are challenges.  

MS AKOL: I thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to say this for the record that on the 16th, I laid the statements for the Ministry of Internal Affairs and Ministry of Works and Transport.

I recall on that day, hon. Cecilia Ogwal put us to task as to the provisions of the law and we heeded to those provisions because we actually informed the House the reasons we did not lay the statement on Tuesday, the deadline.

I would like to say this again; on that Tuesday, our statements were actually ready and I can testify for myself and for the Minister of Works and Transport. Since we had to attend the burial of the late Chris Kassami in Fort Portal on that Tuesday, it was not possible for us to be here before the deadline.

I can also confirm that before I laid that statement here, I had confirmed with my PS that a soft copy had already been relayed to the Clerk to Parliament. A statement has been made here that we contravened the provisions of the law. I want to confirm to the House that we did not contravene the law because we took cognisance of the need to give a report and we did it, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, that is for Ministry of Internal Affairs. (Laughter) (Members rose_) Please, we do not want to extend this debate, Members. Let us take this in spirit and accept the policy statements that have not yet come and handle them. It is not necessary for us to extend this debate really. Let us take the statements as they come but the same amount of time will be allocated to the Opposition so that - 

6.16
THE OPPOSITION CHIEF WHIP (Ms Cecilia Ogwal): For the purpose of Hansard, we did allow the Minister of Internal Affairs to lay the papers although we were aware of the requirement of the law. However, we had anticipated that subsequent submissions would be followed by the reports and we thought that the minister should have acknowledged and appreciated the fact that we were very accommodative. I was very accommodative; we agreed but at the same time, we expected the minister and other ministers to bring the required report. 
This is not the Opposition putting this requirement on you; it is our law and we are trying to help you to abide by the law. We are not forcing them to do the unusual, so, we expect them to comply.

Mr Speaker, I humbly want to inform this House that anybody right now can check with the Clerk, there are no soft copies of some of the ministerial statements up to now. You can check with the Clerk to confirm that. I think it is wrong for the purpose of Hansard to say that all the ministerial reports were submitted to the Clerk in soft copy - it is not true.

It is important for us to be fair to this institution as a Parliament and also to be fair to the Clerk because I checked and made sure that actually, some of the ministries, which I have listed in my short submissions, do not have their reports ready. For your information, Mr Speaker, some of the information in the soft copy version does not tally with that of the hard copy. I will quote the one of Local Government - I am just giving you free information - I have read some of them. I have read the soft copy and the hard copy and there is variance.

You need to clarify to the House, which one we go with, the soft copy or the hard copy? I personally studied the report of Local Government and there is a variance. Therefore, I am informing you, Mr Speaker, that as Members of Parliament, we still have a problem with the minister because we may go with this report to our various committees and we will stumble over problems.

I would like the ministers to go back and check with their permanent secretaries and the technical staff to make sure that the soft copy is in absolute agreement with the hard copy, which has been circulated. I thank you. (Members rose_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, let us proceed this way; let us allow the policy statements that are ready for laying to be laid. We will take the date when they are laid and I think the statements that were supposed to be made today can be made tomorrow by the two ministers; both of them were on Kasese issues. The Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs was also waiting for some documents from the Electoral Commission about the gazettement and so we can accommodate these issues tomorrow afternoon. 

Let us take all the policy statements, which are there including 4(1) which is the Supplementary Schedule for financial year 2015/2016 and then we adjourn and come back tomorrow.

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: I stand on a point of procedure, Mr Speaker. On item number 3(VI), status of land acquisition for the proposed inland port at Bukasa -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That one we finished.

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Is it finished?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We started with that one because the people were ready before any other.

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Was there quorum in this House? (Laughter) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The House was properly constituted. 

MR OKUPA: Mr Speaker, I know the number of policy statements that have not been laid; wouldn’t it be prudent –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I wanted to make a statement, after we finish with what is there, on how we proceed with the rest.

MR OKUPA: I wanted us to set a deadline within which to deliver.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is what I wanted to do when we see what is there.

LAYING OF PAPERS

SUPPLEMENTARY SCHEDULE 1 FINANCIAL YEAR 2015/2016

6.21
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PRIVATISATION)(Mr Aston Kajara):  Mr Speaker, in accordance with Article 156(1) and (2) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda and section 25 of the Public Finance Management Act, 2015, I beg to lay the supplementary expenditure schedule number 1 for the financial year 2015/2016 as follows:
There are two sections: section a) of Shs 720.26 billion, which is equivalent to 3 percent of the approved budget for the financial year 2015/2016 that has been authorised in accordance with the law and section b) Shs 316.649 billion, which require prior approval by Parliament.

The total supplementary expenditure for the financial year 2015/2016 therefore, under schedule 1, which I am due to lay is Shs 1,036.916 billion of which the first figure I have read has already been authorised.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Did you say billion?

MR KAJARA: It is Shs 1.036 billion and it requires prior approval of Parliament. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. It stands referred to the Committee on Budget for examination and reporting to the House within the time outlined. We take cognisance of the fact that this is a transition Parliament and we need to finish these quickly such that this House can take a decision on them and also for purposes of closing the last financial year.

MS CECILIA OGWAL: Mr Speaker, fresh supplementary submission is being made but I remember you were chairing the meeting when supplementary budget, schedules 1, 2 and 3 for the previous financial year were submitted. The committee has gone through the three submissions and has asked the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to give us some update and explanation on the same issues, which were raised on the Floor of Parliament. Up to now, in fact the vice-chairman is seated there; we have not received any reply, which, therefore, implies that the minister did not have any answer to the questions we raised. 

If that is the case, before you come with more reports, could they first dispose of the first one? Because now, we are carrying the baggage of 2014/2015 into 2015/2016 and as soon as we start the first quarter, they will come with a supplementary for 2016/2017and we will be lost.

Mr Speaker, I think it is important, at this stage, that you make a ruling because we still have that budget. Last week, I remember the minister said that they had answered all the questions and that it was the committee that had not complied to bring the report to Parliament. Mr Speaker, that was a complete lie. As far as the committee is concerned, we have done our work, we have done an analysis and I have written a fresh report updating the minister on the outstanding matters, copies of which were given to the Speaker and Deputy Speaker but up to now, I have not received any reply.

However, the minister is very quick to bring a fresh submission of supplementary budget. I do not know how Parliament is going to proceed. It is not about Mrs. Ogwal but about the institution of Parliament. How are we going to proceed, Mr Speaker? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the Member raises a valid point but the two are separate in the sense that the one that closes the last financial year should have already been done in the Supplementary Appropriation Bill. I do not know how far we went with that for closing the last financial year.

Therefore, those matters were supposed to have been resolved there and then for that financial year. This matter is for this existing financial year as I understand it because it is a supplementary schedule and the first one for the year 2015/2016, which will still be within the mandate of this House to refer to the committee to examine. It does not affect the other.

However, what is important is that when the Committee on Budget looks at it, they come and advise the House about what is good and what is wrong and what should never have been done. Then the House can take an appropriate decision on the matter. But thank you for raising that issue.

MR OKUPA: If the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development has failed to give responses, what do we do? The committee should present the report to the House, then we deal with it here.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Precisely. What the Chief Opposition Whip is raising is not the report of the committee and we cannot handle it that way. Therefore, we need a report from the committee that will guide us on how to proceed. That will be the better way to proceed with it. 

Therefore, this matter is now with the Committee on Budget, which will examine it and come back to the House and advise us on how to proceed. We shall discuss and proceed accordingly. Thank you.

6.28
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PRIVATISATION) (Mr Aston Kajara): Mr Speaker, in accordance with section 13(13)of the Public Finance Management Act, 2015, I hereby submit the ministerial statement of the Uganda Law Reform Commission for the financial year 2016/ 2017. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. Any minister who has a policy statement, please, let us receive it.

6.29
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (GENERAL DUTIES) (Dr Chris Baryomunsi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and honourable members. In accordance with the Public Finance Management Act, 2015, I beg to lay the hard copy of the ministerial policy statement for the health sector for the financial year 2016/2017.

Mr Speaker, the statement covers:
Vote 014  - Ministry of Health 
Vote 107 - Uganda AIDS Commission 
Vote 114 - Uganda Cancer Institute 
Vote 115 - Uganda Heart Institute 
Vote 116 - National Medical Stores; vote 134 - Health Service Commission 
Vote 151 - Uganda Blood Transfusion Services 
Vote 161 - Mulago Hospital Complex 
Vote 162 - Butabika Hospital 
Vote 304 - Uganda Virus Research Institute and 
Votes 163 to 176 - for the Regional Referral Hospitals namely: Arua, Fort Portal, Gulu, Hoima, Jinja, Kabale, Masaka, Mbale, Soroti, Lira, Mbarara, Mubende, Moroto and Naguru respectively. 
Votes 501 to 850 -  covering the primary health care grants to the local government. 

Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that ministerial policy statement for the health sector.

6.31
THE MINISTER OF WORKS AND TRANSPORT (Mr John Byabagambi): Mr Speaker, in accordance with section 13 subsection 13 of the Public Finance Management Act, 2015, I wish to present to Parliament the ministerial policy statement comprising:
Vote 016 - Ministry of Works and Transport, 
Vote 113 - the Uganda National Roads Authority, 
Vote 118 - the Uganda Road Fund and 
Vote 500 - for the funds disbursed to local governments for the road works under the Peace Recovery and Development Plan (PRDP) and Rural Transport Infrastructure (RTI) programmes.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

MR OKUPA: Mr Speaker, I do not know whether it is in order to lay a policy statement for a ministry twice. Last week, hon. Akol laid another copy of the Ministry of Works. If you remember, in my submission, I said it is only the Ministry of Works, which has brought the soft copy and a copy was laid. Hon. Akol said she was representing the Minister of Works. I do not know who is laying what. Is it procedurally right for us to lay the policy statement for the ministry twice?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No. I think if the same statement had already been laid, then the laying of the second time only amounts to wastage of parliamentary time. (Laughter) But it has no material value in the sense of how it helps us. However, if the statement was already laid, it is fine. It is captured, so we do not have to lay it the second time. Thank you, honourable minister. I think the information did not go back to him that, “What you gave me I actually executed.”

6.32
THE MINISTER, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (GENERAL DUTIES) (Prof. Tarsis Kabwegyere):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have these policy statements to lay: 
Vote 003- Office of the Prime Minister 
Vote 011 - Ministry of Local Government 
Vote 0147 - Local Government Finance Commission and 
Votes 501 to 797 local governments

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. Thank you. Any other statement!
 
6.33
THE MINISTER OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS (MS ROSE AKOL): Mr Speaker, I beg to lay at the Table the ministerial policy statement for Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development - vote 018, for the financial year 2016/ 2017.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. Any other?

6.33
THE MINISTER OF ENERGY AND MINERAL DEVELOPMENT (Mr Simon D’ujanga): Mr Speaker, in accordance with the Public Finance Management Act, 2015, I beg to lay at the Table the ministerial policy statement for financial year 2016/2017, Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development, Vote 107 and Vote 123.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. Let the records also show that when the Minister for Internal Affairs laid the ministerial policy statement of the Ministry for Gender, the minister in charge of that sector was actually in the House but probably it is already laid. (Laughter) Therefore, honourable minister, in order to be on record, just come and confirm that it was the proper statement that was brought. You do not have to lay it but just say it was a statement from the ministry.

6.34	
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL AFFAIRS (LABOUR, EMPLOYMENT AND INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS) (Mr Kamanda Bataringaya): Mr Speaker, I would like to confirm that the policy statement – vote 018 – laid by my colleague, the Minister of Internal Affairs, is for the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Affairs. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Any other statement! Honourable members, this goes to members of the Frontbench that there are still statements that are not yet here in the House. In order to assist this House so that we are not rushed towards the end, as I said, the circumstances of this particular session of Parliament are different. This Parliament will end by the 18 May, yet we should have passed this budget by 31 May. That means we are bringing forward the day for passing the budget by more than two weeks. 

Therefore, we are going to need to run faster than we have been running in order that this Parliament finishes with the budgetary proposals for this financial year. If it goes to the next Parliament, it is going to be complicated. Honourable members, I seek the indulgence of the ministers whose policy statements are not yet here to move. Today is the 23 March; would 30 March be too far? 

Any statement that is not in the House by the 30th of March will be time-barred in all fairness. If it falls on a Sunday, then you have two days less. Anything beyond 30th will not help the House and the committees will proceed as if there was no statement. They will proceed as if there was only the statement for the last financial year.

The Opposition, who should have already submitted after two weeks, should also be able to submit by two weeks after the 30th of this month – around 14th of April. I urge the committees and their leaders to try and make this a special project so that we deliver on time. The pressure is going to be much.

Please, when the minister comes without a response to the questions you are raising, do not spend time asking the minister to come back. Just make a report without the minister’s clarification and we will sort it out in the House. This is because when you ask the minister to bring documents later, that is more time extended and we do not have that time.

If by the time you want to take a decision, there is not sufficient documentation to support it, you bring and say, “We had this but did not have this information.” The House will take a decision on that particular matter. We should not keep deferring and extending time when we do not have time for extending even by one day.

6.39
THE OPPOSITION CHIEF WHIP (Ms Cecilia Ogwal): Mr Speaker, I think to keep the record straight, it would be appropriate for the ministers who have laid their policy statements after the 15th to maybe by the 30th also bring the report as required by the law. This will enable us keep our records up-to-date and not appear as if we have broken the law. 

In addition, whoever is now going to lay a policy statement, that statement should also be accompanied by a report of explanation as to why they are late. I think this will make us feel comfortable.
	
We do appreciate that some of you should not have been in Kyankwanzi but you chose to be there to catch the eyes of the big people. (Laughter) At the same time, you should realise that you should not do that to break the law. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It is so accordingly ordered that the policy statements that have come today and after the 15th should be accompanied by these reports. Those coming after today should come accompanied by the reports so that we ease these processes and make things easier for the House to proceed.

Honourable members, we have gone way beyond the time I had scheduled to finish business today. Let us adjourn now and resume the House tomorrow. This House is adjourned until tomorrow at 2.00 p.m.

(The House rose at 6.40 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 24 March 2016 at 2.00 p.m.)







	




