Wednesday, 2 March 2016

Parliament met at 2.33 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this afternoon’s sitting. I would like to remind honourable colleagues that the ministries with pending businesses before the committees should arrange to go before those committees and complete the work so that probably, by the end of April, all the outstanding Bills will have been done.

I would like to give notice to the Ministry of Trade and Industry that we would like to complete the Bill on the Uganda Development Corporation. There was information that was requested for in the schedule and we are only remaining with the schedule to complete that Bill. Therefore, if it is available today, we should be able to finish it and if it is not, we should be able to complete it tomorrow. Thank you very much.

LAYING OF PAPERS

2.35
MS ROSEMARY SENINDE (NRM, Woman Representative, Wakiso): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Allow me to use this opportunity to welcome you and my colleagues back from that tedious exercise. I would like to congratulate you as well.

Madam Speaker, I beg to lay reports of the Auditor-General on the financial statements for the year ended 30 June 2013 and 30 June 2014 for the following local governments:

Wankole Subcounty 
Kisozi Subcounty 
Namasagali Subcounty 
Bulopa Subcounty 
Nawanyago Subcounty  
Balawoli Subcounty 
Mbulamuti Subcounty  
Kisoro Subcounty

THE SPEAKER: Is there Kisoro Subcounty? 

MS SENINDE: It is Kisoro Town Council. I am sorry.

Katerera Town Council 
Rukungiri Municipal Council
Namasale Town Council
Padibe Town Council
Lira Municipal Council 
Rubirizi  Town Council
Kazo Town Council 
Mitooma Town Council
Ishongororo Town Council 
Kitwe Town Council
Kanungu Town Council 
Otuke Town Council
Pader Town Council
Kaberebere Town Council
Kasese Town Council 
Rwashamaire Town Council
Sheema Town Council
Mbarara District Local Government
Kasese District Local Government
Kabarole District Local Government
Agago District Local Government
Masindi District Local Government
Rubirizi District Local Government

Madam Speaker, I beg to lay.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Commissioner Nansubuga.

Honourable members, yesterday we said we wanted to give ourselves time to study the issues around guardianship and adoption in the Children (Amendment) Bill. Since we adjourned, I have received several more requests for a careful look at this law.

Therefore, I was proposing that we defer the part relating to guardianship and adoption, complete the other parts of the Bill and we can come back to it later.

Honourable members, before we proceed with the Bill, the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development was supposed to lay something under item 3(a). He can do that now.

2.40
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay the semi-annual Budget Performance Report for the financial year 2015/2016. I beg to lay.

THE SPEAKER: It will be sent to the committee on finance for scrutiny.

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE CHILDREN (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2015

Clause 11

MS ALASO: Madam Chairperson, thank you. Yesterday, I moved an amendment under clause 11 (43)(a) subclause (1)(a) to the effect that those who are not citizens of Uganda are not entitled to access legal guardianship. I would like the House to consider it and decide on it. 

Yesterday, I argued that all these children who go out under legal guardianship are very difficult to track. If you look at the Auditor-General’s special audit on adoption processes - Let me quote for you a small portion. He says, “In the period 2009-2012, there were 796 applications for legal guardianship orders in the High Court family division of Kampala alone.” 

We also listened to the Uganda Registration Services Bureau who said that in terms of filing returns, they could only get returns for children that have gone through normal adoption. Those are the ones whose adopting parents file returns for. 

However, these children that go under legal guardianship have nobody tracing them and you cannot find them. I, therefore, moved this amendment so that we close that door of these children getting out and are never accounted for. Madam Chairperson, I still beg that the House considers my proposal.

MR SSEWUNGU: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I humbly and reluctantly disagree with my honourable chairperson. Regarding legal guardianship, if you want to deny it to foreigners, you must do the same to Ugandans. This is because all of them can mishandle children; it is not about foreigners alone.

I am of the view that we should improve the law on legal guardianship. We can suggest or put in the law that whoever takes a child must report back to court every after two years concerning the status of the child. 

We can also borrow -(Interruption)

MS ALASO: Madam Chairperson, hon. Ssewungu is a Member of the Public Accounts Committee. I am not saying it takes away his right to disagree. However, is he in order to pretend that he is ignorant of the facts that the Uganda Registration Services Bureau and the Auditor-General presented to the Committee on Public Accounts that there are no reporting procedures in place? There are no linkages to the places where the children go and the children have never been accounted for. Is he in order to pretend to be ignorant of the information he was given as a Member of the Public Accounts Committee? 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, that report of the Public Accounts Committee has not been presented to this House. Therefore, I cannot guess what was discussed in the committee.

MR SSEWUNGU: Sincerely what the Auditor-General is stating is about not having the law and that is exactly what we are trying to put in place here and -(Interruption)

MR WADRI: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. I wish to thank hon. Joseph Ssewungu for accepting this information. The problem is not about the non-existence of systems. I can say for certain that while I was in that same office - even in courts of law, there are procedures that once a child is placed under a guardianship order or foster placement, there must be monitoring systems built between the country’s probation and welfare offices and the home country where the guardianship order is going to prescribe that child to be. 

This is so that on a regular basis, information is sent back to this country. I think what is happening now is a matter of laxity in regular monitoring. It is not that it is absent; it is there in place. Thank you.

MR SSEWUNGU: Madam Chairperson, you know that I love children and it is very difficult to challenge me on the love of children. This is because even after Parliament, I will go back and teach children. I am always proud to say that I am a primary school teacher. 

I have looked at the pictures here and I have read the presentation that hon. Nyombi gave us. Sincerely, we have to improve the law. We have to pick some clauses in the Children’s Act that deal with adoption and bring them into legal guardianship and improve the law.

I do not see a situation where someone who is either a citizen or non-citizen comes in - both of them can commit crimes against children. Today in Uganda, we have people who are using young children as maids. There are those who have taken their brother’s children and are burning them. Therefore, the issue of mishandling children does not only arise with foreigners alone. It can be done by both natives and non-natives. 

Therefore, let us improve the law on legal guardianship. If we say that every after two years, a person who has taken a child should report back to court on the status of the child, that will be a very good law. When you look at what is here – (Interjections) - we will enforce it because we have probation officers. Let us not – (Interruption)

THE CHAIRPERSON: Have you finished?

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. First of all, for the record, children are a very sentimental issue and the protection of children is the responsibility of every country and every citizen, more so representatives of the people like we are. 

I have listened to the wonderful submissions of hon. Alice Alaso and like hon. Ssewungu, I would like to disagree. Legal guardianship, as provided for under clause 11, is very exhaustive. 

Hon. Alaso would like to guide me on this submission and I want to disagree. The Bill proposes conditions for guardianship. If hon. Alaso went through the conditions for guardianship, her fears would be put to rest. One, guardianship will only be a grant of the High Court, upon an application made by the person who wants to be the guardian. The court then would have to satisfy itself on the following conditions. 

Madam Chairperson, for the benefit of hon. Alaso, please permit me to read verbatim. The following conditions pertain where: 
“ a) there is no known relative or next of kin of the child;
b)the relatives or next of kin are unwilling or unable to take parental responsibility of the child -” 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Odoi, where exactly are you reading from?  

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: I am reading from (43)(a). 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Is that page 15 of the Bill? 

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Yes. 
“ (a) 	all alternative care options available to the child have been exhausted;
(b) 	the child is suffering or is likely to suffer significant harm under the present custody.” 

Madam Chairperson, it goes on. Therefore, the children who will be placed under guardianship will only fall in the category that is contained in (43)(a).

I am not so sure that hon. Alaso would want to argue that if a child has no known village or next of kin, that child cannot be put under the guardianship of a foreigner. He has no known relative. If the relative or the next of kin of the child is not willing or is unable to take parental responsibility and there is no Ugandan -

You see, clause 11 provides for guardianship for foreigners but also for Ugandans who are not ordinarily resident in Uganda. Therefore, I do not see the point of concern that hon. Alaso is raising. 

Yes, I understand that there may be problems of reporting, accountability and tracing these children and it is our responsibility to make sure that we know that the welfare of these children is well taken care of when they are placed under guardianship. That we should address but we cannot address it by excluding foreigners from being legal guardians. We can only address it by making – (Interruption)

MR ATIKU: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. The information I would like to give hon. Fox Odoi is that legal guardianship or guardianship in itself is not a one-off thing. It is a temporal measure where you place a child under somebody’s care. This placement does not mean that this person takes full parental responsibility.

Therefore, to grant it to a foreigner who is not a national is really exposing this child to all sorts of challenges out there. Our proposal of limiting it to nationals is for closer monitoring and supervision and I am sure that when we passed the authority yesterday, we did it with this at the back of our minds; that this mechanism will be enough for us to protect our integrity as a country.

By the time we begin surrendering our children to foreigners, it means that as a country, we have failed in our duty. If our parents have failed, then as a country we should not fail. For me, it is all about protecting our national integrity and proving to the international world that we are also capable of looking after our citizens.

Therefore, the issue of legal guardianship is a temporal measure and I do not expect too much debate about it but we should limit it to only nationals. Thank you.

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Thank you, honourable colleague, for your information. Madam Chairperson, I thought the information given to me very graciously by my colleague only goes to reinforce my argument. If legal guardianship is a temporary measure and it does not confer permanent responsibility of a guardian to a foreigner, that only goes to reinforce my argument that you can as well grant that guardianship to a foreigner.

I can see your discomfort, my brother, but the beginning point of my argument is that we should move away from sentiments; let us look at reality. Let us protect children without being sentimental about this matter. I thank you, Madam Chairperson.

MR ALEX BYARUGABA: I thank you, Madam Chairperson. I would like to support hon. Alaso’s argument, which has a very strong case within my constituency. Just on Sunday, a woman approached me. This lady has lost four children under those circumstances and to date, it is about 10 years or so and she has completely failed to trace them or know where they were taken.

We need to remember that the circumstances under which we are operating are such that most of our people do not know all that we are talking about here; the law. This woman lost four children who were taken by foreigners; Americans. She is crying and all she wants is to know where her children are. I think the sooner we do away with legal guardianship to non-citizens, the better. This lady is a living example. Thank you.

MR PETER NYOMBI: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I am surprised that hon. Alaso is saying that once children are taken out of the country, they cannot be traced. I am talking from experience. When an application for legal guardianship is filed, the applicant must submit a notarised copy of his or her passport –(Interruption)

MR KATOTO: I rise on a point of order. There is a pastor who came to Uganda and requested to take care of a child. Some Ugandans were not certain of where the child was going to be taken and they became suspicious. They requested that tickets be given to the parents to escort the child because it was under the guise of an operation in South Africa. 

This pastor turned down the request. A follow-up was made and at the end of the day, the child died in South Africa when they were transplanting her kidney. If you say that children can be traced after being taken, how can this particular case be explained? I am, therefore, standing on a point of order.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable member, I do not know whether that person was a subject of a court order. Did the child go as a result of a court order?

MR KATOTO: It was not a court order at all. It was through this confusion of saying that someone can be traced thereafter. I am, therefore, standing on a point of order to say that there is no way you can say that these children can be traced after they have left the country when we have lost several children under similar circumstances.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, let us distinguish between casual situations and the legal position.

MR PETER NYOMBI: Madam Chairperson, I was saying that I am surprised that hon. Alaso said that when children are taken out of the country, they cannot be traced and that we do not hear about them. When this issue was raised in the Public Accounts Committee, I compiled a complete booklet of reports that had been received and submitted to the High Court, Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development and the Ministry of Internal Affairs, with reports and photographs of these children.

Secondly, before one is appointed a legal guardian, one must submit a notarised copy of his or her passport. If she is married, she must submit a notarised copy of the marriage certificate, a reference letter from the place of employment, an international home study, which takes two or three months to compile and a criminal clearance certificate. It is therefore preposterous for one to say that when a child is taken out of the country, he or she cannot be traced.

Hon. Alaso, I submitted a complete booklet. The Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development has been receiving complete booklets, the High Court and the Ministry of Internal Affairs – (Interruption)

MS CECILIA OGWAL: Madam Chairperson, I have heard this argument about a complete booklet presented to the Public Accounts Committee concerning these children who are under guardianship and taken out of the country or whatever. 

Can the person holding the Floor explain to us how the authority or the Government was able to ascertain that those reports were actually the true reports concerning those children? Do we have a profile to prove that these children, from the time they were taken from the country to the time this report was compiled that is what they went through? Do you have any record? 

This is where we are departing from the truth. You are running away from your responsibility. You know very well that when these children get out of the country, they can be subjected to all sorts of cultures including homosexuality and I am afraid that the people who are arguing for this are people who may be biased in favour of homosexuality – (Laughter)

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Nyombi was on the floor. You finished?

MS ALASO: Madam Chairperson, I would like to give hon. Nyombi some information. It is indeed true that he submitted a compilation to the Public Accounts Committee. It had about 10 photos of some children. However, he knows that he has processed more than 200 in the last one year and the missing information is about the other 150 plus children that he did not tell us about. 

The information I would like to give him is from the Auditor-General’s Report, page 24 of the special audit on adoption process, which states, “In 2009, 150 orders were granted.” The expected number of reports on file was supposed to be 150 but they only found 17 reports. In 2010, the total number of orders given was 191 but they only found 28 reports. In 2011, there were 189 orders but there were only 32 reports. In 2012, there were 189 orders but there were only 41 reports. The total was 719 orders and 118 reports. 

Therefore, there are more reports that are required than these few photos that hon. Nyombi is giving to this House and that he presented to the Public Accounts Committee.

MR PETER NYOMBI: Madam Chairperson, the submission she is referring to is not the submission I am talking about. The submission hon. Alaso is referring to is that one where I gave about 10 or 11 cases of children who had been adopted. 

I gave PAC a full booklet of very many reports and if challenged, I would be willing to lay them on the Table. I am also concerned and I would not like children to go outside and suffer. I think the solution is actually in the report of the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development that Uganda should sign the Geneva Convention so that there is exchange of information about these children but not in denying foreigners from being appointed legal guardians.

We have very many cases, if I am allowed to cite an example. A father rapes a daughter and a child is born as a result of that incest. Nobody in the family is willing to take care of this child and a kind family is willing to provide a home for this child. Would you deny this family the opportunity?

I can give hundreds of examples. In Uganda, the culture of adoption or appointment of legal guardianship in the High Court is not there. You lose a relative then you take over the children of your brother or sister but not a child who has been picked from a lunatic on the streets. That culture does not exist here.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Thank you, hon. Nyombi. The information I would like to give you is the case of Ethiopia. The country has liberalised its adoption laws and they do not raise these sentimental arguments that some of us seem to be buried in, in Uganda because the world is a global village. I can have breakfast in Kampala and dinner in New York. That is the reality of the world.

Other than leaving in denial that a child can be abused abroad, the information I am giving is that we should strengthen reporting mechanisms because whether you want it through court or not, the children will still go. People will still take their children even without following the legal regime.

Therefore, I am supporting the arguments of hon. Nyombi and hon. Odoi that we should be liberated. It is a losing battle. The world is just one. The only thing is to put enough safety nets. In any case, I have seen some of these children in Brussels that were picked from Uganda and they are living better lives than the ones left here. There are better opportunities, save for the wrong aspects of sexual orientation and all those issues.

Therefore, I would really like to agree with hon. Nyombi that we should put enough safety nets. The world is one and we cannot run away from that reality.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Commissioner Seninde. Hon. Nyombi, you had finished.

MR PETER NYOMBI: I was winding up, Madam Chairperson. My recommendation is that the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development should sign the Geneva Convention for the protection of the children so that there is exchange of information regarding these children.

Lastly, I would like to say that at one point, when these allegations were raised, parents in the southern part of USA volunteered to ferry judges and officials from the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development to go and meet all these children in one place but the offer was not taken up.

These allegations of sentiments will not work. The Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development cannot look after these children. Regarding the examples that I have put in the booklet, where was the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development when these children were being tortured? Those are just a few examples. We have hundreds, which I can produce here in Parliament –(Interruption)

MS SENINDE: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. First of all, I appreciate the spirit in which hon. Nyombi is making his arguments. However, I would like to support hon. Alaso’s amendment. Let us not take these things as if we live on Mars.  We must look at the realities. The laws are in place and we appreciate this. The spirit in which we are making an amendment on this Floor is because we want to enhance the protection of our children.

Secondly, we all know that this Bill intends to fill in the legal gaps but also deal with implementation challenges. Hon. Nyombi has made a very good case; he has made it clear that he has written books and so on. Madam Chairperson, the question is, he is referring to the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development but we must not forget that it is the same ministry, which will be there tomorrow. Who is going to follow up these children when they are taken out of the country?

Madam Chairperson, I still feel that we should adopt hon. Alaso’s amendment. We must not forget that time and again, we have raised issues on this Floor of Parliament, not only regarding young children but also with our girls that are always taken outside the country to work. We know very well that some of them are taken by organisations that are registered but we have seen what has happened. Who follows to know how they are suffering? 

In the same spirit, these vulnerable children who cannot fight for themselves, who cannot speak like the girls are doing that, “We are suffering here” - If we really have to fill the implementation gaps, I think hon. Alaso’s amendment is something that we can also look at and fill in that law. I beg colleagues to support hon. Alaso’s amendment.

MS MUTYABULE: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. My only problem with restricting legal guardianship to citizens of Uganda is, when you look at our citizens outside Uganda, what conditions do they live in? Are they capable of adopting other children in addition to theirs? How much do they earn? Are they citizens of those countries that they can be able to access some benefits? If we restrict guardianship to only citizens of Uganda, who are living outside Uganda, are our children going to be taken care of? Won’t we leave many of them suffering without anybody to take them on? That is what is running in my mind. Can’t we really examine that situation too? Thank you, Madam Chairperson.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, perhaps someone will be able to tell us how many Ugandans have applied for guardianship vis-a-vis the others as we discuss.

MR KATOTO: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I would like to call the attention of Members - as we make this law, most of us have children and I would like us to be in that picture before we continue. For example, there is no mechanism of following up a child who has been taken outside Uganda. There is one called Stuart who was taken under the guise that an applicant got permission from the Government, but was denied return here. Madam Chairperson, I would buy the amendment moved by hon. Alice Alaso in order to protect our children very well. Thank you, very much.

MS OPENDI: Thank you. Madam Chairperson, you have raised exactly what I wanted to talk about here. We all know that there are so many children living in this country and those who are well off, if we may ask, how many of us - even Members of Parliament - have extended a hand to those children who do not have parents? You realise that we are not good, as Ugandans, at helping the less fortunate people. So, the issue of guardianship should not be restricted to Ugandans alone because I was trying to look at a book that was yesterday distributed here and discovered that a number of children who could have lost their lives and failed to go to school, have actually been assisted by some well-wishers out of this country.

Therefore, Madam Chairperson, I want to state that what hon. Alice Alaso is talking about may be pertinent, but considering our own culture, we may not go that way. I think what we have to do, now that we have an authority in the law, maybe we make it a point that those who take over these children as guardians should give reports to the Authority. We entrust the authority with the mandate of following up these children.

Secondly, looking at the conditions for one to be granted guardianship, I am not comfortable that one may be given guardianship if that person is above the age of 18 years. That age of 18 years as the minimum is - a person at 18 is also still young and we have to be aware of what is going on right now. 

Madam Chairperson, as I read through the newspapers today, surprisingly, they were talking about children disappearing during political times. It is alleged some people sacrificed children during such political times. Let us raise the age for one to be a guardian, maybe to 25 –(Interjections)– yes, for one to qualify as a guardian; I am just thinking.

That is the point I wanted to make. We now have an authority. Let us give it more responsibility and let us not restrict the guardianship to Ugandans. Thank you.

MR MURULI MUKASA: Madam Chairperson, I think there is a misunderstanding here between legal guardianship and adoption. The two things may be related but they are fundamentally different. 

The responsibility of the children of Uganda is ours, whether we are their biological parents or not. Once the children are in Uganda, they are our responsibility. So, we cannot give it away unless under very difficult circumstances. 

There is some merit in the argument of hon. Alice Alaso, in that legal guardianship by foreigners has, in a way, been used as a shortcut for adoption. Once it is granted, the children go away, then the process of adoption is completed in their own country and so it becomes very difficult to trace them.

It is true, in the case of examples quoted by hon. Peter Nyombi- he has been able to keep track of some of those children, but that is just a small number of children whose adopters have been able to make accountability. But there are others who cannot be traced. There are also instances, which have been recorded, of babies of six months, eight months, one year, two years - they make advancements, they go to court and are given guardianship orders and they go. Obviously there is no time to carry out a rigorous assessment of the adopters and the children who are being adopted, whether the whole process is flawed or not. There are cases where they have gone but returned here. Or they have been re-advertised in their own countries -(Interjections)- I am well informed over this matter, which I am raising. They have been returned or where they have not been returned, there is a question of re-advertising. This puts the child at risk. And if there is no trace, then we cannot know exactly what happens after.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable minister, I would like to understand that issue of re-advertising the children. Who is re-advertising these children?

MR MURULI MUKASA: The person who takes the child as the guardian is sometimes barred by the laws in their country from adopting and so the fellow takes recourse of putting this child somewhere and starts calling upon people who may want to take care of this child. This has happened to some of these unfortunate people and this is not good at all -(Mr Peter Nyombi rose_)- Honourable member, I am just about to complete this.

Therefore, adoption, yes and there is no problem about that. Anybody eligible can adopt and we can have the right procedure for that. But this legal guardianship, I think there is merit in what hon. Alice Alaso is saying. (Applause) We could have a look at it and probably there would be no harm in limiting it to citizens, and I do not agree that Ugandans here -(Interruption)

MR PETER NYOMBI: Madam Chairperson, my brother, hon. Muruli-Mukasa is the Minister of Gender. He knows very well that before a legal guardianship order is granted by the High Court, the applicant must submit an international home study, which is a big document that takes about three months of research in the country of origin. For example, in the USA, it takes about three months whereby security agencies and social workers carry out research on the applicant and that report must be presented here. 

Is the minister in order to say that they just come here and they are issued with legal guardianship orders when he knows very well that one must submit an international home study?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I am not familiar with those processes of the guardianship. But I think what is coming out is that this House would prefer adoption, but would like to end a shortcut of legal guardianship. Isn’t that what you are saying? The issue of adoption is okay for both citizens and foreigners but guardianship, no. Isn’t that what you are saying?

MR MURULI MUKASA: It is coming to that, Madam Chairperson. Yes, there is basically no harm in limiting legal guardianship to citizens, but when it comes to adoption, yes it can be open and people can be free to adopt, following that rigorous method of ascertaining.

MR SSEMPIJJA: Madam Chairperson, I am a coffee farmer and have never dealt with children, but I would like to say that we are getting and deciding with bias. The problem we have now is not legal guardianship; it is the weakness on our side to follow up on children that have been granted that order. It is not –(Interjection)– what is the difference? A child remains a child even if he or she is adopted legally or given away under legal guardianship. Therefore, to me, let us look at the issue of strengthening the follow-up strategies for our children. Thank you very much.

MS KABASHARIRA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I would like someone to make a clarification to me that the guardianship will be for a short-while to only Ugandans. What about these priests or pastors who come to Uganda or pastors and have taken care of so many children –(Interjections)- or Imams, for that matter? How do we categorise those ones? They are foreigners, but are taking guardianship of many children. So what do you do? 

I think the problem is on how we take care of the whole process. In Uganda, it is a big problem that while we have very good laws, but implementation is bringing us a problem. We have talked about rape here but don’t we have good laws; and how many women and girls have been raped? Defilement, how many have been defiled? Likewise even on children, it is implementation, which is really wrong. I am just so confused - and maybe others are also confused like me – but what do we do about those children whom we want to be taken care of by foreigners who are in Uganda and they have not even taken them away?

MS KAMATEEKA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. Yes, we have laws, but everything has a background. There is a background as to why it was proposed that - first of all, we had adoption laws. They were not enough and we had to introduce legal guardianship. This legal guardianship basically was for Ugandans who are – in our cultural setting, a person passes on or you are a relative taking care of these children as a guardian. And so there was need to legalise this because you take a child into your care and you just treat them anyhow. There were no laws to regulate that relationship with this child. Therefore, there was need to introduce this law for guardianship so that this child has legal backing and that they can enjoy the benefits of a child while in your home.

I have heard what hon. Naome Kabasharira has said. When these people come, sometimes they have established schools and they would like to look after these children in schools. And with this school situation, there is no need for legal guardianship. So, let legal guardianship remain with Ugandans. Even if a foreigner wants to look after a Ugandan child, let them take care of them in collaboration with a relative. 

I am aware that there are cases where a child may not have relatives. But Government should take its responsibility over its children rather than leave them to foreigners.

Madam Chairperson, I would like to strongly support –(Interruption) 

MR KATOTO: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. The problem here is the follow up when the child is being taken up under guardianship by a foreigner. For example, we cannot follow it up because Uganda is not party to The Hague Convention. So, there is no way one can follow-up on that child whose guardianship is being managed abroad. So, we should at least limit it to Ugandans.

MS KABASHARIRA: Let me give information to hon. Jovah Kamateeka so that she can maybe make a clarification to me. I also agree with you that Ugandans should take care of these children. However, here is a situation - and we have seen it - like someone has lost all the parents or even at times the parents are there, but they are unable. And here comes a good Christian and they want to take care of the child; he could be a sheik or whatever. What do you do now that they are foreigners but in Uganda? Maybe if we include it on the amendment like what hon. Alaso proposed, then we take it over. The problem is about taking the children away, but on guardianship, we have so many foreigners who are taking care of Ugandan children and Ugandans don’t. 

Therefore, let the amendments take care of these foreigners who are in Uganda and who should not take the children outside. When that is done, my mind will be cleared. But if you say that we leave it to these Ugandans who do not take care of even their own - this morning I was at a police station and there was a woman holding a child and they had arrested the man because he cannot take care of the child. There are many who are like that. So, when you get a chance and someone picks on the child, what do you do? Let us put it in that amendment; it will work maybe. Thank you. 

MS ALASO: Thank you very much, hon. Jovah Kamateeka. Let me first agree with hon. Naome Kabasharira that we can draft something to take care of that local situation, as part of an additional amendment; that should be okay. But the information I would like to –(Interjection)- Madam Chairperson, please protect me from hon. Fox Odoi.

THE CHAIRPERSON: You are protected.

MS ALASO: Thank you very much. The information I want to give my sister, hon. Jovah Kamateeka, which I think will be very helpful even to the House is: this House must understand how this legal guardianship thing works. If we do not understand it, we will probably even miss a point. Here is what starts it off. There is some organisation out there in some country called a child placement organisation. They are the ones that encourage the setting up of children’s homes. So, you wake up one morning and you find that there is a children’s home. Who are the sponsors? It is the other organisation. 

These people then go round – these vehicles you see being intercepted by the police with people’s children – the villages and pick children, whether they are needy or not, they just promise them: “We will give you sponsorship.” And they collect these children into those homes. When that has happened, the placement organisation works with the children’s home to match each child with a prospective guardian. 

After matching them, for example, the hon. Peter Nyombi’s law firm is commissioned to come to the children’s home with a matched guardian and a child. They then get a probation officer, they write a report before they go to court and in less than seven days, the children will be out of this country.

I think that while we still are a state; while we still have a Government in place; and while we still have hearts that care for our children, it is still safer for us to restrict this shortcut called “legal guardianship” because it circumvents scrutiny and is difficult to monitor. Let us just scrutinise for proper adoption. That is the information I wanted to give you. Thank you.

MS KAMATEEKA: Thank you, hon. Alice Alaso. Madam Chairperson – 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I would be interested to know how the other countries handle this matter. I suspect there must be applications for guardianships.

MS KAMATEEKA: Madam Chairperson, I was still holding the Floor. I wanted to wind up by thanking hon. Alice Alaso for somehow responding to hon. Naome Kabasharira. But also let me say that we are not saying that hon. Peter Nyombi’s firm is in the wrong. On the face of it, they are legally correct but the system has been abused and so we must put in place checks and balances to monitor this system of taking our children out under legal guardianship.

Therefore, let us decide that we shall leave legal guardianship for Ugandans and the others – for example, hon. Nyombi was talking about research being done for three months. If someone can wait for research to be done for three months, let them wait for a year and then adopt a child. Thank you. (Applause)

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I think we need to move on this issue. There is a proposal that the rights to legal guardianship be restricted to the citizens of Uganda.

MR PETER NYOMBI: Madam Chairperson, if that proposal is taken, we stand the risk of being unconstitutional. 

HONOURABLE MEMBERS: No! 

MR PETER NYOMBI: An educated person listens and takes a decision. Madam Chairperson, clause 3 of the Bill provides that the most important factor to consider, in deciding issues affecting children, is the welfare of the child. 

The Constitution of Uganda entrusts the High Court with inherent jurisdiction and so under the Judicature Act, the High Court has adopted the English rule under the common law of legal guardianship. 

You posed a question as to what happens in other countries. Madam Chairperson, the concept of legal guardianship is rooted in the English law, whereby parental responsibility is entrusted to an individual. And the most important factor to consider, even under the English law, is the welfare of the children. But if hon. Alice Alaso’s amendment is adopted, I am sure the Bill is likely to be thrown out for being unconstitutional. 

MS ALASO: Madam Chairperson, I have just heard hon. Peter Nyombi refer to the Judicature Act – you see now for me those things of Judicature Act, I do not know them. But I understand, from what I have read, that in 1996, the Judicature Act was revised to remove legal guardianship. Is he, therefore, in order to come here and threaten me and the law-making process with things that have been removed from the Judicature Act?

And Madam Chairperson, our neighbours – I am just trying to respond to the question you asked – Kenya, Rwanda and Ethiopia have put a moratorium on this thing called “legal guardianship” because it is the other side of trafficking in children. (Applause) If other people have seen it, why does hon. Peter Nyombi – is he in order to insist that we help, in one way or the other, keep the door open for our children to get out? 

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, honourable members, this matter is just for debate.

MR BAHATI: Madam Chairperson, we are talking about children and their future. And I think it is important, where we cannot get consensus, the world is not ending today; we can adopt the amendment moved by hon. Alice Alaso and where we think it can change, in the future we can change it. Hon. Fox Odoi knows how complicated the world is becoming; he knows when we talk about children - (Applause)- and to get a persuasion from hon. Fox Odoi, I think will be misleading to this House. (Laughter)

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the law-making process is a partnership between Parliament and the Head of State. I think this is another opportunity to review our proposals in case they are not commensurate with the international legal practice. So, I think for now let us go with the amendment. What are you saying, committee chairperson?

MS KOMUHANGI: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. Since there is consensus building up that we allow legal guardianship for Ugandans – but Government should keep it in mind that they are a signatory to The Hague Convention. And when it comes to ratification, they have not; even domestication not yet. So, they should take care of these processes expeditiously so that we harmonise these positions, which we are undertaking. I concede, Madam Chairperson. (Applause)

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 11 be amended as proposed by hon. Alice Alaso.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 11, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 12, agreed to.

Clause 13

MS KOMUHANGI: The committee proposes to insert a new provision before paragraph (a) to read as follows: “In subsection (1) (a) by substituting the phrase ‘three years’ with the phrase ‘six months’” –(Interjections)- well, that is your position but this is a committee position. I beg for your indulgence so that I complete my amendment.

The justification is that the period of three years is too long and most prospective adoptive parents have been circumventing the long and tedious process and would prefer legal guardianship instead of adoption.

Amend paragraph (a) by substituting the words “twenty four months” with “six months.”

The justification is that the proposed period of 24 months is still too long and acts as a deterrent to prospective adoptive parents. The fostering period should be as short as possible to ensure that permanent placement is achieved so that bonding can take place and the child can grow in a wholesome manner.

In many jurisdictions, fostering and residence is not a requirement for grant of the adoption order and applicants take a shorter time in the countries completing the process, including court attendance. 

The list below shows the average time taken in a country to complete the adoption process. In the case of Brazil, it takes six to eight weeks; China two weeks; Ethiopia one week; Congo two weeks; Costa Rica five to six weeks; Peru four weeks; Kenya three months; and Uganda is now proposing six months.

Madam Chairperson, those are the amendments that I have on clause 13.

THE CHAIRPERSON: What is the problem with the mover? Why don’t you allow people to speak out? You are the mover. Why don’t you allow other people to speak to your Bill? Yes, hon. Alaso.

MS ALASO: Madam Chairperson, I would like to oppose the position proposed by the committee and to suggest that we retain the present provision in the Children Act of 36 months equivalent to three years.

This is about the very argument that we have just had. The problem is that we need to have an opportunity for foster care monitoring; that the probation officers have to file reports before we can complete the adoption processes. My view is that we maintain the position in the Children Act.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Since you are the mover, why don’t you come last?

MR KABAJO: I thank you, Madam Chairperson. Whereas the six months might be shorter, I still think it is also reasonable. On the other hand, the three years or 36 months is rather too long. 

We have seen in the previous arguments on guardianship orders, especially for foreigners, that the reason why that route was being picked was that we had provisions in the law, which were taking too long and, therefore, acted as an incentive for them to look for a shortcut.

Therefore, in order to avoid people taking shortcuts because of the very long period, I would propose that we should not have a period longer than 12 months. I think 36 months is too long. I do support the committee position of six months. Thank you, Madam Chairperson.

MS ALASO: I thank you. I just wish to inform you that the child will now be staying with the prospective parents. It is just the finalisation of the adoption that will take 36 months. Otherwise, the child will be with the prospective parents who will be filing reports and the welfare officer will also be visiting.

THE CHAIRPERSON: So, you mean to say that these people should come here and stay for three years while their ‘things’ are being processed?

MR KABAJO: In case of a local adoption, these three years can look reasonable. But for an international adoption, you cannot expect a foreigner to live in Uganda for three years as he or she waits for all those processes. I think that six months, as proposed by the committee, is better.

MS SENINDE:  I thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. The six months as proposed by the committee would not be a bad period. However, I would like to propose, in view of what hon. Alice Alaso is raising, that probably one year is not too long or short a time. 

Therefore, I would like to propose and support increasing the time from six months to at least a year.

MS ANYWAR: The  child will be coming from a different background going to another background even the cultural set-up is totally different. My proposal, therefore, is that even one year is not really good enough to make this child completely adapt to a new situation. My proposal, therefore, in light of the argument, is that one year can suffice. 

However, that one year will not be adequate to orientate the child from the original set-up – as mothers, we carry the child for nine months inside us but we still have to breastfeed for two years to create that bond and prepare the child for the new life. One year is not bad although in the best interest of the child, two years would have been better. I thank you.

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: I thank you, Madam Chairperson. The point that we should not miss at any particular moment is that hon. Alice Alaso’s children will never be put up for adoption and the same applies to my children. 

This then begs the question: Who are these particular children we are talking about? They are the ones that are dumped in pit latrines, born to mad women on the streets or whose parents are not there. These are the children that we are talking about that will be put up for adoption - like the ones that you find in Sanyu Babies Home. 

We are seated here saying that we need to protect them but we also need to be sensitive to the interests of the parents who would want to adopt them. It is unreasonable and very unfair to think that any foreigner or any Ugandan will sit here and wait for 36 months to adopt a child. I know it is a lifelong commitment – (Interruption)

MS ANYWAR: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. We are talking about the right of a child on the street or where the parents are dead.

We are here as legislators talking for the voiceless and standing up for their rights of existence. It was not by their design that now they have nobody to take care of them. But whoever wants to take care of them must be ready to take the interest of such a child into consideration. Is the honourable member in order to imagine that a child without a parent has no rights?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, yesterday I reminded us that we are the only House that can make laws for this country. There are people who cannot speak in this House. The welfare principle which we were told about earlier - in whose interest are we giving the three years; who benefits from those three years we are giving?

Honourable member, why are these fellows on the streets? Unless you are saying that there should be no adoption in this country - let us be realistic and sensitive to the welfare of these children.

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Thank you, Madam Chairperson, for your wise ruling. During the course of last year, the Uganda Police Force received and recorded complaints amounting to about 13,000 of parents who fail to provide the necessities of their children. That is the state of your country. Your parents cannot provide for the welfare of their own children. They are being dragged to police.  There have been 13,000 in one year and this is on record.

Now this is one group, but there are those without family in the traditional sense. Madam Chairperson, I would propose that we probably settle for one year. It is still way too long but if we are to stretch the limit, then one year would be the maximum.

The committee report is very instructive, two weeks in a country like China - China is the most radical country –(Interruption) 

MR MURULI MUKASA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. The two weeks, I think is outdated; the current adoption policy in China does not give two weeks for adoption, it is anything between one year and three years because the process is long. In Ghana, it is again 12 to 24 months and Kenya has put a moratorium; they are revising the situation to make sure that really that principle of the welfare of children is fulfilled to the letter.

Madam Chairperson, the question of so many years does not mean that the prospective adopter must come and stay here for all that period. Obviously that adopter has other work to do. It is a question of initiating the process, coming from time to time, achieve the bonding, and then within that period, the bonding actually crystallises and this child can be taken.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable minister, what report would the probation officer be filing if the parents are absent and the child is here?

MR MURULI MUKASA: Well, when they have the interest, they will certainly come. People who adopt these children really love children. If they are genuine, they will surely come. We also have in place the alternative care framework in the ministry which takes care of some of these concerns.

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: I thank you for that information but, Madam  Chairperson, you notice that the committee chair is not in agreement with the minister and I am more comfortable going with the position of the committee chair than the one of the minister.

The honourable minister is my friend, but we have to be realistic. You are talking about our Government that has only remembered after 30 years that we need to provide sanitary towels to our children when going to school. Are you telling me that the welfare of children without parents, and the welfare of street kids, and those in Sanyu Babies Home will be best taken care of by you? The answer is certainly, no.
 
Madam Chairperson, I still insist that we go with six months and in the worst case scenario, we take one year.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I would like to propose that we meet in the middle and we do one year. 

MR EKANYA: Madam Chairperson, I have a problem with one year because even one year or five years or three months is about the life of the child.

Hon. Muruli Mukasa has been the Minister for Security; even when you want to employ people locally or internationally, you do background checks. This is because even if somebody came here and stayed here and faked his or her behaviour and yet for the last 10 or 20 years he has been a thief, it will not help. That is why I thought hon. Muruli Mukasa, who has been a Minister for Security, knows that before any person is even given an assignment or job you conduct a background check using ESO and other Government institutions like Interpol.

In this case of children, we have home study. Most of these countries where these children are taken have well-established systems where you can use the institutions to conduct a background check.

The way we are doing this legislation raises questions. In the past if you wanted to borrow money or if you had an account in Stanbic Bank, it would require you to have been an account holder for six months or two years. However, the world has moved beyond that; now, you just submit your record and the bank conducts a background check. This is similar to this case. 

Let me give an example; hon. Muruli Mukasa, you have your brother or relative who is working with the UN and wants to help you with one of the clan kids. You are saying that he should come here and stay for one year and abandon his assignments. By virtue of their work in such an organisation, they adopt world citizenship in our Constitution because of the several advantages that accrue. That person is a citizen of those countries but he is a relative of yours as well.

Would you tell him or her to come here to stay and abandon their job? The best way, Madam Chairperson -(Interruption) 

MR MURULI MUKASA: The information I want to give to my colleague, hon. Ekanya, is that the person is not required to come and stay permanently here. The person can initiate the process of adoption and he can go away. Then he may come periodically, to continue with that process. In the process, the bonding is happening, so at the end of the year, there would have been sufficient bonding and this person can take the child away. That is what we are saying.

I would not like us to misunderstand this, that somebody will leave his responsibility and come and stay here for one or two years waiting for bonding. That is being a little bit irresponsible and careless. However, certainly, the issue of bonding is important. Much as we may have the technology to check and back stop and check these other people, the question of bonding is important.

That is why we are saying that let us have this period and it is good enough. There are other countries that are doing this. They usually take that period and sometimes even longer.

MR EKANYA: Madam Chairperson, let me conclude this. I do agree with the minister that you are not telling the person to abandon his or her job. However, we have faced a similar situation with foreign service missions; child growth is very important even for three months.

Madam Chairperson, you know Ugandan foreign service officers have always complained that periodic and constant transfer affects the child’s stability and education. An officer stays for a year in Canada, next year he is taken to South Africa and so forth. Even this bonding can fail.

Therefore, bonding a child for a period of one year with such a person is bound to fail. The longer you expose a child to somebody on probability of yes and no, the more it puts the child at a very high risk. That is why in most countries, the shorter the period, the better. 

Just assume, Madam Chairperson, that you put your child in Rwanda to study French for a period of one year trying to bond - (Interjections) - I am just giving an example. Bonding with French, then after that one fails, you put that child with an Arab, again for one year; you are affecting the child’s growth at the most crucial stage and, therefore, a shorter period is very important so that if it fails then, another alternative is tried.

This is the most crucial stage of a child’s growth. Therefore, I would propose that we have a shorter period like Kenya -(Interjections)- and other countries. Instead of one year, I propose six weeks.

MS KAWOOYA: Thank you so much, Madam Chairperson. I have been listening to the debate on the Floor and I was constrained to rise when hon. Fox Odoi was misleading the House that the only children who can be adopted are those on the street, other than those of the Members of Parliament. In my experience, I nearly adopted twins of a Member of Parliament here -(Laughter)- and I stand by that - until I found out that the father of the twins was a Member of Parliament like me.

I have been in other countries like China and India where the process of adoption is worse than what we are going through now. The one year that Members are calling for is a year of bonding. You are not supposed to stay in this or that country. They give you a schedule when to come back and interface with the baby you want to adopt. You then go back and go through the welfare and you are monitored through that period. At the end of the day, when you qualify within that period, you are allowed to adopt the child.

In another scenario, there is a time when I had gone through all this process here in this country and it did not take me less than three years. At the end of the day, it was established that my husband had a baby of three months that I was not aware of, so the adoption was cancelled. Therefore, it is necessary for at least one year to have this child bond with the person who wants to adopt it for the good of that child. I agree with one year. Thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I think we have taken the decision about the one year. Let us move on; if one year does not work, we can come back. In the meantime, you will have been informed that adoption assurance is for three years. However, as the process continues, you look after those people for three years. Is that what you are suggesting? Members, be reasonable. Let us settle for one year, if it does not work then we shall come back and amend the law.

Honourable members, I put the question that clause 13 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put, and agreed to.)

Clause 13, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 13(5)

MS KOMUHANGI: Madam Chairperson, the committee has an amendment. We wish to insert a new clause to read as follows: “Notwithstanding subsection (5), the following person may facilitate the courts of law with information to protect the best interest of the child -
Advocates; 
probation and social welfare officers; or
any other person the court may deem fit for the purpose and the equivalent of appointment of a guardian and for the children.”

Justification: The child’s representation should not be limited to the state attorney and should be open to include other persons who actively participate in children affairs.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Members, the question is that clause 13(5) be amended as proposed.

(Question put, and agreed to.)

Clause 13(7)

MS KOMUHANGI: In clause 13(7) insert the following words at the end of the subclause (7) which may include: 
“i) Family preservation
ii) Kinship care
iii) Foster carei
v)Institutionalisation.” 

Justification: The Bill should list the continuum of comprehensive child welfare services referred to so that these services are known to all, published and explored before intercountry adoption is considered.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 13(7) be amended as proposed -

MR EKANYA: Madam Chairperson, the committee chairperson is saying that before you go to inter-country adoption you first go through family preservation, which is good; kinship care; foster care; and then she talks about inter-country adoption, as the last one.

However, in the Bill, the details do not provide for the institutional framework. She just assumes that there will be some orphanage or charity that would be providing this. Can you really -(Interjections)- no, Madam Chairperson, sometimes I get disturbed when colleagues are talking about an authority where you are going to have an executive director being paid Shs 40 million plus the expenditure of the entire staff and the money which is meant for child activities is diverted.

I, therefore, want to just make adjustments with the chairperson of the committee that family preservation and kinship remain important; then local adoption first before we go to international adoption. I beg to move.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I think what the chairperson was doing is to breakdown the various categories of care because this one was general. Therefore, what she has done is to break them down.

MR EKANYA: But she left out a very important aspect –(Interruption)

MS KOMUHANGI: Hon. Ekanya, can you patiently read subclause (7)? I can: “For purposes of this section, the continuum of comprehensive child welfare services includes a broad range of preventive services and community-based family-centered alternative care options.” This is what we unpacked for clarity. 

Actually, you can see in the justification that the Bill should list the continuum of comprehensive child welfare services referred to so that these services are known to all, published and explored before inter-country adoption is considered.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the question is that clause 13(7) be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 13, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 14, agreed to.

Clause 15, agreed to.

Clause 16, agreed to.

Clause 17, agreed to.

Clause 18

MS KOMUHANGI: Madam Chairperson, we propose to substitute the word “sentence” with the words “an order” in subclause (2) and wherever it appears in the Bill. The justification is that section 101 of the Children Act, Cap. 59, restricts the use of the word “sentence” in reference to a child appearing before a family court and children court.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the question is that clause 18 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 18, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 19, agreed to.

MS KOMUHANGI: Madam Chairperson, I have an amendment to clause 15; I do not know how it was skipped. When you look at the committee report, there is an amendment to clause 15.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Move it so that we can accept it later in the Bill.

MS KOMUHANGI: We propose to amend clause 15(1) by inserting the words “within six months” at the end of the provision.

Two, insert a new clause immediately after subclause (1) to read as follows: “After the expiry of six months from the date of submission of the application under subsection (1) the home shall be deemed approved”. The justification is that there should be a limitation period within which the minister approves the home after an application is submitted to avoid any possible abuse of the process.

Three, insert two new clauses immediately after clause 24. I think this is clause 24. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Madam Chairperson, I do not know whether we really need that amendment. If you apply and no one answers, should your application be deemed to have been approved? I do not know. What was the rationale?

MS KOMUHANGI: Justification?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Yes.

MS KOMUHANGI: Again, the justification is that there should be a limitation period within which the minister approves a home after an application is submitted to avoid any possible abuse of the process –(Interjection)- Hon. Ekanya, we are proposing, “After the expiry of six months from the date of submission of an application, the home shall be deemed approved.”

THE CHAIRPERSON: I do not know whether the Members are happy with that.

MR KABAJO: Madam Chairperson, I would tend to agree with the thoughts you have expressed. To say that a home will be deemed to have been approved after six months after submitting the application - if the minister does not take any step, it may not be for the good of the country and the children. 

We know that in Government, bureaucracy sometimes happens. A home which is not worth being called a home may apply and its application may fall through the cracks and if we pass this, after six months that home will be deemed to have been approved even though it does not deserve to be approved. I think the best way to handle this would be that if after six months the approval has not been received, the person should- 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Re-apply?

MR KABAJO: I would rather end on the side of caution and say that the application will have been deemed to have been unsuccessful and the person can either re-submit the application or go to court and appeal.

MR MURULI MUKASA: Madam Chairperson, probably to offer some improvement; if after six months there is no response, the applicant could lodge an appeal to the ministry so that the matter is followed up. We could say after six months, the applicant should again appeal and the appeal should be considered expeditiously.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, we really do not need this amendment. I want to remind ourselves that we had a debate on schools and I think it was hon. Kabahenda who described things you cannot call a school, where children had been collected. If we now say that if I apply and the ministry does not answer it is deemed approved and I just continue - I do not think we need this amendment.

MR EKANYA: Madam Chairperson, it is great that you are here and have been here. Parliaments worldwide adopt the concept of “deeming” in order to tame government bureaucracies and inaction. It is assumed that from the date somebody submits an application or a letter, the minister or the bureaucrat responsible should write and say we need a, b, c and d or we are not taking any action. However, the practice worldwide and especially here in Uganda is to just ignore people and the period elapses. That is why parliaments worldwide and especially here put a time limit and deem it so that the responsibility and the burden fall on the Government. 

From day one, when the application is submitted, the inspectors and other necessary people should go and inspect and say, “This place is not fit, therefore, close it”. However, to just wait there while somebody is struggling with children and doing fundraisings and when the period elapses he is again required to appeal is a burden to these people who are volunteering. That is why we included this concept; let the burden be with the minister to say after one week or five months that they are not approving. Even with the certificate of financial implications here in Parliament, we say if you do not reply within a given period of time, it is deemed to have been issued. That is now the trend.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable member, a certificate is a document but to deem a home where children are being collected, mismanaged or underfed as fit because the minister was late! Let us say after six months you re-apply. If you deem them approved, you are going to find all these slums being deemed to be children’s homes.

Honourable chairperson, can we say that the applicant can re-apply if the six months elapse? You cannot simply deem them approved; all these slums are going to be homes.

MS KOMUHANGI: Madam Chairperson, much obliged. However, we had reasons as a committee as to why we pushed this to you. There are some children’s homes that have been asking and applying and have never been given licences for years. They are there but are not licensed.  Although they exist, they are illegal. However, when you give a timeframe, say six months, at least the ministry will have to work. We may not use the words “deemed approved” but it is because when you say “deemed approved”, they will work, Madam Chairperson. If you leave it open, the way it has been, then there will be issues.

There are homes that are really in bad shape but are operating. There are homes which are good, but are operating without licences.

MS ANYWAR: Madam Chairperson, I am very uncomfortable to deem life. (Laughter) It is like sending a human being who is living to a slaughter house. 

The inefficiency of the minister or Government should not come to play in the life of the children we are talking about. We can only tighten our accountability processes on these Government officials. We are here, as the House; somebody should be following up all these. We can even say periodically, this ministry comes and reports to this House. We represent those people and we cannot afford to “deem” the lives of these vulnerable children.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, can we first propose a provision requiring the minister to handle the pending application expeditiously so that those which have been sitting can be handled? [MR MURULI MUKASA: “Within six months.”] That will entitle them to go to court. Why don’t we put that period in the law to deal with the existing applications which have not been approved or rejected?

MS KAMATEEKA: Madam Chairperson, is it possible for us to establish an inspection section in the ministry so that we are sure they will inspect these homes and recommend that they are given certificates to operate? Would it not be safer that way? I beg to propose. 

MS KABASHARIRA: Madam Chairperson, we established an authority, what would its function be and also its use? I will give an example of schools. We have so many good institutions running but because of bureaucracy, they are not licensed. These are big people but here we are talking of lives of children. Therefore, we need to tighten on the minister so that he knows he has to do it. If he does not do it, something must be done; the authority should intervene.

MS KOMUHANGI: I would like to propose, Madam Chairperson, that we provide that the ministry approves within six months-

THE CHAIRPERSON: All applications?

MS KOMUHANGI: Yes; he either approves or disapproves.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Let us make that change; that applications for approval of homes shall be considered within six months. 

I put the question that clause 15, as amended, do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 15, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 20, agreed to.

Clause 21, agreed to.

Clause 22, agreed to.

Clause 23, agreed to.

Clause 24

MS KOMUHANGI: Insert two new clauses immediately after clause 24 as follows:

a) “Insertion of section 114 in the principal Act 
	Vesting of assets and liabilities, subsisting contracts and pending proceedings

(1) 	All property, except any such property as the minister may determine, which immediately before the commencement of this Act was vested in the National Council for Children shall, on the date of commencement of this Act and without further assurance vest in the authority subject to all interests, liabilities, charges, obligations and trusts affecting that property.

(2) 	Except as otherwise provided in subsection (1) in relation to property, all contracts, debts, engagement and liabilities of the National Council for Children shall remain vested in the Government and may be enforced by or against the Government.

(3) 	All legal proceedings and claims pending in respect of National Council for Children shall be continued or enforced by or against the authority in the same manner as they would have been continued or enforced if this Act had not been enacted.”

The justification is to cater for the transition of the council into an authority.

b) “Insertion of section 115 in the principal Act 
Repeal of the National Council for Children Act, Cap 60

The principal Act is amended by inserting a new section immediately after section 114 as follows:

‘114. Repeal of the National Council for Children Act, Cap 60
The National Council for Children Act, Cap 60, is repealed.’”

The justification is that the National Council for Children has been instrumental in raising child-right awareness, promoting child-focussed planning and the development of various policies on children. However, it has not been an effective co-ordinator of policies and activities relating to children’s rights.

There is a clear consensus among the stakeholders, including children, that there is need for a strong body to oversee children’s welfare. It is, therefore, proposed that an autonomous body be created to replace the National Council for Children. The body should co-ordinate, provide leadership and oversee child rights in Uganda. The National Council for Children is organisationally unviable, with no proper mechanisms for funding and co-ordination of child-related policies.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the question is that the principal Act be amended in sections 114 and 115 as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 24, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 25, agreed to.

Clause 26

MS KOMUHANGI: Madam Chairperson, insert a new clause immediately after clause 26 to read as follows:

“Insertion of the fourth schedule to the principal Act

The principal Act is amended by inserting the fourth schedule as follows:

‘Fourth Schedule:  Meeting of the board

1. 	Meetings of the board

(1) 	The board shall meet at least once every month at such place and such time as may be determined by the board.
 
(2) 	The chairperson shall preside at every meeting of the board and in his or her absence the members present may appoint a member from among themselves to preside at the meeting.

(3)	The chairperson or in his or her absence, a member appointed by the board to act in his or her place may at any time call a special meeting, upon a written request by a majority of the members.

(4) 	Notice of a board meeting shall be given in writing to each member at least five days before the day of the meeting, but an urgent meeting may be convened in less than five days’ notice at the request of two or more members.

2. Quorum 

The quorum at a meeting of the board is four members.

3. Decisions of the board 

All questions proposed at a meeting of the board shall be decided by a simple majority of the votes of the members present and voting; and in case of an inequality of votes, the person presiding shall have a casting vote in addition to that person’s deliberate vote. 

4. A decision may be made by the board without any meeting but by circulation of the relevant papers among the members and by the expression of the views of the majority of the members in writing; however, any member shall be entitled to require that the decision be deferred and the matter on which a decision is sought be considered at a meeting of the board.

5. Board may co-opt members

The board may invite any person to attend any of its meetings as a consultant and may co-opt any person to the board but that person shall not vote on any matter before the board. 

6. Declaration of interest

(1) 	Any member of the board having pecuniary or other interest directly or indirectly in any matter before the board shall at that meeting declare the nature of such interest and shall not take part in any discussion or vote on that matter and if the chairperson directs, the person shall withdraw from that meeting. 

(2) 	The failure of any member of the board to disclose an interest in any matter before the board will cause the decision of the board to be voidable at the insistence of the other members of the board and that member shall be liable to be relieved of his or her duties. 

(3) 	For purposes of determining whether there is quorum, a member withdrawing from a meeting or who is not taking part under subparagraph (1) shall be treated as being present. 

7.  Minutes of proceedings

(1) 	The board shall cause the minutes of all proceedings of its meetings to be recorded and kept, and the minutes of each meeting shall be confirmed by the board at the next meeting and signed by the chairperson of the meeting.

(2) 	The chairperson of the board shall submit to the minister a copy of the minutes of each meeting of the board as soon as the minutes have been confirmed. 

8. Board may regulate its procedure

Subject to this Act, the board may regulate its own procedure and may make rules regarding the holding of meetings, notice to be given, the keeping of minutes or any other matter relating to its meeting.’”

The justification is: To establish clear procedure through which meetings of the board can be organised. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: There was something I wanted us to correct under meetings of the board: “The chairperson or in his or her absence…” The “his” was not there, and then the spelling of deferred was “differed” but it should be “deferred”.

MS ALASO: Madam Chairperson, I am sorry I seem to have missed something; did you call up the schedules? This is because I have issues on the second schedule. Are we now -

THE CHAIRPERSON: The amendment to the fourth schedule -

MS ALASO: Yes, but there is also this –

THE CHAIRPERSON: Let us finish with the Bill then we shall go to the schedules.

MS ALASO: Madam Chairperson, I do not seem to follow but I have interest in - 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Where is your interest? Which schedule are you interested in? 

MS ALASO: My interest is in this schedule in regard to the petition for legal guardianship in the High Court of Uganda. I think it is the third schedule, form 1, which is in the Bill.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Is it the one on page 28? 

MS ALASO: Yes. It is the one on page 28. I was just wondering if you had called it up or we have not yet reached it. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: The schedules come under clause 26. 

MS ALASO: Okay. Thank you. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: What do you want to amend, hon. Alaso? 

MS ALASO: Madam Chairperson, in that schedule on page 28, I would like to justify - 

THE CHAIRPERSON: I think we should just go schedule by schedule. 

MS ALASO: It is a consequential amendment.  

THE CHAIRPERSON: To simplify all these, we should just go schedule by schedule. Is it the third schedule? 

MS ALASO: Yes, Madam Chairperson. I would like to propose that the third schedule be amended to remove any reference to foreigners and foreign countries as applicants for legal guardianship because it runs through the entire schedule. It is consequential following the fact that we closed that door to legal guardianship by foreigners. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, it would really be consequential because we had taken a decision earlier. Therefore, let it be amended as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR KABAJO: Madam Chairperson, before we did this third schedule, had we finished the previous one that had the board and others? I did not hear you declare it? 

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 26 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 26, as amended, agreed to.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Let us do the interpretation first.

Clause 2

MS KOMUHANGI: Madam Chairperson, the interpretation clause is clause 2 and it includes the following definitions:

a) “Alternative care” means formal care options availed to a child without parental care. 

The justification is that the definition is in the Government Bill but it was lacking in the Private Members’ Bill. 

b) “Authority” means the National Children Authority established under section 6A.

c) “Board” means the board of directors established by section 6A.

d) “Chairperson” means a member of the board of directors. 

e) “Children with special needs” means children who have long-term physical, mental, intellectual or sensory impairments which may hinder their full and effective participation in society on an equal basis with others. 

The justification is: For clarity.

f) “Child marriage” means any union, whether formal or informal, involving any person below the age of 18 years for the purpose of living as husband and wife. 

The justification is: To be specific on the meaning of child marriage. 

g)	“Child pornography” means any representation through publication, exhibition, cinematography, indecent show, through information technology or by whatever means, of a child engaged in real or stimulated explicit sexual activity, or any representation of sexual parts of a child for primarily sexual purposes. 

The justification is to clarify on the meaning as used in the Bill. 

h) “Child trafficking” means recruitment, transportation, transfer, harbouring or receipt of a child by means of threat or use of force or other forms of coercion, abduction or fraud, deception, abuse of power or of a position of vulnerability or of the giving or receiving of payments or benefits to achieve the consent of a person having control over another person for the purpose of exploitation.

i) “Joint guardianship” means two or more persons having parental responsibility of a child.

j) 	“Member means” a member of the board of directors.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Members, the question is that clause 2 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to).

Clause 2, as amended, agreed to.

The Title

MS KOMUHINGI: Amend the title by deleting “No.2”. The title should now read, “The Children (Amendment) Bill, 2015”. 

The justification is that the numbering is not necessary because one of the Bills introduced by the Executive was withdrawn by the Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development on 6 August 2015.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the question is that the title be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to).

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

4.44
MR BERNARD ATIKU (FDC, Ayivu County, Arua): Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House report thereto.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the question is that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House do report thereto.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding_)

THE SPEAKER: I think it is the mover who is supposed to speak to the motion first.

MS ALASO: Madam Speaker, I would like to move a motion for recommital.

THE SPEAKER: You did not give us a notice.

MS ALASO: I was just trying to give the notice. I would like to –

THE SPEAKER: No, honourable members. You are supposed to indicate that there are areas you would like to recommit when we are still at the committee stage. Honourable mover, move the motion for adoption.

MS ALASO: Madam Speaker, I beg your indulgence. It is consequential – 

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

4.46
MR BERNARD ATIKU (FDC, Ayivu County, Arua): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the report of the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

THE SPEAKER: I think you are supposed to report that now all the clauses have been passed with amendments and then we go to the next stage.

MR ATIKU: Thank you for the wise guidance, Madam Speaker. I beg to report that the Bill entitled, “The Children (Amendment) Bill, 2015” has been considered and passed with several amendments. I beg to report.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

4.47
MR BERNARD ATIKU (FDC, Ayivu County, Arua): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the report of the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the question is that the report of the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted. 

BILLS
THIRD READING

THE CHILDREN (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2015

4.48
MR BERNARD ATIKU (FDC, Ayivu County, Arua): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Children (Amendment) Bill, 2015” be read for the third time and do pass.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the question is that, The Children (Amendment) Bill, 2015 be read for the third time and do pass.

(Question put and agreed to).

A BILL FOR AN ACT ENTITLED, “THE CHILDREN (AMENDMENT) ACT, 2016”

THE SPEAKER: Title is settled and Bill passes. (Applause) I would like to thank the mover and the chairperson of the committee. It has been a very long journey and we hope that these additional quotations will support the children of Uganda, and we hope that the minister will act expeditiously to implement what has been decided. Would you like to thank the House?

4.48
MR BERNARD ATIKU (FDC, Ayivu County, Arua): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity. I just would like to thank all the stakeholders who have played a role in delivering this amendment Bill that has been passed today.

First, I would like to thank you, Madam Speaker and your Deputy, for the patronage you have offered the Uganda Parliamentary Forum for Children. (Applause) What we have successfully done today has been the effort of the forum for children and I would like to thank the leadership and all the members and the Members of Parliament, who have been very supportive of this process.

I would also like to thank the Uganda Child Rights NGO Network that has been doing all the studies and research to guide this process. I equally would like to thank the current minister together with his technocrats who have worked together with us to see that we have harmony in delivering a law that can stand the test of time in guiding and protecting our children.

I would like to thank this institution once again for this very important legislation through the committee that has been ably led by a mother - the Woman Member of Parliament of Nakasongola District. She did a good job. 

I am grateful to you, Madam Speaker. I would like to pray that the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development will do the needful in ensuring they operationalise the authority that has been created and also Parliament appropriates resources to see that the future of this country is well protected. I thank you, Madam Speaker. (Applause)  

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, hon. Atiku.

4.56
MS CECILIA OGWAL (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I think today is a day that we can celebrate that a private Member’s Bill can be moved, processed and is passed into law. I think we need to congratulate this Parliament under your leadership. Although the Member has eventually staggered along the way –(Laughter)- we know that he has good intentions. 

The most important thing, however, is that Parliament has shown that we are responsible. It is very important that we have come up with a law to protect the rights of children. Although this particular Bill focuses more on the rights of children, to try and make it difficult for children to be trafficked, I think we need to find a way of protecting the rights of children so that they cannot be a subject of child sacrifice and child abuse even within the house. I think we need to find a way of protecting the rights of children.

I have looked at this Bill and it does not take care of the holistic needs of the children. However, I would like to congratulate you, Madam Speaker, for presiding over this very important Bill and I know that the women feel that when you take care of the rights of children, you should take care of the rights of women too. We are not happy at all, Madam Speaker, to get stories of women being abused outside there. Something has got to be done to change the image of the women of Uganda. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable members. As I indicated earlier, the Minister of Trade and Industry is put on notice. We need to complete the Bill. All we have left is the schedule. We have finished the Bill but the schedule has not been done. Is the minister coming? Are you ready with the schedule? Have you circulated it?

Members were very interested in that information. I think it is better that you circulate it and then we can complete that Bill tomorrow. However, we are glad that you are here. Let us hear from the Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Affairs on the International Women’s Day.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT 

4.58
THE MINISTER OF GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL AFFAIRS (Mr Muruli Mukasa): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. You are aware that 8th March was designated by the United Nations as the International Women’s Day and this day has been commemorated since 1975, which was the UN International Women’s Year. In Uganda, we have gazetted it as a public holiday and ceremonies are organised at national as well as local levels. 

The importance given to the observance of this day lies in the commitment by Government to the goals of gender equality and empowerment of women. This is enshrined in the Constitution of Uganda which guarantees equality of all citizens irrespective of ethnicity, age, sex, faith and ability without discrimination.

Government on this day takes stock of the achievements attained towards improving the lives of women and girls and also helps reflect on the challenges that still hinder the emancipation of women. In addition, it is a day when acts of courage and determination by women who have played extraordinary roles in the empowerment process are remembered. The actors in both central and local government also take stock of the contributions made towards the empowerment of women and set forward-looking strategies for women and girls to accelerate gender equality and women’s empowerment through tackling the unfinished agenda. We also remember the women’s struggles and we realise that these struggles will be won by democratic means organised and led by women with the support of men.

Madam Speaker, the International Women’s Day this year is very important for the women of Uganda for a number of reasons:

1. 	The year 2016 marks the beginning of the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), which have been agreed on by the United Nations member states and Uganda subscribes to these development goals and the framework. This has put gender equality and women’s empowerment high on the agenda.

2. 	At the centre of these goals, there are three core principles of universality, indivisibility and all-inclusiveness, meaning leaving no one behind. These can only be put into operation if we build on each other’s strengths through effective and mutually beneficial partnerships and respect for human dignity. 

3. 	The Sustainable Development Goals focus on gender equality and women’s empowerment through goal No. 5 which is, “To achieve gender equality and empower all women and girls”.  This goal specifically targets the following:
End all forms of discrimination against all women and girls.
Eliminate all forms of violence against all women. 
Eliminate all harmful practices such as child and early and forced marriages and female genital mutilation.
To recognise and value unpaid care and domestic work. 
Ensure women’s full and effective participation and equal opportunities for leadership
Ensure universal access to sexual and reproductive health and reproductive rights.
To undertake reforms to give women equal rights to economic resources including financial resources.
Enhance the use of enabling technology to promote the empowerment of women; and adopt and strengthen sound policies and enforceable legislations for the promotion of gender equality and empowerment of all women and girls at all levels.

Honourable members, you may wish to note that all the other 16 Sustainable Development Goals also have targets and indicators for achieving gender equality and empowerment of girls. As we celebrate this year’s International Women’s Day, the Sustainable Development Goals provide a framework and also an opportunity for us to consolidate the gains so far made and build on them to move forward and address the unfinished agenda. Under the framework, each actor will gain from mutual support of others and synergies will be built and strengthened to attain gender equality within the three dimensions of sustainable development, social, economic and environmental.

We will require adaptation of programmes and policies to the new sustainable development agenda. This will entail bringing together voices from a wide variety of stakeholders to broaden dialogue and facilitate consensus on how the new stand-alone global goal on gender equality will be customised to a national context. It will also require that institutional capacities are enhanced to build on and consolidate the achievements and lessons so far learnt. 

In addition to the stand-alone goal on gender equality, all the other 16 goals have targets and indicators for gender equality and women’s empowerment. As such, achievement of the Sustainable Development Goals will require a multi-sectoral approach more than ever before, thus requiring the active participation of all state and non-state actors. The International Women’s Day celebrations will provide a forum for advocacy to enlist the full and effective participation of all the actors with specific calls for action.

It is worthwhile noting that the NRM Government, which you have just voted back into power, has registered a lot of progress towards achieving gender equality in various aspects such as enrolment in school at primary school level and decision-making. You may recall, Madam Speaker, last year the African Union recognised Uganda for the good progress in gender equality regarding women and decision-making. In the same vein, the NRM party has been at the forefront of inclusion of women and gender equality issues in its policies in order to deepen the commitment for advancing the cause of women.

Honourable members, over the years, the International Women’s Day has been celebrated under various themes selected by the United Nations. This year’s theme is “Pledge for Parity”. In other words we must pledge for equality. It calls upon women and men to support the acceleration of achievement of gender equality. In line with domesticating the celebrations, the national theme is “Women’s Economic Empowerment: A Vehicle to Sustainable Development”. Madam Speaker, this theme has been selected to demonstrate that focusing on economic empowerment for women has a gender equalizing effect on all spheres of women’s lives such as health, education and livelihood sustainability.

Economic empowerment is a journey that cannot be attained within a short time but it is a process that needs continuous effort toward its attainment. Since 1986, the NRM Government has put in place several strategies and programmes that have promoted women’s economic empowerment. This theme will provide an opportunity to evaluate the achievements and set strategies for advancing Ugandan women in the post-2015 global development agenda.

The theme draws attention of all actors - Government, civil society, faith-based organisations, the private sector - to review and re-examine the extent to which their respective policies and programmes have responded to the economic needs of women. In addition, the theme calls on all stakeholders to prioritise economic empowerment of women as a precursor for all the other forms of empowerment. 

Honourable members, it is within this context that the national theme this year is focusing on economic empowerment of women and girls. This has a gender equalising effect on the other aspects of women’s lives. In this regard, Government has prioritised the economic empowerment of women and girls through initiating the Uganda Women Entrepreneurship Programme that has been allocated Shs 53 billion in the financial year 2016/2017. The programme seeks to empower Ugandan women to improve their income levels and contribute to development. This will be achieved through strengthening their entrepreneurship capacity, providing affordable credit and facilitating access to markets and appropriate technologies for production and value-addition.

Honourable members, the venue for this year’s national celebrations is going to be Kololo Ceremonial Grounds and His Excellency the President of the Republic of Uganda will officiate at this national celebration.

As I wind up, Madam Speaker, this day is usually preceded by Women’s Week which has been held from the 1st and stretches up to 7th March. During this week, various actors will engage in self-help activities to show solidarity with women. In this regard, all actors in the various sectors including district political leaders, women leaders, civil society, government departments, the media and the private sector are expected to participate in the preparations and make sure that this year’s International Women’s Day is memorable.

I, therefore, call upon all of you to show solidarity with the women of Uganda and join us to observe the International Women’s Day at Kololo and also to support your constituencies so that they can also commemorate this day. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. For God and My Country.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, our minister.

5.05
MS JOVAH KAMATEEKA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mitooma): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for the statement. 

Throughout the campaigns and all this period, we got to learn that Government had allocated Shs 234 billion to the Uganda Women Entrepreneurship Programme. First of all, we are happy that Government came up with this programme and committed funding to it. However, we were told it was Shs 234 billion but according to the minister’s statement, it is Shs 53 billion. The women of Uganda would like to know what has happened to these funds. We are grateful but we would like to know why it has reduced to this amount. Thank you. 

5.07 
MS FRANCA AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative,	Agago): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for the statement. 

I have observed that every year, Government makes very good statements as we prepare to celebrate the International Women’s Day. I would like to ask and request Government to make a commitment that this financial year, we make good the statements we make in this House especially in terms of ensuring that the money that is allocated to women this financial year gets down to them.

Madam Speaker, I sit on the Committee on Budget; we all agreed as Parliament to allocate money to women for this special programme called the Uganda Women’s Entrepreneurship Programme. I would like to request the ministry and everybody in this House to commit themselves to follow up this money. There is still a discrepancy in the figures and we will sort that out but the fact is that money has been allocated to this programme and Parliament resolved that this money will work in every district. There is nothing like selecting a few districts to pilot. We will not accept government money to be piloted in a few districts. 

I have worked out the mathematics and out of the Shs 53 billion the minister has spoken about now, every district at least will receive over Shs 400 million. Though small, it can do something in the small groups that women are trying to engage in especially in economic empowerment. It is very small but at least it would be better for us to make sure every district in this country gets a small share, however small it may be, as we work hard to make sure every financial year we add something. If this is done, I will also for once attend the International Women’s Day celebrations in Kololo. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

5.10
MS CECILIA OGWAL (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I feel that starting with ourselves and the current Government, there must be real commitment to what is in our Constitution to address the gender imparity. We would like to see the Government demonstrating that it is addressing that gap this year.

Madam Speaker, it took us long to deal with the issue of women being deputies across. Even now, right from the very top, you find that it is male-dominated and yet women are there and we are all committed to make sure that we improve on the positions of women in leadership; even His Excellency the President has stated that. However, the President is very aware that even his deputy is a man and all the four positions of the Prime Minister and his deputies are held by men. Even when you look at the composition of women in the Cabinet, it is all dominated by men. 

When can we get commitment from the Government -(Lt Gen. (Rtd) Rwamirama rose_)- Excuse me, I am making a statement; can you wait until I have finished then you can make your intervention. I will give you clarification but I cannot clarify what I have not spoken. Can you sit down, please? (Laughter)

LT GEN. (RTD) RWAMIRAMA: Madam Speaker, I would like to clarify that it is in the history of the NRM that we had a Vice-President who was a woman; it is also in the history of the NRM that we have a woman in the office of the IGG; it is during the time of the NRM that we have a woman presiding over this House as Speaker of Parliament. Therefore, it is not right to say that the President has been reserving the top positions for men only. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

MS CECILIA OGWAL: Madam Speaker, I think we should not evade the truth. I am not making a statement of criticism; I am not criticising the Government but I am demanding for commitment. The Government must be committed to what it says and what it preaches. If it is to address that gap, I have voluntarily given you where the gaps are. Look at the very top; they are all men and please, do not divert our minds by referring to the Speaker. We put the Speaker in that Chair and not His Excellency the President. He can maybe help but this Parliament is the one that elected the Rt Hon. Rebecca Kadaga to be the Speaker of this Parliament; it is not the NRM Government. 

You have to be aware that I am not criticising the NRM Government and it is not my work to criticise the NRM Government. This is my country and I am holding the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, which I participated in making. Therefore, I am asking whoever is holding power in this Government to let women stop begging.

It seems that we are always begging and the Government always comes up with tokenisms – “We have given you the Speaker, why are you complaining? We have given you the IGG, why are you complaining?” We are not talking about tokenisms but commitment. So, can the Government this year embrace its own message of commitment? I think this is what I would like to see happen, Madam Speaker.

Secondly, this Parliament must be reminded that the African Union (AU) has adopted the ratio of 50 to 50 per cent. I know that this Parliament has adopted a percentage of 40 and I think it is important that after 20 years, which we are about to reach now, in testing this affirmative action, we should move from 30 to 40 per cent officially. The AU has adopted 50 per cent and that is what we should strive towards, and yet we are just moving in a circle of tokenisms. I think this is wrong, Madam Speaker. I am not speaking because I am a woman but because I stand for the rights of women and I am blessed to be one. I would have still made the same statement even if I was a man. 

I would like to ask those who are holding the power now to rise up to the call of this year to put women where they belong. If you want to address the issue of corruption and impartiality, put a woman in power. We do not want to just talk but we need to take action. That is why I am pleading with the current Government in power and with you, Madam Speaker, as you preside over the House. Everybody is very proud of the excellent performance of the Parliament of Uganda because a woman is in charge. (Applause) Now, you imagine if we had a majority of women in Parliament, definitely our performance would have been tremendous. That is what I am talking about. Madam Speaker, let this Government wake up to its own call. I thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, the opportunity to demonstrate the pledge for parity should be in the formation of the new Government. Let us see parity in the new Government. 

5.16 
MS ANNE AURU (NRM, Woman Representative, Moyo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for his statement but I wish to request that he uploads it so that we can access it on our iPads; we do not have it. 

It is good that this year’s call is for gender parity; it means that men and women should be brought into equal standing. However, my attention really focuses on the women councils and their budget. Government has put in its structure women councils to monitor and promote the women agenda but they have been poorly supported. 

I realised this when I was challenged during the elections, when my opponent said yearly, women get Shs 30 million in my district. However, when I went to find out the reality, they were only getting Shs 3 million; that is the support to the women councils. There is need to empower the women and give them the tools and they will rise to the occasion. Thank you very much.

5.17
MS FLORENCE MUTYABULE (NRM, Woman Representative, Namutumba): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to join my colleagues to appreciate the statement made by the minister. 

I would like to request that this economic women empowerment should target the very rural woman because what I discovered during the time I was campaigning is that the rural woman is really badly off. When we talk about empowerment of women, we are always looking at the middle class and working class women but the very rural woman is still badly off. I had a case where my supporter called me and said his wife was admitted in hospital and they needed Shs 50,000. I sent that money but the man pocketed it and the woman was still crying saying, “I am here and have no help and I do not know who is going to help me” and then she had to contact relatives. The little money I sent for the woman’s treatment was not given to her because the man says he owns everything. 

These women are yearning for capital to start something, which can help them, but they do not see that money. Honourable minister, if that money comes, let it target the very rural woman because that woman is really suffering. The middle class woman is a little bit okay because we know she can get money from employment or something of the sort. I know it is those same women who will go in for that money and the rural woman will not be able to access it. Therefore, I think it is something you should really take care of. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

5.20
MS SYDA BBUMBA (NRM, Nakaseke County North, Nakaseke): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to join my colleagues in thanking the minister for the statement made. The pledge by the UN for this year’s International Women’s Day is long overdue but there is no way we are going to achieve parity unless there is full economic empowerment of the woman.

During the campaigns, you must have all experienced how many competent women failed to make it because they lacked resources. They had to depend on people to fund them and these people were not willing. Because of lack of funding, there are many competent women who would be here or who would be in positions of decision-making who have not made it.

Madam Speaker, my prayer is that as Government domesticates the UN theme, they should really come up with a strong commitment to fund the women activities. What I have seen in the past is that over 90 per cent of the money, which is supposed to go to women activities, goes for Women’s Day celebrations and seminars without consequence. Therefore, this money, which has been allocated, - the Shs 53 billion - though it is not up to what we expected, it should be ring-fenced to be strictly used for economic activities and not for conferences and Women’s Day celebrations.

Government should also find more money. Women are at the core of production in this country; if we say that this country is an agricultural country, it is the women who do the cultivation. The men are marketers but the women who carry out the main activity are still getting very little. So, we really demand that Government comes up with more funding and with a strong commitment to funding the women, especially those at the grassroots. Thank you.

5.23
MR KENNETH LUBOGO (Independent, Bulamogi County, Kaliro): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also thank you, honourable minister, for the statement that you have presented to the House.

I appreciate that Uganda has not achieved 100 per cent of what we should have achieved in terms of women advancement but I believe that we have made giant strides that we need to appreciate and applaud our country for. At all the district councils, we have representatives from subcounties and we have a woman councillor and the other councillor who can also actually be a woman.

We know that we are making these strides and over time, we shall achieve 100 per cent but let us appreciate that we have moved somewhere. Countries are looking to Uganda for the steps we have taken. Where the Parliament of Uganda has almost 40 per cent of its Members being women, I think this is not a mean feat and we must appreciate and be proud of this.

I attended a certain conference in Europe, which focused on women in higher education. What we are talking about here is actually what the women in Europe were talking about. They said that they were not taking positions of leadership as they should. They gave statistics, which showed that even those we look to in terms of parity are not doing better than us. Therefore, I think where we are as Uganda, given the period we have had behind us, we are making great strides towards gender parity.

Madam Speaker, that said, this financial year this Parliament appropriated money for women entrepreneurship and it was for a women’s fund. Some districts were specifically pioneered to benefit from this money, including my district, Kaliro. I think there were 16 or 18 districts. However, the financial year is about to come to an end and we do not know where this money is. What happened to this money that was appropriated for women? Where is it? We now have the issue of the Shs 53 billion you have just talked about coming next financial year. Can you assure us that this is not going to disappear and that this money is actually going to be delivered to the people who are supposed to use it?

I am rather sceptical about this amount of money you are talking about, given that what has already been appropriated has not been delivered to the beneficiaries. Please, explain to this House where the money appropriated for women for the 16 or 18 districts which were pioneered has ended up. Thank you.

5.25
MR BERNARD ATIKU (FDC, Ayivu County, Arua): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the minister for the statement preceding the International Women’s Day celebrations. 

I have few questions to put forward to the minister and the Government in regard to the plight of women and girls in this country. I want to ask the minister to provide answers – let me say Government because I think it would not be just to put it squarely to the minister – in regard to maternal mortality in this country. It is documented that every day, 16 mothers die giving birth in this country. What is Government doing because we have been singing this song for quite a long time? Can we have a concrete response to these mothers who are dying every day? The Leader of the Opposition has just whispered to me that the statistics have gone up to 19 women now.

Can we also have a response to the high dropout rate experienced among girls in our primary schools? Yes, we have got UPE but when you look at the completion rate or statistics, a majority of the girls who enrol in primary one fall out before completing primary five. Can Government provide a concrete response to this problem that is affecting girls’ education in our country?

The third issue is in regard to early child marriages and other sexual offences related to girls. Girls are the future wives of this country; they are the future of this country because once they have matured, they are the ones who give birth to the citizens of this country. However, a majority of them die as a result of the various sexual offences as police reports have indicated. Can we have a response from the Government to these questions, which affect the future of this country, particularly the women, as we celebrate the International Women’s Day, if we are to talk about pledging parity to match with what the UN has proposed as the theme for this years’ celebration? Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: There is a request from the Prime Minister. He wishes to contribute to the statement.

5.29
THE SECOND DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND DEPUTY LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Gen.(Rtd) Moses Ali): Thank you, Madam Speaker. As I walked in, I heard my sister talking – usually, she talks in a loud voice - and I did not know what this was all about. However, when I sat quietly, I realised that there was a statement about the International Women’s Day celebrations and there was also the issue of affirmative action for the women.

I would also like to contribute by saying that since the Government deliberately introduced affirmative action for women in many areas, many women have benefited, especially the girls. If you start with 1.5 points for females joining university; this has empowered women and in fact, they are now the majority in some faculties. When I was at Makerere University, women were almost three-quarters and by now, in the Faculty of Law they are the majority because of that affirmative action. (Applause)

It is not really about competition between men and women. It is about how we pull these women up because they had been left behind for many years. We should not create a situation of blackmailing men as though men should not exist in this world. (Laughter) If we were not to exist, you too would not exist because we men are also a catalyst for women’s existence. Without us, it becomes difficult and also without you, it becomes difficult for us to exist. So, it is God’s plan that we must co-exist. 

What I really want to say is that Government has tried and is still trying to implement affirmative action in many areas, including leadership. However, what we discovered in the just concluded election campaigns is that the poorest people in this country are the women and those who carry the biggest burden in every village are women. It is really a pity. This man leaves in the morning and returns in the evening demanding for food without contributing. Sometimes he gets drunk and wants to eat food and then starts to disturb this woman at night. (Laughter) This is very dangerous. Therefore, I would like to sympathise with any contributor, including myself who has now discovered this.

I see that this Government has done something of importance; for example, in my district some NGOs have introduced self-help savings projects where people save until the end of December and then they distribute what has been saved. This has helped very many women to even pay school fees and take care of other responsibilities. If you borrow and you do not pay, they collect your utensils in the house leaving you with nothing to cook with. So, on that, Government is covered.

If you want to help these people and the country – President Museveni was talking of billions directly to these women. If properly implemented, poverty will be history and there will even be more competition for leadership by women, not just for you in the town only. Many people will be able to study and there will be competition even in the villages because women would have been supported and pulled out of this poverty. With this, I think we shall see poverty eradicated and especially among the women. Once a woman is out of poverty, the rest will be okay. The man can eat every day because the woman is there but the man does not contribute and yet he wants to eat.

Madam Speaker, I think this is information that is not a secret. It is common knowledge that the NRM manifesto is coming up with deliberate affirmative action to fight poverty among the women. I would like, on behalf of Government, to thank the general public for voting for the NRM – (Interjections) – Oh! Yes. This is clear and for us we are very happy that the FDC has also taken part in the elections. Without them, we would not say that we have had elections. An election must have at least two or three people standing just like how President Museveni stood with seven people. This is important for democracy. 

Now that we know our positions, we are moving on with affirmative action so that we keep this country going. It is also an important system of running the country democratically; the guns had tormented our country for 40 years from 1966 to 2006. I think that much as there is a problem here and there, democracy is still the answer. If you lose, lose honourably and if one does not lose, let the others accept.

Madam Speaker, I thank everybody who won and also thank everybody who offered to compete. If you lost, I am sorry. (Interjections) – I am not spoiling but I am winding up. (Ms Alaso rose_) I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister.

GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: I am sorry but I did not thank hon. Alaso for struggling although I heard that she lost. We shall miss her anyway because she has been very clear-minded, strong and so on. However, in a Tsunami, people lose; so, I thank you anyway. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: I thank you. Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Affairs, please, wind up.   

MS ALASO: Madam Speaker, do I have a right to reply?

THE SPEAKER: I thought it was a light joke.

MS ALASO: You see, when your name is mentioned and it stays in the Hansard, you must also respond, also lightly. First of all, I would like to thank the Prime Minister for those very kind comments about me. I would also like, for the sake of it, to say that –

MR MURULI MUKASA: Madam Speaker –

MS ALASO: I am responding to the Prime Minister. He mentioned my name.

MR MURULI MUKASA: My sister, hon. Alaso –

MS ALASO: Hon. Muruli Mukasa, since when did you become Alaso?

THE SPEAKER: Give her two minutes.

MR MURULI MUKASA: One minute. Okay, my sister.

MS ALASO: The Speaker has given me two minutes. I just wanted to thank the Prime Minister for those very kind comments about me and secondly, to say that it is okay to lose but in a free and fair election unlike the one in Serere, which was commanded by Generals. That begs for another debate - when the army descends on you and takes over the tallying. That is for another day. I thank you very much for your comments.

MR MURULI MUKASA: Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you and the august House for the warm response that you have given to the address about the International Women’s Day. We are indeed very thankful for the advice and the proposals that have been given to Government by the various Members of the august House. You have all spoken when the Leader of Government Business is around and I can assure you that he has taken note.

Madam Speaker, it is true that Shs 234 billion was pledged towards the women empowerment programme but because of budgetary constraints, what we are likely to get this year is Shs 53 billion and in the subsequent years, we shall be getting more. It is a commitment that Government has put down to make sure that women get this special fund to enhance their empowerment and indeed, once women are economically empowered – (Interruption)

MS FRANCA AKELLO: I thank you, Minister. You are giving us very good information in light of the clarification raised by hon. Kamateeka in terms of the amount of money that was pledged and the actual that is available, and I suppose that you are talking about this financial year. The point of clarification that I wish to raise is whether that Shs 53 billion that is available is being processed or has been disbursed. Is it the money that is actually being talked about by hon. Lubogo in as far as the districts that were piloted - because I was part of the budget process? 

I was in this House when we agreed that the money must be disbursed to all districts. We all agreed here that there was no question on piloting. I, therefore, wonder whether this Shs 53 billion that you are talking about is for the next financial year or is it going to – I really need clarification on that.

MR MURULI MUKASA: I thank you very much. I think that the budgeting process for the next budget started some time back and we are very soon going to have the budget discussed in this House. The Shs 53 billion we can say, in earnest, for clarity’s sake, is going to be in the next financial year’s budget that we are going to pass in this House and indeed, it is going to be used in all the districts of this country. (Interruption)

MS KOMUHANGI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The information I would like to give the minister is that the money that is already operating now is for training. In this financial year, the budget committee appropriated Shs 2 billion to train the pilot districts, which are 19. I must assure this House that the 19 districts, which are going to benefit in the first group in the next financial year, are the ones that have started training and they are spread across the regions. (Interjections)- Training is about capacity building because this is what was provided for in this financial year.

I am giving you information, hon. Akello Franca. I sit with you in the budget committee and you know how you appropriated this money for training. The Shs 53 billion is for 19 districts that are going to start training in June. Honourable minister, I think we need to be clear to the House that the Shs 234 billion is money spread over five years.

THE SPEAKER: No.

MS KOMUHANGI: This information I am giving you is the right information from the budget committee. Can I conclude? (Interruption)

MS FRANCA AKELLO: Madam Speaker, can I also say something on the very issue of Shs 53 billion that we are talking about? The reason I am so passionate about this is because I was part of this right from the beginning. Hon. Komuhangi, you have got to be honest; I remember that we agreed to a position in the committee, unless you were just agreeing because you wanted the committee to wave you on or to endorse your budget. We agreed in the Committee on Budget that we come to the House, and the House agreed that the Shs 53 billion be distributed in all districts of this country.

This is not little money because when you calculate, at least every district would get over Shs 400 million. That would not be very small to start with, other than giving it to just 19 districts. Some of these 19 districts are complaining that there is nothing going on. 

Secondly, we also agreed that there are already existing groups. I am so glad that the Rt Hon. Deputy Prime Minister here also mentioned it. There are village savings and loans associations or groups all over this country. They are already set up, they are already trained and they know what they are doing. So we thought there would be no need for any part of this money to go for training in terms of capacity building and so on, which would eat up on the overall amount of money.

Madam Speaker, we have got to get clarification about this money. I am very shocked, honestly speaking.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, can I know whether the Shs 234 billion for the youth is also for five years?

MR MURULI MUKASA: Madam Speaker, this money is going to be phased, and as far as I know the Shs 53 billion is for next financial year. More money will be given as we go along. In fact, this matter was discussed in Cabinet this afternoon; the Shs 53 billion is for the next financial year and it will be disbursed in phases. We have Shs 53 billion next financial year and the other financial year we may have another Shs 80 billion or something like that. We will eventually get the Shs 234 billion.

THE SPEAKER: I am sorry I think this is air supply. How will you choose the districts to get the next Shs 53 billion? It means it is a one-off. This is air supply. Honourable minister, I think we need a proper statement on this issue. I think we need a proper statement because I have been holding out there in Busoga that this money is going to be available every financial year. That is what I told them and that is what the President told us. 

MR MURULI MUKASA: Okay, we shall make a statement. However, what is clear is that every year, there will be money under the women empowerment programme. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, come with a statement tomorrow. It is very important because this is air supply.

MR MURULI MUKASA: We shall come with a statement to clarify the status of that money tomorrow afternoon as directed by the Speaker. There were other issues, which were raised.

MS CECILIA OGWAL: Madam Speaker, it is important that we deal with this matter with a bit of seriousness. The Committee on Budget only deals with matters which have been presented through the sectoral committee and also what has been captured by the ministerial policy statement. I am surprised that the minister is not aware of what he came out with in the ministerial policy statement – what was captured and eventually taken to the sectoral committee and forwarded to the budget committee. It is important that you capture those figures and come out clean.

What I know, as a long serving member of the Committee on Budget, is that we are aware of the Shs 234 billion but I am not aware of the idea of giving it to 19 districts. I am aware that the ministry is going to give the women Shs 234 billion.
What we are asking as the Committee on Budget is, let this money not to be handled the way that of the elderly was handled because it has become an embarrassment even to you since you have a constituency. Everybody was asking why this money has not reached their districts and we had no answers.

We do not want the woman representatives in this House to be put on the dock for that money. So, we decided that every district must get its own portion. Therefore, you go and make your presentation in Cabinet if need be so that you tell your Government, the Cabinet, that Parliament has women who have an interest in this matter. We are demanding that this money must go to the targeted group and the targeted group are the rural people in our respective districts and that is our demand, Madam Speaker. 

I am also surprised to hear about the 19 districts. I am sure if I scan through them, Dokolo will be far away from this. I would not be a member of the Committee on Budget and be party to approving it if Dokolo is not included because they will ask me as they have been asking me about the senior citizens’ money. 

Madam Speaker, it is important that the minister does not only come with a statement about the money for the women but we also want to know about the money for the aged. What has happened to that money? We have been asked, we have been put on the dock, the women have been embarrassed, the Members of Parliament have been embarrassed before the electorate because we cannot explain what happened to the money. My own mother died without testing that money. Now there are very many old people who are dying there and they have not seen that money. So, can you, please, explain to us and exonerate Members of Parliament.

THE SPEAKER: I think let us wait for the statement. Honourable minister, I was going to say something nice - that I am very happy because you have brought the statement on International Women’s Day very early - but now you have spoilt my mood. You should really clarify before we go on Tuesday. It is a very serious matter for us.

MR MURULI MUKASA: Madam Speaker, I am sure that the statement will bring back your mood when it is made tomorrow and there will obviously be very good celebrations at the International Women’s Day event at Kololo.

I will indeed come here tomorrow with the statement regarding the Shs 53 billion. I will come to make a clarification on the Shs 234 billion, which was promised by the President and now the Shs 53 billion, which has been committed in the budget for the next financial year.

Madam Speaker, there are a few other issues that were raised by hon. Atiku about what is being done about some of these challenges our young people are facing, the high mortality rate of mothers, the dropout rate and a few other challenges the women are facing especially the young ones. The interventions have ranged from creating the relevant policy and legal environment, including advocacy, and trying to make sure that the factors which cause high dropout rates among girl children in primary schools are addressed. 

Some of these issues were even tackled in the NRM manifesto. Some simple things which make girls drop out include lack of sanitary facilities in the primary schools. There are instances where we do not have adequate sanitary facilities for both girls and boys and even for members of staff. All these have first of all been captured and various steps have been taken to make sure that they are eliminated and to ensure that at least problems of high dropout rates of girls in schools are checked. 

Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for giving me this audience to say something about the International Women’s Day. Let us hope that we shall meet tomorrow in a more cordial environment. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable minister. House adjourned to tomorrow at 2 O’clock.

(The House rose at 6.05 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 3 March 2016 at 2.00 p.m.)

