Tuesday, 22 March 2016

Parliament met at 2.45 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this special sitting. This particular sitting is to enable this House pay tribute to the late hon. William Kiwagama, former Member of Parliament for Bunya County West in Mayuge District. As you know, days back we got information that hon. Kiwagama had passed on. Being a distinguished Member of this House, it was deemed necessary that his body is brought to this House for us to speak in commemoration of his life and his contribution to the development of this country.

I have one announcement to make. The Parliamentary Anglican Chaplaincy will be holding Easter Carols this evening from 5 o’clock. You are all invited to attend. It will be in the Parliamentary Conference Hall. Thank you.

(Entrance of the late hon. William Wilberforce Kiwagama.)

The National Anthem. 

The East African Community Anthem. 

Laying of wreaths.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Rt Hon. Prime Minister, before you present the motion, let me recognise, in the VIP gallery, hon. Bernard Mulengani, Member of the East African Legislative Assembly, who has come to attend this session. (Applause)

Honourable members, before we start, let me make this short statement in relation to what happened yesterday while we were trying to confirm the procedure for bringing the body of the late hon. William Kiwagama to Parliament. I apologise for the stress that we caused to the family as the procedures took long. We needed a confirmation but the confirmation took long to come. However, it finally came. 

I thank the Rt Hon. Prime Minister for taking the decision and making the necessary consultations for this matter to be handled the way it has been handled. I am grateful. I do apologise to the family because the procedure was not known to them and we were just receiving messages on our phones of what we should do and yet there is a clear laid down procedure. 

This is just for the record: For former Members of Parliament and distinguished personalities whose passing draws the attention of this country for this House to make some recognition and have a debate on their contribution, the procedure is that the initiative comes from the Executive arm of the Government through the Prime Minister. However, sometimes we get communication directly from the President that such a matter should be handled in a certain way. When that happens, it becomes either an official or state burial and Parliament is then moved to make the necessary arrangements to receive the body and arrange for the tribute motion to be moved and debated and a decision of the House taken on that motion. 

For sitting Members of Parliament, that is squarely the responsibility of Parliament. When death of a sitting Member of Parliament occurs, we do not have to consult with the Executive because it is a matter of Parliament to handle. The Executive is part of this House and the procedures are well laid out.  

I do apologise for what happened yesterday as a leader in this House. This decision was not taken in a speedy manner and the family had to keep on consulting and we also had to make phone calls left, right and centre to sort out this matter. The decision was eventually made at about 6.00 p.m. last evening. I thank the Prime Minister for intervening to make this matter easier for everybody. I apologise to the family. That is what I needed to clarify and I am sure that Members are now aware of how we handle these matters. We can start the motion.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO PAY TRIBUTE TO THE LATE HON. KIWAGAMA WILLIAM, FORMER MEMBER OF PARLIAMENT OF BUNYA COUNTY WEST, MAYUGE DISTRICT

2.27
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): I thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am moving this motion for a resolution of Parliament to pay tribute to the late hon. William Wilberforce Kiwagama under rule 47 of the Rules of Procedure of this august House. The motion reads as follows:

“WHEREAS Parliament of Uganda has learnt with sadness of the death of the late hon. William Wilberforce Kiwagama, which occurred on 18 March 2016 at Mulago National Referral Hospital, Kampala;

AND WHEREAS the late hon. William Wilberforce Kiwagama was born on 5 October 1934;

AWARE that the late hon. William Wilberforce Kiwagama was a member of the National Resistance Council representing Bunya County in Mayuge District from 1989 to 1996, a delegate to the Constituent Assembly for Bunya County West from 1994 to 1995, and a Member of the Seventh Parliament representing Bunya County West for the period 2001 to 2006;

NOTING that in the Seventh Parliament, the late hon. William Wilberforce Kiwagama served on the standing Committee on Business and Welfare and the sessional Committee on Works, Housing and Communications;

RECOGNISING that the late hon. William Wilberforce Kiwagama also served the Kingdom of Busoga as Deputy Katukiro (Prime Minister) from 1993 to 1996, a position he held until the year 2000;

FURTHER recognising that in all the positions he held, the late Kiwagama served his country and community with diligence and dedication; 

NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved by this Parliament as follows:
1. 	That Parliament collectively conveys its deep condolences to the bereaved family, relatives, friends, the people of Bunya County West and the country upon the demise of the late William Wilberforce Kiwagama.

2. 	That Parliament takes cognisance of the distinguished services rendered and contribution made by the late hon. William Wilberforce Kiwagama to the people and the Republic of Uganda. 

3. 	That the Almighty God rests hon. William Wilberforce Kiwagama’s soul in eternal peace.” 

Mr Speaker, I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The motion is seconded by the Opposition Chief Whip, the Member for Dokolo District; Member for Aruu County; Member for Busia Municipality; the Rt Hon. Kirunda Kivejinja; Member for Kiboga District; Member for Butembe County; Member for Mayuge District and all the honourable members who have stood to second this motion.

Honourable members, I always have a problem with the drafting of the last resolution, “that the Almighty God rests his soul in eternal peace.” I do not think we can pass that by a resolution. (Laughter) We can only collectively pray that the Almighty God rests his soul in eternal peace. I do not think a parliamentary resolution will settle that matter; it can just be a prayer. Prime Minister, would you like to speak to your motion?

DR RUHAKANA RUGUNDA: This is the justification for the motion. Mr Speaker, it is indeed with great sadness that Government has learnt of the demise of our comrade and colleague, the late hon. William Wilberforce Kiwagama, which occurred on Friday, 18 March 2016 at Mulago Hospital after a long illness.

The late hon. Kiwagama was born on the 5 of October 1934 to the late Zachariah Ndego and Ms Nabirye of Kisewuzi Village, Ivukula Subcounty in the present-day Namutumba District. In 1972, the late Kiwagama migrated from Ivukula in Namutumba to settle in Imanyiro Subcounty, Bunya, in the present-day Mayuge District.

He attended his primary education at Ivukula Primary School and Budini Junior School in Namutumba District and Namilyango College for his O’level. He later joined Royal College Nairobi, which is the current Nairobi University, where he eventually qualified in quantity surveying.

In terms of his career, Mr Speaker, in 1964, immediately after graduating in quantity surveying from Royal College Nairobi, he returned to Uganda and joined the civil service where he worked for the Ministry of Works at Entebbe. Because of his education, determination and quest for education and knowledge, in 1965 the late Kiwagama secured a scholarship to the United Kingdom to upgrade in quantity surveying.

In 1968, after completion of his studies in the UK, the late Kiwagama returned to the Ministry of Works as a quantity surveyor. This was a clear demonstration of the spirit of patriotism for his mother country, Uganda. Some people would have preferred to remain abroad for greener pastures. 

From 1969 to 1972, the late Kiwagama worked with Armstrong, Duncan and Russell Surveying Company. Because of his industrious and enterprising skills, the late Kiwagama together with his colleague, Mr Kiwanuka, in 1972 formed the first indigenous surveying company called Kiwagama, Kiwanuka and Partners where he was a major shareholder. He served in this company until his death. We have lost a senior colleague who would mentor young entrepreneurs on how to grow and nature companies, and this job he did very well.

Because of his commitment and love to serve his people, the late hon. Kiwagama offered to serve the people of Uganda and Mayuge in particular in various capacities. I will give a few examples. From 1989 to 1996, he was a Member of the NRC, representing Bunya County in Mayuge District. From 1994 to 1995, he served as a Constituent Assembly Member for Bunya County West. During this time, he simultaneously served as Deputy Katukiro (Prime Minister) of Busoga Kingdom. From 1996 to 2000, he was appointed Prime Minister of Busoga Kingdom. From 2001 to 2006, he was re-elected Member of Parliament for Bunya County West.

In terms of community service, from 2006 up to the time of his demise, the late Kiwagama was involved in private consultancy and social development projects such as schools and churches, for the good of the community in Busoga, especially Namutumba, Mayuge and also in Lungujja in Nateete in Kampala plus Uganda in general. This is evidenced by his generosity to the extent of donating a number of pieces of land for the construction of community projects. A case in point is five acres of land that he donated to Kisewuzi Primary School and four acres of land for the establishment of Kisewuzi Secondary School in Ivukula Subcounty in Namutumba District. 

The late Kiwagama lobbied investors to establish Mayuge Sugar Factory and also availed them prime land on which to start the factory. This was a fulfilment of the NRM’s commitment of inviting and welcoming investors to create jobs for our people. The late Kiwagama gave out 18 acres of land to Bufulubi Primary School, St Paul’s Church of Uganda, Bufulubi, and 10 acres to the community for the establishment of Bufulubi Secondary School, which is currently under the Government programme of Universal Secondary Education (USE).

Mr Speaker, the late hon. Kiwagama died at Mulago Hospital after losing the battle to diabetes, hypertension and lymphatic cancer, which he had battled for a long period. The late hon. Kiwagama is survived by a widow, Mrs Proscovia Mutibwa Kiwagama, and nine children - four boys and five girls. 

Mr Speaker,  I take this opportunity to convey my sincere and heartfelt condolences to the family, the widow, Mama Proscovia; and to the people of Uganda for the loss of a distinguished, industrious and gallant son of Uganda. I thank you, Sir.

4.40
THE OPPOSITION CHIEF WHIP (Ms Cecilia Ogwal): Mr Speaker, I stand here to second the motion. I also want to convey condolences of the Members of the Opposition on this side and my personal condolences to the family and to the Kingdom of Busoga.

I am particularly touched by the departure of the hon. William Wilberforce Kiwagama because he went through a special university in the region where I also went; that is the Royal University of Nairobi. I think it is very rare to find people of distinguished academic excellence as people who have gone through the Royal University of Nairobi. (Laughter) He was indeed a dedicated servant of the people and he served the Kingdom of Busoga and this country with humility, integrity and honesty. We wish to express our most sincere condolences not only to the people of Busoga but to the whole of Uganda. 

You are aware, Mr Speaker, as the Prime Minister has just stated, that hon. William Wilberforce Kiwagama was a Member of the Constituent Assembly and indeed some of us who were privileged to be in that House do remember that that is when we learnt how to be nationalistic - how to learn the interests of Busoga and translate them to the interests of the people of Lango and unite the country together behind the key issues. Therefore, William has left behind a very big story of transforming this country. I hope the family and Busoga will always put that as something to remember William for.

Mr Speaker, we celebrate the life of this son of Busoga mainly because he contributed so much to the community. As you have heard, - and some of you who have read the Hansard will know - the man was so passionate about sanitation. It is very difficult for many of us, Members of Parliament, to talk about sanitation. We think it is shameful to talk about it. However, he was so passionate about sanitation and improvement of people’s standards of living.

Mr Speaker, as Katukiro or the Prime Minister of Busoga Kingdom - I happened to have learnt a bit of Lusoga because my husband went to the famous Mwiri - (Laughter) - I indeed married a man not an ordinary person. (Laughter) Mr Speaker, I am told those ladies who marry men from Mwiri have actually married men; so I am very proud to have married a man from Mwiri. 

Mr Speaker, he was indeed a professional quality surveyor who, besides his work, had a passion for agriculture just like me; as a commercial farmer, he owned a number of sugarcane and banana plantations and he always talked about his farm despite the fact that he was a Member of Parliament. He always urged his colleagues to go to Busoga and see what he was doing as a farmer. This really touched me.

He was also well known for rearing goats and for dairy farming, which is very rare. We know that dairy farming is common but there are very few of us who can brave rearing goats because they are very stubborn. However, my brother, William, did it.

As a qualified surveyor, engineer Kiwagama served with high professional integrity. He was never associated with any corruption scandal which is endemic today among many professionals. We have had so many scandals regarding road construction. I wish people identified the quality in this man and got him involved in the road construction sector.

As a nation, we are proud of the distinguished service hon. Kiwagama offered to this country. Mr Speaker, the measure of the success of a person in life depends on how many lives he has touched during his lifetime. We have heard that this man, a son of Busoga, was so hardworking and generous that he gave away personal assets for the development of the community. This is a very rare quality.

Many of us, leaders, are associated with grabbing. Wherever we go, we want to expand our land, we want to buy assets but this man gave away his assets for the development of the community. (Applause) Certainly, the Basoga will miss a true nationalist, a man who gave his heart. He did not only care about his family; he gave his heart because he knew his family had enough and so the extra he had had to be given to the community. This is a very rare quality from Busoga.

The Bible sometimes challenges us. In the Bible, some people did not believe in the quality of the person of Jesus Christ. They said, “Can anything good come from Nazareth?” Indeed, something good can come from Busoga –(Interjection)– not only jiggers. I think some of us who only think about jiggers when we think about Busoga must know that quality, commitment and nationalism can also come from Busoga –(Interjection)– Mr Speaker, protect me.

The strongest drive of William’s personal and professional life was to support the less privileged. That is why he committed himself to homestead sanitation. The Rt Hon. Prime Minister has already elaborated how much he did for the community. However, what I am particularly touched about is the giving away of 18 acres of land to Bufulubi Primary School and the Church, as well as 10 acres to the secondary school. This is something which will live beyond him and his family; even his grandchildren will live to remember this.

Some of us who read the Bible know that wherever you go, the trademark of Abraham was the number of the wells he left. They would say, “This is the well of our grandfather Abraham”. That is how they came to identify themselves with a great history. Therefore, the family of William and the people of Busoga will remember this great man because of what he has left behind. What he has donated in the form of land will go beyond him, his children and even his grandchildren. This is a great blessing. To some of us who know God, he has planted a seed that will be harvested forever. I would like to thank God for his family.

Mr Speaker, I can only urge the Government to use this opportunity to improve on the Uganda Heart Institute and the Uganda Cancer Institute. We have talked about this matter; every time we lose a colleague, we reflect on the miserable conditions in which the heart and cancer institutes are. My mother and the mother of the Minister of State for Health, Chris Baryomunsi, died at the Uganda Heart Institute. Definitely, something has got to be done. 

We should not mourn as if we do not have power. We have power to change things. We have power to improve on the budget allocation for the health sector and particularly the heart institute. Because of the nature of our work, many of us are victims of high blood pressure and diabetes. We need to do something. Let it be our brother, William, to remind us that if he had a good facility at the heart institute and cancer institute in Uganda, definitely his health condition would have been better managed. This is a cry of all Ugandans.

It is worse if you are a poor person. If you come from Dokolo to the Uganda Heart Institute in Mulago, you cannot get treatment. First of all, it is very expensive and secondly, it is very difficult to access quality attention. Therefore, it is very important that we give attention to the people who bring us here.

Mr Speaker, I would like to end by saying that hon. William Kiwagama has left behind a lot for us to learn. It is humbling for many of us who claim to be leaders, yet we are too mean to even care for the orphans who are around us or the churches where we pray. Many of us still pray in grass-thatched churches. We go with our Pajeros, pack them there and enter to pray in a grass-thatched church. This is a challenge to us as leaders. We must improve the environment where we are. Let us learn from our brother and colleague, the late William Kiwagama. I would like to tell the family of William that we are with you in this situation. We are mourning with you. 

Mr Speaker, we hope that at an appropriate time, we will also bring to Parliament a resolution to pay tribute to another son of Busoga who died when we were all busy in the field, the late hon. Patrick Mwondha. I pray that at an appropriate time, you will create time for us to remember him. We need to do it because these are the people who have helped Busoga to be what it is. They have united Busoga with other regions and I feel very passionate about Busoga because of what they have done. My husband is from Mwiri and there are many Basoga such as Mzee Kirunda Kivejinja who were very closely associated with my husband. We must continue to build this spirit of nationalism. Nobody else will do it for us. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion before the House is for a resolution of Parliament to collectively convey its deep condolences to the bereaved family, relatives, friends, the people of Bunya County West and the country upon the demise of the late hon. William Wilberforce Kiwagama; that it takes cognisance of the distinguished services rendered and the contribution made by the late hon. William Wilberforce Kiwagama to Uganda; that it collectively prays to the Almighty God that He rests hon. William Wilberforce Kiwagama’s soul in eternal peace. That is the motion for our debate and debate starts now.

2.55
THE THIRD DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND MINISTER FOR EAST AFRICAN AFFAIRS (Mr Kirunda Kivejinja): Mr Speaker, as fate would have it, the late Kiwagama, who belonged to my generation and was just a few months older than me, has been brought here in a coffin for us to pay final tribute to him. I am here to represent that generation. I am going to point out a few points, which we would like to pass over to the new generation; maybe that is why God has left us here, to be able to pass on these few lessons. They may be able to assist you also to live a good life and be able to plan not only for your life but also for your children and the country.

I am not going to repeat what has already been said about Kiwagama but I will bring out only the salient features. The first one is that we, who have had the chance to be exposed to a wider community and wider knowledge, have a responsibility to lead our people out of where we have come from. The tendency, especially during the colonial time and which has continued, is that once you are ahead of your people, your main job is to make sure you aggrandise yourselves so that you remain on top to be seen by everybody as one who has never appeared in this world. 

Humility is what our generation imbibed. Even our girl, whom we used to call the “black carrot”, was a pearl. We were highly disciplined right from our personal hygiene. We used to call her boyfriend a “smart boy”. She was attracted to him because he knew how to conduct himself.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Kivejinja, for the purpose of the Hansard, who is the “black girl” so that we - (Laughter)

MR KIVEJINJA: When we say, “black carrot”, it is one of the pearls of the jewel. She was a jewel - [MR OKUPA: “Who was that?”]- That was her –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: For the record.

MR KIVEJINJA: Hon. Cecilia Ogwal. (Laughter)  It fitted well with what we wanted for this country. We really wanted everybody to come out and contribute. We lived by example. Hon. Kiwagama lived by example; that you can live in and leave this world without any scandal of being bribed or bribing your way to lead the population. You will be honoured up to the end. Therefore, this is a challenge to our generation. If you think you cannot survive by being honest, here is a lesson to pick from. 

We can see even the longevity of our House - recently, the “mortality” rate was at about 83 per cent. That shows that the terrain has changed and other forces have overrun. However, if we build on that, there will be no future for this country and nothing to look forward to. Hon. Kiwagama’s death reminds us of that message.

Secondly, hon. Cecilia Ogwal has posed a question on the upbringing of the people from Mwiri. That is okay, but these are our identities; everybody must have an identity. You belong to your father and mother and you happen to have been born in a certain area. That is your identity. 

However, when you are in this world, you need to harness the common interests and you must be able to fit them into a bigger unit. Therefore, it is not by accident that he was one of the first graduates in this country. I also would like to remind you that by 1962, there were only 500 people with O-level certificates and 103 graduates. He did not graduate before; he is a product of post-independence. I am one of the 103 graduates still surviving and relevant. (Laughter)

In other words, when you see me and this man, you are seeing a generation and the values that have lived, worked and wished this country to be well. Actually, when you become selfless, you become the owner of so many things. 

I would like to remind my sister that health facilities do not come from heaven. It is the people themselves, through the way they behave in society and plan their things, that these facilities will come up.

I was one of the factors. I named my first son Lumumba. Therefore, you should know the extent of my heart and the extent of the Prime Minister’s. He, however, died of lymphatic cancer at the age 37. He was one of the first graduates with a Masters’ Degree in Business Administration. Therefore, the fact that there are gaps within our society, that should bring us together to be able to plan for our country; nobody is going to plan for us. Even if we pray a thousand times, God did His job a long time ago. He allowed us to be here and endowed us with knowledge. God is not going to plan for this country because He is not going to produce another child to come and deliver us.

The honour is on us. Let us humble ourselves and know that the honour to move this country, create a society and be able to build structures to attain and uplift those people still lies on our heads. Those people whom you donate land to, you uplift - the question now is not only uplifting a few but transforming the whole of our society. It is because the more we are, the more wealth we shall create and the happier we shall be. We shall be able to exploit the opportunities around us. 

Rest you, Kiwagama. May your spirit continue to live within the hearts of these people who are here; who have been entrusted with the fate of this country so that it rages into their bodies. Bye, Kiwagama.
	
3.05
MR SAMUEL ODONGA OTTO (FDC, Aruu County, Pader): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker, for this opportunity. I rise on behalf of the people of Aruu County - the traditional Aruu, not the current one - to pay my last respects to hon. William Kiwagama whom I worked with in the Seventh Parliament for five years. When I got a message about his demise, I felt it was prudent to come and pay my last respect.

When I joined Parliament in 2001, I was not this old - (Laughter) - I was just 23 years and I had just come out of the university. I did not have a bald head like now. Most interestingly, it was also my first job and I have never worked elsewhere since then. That was when I met hon. William Kiwagama who was fairly elderly. 

The little memories I have of him is that he was very committed and loyal to his party. At that time, for those who do not know, we were all under the movement system. Everyone was in the movement. You would sit on either side of the House. Kiwagama and I would sit that side, slightly behind hon. Majegere and he would often be clad in yellow. Interestingly, on a lighter note, he would occasionally come to the House with a dry banana leaf tucked into his pocket - what people called “ekisanja’. 

Those memories make me see a committed individual. Many of us are not committed. When we are thrown out of our parties, we become independents. (Laughter) We keep changing. When you find it is viable not to be an independent, you join the parties. People keep somersaulting depending on the situation. (Laughter) 

Hon. William Kiwagama was not that kind of a person. At that time, there was an extensive campaign that the multi-party system should be brought back to Uganda. He, however, was one of the few individuals, including hon. Kirunda Kivejinja, who thought it was not wise to bring back the multi-party system and I think they were right. 

When I look back a few years, we are now under the multi-party system but I do not think we have made gains because now there is a de facto movement and a de jure movement. (Laughter) It looks like winner takes all. Therefore, as a country, we need to start thinking about the politics of us versus them. I do not think we are making gains. If we continue like this in the next 20 years, the elections will not be very nice.

We need to start thinking, now that our fallen colleague that was loyal from day one is lying before us, which direction we need to go. Mr Speaker, we are now at a level where certain important decisions are made to the exclusion of others, not because those people are bad but because we are in a system where some people have to be locked out. It is very strange.

I have been in Parliament for 15 years, Mr Speaker. Unfortunately, I have never gone to the National Leadership Training Institute in all these 15 years. I have not even been extended a single invitation just because I am on this side of the House. What kind of life is this? I even do not know what Kyankwazi looks like and yet it is the National Leadership Training Institute. 

I am not eager to go there. However, in countries like Israel and Tanzania, the National Leadership Institute is really a national leadership institute. I pray today that we recollect and see the direction our country is taking. 

I did not study in Mwiri. Hon. Cecilia Ogwal, I do not think I have any opportunity to study in Mwiri. However, if I may say, I am a real man. What runs in my mind are the traditional people who studied in traditional schools. My father, James Otto, who is still alive, studied in St Leo’s in Fort portal. There was a deliberate effort by the Government then to pick people from different parts of the country and take them to another part of the country to appreciate their culture. 

In traditional schools like Mwiri, Sir Samuel Baker, in Gulu; St Leo, Kigezi High; Mbale College, Ombachi in West Nile; Comboni College and Teso College, there was a deliberate effort to make people go and appreciate each other’s culture. That is why we have solid people like hon. Cecilia Ogwal today and hon. Kirunda Kivenjinja, a senior citizen.

Mr Speaker, the death of our colleague, hon. William Kiwagama, should make us start thinking; are we going to continue having our children study from nursery to university in the same village and think that they know Uganda? Where are we taking the country? 

In Uganda today, when you go to a public office, you find people speaking in vernacular without shame even if they know that the third person does not understand that language - (Laughter). Take an example that you are only three in an office, two are Acholis and another one is probably a Muganda. These Acholis will start shortwaving without shame. In Tanzania, the moment a third person comes, it becomes embarrassing for those people to continue speaking the local language in his presence. We, therefore, need to start thinking as a country.  

To the family members - I have seen the children here; your father has passed on. We celebrate his life. Those of us who will get time will come to the burial. However, I think the legacy of Mzee William Kiwagama should not end in this wooden box, which is a coffin. I would encourage you to start thinking in the line of politics. We need people to come and help this country. My encouragement that you join active politics is immediately endangering the sitting Member of Parliament - (Laughter). I am not saying that it should be done now but sooner or later, this country needs leaders. That is why we can have seven Members of Parliament coming to this House unopposed. This is not a very healthy phenomenon. Everyone who comes here should meet some kind of resistance so that people can choose from those who avail themselves. 

On behalf of the people of Aruu County and the Acholi as well as on my own behalf, I wish to say Mzee William Kiwagama, rest thee departed. Thank you very much. 

3.15
THE MINISTER OF LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (Mr Daudi Migereko): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I too rise to support the motion on the Floor, moved by the Rt Hon. Prime Minister and supported by the Leader of the Opposition. 

On behalf of the people of Butembe, I would like to register condolences to the family, the people of Mayuge, the people of Busoga, the NRM and the entire country upon the demise of hon. William Kiwagama. He made immense contributions to his communities, professionally and here in the House and all over the country.

Hon. William Kiwagama who lies before us here, first distinguished himself as a Quantity Surveyor in the country. He settled for that line of profession when very few Ugandans even thought that there was a profession called quantity surveying. At that time, many people wanted to become administrators and thought of all sorts of professions but he chose quantity surveying. He did extremely well as a Quantity Surveyor. He also set up Kiwagama, Kiwanuka and Company Quantity Surveyors and practically trained all the leading quantity surveyors in this country and in East Africa, I dare say. 

Therefore, as Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Development, I can only say that it is a huge loss to the construction industry in Uganda as well as the entire East African region. He chose to be a quantity surveyor at the time when only people like Changa Macho could think of land surveying. He chose it at a time when few people like Dr Kadama settled for medicine. 

I would like to say that all those who worked with him as interns, employees and partners enjoyed working with him. They always confessed that they had a lot to learn from him. The late Kiwagama had a role to play in the costing of all the major buildings that have practically come up in this country after independence. You could not get a building put up in Kampala or anywhere in the country that attracted huge funding without his stamp and seal of approval as a quantity surveyor. We really must thank him for that contribution. 

However, there is a problem. We still have very few quantity surveyors in the country. I would like to take this opportunity to appeal to Members of Parliament and the parents to encourage their children to take up this noble profession of quantity surveying. We have a few engineers in the country and few people who have trained in these disciplines. 

As a country whose population is growing so fast and demand for roads, houses and buildings is growing every other day, we shall not be in a position to register the kind of success that we would desire if we do not train people in these vital disciplines.

Mr Speaker, hon. Kiwagama donated land. He appreciated the value of land. He talked about land with a passion but he did the rare thing; for practically every piece of land he acquired, he also acquired a land title. He did not only acquire land titles for himself but he tried to encourage our people to acquire land titles. In some of our communities, including Busoga, there is a phobia for land titles. Here was a leader at the risk of losing popularity in Mayuge –(Interruption)

MR KIVENJINJA: I would just like to inform my colleague that the Basoga did not have a phobia for titles. However, they were suspicious of the way the British came here in Buganda and  robbed our land. They assembled 1,000 Baganda collaborators and each was dished eight square miles. The Basoga on the other hand could not see the wisdom in what these Europeans were doing, coming 6,000 miles away to  apportion to us our  land on which we had lived for generations.

MR MIGEREKO: Thank you very much, hon. Kirunda Kivejinja. However, I believe that times have changed. Land titles are instruments of economic empowerment and the sooner our people see this from that angle, the better off we shall be.

I know that only 20 per cent of the country is titled but we need to get out of this as fast as we can. It is fairly clear that those who happen to have land titles have certain advantages over those that do not have, particularly when they walk to financial institutions.

Mr Speaker, hon. Kiwagama who is lying before us here was a large sugar cane producer. In my view, he was only second after Madhvan in the Busoga area. He could have been number two in terms of land holding and sugar cane production in the Busoga region. He produced huge tonnage of sugar cane and supplied it to Kakira Sugar Works and later on attracted Mayuge Sugar to Mayuge District. My belief is that he should have been in position to move a step further and carried out value addition on the huge tonnage of sugar cane that he always produced year in and year out.

 Now that the children are here, the family should really think about this. This is important because if you want to increase your earning from agricultural products, it is only prudent that you consider undertaking value addition to whatever commodity you are producing. It cannot be true that when you are a black person or when you are a Ugandan, the best you can do is production on the farm but when it comes to processing, you are not supposed to do so. 

I believe the knowledge and the wisdom that the Almighty has endowed the Asians and the Whites with can also be found in abundance when we are relating to each other as black people. I believe that the family really needs to take up this, so that we can be in position not to talk about a large sugar cane estate in Mayuge but also a production unit. If it is not for sugar, there are other commodities that one can get out of sugar cane and this is the time for the family to be thinking in that direction.

We thank the Almighty for the mentorship that hon. Kiwagama provided to those he worked with. In the quantity surveying profession, he did a commendable job but also in politics, he too did a wonderful job. Practically, all the Members of Parliament from the Busoga region that have come up at a time when he could counsel and give guidance to leaders have benefited from his mentorship. The Members of Parliament from Mayuge, Busoga and members from other parts of the country immensely benefitted from his mentorship and this is a role that we must all play once we get into a leadership position. 

Mr Speaker, hon. Kiwagama did so well in his private businesses as a quantity surveyor, as a farmer and in other discipline. There was demand on him to serve in a political office and he did so. He joined the NRC, the Constituent Assembly and also served here in Parliament.

However, I must say that this must have also been at the cost of his businesses.  We shall, as leaders, try to see if we cannot recreate good balance serving as political leaders, entrepreneurs and as business people. Often times, many people who have joined politics with a rich background of business in this country have immensely suffered. Their businesses have been really run down. Hon. Kiwagama has been lucky; his businesses had not been run down.

However, I know many MPs and former MPs who have suffered immensely on account of trying to serve the people to the extent that they have become impoverished, to the extent that they themselves are now candidates for donor support from all sorts of corners.

My view is that the House has just started. It should be the duty of the leadership of the country and Parliament to see how to guide the new Members of Parliament and particularly, the young ones on how to lead a successful life not only as a Member of Parliament but also as a private person. 

May his soul rest in eternal peace and can we build on what he started, what he has contributed to and what he would have desired this country to be. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, in the gallery this afternoon, we have students from Kampala University, Luweero campus, represented by hon. Khiddu Makubuya and hon. Brenda Nabukenya, Luweero District. They have come to observe the proceedings and the business of this House. Please join me in welcoming them. You are very welcome. – (Applause)

3.25
MR JACOB OBOTH (Independent, West Budama South, Tororo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I equally would like to support the motion of paying tribute to a gallant Musoga, lying in front of us. I may not have had an opportunity to meet him personally. However, I would like to rely on the words of hon. Kirunda Kivejinja, who spoke as an elder. I also would like to rely on the evidence that I even saw in this House. 

As hon. Migereko said, he mentored many, including, hon. Vincent Bagiire. In Bunya West, they are oscillating between Bagiire Vincent and Aggrey but I could see a lot of humility in him. 

I have a few relatives in Busoga and I would like to be helped. When I was growing up, my great parents, when speaking about the Mvule tree, would say that it was the Basoga who handed this tree to the “Bazungu” – the Europeans. That when they asked them what the name of the tree was, they would say that it just grew up by itself. So, they started picking tax. You had to pay license to cut a Mvule tree. However, my own father lived in Busoga briefly, in what is now known as Luuka District and one thing for sure is about the loyalty; ability to be loyal and the famous saying that he used to use when conceding in consensus building, he would say, “As the Basoga say, Omwami Kyakoba, zeena kyenkoba” literally meaning no dispute; that as it has been said by the big person or the husband, so I concede. “Omwami” does not necessarily mean a husband but being loyal to the authority above you and – this is something to do with the Basoga then. I do not know how it is now.

Mr Speaker, I have also discovered that the late, hon. Kiwagama, was fairly exposed and his exposure added value to his life. We are talking about the attrition rate in this Parliament, which we now call “mortality” rate of 83 percent. In this House, the Members of Parliament who have worked with the late hon. Kiwagama are not more than 30 because of attrition rate. In the next Parliament, about 83 percent will not come back – (Interjections) – that is the probability; it was 60 plus when we came and it affected about 83 of us. 

The resourcefulness of people like the late hon. William Kiwagama would be very helpful. As I listened to hon. Kirunda Kivejinja; it is such an inspiring talk of an elder. In this world, we are either brought up or just grew up. People who influenced lives are people who were brought up and I have no doubt that this gentleman was well brought up. Why are the elders leaving us to grow up? The challenge is to our elders.

As far as they are leaving us to grow up without patience, and tolerance – I made that statement somewhere else and someone thought it was an insult; you are either brought up or you just grew up like a wild tree that is not tendered.

If in my mind, I can comprehend his humble beginning; he went overseas and then came back, studied here and gave support to his community. What a challenge to us?  As hon. Cecilia said “instead of giving land, we are grabbing”, shame upon us who grab land from poor people. Hon. Kiwagama gave land to his community.

If I was in the church and asked to select a hymn song in the Protestant Church, I would select Hymn 77 which says, “Amaze omulimugwe”. He fought a good fight and he did his best. What about us? May his soul rest in eternal peace.

3.33
MR GODFREY KIWANDA (NRM, Mityana County North, Mityana): Mr Speaker, I rise to support the motion in paying tribute to the late hon. Kiwagama. I served with the late Kiwagama in the Seventh Parliament. When I had just come here - and hon. Odongo Otto was also here with late hon. Kiwagama and we could see a very humble man in him. 

Later, I learnt that he was made the Katikkiro of Busoga.  We have been brought up well and we believe in our cultural institution. I saw a very cultured man in the late. He loved Busoga Kingdom, his country and Africa at large. 

He was also a follower of the NRM Government because NRM believes in four courses: nationalism, pan-Africanism, democracy and socio-economic transformation. Indeed, the late hon. Kiwagama lived up to this.

When we talk about socio-economic transformation of his area, he scored in this area. He employed many people from his area. As hon. Migereko said, we paid a visit to him as young people during that time. 

Actually, during lunch time, I was interacting with the family members and asking them whether we were going to that particular home where we saw a very well built house; a house which was built around 1970’s but still very strong. Even the surroundings of the areas we saw portrayed that the late hon. Kiwagama did a lot to transform his community.

With that humble life, we learnt a lot as young people from late hon. Kiwagama. He also had a very good profession because there were very few Ugandans of his profession during that time. He decided to work in Uganda, yet he would have gone out of this country. 

He was a family man. When I looked at the Order of Service, I saw the late hon. Kiwagama as a family man; a man who was able to bring up his children - and that is exemplary to the young generation.

When we join politics or other businesses, we tend to give a deaf ear to our families and we do not bring up our children the way late, hon. Kiwagama did. I interacted with some of his children and I saw children who are brought up by a real man.

We would like to appreciate God for the gift of life He gave to the late hon. Kiwagama. I know if He had given him more years, we would have enjoyed him more. However, if we emulate the good examples and good things he has done, we shall be prolonging his life.

I would like to thank the Members with whom we served in the Seventh Parliament. During that hectic period, we would be with the late hon. Kiwagama, ask for his counsel and he would gladly offer it.

Mr Speaker, you remember during the constitution amendment, when you were chairing the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs, we worked so hard. I remember the time when you were reporting to the House, we were almost getting stuck. The late hon. Kiwagama, counselled us and requested that we must move on much as we had a lot of issues; we had to move together as a country.

It is a challenge that we must build on the blocks that these people have started. As hon. Kirunda Kivejinja, the Third Deputy Prime Minister submitted, they brought this country to the level where it is now. It is now a challenge to this generation to take this country forward. 

We belong to different political parties but we should know that we are serving one country, and we should know that there are people who have sacrificed their lives for this country. Therefore, we must emulate the good examples they have given to us and move forward. By doing that, these people will enjoy their lives after death because much as they are dead, like hon. Kiwagama, in Africa, we believe that the dead are not dead but are living. If we work towards the unifying of Africa, Pan-Africanism, nationalism, democracy and socio-economic transformation of our country, we shall make his soul rest in eternal peace.

I would like to thank you, Mr Speaker, for this opportunity. In your communication, Mr Speaker, you briefed us about the procedure on how the bodies of late honourable members are brought to the House. Much as we may not bring everybody here after their demise, it is also very important that we should give special tribute to such gallant sons. 

The late hon. Mwondha died when were in campaigns. We shall be very grateful as Members of the Ninth Parliament to talk about him when that time comes. Thank you, very much and I would like to thank Government for having made this special arrangement. May his soul rest in eternal peace.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, posthumous tributes in this House are very common and we have done so many, including one of the late hon. Abola. We can count our fallen Members whose bodies were not brought here. Sometimes the families just opt to take away the body without bringing it here; they do not even make the request. But as a House we feel obliged to recognise one of our own who has passed on even when he was not serving at the time of death. There will be no reason as to why we should not recognise the contribution of hon. Patrick Mwondha when the time comes. 

3.40
MR VINCENT BAGIIRE (NRM, Bunya County West, Mayuge): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on behalf of the people of Bunya County West, which the late represented for several years, to convey our condolences to the family, friends and relatives.

Mr Speaker, I will borrow from the words of hon. Cecilia Ogwal and say that the mark of successful people is that they lift along other people. 

Hon. Kiwagama has lifted so many people along and having been shaped by education as you heard from the honourable Prime Minister, he wished that every individual got access to education. And indeed, it is based on that that he built several schools in Mayuga, Namutumba, Ivukula and several other places.

However, what is so special about the school in Mayuge Bufulubi S.S is that indeed in Mayuno Subcounty where that school was built, we did not have a Government secondary school. 


Having lobbied to have one and nothing was forthcoming, he took it upon himself to donate land and together with the family constructed that school. As of today that school is supported through Universal Secondary Education but we strongly think that more should be done.

Hon. Kiwagama has been a centre of gravity for very many individuals not just in Busoga but in Uganda at large. Yesterday, when we were at his funeral service in Nateete so many people alluded to the fact that he had assisted many to get education.
I personally benefitted from him as a politician; I occasionally sought his counsel and he advised and guided. And indeed when the primaries did not go well, and I was being misled to stand as an independent, when I consulted with him, he asked one question, “You claim you were cheated, have the people that cheated you died”? I did not answer him and we continued with a different discussion all together.

However, what is extremely important is that there is an observation that the likes of the hon. Kiwagama have left a very rich gap in society. A huge gap in the sense that people of his age did not strive for respect or strive for honour but worked and the respect came along. Unfortunately, our generation is preoccupied in getting rich quick a thing that we need to reflect on and perhaps change our ways. 

Mr Speaker, as I conclude my tribute, hon. Kiwagama was a gentleman with humility and integrity. There was no single day that hon. Kiwagama was heard in any dubious dealings.

He was God-fearing and that is the reason he built churches and ensured that communities that did not have a place to go and worship had a decent place, and not the grass thatched ones that hon. Cecilia Ogwal referred to. 

Mr Speaker, I will take the opportunity to invite the honourable colleagues to Mayuge to escort our gallant father. 
May his soul rest in eternal peace.

3.45
MS RUKIA NAKADAMA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mayuge): Mr Speaker, I also stand here to support the motion moved by the Prime Minister. I wish to express my sincere condolences to the people of Uganda and to the people of Busoga, in particular, for the loss of our colleague. He has been a father, a grandfather and a son to the Busoga region.

Hon. Kiwagama had unique qualities in that he was one of the first quantitative surveyors in the country, and of course in Busoga as a region. During that time, I do not think we had many people who could take such courses but hon. Kiwagama did that.

Hon. Kiwagama was the first representative in Mayuge; that is, during the NRC like it has been mentioned, and Constituent Assembly in what was called the bigger Bunya County. And because of that he has been so instrumental in the politics of Mayuge District.

During that time, when he was still in the NRC he proposed for the creation of other counties and that is how we came up with Bunya East, Bunya West and Bunya South.

He has been a mentor, and among the people he mentored is hon. Vincent Bagiire who is here with us in this Parliament.

Hon. Kiwagama’s consultancy firm contributed a lot to the palace of the Kyabazinga and this is not because he wanted money but because he loved his culture. 

He has contributed a lot in the social sector: the health centres that have been mentioned, the schools, churches and many other areas not only in Mayuge but in Busoga and other places in Uganda. 

Hon. Kiwagama has been a synod delegate in the Busoga Diocese which means many people have benefited from his guidance in the church.

Having contributed to the development of Busoga, Mayuge- right now I see very many people being employed in the Mayuge Sugar Factory, where he offered acres of land which forms the new area of Mayuge Sugar Factory. At that time, we did not have land, we wanted a factory but nobody could give in land to construct that factory and many are employed in that factory.

As we talk about the poor infrastructure in Uganda - of course, we need to improve and I know Government is trying its best to improve the poor facilities that we have. I would like to tell Members that death is a calling from God; nobody can prevent it.

We need to continue praying for the family so that they stay strong, they continue praying for the deceased and I ask Ugandans to pray for him too. I know all the good things that he has done; his works will be remembered by many of us.

Hon. Kiwagama William Wilberforce may your soul rest in peace. I thank you.

3.51
MR ABDU KATUNTU (FDC, Bugweri County, Iganga): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I stand to support the motion moved by the Prime Minister and seconded by the Leader of the Opposition.

Mr Speaker, I have had opportunity to know Mzee Kiwagama, lying over there, since 1990. At that time, I was a third year law student at Makerere University and we had just formed an association for students from Busoga region. We did not know many prominent people at that time but the previous year, the National Resistance Council had been expanded and he had been elected member of the National Resistance Council.

Therefore, we approached him to be our patron. The very day we walked into his office, he welcomed us like he had known us before; just like his own children. Since that time, he has treated me as one of his children. Actually he used to address me as, “my son”.

Mr Speaker, there are three issues I would like to talk about. First, as ably put by the mover of the motion, he worked in civil service from the early 60s up to the early 70s. During that time, he also went for further education and became one of the most prominent quantitative surveyors in the country.

In 1972, he formed a private practice company in quantitative surveying which he has run until the time of his demise. However, in 1989, he offered himself to come and serve his community. Those are the people who added value to this institution. He brought experience and skills. I know some colleagues who may be exceptions, like my brother, hon. Odonga-Otto and hon. Kiwanda could have come a little bit earlier in this institution and they have excelled. However, this country is missing out on people who should come to this institution and bring skill and experience instead of turning this institution into a school.

Secondly, I think our voters missed because the responsibility of a Member of Parliament is enormous; that you get somebody out there - the other day, someone came here and immediately went back to school instead of doing parliamentary work. He was running around burying people and trying to get boreholes dug; it is a huge burden to such people! Hon. Kiwagama gives an example of people this institution benefitted from.

Thirdly, Mr Speaker, I have quietly listened to colleagues and I have observed this over a long time - we get united in death. We speak with one voice; both the Opposition and the Government side. What happens when there is no death? We start jeering at each other and insulting each other outside this House; it is hate, anger, teargas, stones and all that. We do not want to be united except when there is death. This country we live in is only one; why don’t we speak with the same voice as we do when there is death?

This is one of the biggest challenges and whenever there is death, I think that is the lesson we should always remind ourselves of; that these little things that divide us as a nation, are petty. At the end of the day, we shall lie in the same box Mzee Kiwagama is lying in and we will be Ugandans still. So why the fighting!

Why do we continue fighting honourable colleagues? Why do we not speak with one voice on almost all issues and send a signal to the people we represent that as politicians and Members of Parliament, we are talking with one voice and legislating for their own interest?

Hon. Kiwagama is one of those people I have seen who have been so humble; humility is what described him. All the years I worked with him in the Seventh Parliament here, he never raised his voice. Even when he disagreed, he would take issues outside there and he would sit us down. What has happened to people nowadays? The elders, where are they? There are a few remaining. Even the elders are full of anger, impunity and you wonder what has happened to our country?

I know for sure, I have competed with Mzee Kirunda Kivenjinja, who belongs to the generation of Mzee Kiwagama. But whenever we meet, he is chatting, laughing, smiling and talking to me freely. I do not notice that anger in him. I must say that now while he is here; if God wills that he goes first, I do not want to start speaking about it – (Laughter) - I can tell you that I have not noticed that anger in him much as I competed with him and the people decided in my favour –(Interjections)– when I went to compete, it was not my motive to compete against him. I just wanted to be a Member of Parliament. Even if he was not there, I would have competed anyway. Therefore, it was not personal. That is what politics should be all about. It is not about getting money. If Mzee Kiwagama wanted money, I am sure he would look elsewhere; he was making more money in Kiwagama and Kiwanuka Quantitative Surveyors than the money he made in politics.

There is no money in politics, whoever is out there wishing – I heard hon. Kirunda Kivejinja calls it mortality rate; the attrition rate of 83 per cent. Let me tell you, if the 83 per cent are thinking that they are coming to this institution to make money, they will get a big surprise; it is service to the people and I think that is what Mzee Kiwagama stood for.

I know, Rachel, one of Mzee Kiwagama’s daughters. We met long ago and I know you will miss the old man. At a personal level, I pray that God gives you the strength to shoulder this because death must come anyway. 

I would not like the family of Mzee Kiwagama to mourn. At 82 years you can celebrate God’s gift to you. How many have been all that lucky to be like Mzee Kiwagama or hon. Kirunda Kivejinja. Almost all their colleagues are no more and so at 82 years, we need to celebrate his life. He was such a great man and for Busoga particularly, there are not many professionals. Hon. Cecilia Ogwal said we are known for the other things, but despite that, there are good things that come out of Busoga. Let me take it as a compliment that she is more concerned about the good things that come out of Busoga including the education of her dear husband. 

For Busoga, we have lost a very senior professor and an elder who was involved in what we call, “real” community work; donating his own land to make sure that generations after him have a basis of education to sustain themselves. 

What more would you require of a man of his experience and age? Communities expect that at a certain age, you are not looking for wealth like we see these days, people grabbing land instead of donating. Hon. Migereko is busy running around with land grabbers, as minister in charge of land of course.

I think that in the example of the late Kiwagama, we see what God would want a human being to be. Hon. Kiwagama, may your soul rest in peace, until we meet again; as the Christians say, maybe that opportunity will be there.

4.03
MS FLORENCE MUTYABULE (NRM, Woman Representative, Namutumba): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. On behalf of the people of Bukono, in particular, and Namutumba District as a whole, I stand to pay tribute to the late hon. William Kiwagama.

I would like to remember the late for three important things: I first met him personally when he was interviewing me for the job of headmistress of Buckley High School in 1995.

I remember when I faced his panel; he asked my name and asked me to sing the Busoga anthem. I thought very fast and said “Mr Chairman and members, can you stand up for the Busoga anthem?” They all stood up, I sang and they sat. People wondered how courageous I was to ask a panel that is supposed to give me a job to stand up. I told them it was the requirement and eventually I turned out the best and took the job. I will always remember the late hon. Kiwagama for that. 

I would also like to remember him for his service in the Busoga Kingdom. I did not have interest in the kingdom before he became Prime Minister. But as soon as he became Prime Minister, and at that time I was a headmistress, he wrote letters to schools to ask us to help the kingdom. Whenever he called you to his office, he spoke with a very soft voice, not a commanding one. However, you would not say “No” to him; you would simply go and do whatever he asked you to do. 

He made me serve the Busoga Kingdom and eventually he proposed that I be appointed the deputy minister of the ministry for the elderly in Busoga. At that time, I was not as old as I am now, but I served and he gave me the opportunity. I really thank him for that.

In the church, as a member of the Synod, diocesan council and fathers’ union, I would look at him and his wife and admire the very smart woman dressed in white. Even if I am in the mother’s union, I used to hide at the back. So, on one occasion, I decided to try to come in front.

It was because of him and his wife; they would march in the church right from the back door up to where they would sit and I admired the couple. That gave me interest to love my husband more – (Laughter) – and one time I asked him if we could walk through the church as Mr and Mrs Kiwagama did. He eventually took me to church and I was glad about it. So he helped me grow up in my marriage and in serving the church.

I would like to thank him and his wife who is still alive; mama thank you for being an example and taking care of papa.

Mr Speaker, my colleagues here have been talking about the late Kiwagama and what he has done. When I joined Parliament, I was able to work with him when he was establishing Kisozi Primary School in Bukono, Ivukula Subcounty, Namutumba District. This was his initiative. That area did not have a senior secondary school, but he took the courage as a leader because that was one of his virtues.

He started that school and he got money from well-wishers, but much of the money that built that school came from his pocket. That school is now helping very many students who cannot afford to go to expensive schools. The parents, students and communities are happy.We shall always remember him for that. 

Mr Speaker, the late Kiwagama lived rather a simple life yet he was certainly rich. This is a mark of humility that many young people do not have. I call upon the young people to see the late William Kiwagama as a role model so that they can pick up that virtue. Thank you, Mr Speaker. May his soul rest in peace!

4.10
MR WAIRA MAJEGERE (NRM, Bunya County East, Mayuge): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity to talk about the late Kiwagama. The late Kiwagama was one of the few political leaders we had. We had hon. Masiga and much as he was from the “Samialand”, he spent most of his time in my constituency because he had a home there; he departed. We also had the late Wamulongo in Bunya East Constituency; he departed. We were left with the late Kiwagama, who we have been looking to for any consultations.

Mr Speaker, I had a chance to meet the late Kiwagama during the function of hon. Obama Bagiire; my young brother who has just been here and I learnt one thing from him. He had his traditional way of canvassing votes for a candidate of his choice. For example, for Obama he would say, “Obama, tick, tick, tick, tick.” The voters would get excited and go by his choice. 

I also copied that and took it to my constituency. I would tell my people, “Majegere, tick, tick, tick, tick” and that is exactly what they did on the historic day of 18th February. However, some would put many ticks on a ballot paper and it would become spoilt –(Laughter)– but at least they got the message and it worked for me. 

Mr Speaker, I have also learnt, listening to hon. Nakadama, that he is one of the reasons as to why I am here because he asked for the division of Bunya County into the three counties of Bunya South, Bunya East and Bunya West. I am here for Bunya East. Maybe if he had not suggested so, we would still have one county. So, I thank him. 

Hon. Katuntu hinted that we are always united at death but outside there – of course like in Mayuge and even in other districts, for those who are familiar with politics, you know that there are always political fights. In Mayuge, we have leaders fighting each other and I do not think that the late Kiwagama and other leaders would be happy to leave Mayuge as it is. Of course, we can use this function, as we celebrate the life of the late Kiwagama, to ensure that there is unity and that we have one Mayuge so that we move on with development.

Lastly, hon. Oboth was trying to mislead this House that it is the Bazungu who took our trees. It is not the Bazungu and nobody paid for our Mvule trees. The MP from Kawempe and hon. Kiwanda know who took our trees. They came and hoodwinked us and we told them, “These trees grew by themselves.” They then cut our trees and like they say in Busoga, the Basoga have a big heart and hon. Cecilia Ogwal confirmed it. 

We have not sat down to demand for the money accrued from the trees, which were cut. As Basoga, we have a big heart but I wanted to correct that impression that the Bazungu took our trees. The people who took our trees are known and it is on record. 

Mr Speaker, I pray that the late hon. Kiwagama rests in peace. Thank you.

4.15
MR MOSES KASIBANTE (DP, Rubaga Division North, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to support the motion. As it is, hon. Kiwagama represented Bunya West Constituency but I am personally humbled that he died as my constituent. He lived in Rubaga and we went to the same church there. I deliver heartfelt condolences, on behalf of the people of Rubaga, to the family, to the people of Bunya, to the Basoga and Ugandans in general. 

As a Christian, I know hon. Kiwagama would only miss Church Service for a reason; he would either be away or sick. Most of the time, Mrs Kiwagama would be present to give the reason as to why hon. Kiwagama was not in church. We shall miss him in church as well.

As a Christian, I know that those who die in Jesus Christ only go away but indeed they are not dead. Every time one would share a light moment with hon. Kiwagama, he sounded like a happily retired politician. 

Mr Speaker, I am emphasising this because many people fear retirement. In the recently concluded elections, guns were brought out and one would hear of tear gas. People’s houses were torched and people were killed because, “they were forcing others to retire”. 

The deceased was happy. He had served in his time very well and he was happy to have retired. I believe that he could be a very good role model. If we had a country full of “Kiwagamas”, the story of Kasangati would not be the same. We would not be having records of dead people because others felt that they were being forced into retirement. May his soul rest in eternal peace!

4.18
MR LATIF SSEBAGALA (DP, Kawempe Division North, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to support the motion. I came to know the late William Kiwagama when we were being sworn in for the Seventh Parliament. He was an old man and I was a very young man. I was humbled by the way he welcomed us regardless of our differences, especially in terms of age. Hon. Kiwagama was always a humble person. He used to sit on this side and indeed, that corner is where he used to sit.

When I heard hon. Kiwanda talking about hon. Kiwagama as someone with whom he served in the Seventh Parliament, I remembered that hon. Kiwanda skipped one Parliament – I think it was the Eighth Parliament. However, we are very grateful that under the advice of hon. Kiwagama, we were encouraged and that is why, up to now, we have not had a break as far as serving our people is concerned. We are extremely grateful.

Mr Speaker, when people like hon. Kiwagama are brought here, it reminds me that death has never been the end of our life; it opens doors to another life. However, I am of the view that as Parliament, we must always interact with colleagues before their demise. I propose that we have a reunion day where all those who have served in this Parliament since its inception come together and we get to know who is who before any one is brought here. 

If we happen to get a day where we interact and share like universities have alumni functions, this would be a very good idea so that by the time we pass on to the other world, we are in close contact with our colleagues; sisters and brothers. Like somebody said, the casualty rate in the last elections stood at almost 83 per cent. If we do not have this kind of reunion, we may forget and only remember those people when they are brought here. 

The reunion day will cement our relationship so that when we are brought here, many Members will be on board as they will know who is who in regard to their service. May his soul rest in eternal peace!

4.21
MS RUTH NANKABIRWA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kiboga)): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise to pay tribute to our colleague, the late hon. Kiwagama, and I do this on behalf of the people of Kiboga and my family.

Many people have talked about the times of the Constituent Assembly (CA) and the Seventh Parliament where I was, as a young woman. 

Mr Speaker, if you want to know the late hon. Kiwagama’s contributions in the CA, there is a Hansard in our library. He was very consistent on matters affecting the community, culture, environment and the children of Uganda. We shall remember him for that.

During the CA, I interacted with him because I had a whole sub-county in my constituency. At that time, Kiboga and Kyankwanzi was one district. A group of people from one sub-county in Mayuge came and chose to settle in Itunda in Kiboga and we used to interact. At one time, I took the late hon. Kiwagama and the then Deputy Speaker, Rt hon. Rebecca Kadaga to attend the Women’s Day celebrations in that sub-county. As we interacted, he asked me about his people.

In the Seventh Parliament, I was the Minister of State for Defence when we enacted the law establishing the National Forestry Authority. Owing to our interaction and his concerns about charcoal burning and yet his people, the Basoga, were notorious for cutting trees and encroaching on forests, which he was against, he challenged the Government and everybody to make plans to plant trees. 

That is when I picked up the idea of planting trees and started to advocate for tree planting. We applied for a lease on a central government forest reserve and to this day, I am a tree grower. I do not call myself a tree planter because I grow and nurture trees and many people have picked this from me.

I was persuaded to plant trees because of his insistence and consistence. He even encouraged us to plant Mahogany trees and we used to laugh about the time it would take one to get money from Mahogany. However, somebody who planted Mahogany in 2003 can now get money as I speak. I decided to go into planting Pine trees and I am enjoying the fruits. Therefore, I vividly remember Mzee Kiwagama’s contribution.  

To crown it all, the late hon. Kiwagama was a good man and a man of the people. Because the CA and NRC were running concurrently, it was very difficult for somebody who was already a member of the NRC to be elected to go into the CA. As such, several members of the NRC did not make it to the Constituent Assembly. I for one defeated a member of the NRC. Therefore, we had people sitting here as NRC members and others sitting as delegates to the Constituent Assembly. Hon. Kiwagama made it to the Constituent Assembly and this indicated that he was really a man of the people. 

I know the Bible says everything has its time; there is a time for mourning and crying. Why do you cry? You cry because you are going to miss that person and his counsel. You are at pain because you have lost. Much as you are a believer, you have lost. 

The late hon. Kiwagama had been sick for some time and it pains to see a friend agonising because you feel the pain too. When he cries, you cry. Therefore, we mourn and celebrate his life. We thank God because there is something to talk about the late Kiwagama. The more you talk about the good things that he has done, the more you see and appreciate that he has gone too quickly, much as he was over 80 years. The more you look behind and reflect on his contribution, the more you see the period that he has lived on earth as being very short because you would have loved his contribution to go on and on.   

The question that I always put to myself whenever we sit, mourn and say good things about a deceased person is, what have you invested yourself? Some of you have been given the chance to live. Many times we have been involved in accidents where we say, “I narrowly escaped.” I think that God has given you that chance.

Even though you are not involved in an accident, the moment you wake up and you are alive, God has given you that time to live and invest like the late Engineer has invested. However, we sometimes find ourselves not investing because it is God that created Hell and He knows that some people will go to Hell while others will go where He will be. He did it that way because God wants to test us and see how committed we are. It is important that we keep on reflecting on that.

To the family, I will only leave you with a Bible verse in Isaiah 25:8 which says, “He will swallow up death in victory; and the Lord God will wipe away tears from all the faces; and the rebuke of His people shall be taken away off all the earth: for the Lord has said it.” 

He will definitely wipe away your tears. He does not make a mistake, His timing is the best and we believe that He will take care of the bereaved family. May the good Lord, who gave us Engineer Kiwagama, rest his soul in eternal peace and may He sustain the bereaved family. Thank you for this opportunity.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable members. In the Public Gallery this afternoon, we have students of Vision College, Kikajjo represented by hon. Rosemary Seninde, MP, Wakiso District and hon. Medard Lubega Sseggona, MP, Busiro East. They are here to observe the business of the House. Please join me in welcoming them. You are very welcome.

Honourable members, I thank you for these statements that you have made in commemoration of a life that was lived partly in this House and contributions made by the Member who has since now departed. I too was in the Seventh Parliament. That means that I had the opportunity to interact with the hon. Kiwagama. He was humble indeed; you never heard him laughing loudly but he laughed with contentment. When you saw him laugh, you saw that this old man was really contented and I did not know why.

You never know a person until you visit their home. One evening, Bishop Cyprian Bamwoze asked me to take him to see a friend. I did not know that it was somebody I knew. We drove to Nateete and took a right turn to some village and as we entered a gate, I saw this monumental structure; cylindrical and way up there.

When we entered inside, I was in shock about the thought that had been put into that building. The architecture was just amazing. When I came back, I looked at hon. Kiwagama differently. The compound design and everything there was artistic. This is the old man who laughs with contentment, who never raises his voice. 

I was humbled that a man so rich could be so humble; that a man so gifted in skills could be so humble and yet those of us with nothing are so loud about what we do not have. I was humbled. These are the true heroes we should be singing about. We never sing about these heroes because we like other kinds of heroes and the heroes we like are not the true heroes.

Real heroes do not build structures or bridges. They build people. They help people live up to their potential, they do not drive people down, they do not push people down. They uplift people and let them build their potential. Those are the real leaders; the real heroes we should be celebrating. 

Hon. Kiwagama was one such person and I am privileged to sit on this desk at this time to pay tribute to his passing and to recognise his contribution to his country and to celebrate his life, together with the people he has assisted: the people of Bunya, Mayuge, Busoga and Uganda. In such people, we are beginning to lose the heritage of this country. We are only sad that they do not write books; they should be writing books for us to look at.

A preacher said, “When you must die, die empty.” In other words, leave everything that God has put in you in writing so that when you go, all that God has given you remains on earth for other people to live and celebrate.

Honourable members, the motion before the House is for a decision to this effect; that Parliament collectively conveys its deep condolences to the bereaved family, relatives, friends and the people of Bunya County West and the country upon the demise of the late hon. William Wilberforce Kiwagama.

That it takes cognisance of the distinguished services rendered and the contribution made by the late hon. William Wilberforce Kiwagama in Uganda and that it collectively prays to the Almighty God that He rests hon. Wilberforce Kiwagama’s soul in eternal peace. Honourable members, that is the motion that I now put for your vote. I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MS CECILIA OGWAL: Mr Speaker, this is a matter that would not have come in the motion, which has just been passed but I was of the view that the people from Busoga should consider naming one of the secondary schools in memory of the late William. This is a matter, which can be handled from Busoga and not necessarily passed in the motion. 

I beg to put it on record that the Basoga consider this humble request from me as a person who appreciates having close association with Busoga, as is already known, and I believe that our dear colleague -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The procedural point?

MS CECILIA OGWAL: The procedure is, before we leave, can we make that request? The procedural matter is that Busoga be requested to name one of the secondary schools where the late William donated land in memory of his great contribution to the community. I beg to put that on record. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, certainly the Member for Dokolo District, who also doubles as the Chief Opposition Whip, has a way of inventing procedures but making a point that she should have made at the beginning. However, I always allow her to do these things in respect. 

Sometimes you completely violate the rules but it is okay. We have received that and the people of Busoga region have heard. If it is something that they can continue with and pursue, it can be done accordingly but it is not a decision of the House. It is a contribution from a Member of the House.

East African Community Anthem.


The National Anthem.

(Exit of the late hon. William Wilberforce Kiwagama)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we now come to the end of this special sitting of the House. I thank you for your attendance and for the contributions you have made in this debate. God bless you. This special sitting is now adjourned. The normal sitting of Parliament will be tomorrow at 2 O’clock. 

(The House rose at 4.44 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 23 March 2016 at 2.00 p.m.)
