Thursday, 10 March 2016

Parliament met at 3.20 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Rt Hon. Deputy Prime Minister, members of the Cabinet and Members of the House, I welcome you to this afternoon sitting and do apologise for the late start of the meeting. Between us and the Executive, we are still embroiled in how to implement the Public Finance Management Act, and indeed to pass the Appropriation Bill by 28th April. Therefore, we have been trying to see how this can be done and that is why we are late; otherwise, we will try to move as quickly as possible.

I would also like to amend the Order Paper slightly to allow the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to present the Appropriation Bill for the first reading. Thank you. Hon. Kwizera had some issues.

3.22
MR EDDIE KWIZERA (NRM, Bufumbira County East, Kisoro): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Honourable members, the Speaker some time back informed the House that in Bufumbira East, they would be having elections on 9th March. However, I would like to put it on record that in Bufumbira East, there was voting on 18th February, like in the other constituencies; unfortunately, the returning officer refused to tally our results yet we had voted and finished.

What was surprising yesterday is that the Electoral Commission ambushed us and organised elections yesterday and that is why some of you saw me here. The people had prepared militias to go and fight - I did not go because I wanted to save life, and also because someone’s results were predetermined. That is the information I would like to give to the House. I thank you very much.

3.23
MS BEATRICE ANYWAR (FDC, Woman Representative, Kitgum): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance and I thank you for enabling me make this submission.

Madam Speaker, since election day, on` 18th February to date, one of the presidential candidates, Dr Kiiza Besigye, has been under house arrest and his constitutional right has been curtailed. He is not able to move out of his House. Even if you are arrested and put in prison like some of us have ever been, people are allowed to visit and give you the necessary support. Unlike this situation - the illegal detention of Dr Besigye - nobody is even allowed to go and see him.

It is very unfair that after the presidential elections, in which candidates participated in their constitutional right, one of the presidential candidates, President Museveni, opts to harass other colleagues who contested, in the name of post-election action.

This House is the voice of the voiceless. As Dr Besigye’s movement from his home is curtailed and he cannot even look for survival for his family, we raise this voice in this august House. The headquarters of the FDC, a registered party, have also been besieged by the military and the police and we also heard chambers of lawyers being broken into.

This has become a problem, Madam Speaker. It has caused panic. It is affecting our tourism as a country. Business is being disturbed yet that is the source of our livelihood as a country. We have also heard that people are planning to abandon work because of what is going on - (Interruption) 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Anywar, you wanted to find out what is happening to Dr Besigye -

MS ANYWAR: Yes, Madam Speaker. I was building on that and my prayer is that this House demands the withdrawal of security personnel from Dr Besigye’s home, because a home is not a prison. We have raised this on the Floor of Parliament previously. 

The courts of law have also made it very clear that preventive arrest is not the way to go. We would like Dr Kiiza Besigye’s home to be freed from the security. We also would like to have Government come with a full statement to explain the circumstances under which he is being held. There is already panic and insecurity - the army are on the streets and as I said much earlier –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Point of order

MS ANYWAR. It is a statement.

THE SPEAKER: No; you wanted the Government to tell us what is happening to Dr Besigye.

MS KAWOOYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have been listening to my colleague who began by seeking to know what is happening to Dr Kiiza Besigye. She then meandered into other issues. She did not stop there; she also wants to mislead the House to demand for the police to leave Dr Kiiza Besigye’s home yet my senior colleague knows the functions and mandate of the police. Is she right to insinuate ill motive about the police who are doing their work and to mislead this House into interfering with the work of the police? Is she in order? 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, what we require from the Government is to give us a statement explaining what is happening; then during the debate, you can bring out those issues but do not pre-empt. Hon. Anywar, your time is up. You went into other things and it ate into your time. Hon. Ogwal, you have two minutes.

3.28
THE OPPOSITION CHIEF WHIP (Ms Cecilia Ogwal): Madam Speaker, I rise on a matter of national importance. I would like to start by congratulating Ugandan women upon the International Women’s Day celebrations - (Applause) - that took place on 8 March 2016. We appreciate what the NRM Government has done to empower women over the last 30 years hence their affirmative action policy that provides for a special seat for women district representation in Parliament, one third women representation at all local council levels and the 1.5 university entry admission points to girls. 

International Women’s Day is a day for global celebration and a universal call for gender parity. No Government, feminist, political party, NGO, charity, corporation, academic institution, women’s network or media centre should personalise the International Women’s Day event. It should be for all women transcending political, religious and ethnic barriers.

Madam Speaker, Ugandans have been disappointed by the way the International Women’s Day event is organised in Uganda every year. This year, it looked like a National Resistance Movement political event. The yellow colour code of the event, the NRM song chosen to praise the NRM ‘pakalast’, the yellow buses with the President’s posters carrying people from around town to Kololo; people dressed up in NRM t-shirts singing NRM slogans and vans passing through making announcements to people that the food and drinks will be free -(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: You have one minute to conclude. 

MS CECILIA OGWAL: Madam Speaker, whoever is managing the microphone ought to know this is a very important statement for this Parliament. (Laughter) With all this taking place at the International Women’s Day celebrations on 8th March in Kololo, many different categories of women from the business fraternity, women network organisations, cultural institutions and religious fraternity were discouraged from participating in the function, including myself. In the President’s speech, we had expected him to address the gender parity but he did not. 

Finally, I would like to raise this point and I would like to plead with you, Madam Speaker, that as women - and our male counterparts - should address some of the critical issues which can only be dealt with by this Parliament. First of all, let us not say all is well; in the Cabinet positions, we have 23 male ministers and on only eight female ministers, which is 76 per cent of male representation and 24 per cent of women in the Cabinet; clap for that, if it pleases you.

There are 34 male state ministers and 13 female state ministers, which is 72 per cent male and 28 per cent female; clap for yourselves if that pleases you. Permanent Secretaries are 15 males and seven females, which is 68 per cent male and 32 per cent female representation. The CAOs and so forth; I can give you all the statistics, I will be able to provide. That is why I feel that these are very serious disparities which must be addressed by this Parliament. It is not about politics; it is about the status of women as it exists now.

No woman can claim to be in a leadership position and feel comfortable when there are these serious issues and it is only Parliament which can address them. Madam Speaker, that is why I feel very upset that a woman cut me off from the microphone when I am giving very important information to this country. (Laughter)

In conclusion, I would like to plead with the Government that let the women’s day celebrations be non-partisan and the NRM Government must stop making the International Women’s Day celebrations a political event. You have all the opportunity to make an NRM event but for heaven’s sake, do not make the women’s day event –

THE SPEAKER: Information from the sector minister.

MS CECILIA OGWAL: I am about to finish. Finally, as our NRM colleagues go to Kyankwanzi - (Interruption)

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Madam Speaker, is hon. Cecilia Ogwal in order to ignore information from the sector minister yet she is misleading the country? Is she in order to continue with her misleading submission? I sat there and listened; she made a lot of misrepresentations.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I would like to request hon. Cecilia Ogwal to allow the sector minister to give us information and then you conclude.

3.35
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR GENDER AND CULTURE (Ms Rukia Nakadama): Madam Speaker, I would like to give information to hon. Cecilia Ogwal that International Women’s Day has never been turned into a political or NRM day. On the day of the celebrations, we had very many people across parties and even hon. Betty Kamya attended and I recognised her.

Secondly, when we go for International Women’s Day celebrations, we are not allowed to wear yellow. I was the MC and was dressed in purple. People are allowed to wear different colours; even those in blue and green were there and they participated. Therefore, it is not a political day, it is not NRM day; it was the International Women’s Day and the message that the President gave was not addressing the NRM but the nation. I thank you.

MS CECILIA OGWAL: Madam Speaker, the sector minister has made it worse because she has forgotten that in 2005, the FDC Women’s League decided to also dress in blue t-shirts and they were chased away publicly; it is on record.

I would like to close by saying that these are matters which concern women. It is an issue which must be addressed by women and has nothing to do with ideology and colours and that is why some of us are concerned and we have to stand here to share our grief with the entire Parliament and the country.

As our colleagues in the NRM party go to Kyankwanzi, let us be mindful of the cause of women. I know that you are going to address many national issues in Kyankwanzi and that is why I am concerned and I am happy to note that when the NRM party caucuses, whatever you decide affects the plight and future of this country. Therefore, I would like to implore you, my colleagues that whenever you discuss national issues, do not forget the plight of women. 

We, the women of Uganda, will be very upset if it turns out that the NRM party and the leadership will not address the gaps, which I have just raised in my statement today, starting from the Cabinet; I will be very surprised if you came back with a male to replace a female, in the positions which they occupy now.

Right now, we have a female Speaker and I know that some of you are scheming to replace the Speaker. It is important that as women, we address this issue and I know it is women who are always used to displace their fellow women. That is why it is important that we stand up as women to defend our rights. We are not going to allow men to rob us of the little that we have; you want it to be taken away.

Madam Speaker, I am blessed to be a woman and I will not allow again for the little that we have to be taken away. We have four positions in the Office of the Prime Minister but none of them is occupied by a woman and you are clapping and happy – (Laughter). The position of the Vice-President is occupied by a man and the woman was replaced from that position and you are clapping and happy. (Laughter)

Madam Speaker, I make my submission and I would like to say, as women, we hold a position of the Speaker and no man will take it away from us. I thank you, Madam Speaker. (Applause) 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, hon. Ogwal.

3.40
MS JOY ONGOM (Independent, Woman Representative, Lira): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I am rising on a different issue but I still would like to support hon. Cecilia Ogwal. Women, we have always been preaching and educating our fellow women up to PhD level and we want to pull our fellow woman down; that is a warning and we will not accept that.

However, I rise on a matter of national importance. I represent the people of Lira and Lira District has got 13 sub-counties with 90 parishes. One of the sub counties in Lira has been hit by measles and it is a very serious outbreak. I would like to notify the Minister of Health, who is here, that Ngeta Sub-county has a serious outbreak of measles which needs immediate action. This is a period in which children are going to school and you cannot prevent contact with school-going children.  Thank you.

3.41
MR LATIF SSEBAGGALA (DP, Kawempe Division North, Kampala): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise on an issue of national importance. On 8th Feburary, as my youth in Mpererwe watched the premier league at about 9.30 p.m., they were rounded up by the military and police officers. They were forced into a taxi and were taken to a nearby bush, were ordered to undress, and their possessions, including money, were taken from them. 

This is a very serious issue; we have seen security officers moving around in the name of keeping security in the city but I believe that maybe their maintenance or welfare needs to be looked into. These people were orderly and innocent but were forced out of a pub and were taken somewhere and over Shs 2 million was taken from over 35 people who were forced into a taxi by the military and police officers who were patrolling the city.

Indeed the situation is becoming worse to the extent that citizens have started receiving threats from the people who are supposed to keep law and order and protect them. I need an explanation from the line minister as to how army officers arrested innocent people, took away their money and nothing is being done. Madam Speaker, I request the line minister to intervene so that if these people are in Kampala to maintain security, they must stick to that and their welfare must be considered.

THE SPEAKER: I think that the issue requires investigation. We have got this side but also, we have to hear from the other side. We shall ask the Government to prepare a statement and at an appropriate time to tell us how those people are being maintained and what is happening.

3.45
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr James Baba): Madam Speaker and honourable members, I thank hon. Ssebaggala for raising that issue. I do not know whether that incident was reported and brought to the attention of the police. These days they could be impersonators masquerading as police or military; we do not know but the police I lead are disciplined, have secured the city and peacefully, people are moving freely. 

Therefore, if it was reported, then we can take it up and investigate this matter. You cannot report this matter to the House without any details or the numbers or indications of what really happened. On that basis, I do not think I can do anything but if it is reported, Madam Speaker, I would like to make commitment that I will follow it up and report back to the House.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, I would also like to encourage hon. Ssebaggala that this is your colleague; you can go to his office and give him the details of who the young men are and where they were.

3.46
LT. COL (RTD) BRIGHT RWAMIRAMA (NRM, Isingiro County North, Isingiro): Madam Speaker, it is important for people to know that it is a requirement for police officers to wear their number and name tag. If you do not see the name tags and numbers, then possibly they are impersonators. We need to stop crime and in order to stop crime we must rule out grey areas. Therefore, it is important that hon. Ssebaggala who reported could get these people to find out whether they could have read the name tags of at least two people.

MR SSEBAGALA: For the record, Madam Speaker, the case is already with Nammere Police Station and indeed it is two days without action being taken because they are saying the army officers are above them. Let the Minister of Internal Affairs get in touch with the police stations of Kanyanya and Nammere because they are aware of what happened in Mpererwe.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, you need help but you do not want to provide the information. Why don’t you give the minister the numbers and we move with that? How will he help you because he does not even have the names?

MR SSEBAGGALA: Madam Speaker, the police have hierarchy. The Minister for Internal Affairs is aware about the police station in Kanyanya – (Interruption)

MS SENINDE: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to seek clarification because like the minister has just explained, we are all aware that in such situations, everyone, especially thugs, would want to do anything they wish to do. Even if a report was presented to the police, it is those very people who reported to the police that would have indicated that the police officers or the army officers did not have name tags or they had and if they had name tags, I am sure they should have at least seen a name of one or two.

Secondly, they took them in a taxi – like he has said – and I sincerely feel sorry because none of us would want to see such a situation happening to our people; we do sympathise. However, we must make statements that are not alarming when we are not sure of what exactly happened. In the case of a car and you have gone to the police to report, honestly, can’t you even report the number plate of the car? And the police are also not angels; I am sure they have to investigate but you have to give them sufficient information.

I am seeking clarification from my brother whether those people managed to give that kind of information because we may blame the police when actually they were not served with sufficient information.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think let us not send the minister on a fishing expedition; let our colleague provide the CRB number so that the minister can move. Otherwise if he says, check the police station at Nammere or Kanyanya -

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, hon. Beatrice Anywar here raised the issue regarding our party president, Dr Kiiza Besigye. The minister is here; we thought he would make a statement or a comment but not even a promise that he is going to bring a statement has been made. We want to indulge – 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Baba, I hope you heard the matter raised by hon. Anywar about her party presidential candidate who has been restrained from moving.

MR JAMES BABA: Madam Speaker, I did not hear the issue hon. Okupa raised; I had not come to the House yet. If he could, please, repeat it.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, hon. Anywar wants an explanation from the Government as to why her presidential candidate, Dr Kiiza Besigye, has not been allowed to leave his house.

MS ANYWAR: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Just for the sake of the honourable minister to get to know what I had raised, we had wanted to know from Government why Dr Kiiza Besigye, who was a presidential candidate, is under arrest since the election day to date.

Secondly, we want Government to bring a statement to this House, to explain the circumstances under which many people are arrested under the preventive arrangement. That, in summary, is what we want to know from Government and we are demanding that Dr Besigye’s home be left free from the security personnel. Thank you.

3.52
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr James Baba): Madam Speaker and honourable members, the Inspector General of Police did issue a public statement in a press release detailing explanations as to why Dr Kiiza Besigye is under house arrest. The bottom line is, as long as there is this campaign for defiance and disobedience to the law, under the Constitution and under the Police Act, the police have every right to take measures to make sure that the public and national security, peace and stability are secured.

Until and unless such defiance is dealt away with, I am afraid the police will have to continue with their responsibility of making sure that this city and this country are safe.

MS CECILIA OGWAL: Madam Speaker, I thank the minister for attempting to give us some light on the continued incarceration of our leader, Dr Kiiza Besigye. However, I would like him to tell us which law Dr Kiiza Besigye has broken ever since? Just tell me one.

Secondly, the act of defiance – if you decide to sit in your house as many of us have decided to do today, what law would we have broken? By just sitting in his house, what law has Dr Kiiza Besigye broken? Or by moving in his car and being driven to the bank or to the grocery store, what law would he have broken? Can the minister explain to us because it is also good for us, who are members of his party, to know whether he is leading us into breaking the law – and some of us would not want to break the law – then we can advise the party accordingly.
Which law has Dr Kiiza Besigye so far broken so that we can appreciate what the police are doing? What law?

MR JAMES BABA: Under the Police Act, the police have the authority to detect and prevent crime. On that basis alone, the police can act. You do not have to commit any crime to be prevented. That is it.

MR TINKASIIMIRE: Madam Speaker, we shall not sit in this House and see any Ugandan losing his rights and jubilate that all is well. I remember we were about to be thrown out of this House – (Laughter) – illegally. It was only a sober Speaker and sober minds that stood with us up to the end. I will not subscribe to any view that Besigye is breaking the law by getting out of his gate. If he has broken the law, which charge have you brought against him? (Applause). Produce evidence to this House; this is not a comedy house. (Laughter)

Madam Speaker, if he is saying that Besigye is breaking the law, let him produce a charge that they have brought against him. How long are you going to keep arresting him under “preventive arrest”? It is illegal and I sympathise with the side, which I am joining very soon. (Laughter)

MS KARUNGI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The minister has already informed us that under the Police Act, the police have the powers to detain somebody for security purposes and in this case, we have seen Dr Besigye being followed by so many people whenever he gets out of his house. When the police intervene, the public does not cooperate. Therefore, is hon. Tinkasiimire in order to say that the police have no capacity and are not supposed to keep Dr Besigye until further notice?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the minister says that the Inspector General of Police issued a statement. However, the statement was not issued to the House and so in that regard, I would like to ask the minister to bring that statement at an appropriate time so that we can understand the position. (Applause)

I think the Minister for Health has heard about the measles outbreak in Lira District and I hope that you will do something about it. I thank you. 

4.00
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Serere): Madam Speaker, I think the Minister of State for Internal Affairs should commit himself about when he is bringing the statement to this House.

The second concern that I would like to put through to the Minister for Health affects the people of Teso especially in the districts of Ngora and Serere. During the campaigns, there was the issue of Hepatitis B, which continues to kill so many people. We very well know that the President launched the vaccination in Ngora District but up to now, there are no vaccines in the health centres and hospitals and people have continued dying. 

Some of our colleagues lost the election because people said that they were not raising these matters in the House and yet we passed the money in this House. Parliament was even recalled to pass the Shs10 billion but we are not seeing these vaccines. The finance ministry at that time also promised that they were going to increase the funding but nothing has happened and yet people continue to die. 

It is an embarrassment to us, as leaders, when we have passed money but there are no vaccines and yet people continue to die.   

May the Minister of Health tell us what is happening? This is not only limited to Teso because I am told it is the same case in Kitgum and other parts of northern Uganda. We were in West Nile for campaigns and so many people were dying and we have also had cases in Kabale. Can the Minister of Health come out clearly on this matter – (Interruption)

DR BITEKYEREZO: I thank you very much, hon. Okupa, for giving way. Madam Speaker, before the minister comes in, I would like to comment as the Chairperson of the Committee on Health.

I would like to thank this Parliament for standing with us and I would like to thank hon. Cecilia Ogwal for her efforts in order to get Shs11 billion to specifically cater for vaccines against Hepatitis B in this country. I think the money for the vaccines was released and the finance minister can confirm this. The President talked about it wherever he went.

Madam Speaker, what we want to prove is whether this money was released. If the answer is “yes”, how far have they gone with procuring the vaccines? If not, we should give them time beyond which we should become very impatient and possibly invoke some laws because there is no way we can sit here when the Government of Uganda has released Shs11 billion to buy vaccines for the people and we do not know where the money is.

In case anybody in the Ministry of Health has misused that money, we want it known now. If it is going to follow the Global Fund trend, we should know. If it is going to follow the pension funds trend, we should know but there is no way we can just sit down here. Some of us are signing out of this Parliament but we spoke that this money must be earmarked and released specifically for vaccines. If somebody has eaten the money, let them repent. I thank you very much. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I do not want to agree that some Members lost because they did not highlight the Hepatitis B issue. I think Hepatitis B has been a subject on this Floor many times. We were given the opportunity to talk about Hepatitis B and that is how we even got money from the Contingency Fund. The Members could have lost elections for other reasons because I know that honourable members have been raising this matter during every session, for example, when we were debating the police recruitment and in many other debates.  

MR MATIA KASAIJA: Procedure, Madam Speaker. Madam Speaker and colleagues, I would like you to refer to the Order Paper of today. According to my Order Paper, item No. 3, is a statement by the minister on the Government intervention to combat Hepatitis B. Are we moving procedurally right now?

THE SPEAKER: The honourable minister is not ready and that is why I allowed -

MR MATIA KASAIJA: Madam Speaker, I would request that she comes and pronounce herself here so that we hear it. 

4.04
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (PRIMARY HEALTHCARE) (Ms Sarah Opendi): I thank you, Madam Speaker. Allow me to, first of all, acknowledge the issue that was raised by the Member of Parliament from Lira. We will take up this matter and see how to address it because we already have a campaign to end measles in this country by 2020. 

Secondly, on the issue of Hepatitis B, I do recall that this was a matter that we discussed on the Floor of this House before we broke off in December. I updated the House about what we were doing to specifically have the vaccine sent to a few selected districts because the Shs10 billion that we were given was not enough to procure vaccines for the entire country.

We procured vaccines for 12 selected districts. The reason I am not ready with the statement is because I saw the item on the Order Paper from here and when I tried to call my technical people to send the statement, the responsible officer was not in office. Madam Speaker, I request that we bring a full statement on the status. However, we have procured vaccines and sent them to the 12 selected districts. 

The challenge we had is that when the vaccines were sent, we did not match the vaccines with the test kits. Even where there were vaccines, we could not proceed with vaccination because there were inadequate test kits. We shall bring a full statement next week. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I also would like to clarify. Last week, there was a question about vaccination around Parliament which we had to pay for. It was an NGO that decided to come here to offer the services and not the Ministry of Health. Honourable members, I am sure that you can pay Shs 15,000 for your life. 

DR BITEKYEREZO: Madam Speaker, I thank you so much. Let me be honest again because when we become dishonest, we shall cause chaos in this country. We earmarked money for test kits, vaccines and the anti-retroviral drugs because there are some people who are already affected and we must give them some anti-retroviral drugs.

There must be something going wrong in the Ministry of Health. If hon. Sarah Opendi, the Minister in charge of Primary Healthcare in the ministry, is telling me that she wants people from the ministry to come and give clarification, you are now putting us in a queer state. We are going to look like we are in Hollywood because you are the one in that ministry – do not subject us to those technocrats. I am giving you the information; I am a doctor who knows that the money was given.

Now tell us as the boss whether – go and grill them and they tell you whether they have bought the vaccines or not. However, when you bring technocrats, they will come here and speak English and everybody will – we do not want many more medical jargons. Ugandans have listened to very many things. We want vaccines and test kits and nothing less. The money was given.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, fortunately, those technocrats cannot speak in this House. It is the minister who will relay the information. Please make a comprehensive statement to let us know where we are. 

PRESENTATION OF A PETITION ON THE UNLAWFUL, INDISCRIMINATE AND UNCONSTITUTIONAL GIVE AWAY OF MAIN STREET PRIMARY SCHOOL LAND AND PROPERTY BY JINJA MUNICIPAL COUNCIL

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Balyeku, please concentrate on the subject and prayers; do not go into the body.

4.08
MR MOSES BALYEKU (NRM, Jinja Municipality West, Jinja): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Under rule 29 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament of Uganda, this is a petition of the management committee, Parents Teachers Association (PTA), old students, executive committee of Main Street Primary School and the Jinja NGO forum, all located in Jinja District over unlawful, indiscriminate and unconstitutional giveaway of Main Street Primary School land and property by the Jinja Municipal Council.

The humble petitioners are concerned citizens of Uganda holding various capacities in the management of Main Street Primary School who are aggrieved by the actions of Jinja Municipal Council of giving away the land and property belonging to the school.

Although the school is said to be owned by Uganda Land Commission, some of the humble petitioners are employed both as teaching and non-teaching staff as well as former students who have become responsible citizens in this country.

Main street Primary School is a Government-aided school that was established in 1936 to offer education and training to the people of this nation. 

Currently, it has a population of 1600 students sitting on acreage of eight acres with several structures, such as, classrooms, administration blocks, libraries, staff quarters and a huge playground.

The humble petitioners, to their dismay, were surprised by the decision of Jinja Municipal Council to arbitrate the award of the land to a private investor to establish a shopping mall and in return, to relocate the school to another area, which is also another primary school.

The future of these students is now uncertain and they will be disoriented and there are parents who can only afford to take their children to such a school.

Jinja Municipal Council was in total disregard of the state of the school management committee’s rights as a sitting tenant on the school land.

The humble petitioners pray that Parliament resolves that:
    1. The actions and the subsequent resolution of Jinja Municipal Council to relocate Jinja Main Street Primary School and allocate land to a private investor be investigated because it was not done under the law.
    2. The impending location of the school and other actions incidental to this matter be halted completely until Parliament comes up with a report.

Madam Speaker, your humble petitioners as in duty-bound will ever pray and hereto append their signatures.

Also attached are the relevant documentations: a search from Ministry Lands, documents from Civil Society Organisations, minutes of meetings of PTA and board of management and other relevant documents from the office of the Resident District Commissioner and Town Clerk, Jinja.  Madam Speaker, I beg to lay.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the petition is sent to the Committee on Education and Sports to investigate expeditiously so that the report comes back before this Parliament closes.

LAYING OF PAPERS

CONCEPT ON UGANDA WOMEN ENTREPRENEURSHIP PROGRAMME (UWEP)

4.11
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL AFFAIRS (Ms Rukia Nakadama): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table a concept paper on Uganda Women Entrepreneurship Programme. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the main copy will be sent to Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Affairs but it is a matter of concern to many Members of Parliament. I would require the Clerk to circulate a copy to every individual Member because we discussed this issue last week and we did not conclude. Therefore, make sure the Members get it and then, we can debate at an appropriate time. 

STATUTORY INSTRUMENT NO. 6 OF 2016 - THE INSPECTORATE OF GOVERNMENT (TERMS AND CONDITIONS OF SERVICE FOR STAFF) (REVOCATION) REGULATIONS, 2016

THE SPEAKER: Minister of Justice -  is there anyone who can lay this statutory instrument or they are not here?

FINANCIAL STATEMENTS FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30 JUNE 2012 TOGETHER WITH THE REPORT AND OPINION THEREON BY THE AUDITOR-GENERAL

4.12
MS ROSEMARY SSENINDE (NRM, Woman Representative Wakiso):  Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I beg to lay financial statements for the year ended 30 June 2012 together with the report and opinion thereon by the Auditor-General. 
    I. I will start with National Teacher’s College Kaliro. 
    II. Biyaya secondary school. I beg to lay.

FINANCIAL STATEMENTS FOR THE YEAR ENDED 31 DECEMBER 2012 TOGETHER WITH THE REPORT AND OPINION THEREON BY THE AUDITOR-GENERAL

4.14
MS ROSEMARY SSENINDE (NRM, Woman Representative Wakiso): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay financial statements for the year ended 31 December, 2012, together with the report and opinion thereon by the Auditor-General:-
    i. Angel Senior Secondary School, Nebbi District
    ii. Arua Secondary School, Arua District
    iii. Oriajin Secondary School
    iv. Erussi Secondary School
    v. St Joseph’s College, Ombaci
    vi. Alere Secondary School
    vii. Anyavu Secondary School
    viii. Modern Secondary School, Arua District
    ix. Aripea Secondary School
    x. Logiri Girls’ Secondary School
    xi. Bukooli College.

 I beg to lay.

FINANCIAL STATEMENTS FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30 JUNE 2013 TOGETHER WITH THE REPORT AND OPINION THEREON BY THE AUDITOR-GENERAL

4.16
MS ROSEMARY SSENINDE (NRM, Woman Representative Wakiso): Madam Speaker, I also beg to lay financial statements for the year ended 30 June, 2013 together with the report and opinion thereon by the Auditor-General;
    i. Arua School of Comprehensive Nursing, Arua District
    ii. Iganga Technical Institute, Iganga District
    iii. Uganda College of commerce Pakwach 
    iv. Jinja School of Nursing and Midwifery
    v. National Teacher’s College, Kaliro 
    vi. Jinja Medical Laboratory Training School. 

FINANCIAL STATEMENTS FOR THE YEAR ENDED 31 DECEMBER 2013 TOGETHER WITH THE REPORT AND OPINION THEREON BY THE AUDITOR-GENERAL

4.17
MS ROSEMARY SSENINDE (NRM, Woman representative Wakiso): I beg to lay financial statements for the year ended 31 December 2013 together with the report and opinion thereon by the Auditor-General.
    i. Jinja Secondary School
    ii. Mvara Secondary School, Arua District
    iii. Iganga Girls’ Secondary School, Iganga District
    iv. Wanyange Girls’ Secondary School 
    v. Kaliro Technical Institute, Kaliro District
    vi. Iganga High School
    vii. Nkuutu Memorial Secondary School
    viii. Kigulu College-Namungalwe, Iganga District
    ix. Kiira College Butiki, Jinja District
    x. Bukoyo Senior Secondary School, Iganga District
    xi. Budini Secondary School
    xii. Atapara Secondary School
    xiii. Buzaya Senior Secondary School, Kamuli District
    xiv. Matuumu Secondary School, Kamuli District. 

Madam Speaker, I beg to lay.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable commissioner. The documents are sent to the Committee on Public Accounts for expeditious perusal and report back.

I had allowed the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to lay some papers, if you could do that before question time. You know what you want to do; I have given you the Floor.

MOTION THAT PARLIAMENT DO RESOLVE ITSELF INTO A COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY FOR CONSIDERATION AND APPROVAL OF:

        I) REVISED REVENUE AND EXPENDITURE ESTIMATES FOR THE FISCAL YEAR 2015/2016
        II) THE BUDGETARY PROPOSALS FOR REVENUE AND EXPENDITURE ESTIMATES FOR THE FISCAL YEAR 2016/2017

4.19
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING)(Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, in accordance with Article 155 of the Constitution of Uganda and section 13 of the Public Finance Management Act, 2015, I beg to move that Parliament resolves itself into a Committee of Supply for consideration and approval of;
    i. The revised revenue and expenditure estimates for the fiscal year 2015/16
    ii. The budgetary proposals for revenue and expenditure estimates for the fiscal year 2016/17. 

I beg to move.














THE SPEAKER: Yes, it is seconded.

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, in support of the motion, the budget for the 2016/2017 financial year is premised on Vision 2040, the second National Development Plan and the Sustainable Development Goals. 

Throughout the budgets of the financial years 2015 to 2017, the Government policy framework priorities and programmes are properly aligned towards meeting the strategic objectives of the second National Development Plan. According to the budget for the 2016/2017 financial year, priority is given to interventions that promote wealth creation through increased production, productivity, investment and value addition to strategic commodities while sustaining investments in infrastructure and critical social services. 

Specifically, the budget focuses on the following thematic areas:

    1. Maintaining and sustaining national security and defence as well as macroeconomic stability as prerequisites for economic growth and development;

    2. Promotion of production, productivity, investment and export of goods and services through value addition to strategic commodities;

    3. Sustaining the development and maintenance of strategic infrastructure while emphasising energy and transport to accelerate the country’s competitiveness;

    4. Enhancing human capital development by improving access to quality critical social services and skills development; 

    5. Enhancing domestic revenue mobilisation; and

    6. Strengthening the quality of public service delivery to facilitate public sector investment.

Madam Speaker, the projected total revenue envelope to finance the above priorities for the coming financial year amounts to Shs 21,261 billion. Domestic resources amount to Shs 14,489.7 billion, which is 68 per cent of the budget. External financing will amount to Shs 6,771.4 billion. The total is Shs 21,261 billion. 

Madam Speaker, consistent with the resource envelope, the total Government expenditure for the 2016/2017 financial year will be Shs 21,261 billion. The recurrent expenditure will amount to Shs 10,537.55 billion and development expenditure will amount to Shs 10,721,60 billion. 

In accordance with Article 155 of the Constitution and section 13(10)(e) of the Public Finance Management Act 2015, I wish to submit the budgetary proposals of nine self-accounting bodies. 

In addition, in accordance with Article 155 of the Constitution, Government has made recommendations on these proposals. I hereby lay both the budgetary proposals and the recommendations of the Government before this august House as required by the Constitution.

Madam Speaker, in accordance with Section 13 of the Public Finance Management Act, I beg to lay on the Table the following documents for the House to consider and debate:

    1. Proposals for the estimates of revenue and expenditure for the financial year 2016/2017. I beg to lay the draft estimates of revenue and expenditure, both recurrent and development, for the financial year 2016/2017 as required by the law.

    2. A certificate of compliance of the annual budget for the financial year 2015/2016 to the National Development Plan issued by the National Planning Authority.

    3. A statement of tax expenditures of Government for the financial year 2015/2016 as required by the law.

    4. The grants to local governments and subventions for the financial year 2016/2017.

    5. A certificate confirming that the budget for the financial year 2016/2017 is gender and equity responsive and has taken into account the specific needs of men, women, persons with disabilities and other marginalised groups. 

    6. The consolidated budgets of the public corporations and state enterprises for the financial year 2016/2017.

Madam Speaker, the law also requires us to lay before Parliament a report of the existing loan guarantees, including analysis of the risks associated with those guarantees. I hereby lay it on the Table.

Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table a report of the financial year 2015/2016 on the management of public debt, guarantees and other financial liabilities of Government. They are all here in the envelope. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: For the record, read one by one even if they are many.

MR BAHATI: Okay. They are:
    i. A report for the budget estimates for statutory vote 101, the Judiciary, for the financial year 2016/2017.

    ii. Budget estimates for vote 102, the Electoral Commission, for the financial year 2016/2017.

    iii. Budget estimates for vote 103, the Inspectorate of Government, for the financial year 2016/2017.

    iv. Budget estimates for vote 104, Parliamentary Commission, for the financial year 2016/2017.

    v. Budget estimates for the statutory vote 105, Uganda Law Reform Commission, for the financial year 2016/2017.

    vi. Budget estimates for vote 106, Uganda Human Rights Commission, for the financial year 2016/2017.

    vii. Budget estimates for vote 107, Uganda Aids Commission, for the financial year 2016/2017.

    viii. Budget estimates for vote 108, the National Planning Authority, for the financial year 2016/2017.

    ix. Budget estimates for vote 13, Office of the Auditor-General, for the financial year 2016/2017. 

They are all contained in this report that I have laid on the Table. Finally, Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table a report on the guarantees received by Government for the financial year 2015/2016.

Madam Speaker, as I already indicated we have five tax Bills which are required to be laid before Parliament together with the budget. I beg for your permission to present them for first reading.

THE SPEAKER: Permission is granted.

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE VALUE ADDED TAX (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2016

4.31
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Value Added Tax (Amendment) Bill, 2016” be read for the first time.

THE SPEAKER: Is it seconded? It is seconded.

MR BAHATI: The certificate of financial implications is hereby attached. The five Bills are all here. (Interruption) Madam Speaker, can you protect me from the new member of our party? (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, do lay them on the Table according to our Rules of Procedure.

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE STAMP DUTY (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2016

4.32
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Stamp Duty (Amendment) Bill, 2016” be read for the first time.

THE SPEAKER: Is it seconded? It is seconded.

MR BAHATI: Thank you. The certificate of financial implications is hereby attached.

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE EXCISE DUTY (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2016

4.33
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Excise Duty (Amendment) Bill, 2016” be read for the first time.

THE SPEAKER: Is it seconded? Yes, it is. 

MR BAHATI: The certificate of financial implications has also been attached.

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE INCOME TAX (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2016

4.34
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Income Tax (Amendment) Bill, 2016” be read for the first time.

THE SPEAKER:  It has been seconded. 

MR BAHATI: The certificate of financial implications is hereby attached.

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE FINANCE BILL, 2016

4.35 
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati)): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Finance Bill, 2016” be read for the first time.

THE SPEAKER:  It is seconded.

MR BAHATI: The certificate of financial implications is hereby attached. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, as I told you earlier in my communication, the Public Finance Management Act has got very many changes. This work could have been done in June or July but we are required to do it this time of the financial year.

I would like to request that the revised revenue and expenditure proposals be sent to the Committee on Budget and the other sectoral committees. I would like to remind the ministries that there was a deadline for submitting policy statements. The earlier you bring them, the better for us so that we can comply with the deadline under the Act and the Constitution. They are all sent to the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development for perusal and report back.

4.36 
MS CECILIA OGWAL (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Madam Speaker, as we receive the necessary documents to prepare for the budget of the financial year 2016/2017, I would like to remind you and the House that the supplementary budget for 2015/2016 is still pending. There are some issues, which should have been harmonised and figures reconciled between the committee and the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. We raised very pertinent points, which ought to have been answered by the ministry but up to now the ministry has not answered those queries. As a result, I do not know whether the ministry has now abandoned the supplementary budget so that we, the Committee on Budget, know how to proceed. 

There were serious issues, which I raised in the minority report, that were also looked at by the Parliament and advice was given to the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. However, up to now, the ministry has not addressed its mind to those gaps and issues, which are very pertinent. Therefore, I would like to know how we are going to proceed because we are now dealing with new figures.  

As we do that, it is important that we dispose of anything that is pending from the last financial year. However, as of now, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development has refused to address the issue of the supplementary budget. I do not know how you will advise the House on how to proceed. They are making our work difficult as Parliament and as a committee. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, I would like to remind the Chief Whip of the Opposition that this matter was referred to the committee and the committee is supposed to come to the House and make a presentation and then the House makes a decision on it. I do not know what she means when she says “the minister” - The matter is actually with the Committee on Budget. I am also waiting for you. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable ministers, you also need to take into account the alternative policy statements of the Opposition. We have limited time; please, ensure that the statements come really quickly so that they can look at them and give us their alternatives.

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, there are two schedules, which we are supposed to submit which have not been submitted today. I would like to bring this to the attention of the House. 

The first one is the list of accounting officers. The process of vetting them and making sure that they comply with what Parliament recommended is going on and when we are ready, we will submit this list to the House within time. We will do it in time, according to the law. 

The second one is the Appropriation Bill, which will be brought to the House when we finalise the estimates from different votes. 

The last one, which we have not submitted today, is the multi-year commitments by Government, which will also be submitted within the specified time.

Those three have not been submitted. They will be submitted in time according to the law and as we promised, Madam Speaker. This year, we are doing better and we are keeping the deadlines of the law. 

QUESTIONS FOR ORAL ANSWER

QUESTION 16/1/09 TO THE MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES

4.39
MR KENNETH LUBOGO (Independent, Bulamogi County, Kaliro): 
“The Cotton Development Organisation announced that the farm gate price for cotton this current season shall not fall below Shs 1,600 per kilogram of seed cotton. However, farmers in Kaliro are being paid between Shs 1,000 to 1,200 per kilogram. What measures has Government put in place, if any, to protect cotton farmers from exploitation?”

4.39
THE MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (Mr Tress Bucyanayandi): Madam Speaker, I refer to question 16/1/09 on cotton prices raised by hon. Kenneth Lubogo, the Member of Parliament for Bulamogi County. 

First of all, I wish to make a small correction; the indicative price mentioned is not Shs 1600, but it was Shs 1500 as announced by the Cotton Development Organisation (CDO). This indicative price was announced in December before Christmas last year. It was intended to guide farmers on the kind of prices they receive. 

Clearly, it was not established whether farmers received much less than that, especially before the indicative price was announced. Therefore, this could not be confirmed. However, I was able to establish that since the announcement of that indicative price, the field officers ensured that the farmers got the proper price of Shs 1500. Therefore, I want to confirm that right now, farmers are receiving Shs 1500 per kilogram of seed cotton. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Let us first have a supplementary question from the owner of the question. 

MS CECILIA OGWAL: Can I give information?

THE SPEAKER: No, please. 

MR LUBOGO: Madam Speaker, I will not ask a supplementary question. If she can ask one for the benefit of the House, it is most welcome. 

THE SPEAKER: Yes, cotton farmer.

4.42
MS CECILIA OGWAL (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Madam Speaker, I am a cotton grower and you all know that. Although the minister has confirmed that the price of seed cotton is Shs 1500 per kilogram, I do not know whether the minister is aware that CDO is charging Shs 300 per kilogram of seed cotton in form of seed levy. I am sure he is aware of that. 

This is an issue that we have consistently brought to the House every year, and every year, the Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries has failed to address the issue of the cotton seed levy although the ministry is aware that it is an illegal levy. This is because a tax can only be charged on the people if it is approved by the Government and this Parliament. For several years now, the minister has failed to address it. 

If this matter is resolved between the ministry and CDO, the cotton farmers would actually be getting Shs 1800; that is Shs 1500 plus the Shs 300, which goes to CDO. The farmers should, therefore, be paid Shs 1800, Madam Speaker. I thank you.

MR BUCYANAYANDI: Madam Speaker, I am fully aware that levies are paid on specific commodities. For coffee, for example, a levy or one percent of cess is charged. Similarly, I understand cotton is supposed to also attract a cess in form of levy of two per cent. Therefore, this levy or cess is legitimate. However, if there are any queries, I will undertake to study it further and report back at a later date. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, our rules only allow the mover of the question to ask a supplementary question but he has given his opportunity to a serious cotton farmer. Let us go to the next question. 

QUESTION 19/1/09 TO THE MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES

THE SPEAKER: Is anyone standing in for Dr Epetait?

4.44
MS CECILIA OGWAL (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo):  
“i) Would the Minister update the House on the progress of electronic branding of cattle in Karamoja?
ii) 	Of these treaties/charters adopted by the African Union, which one has Uganda ratified?
iii) 	What are the cost, impact and future prospects for roll out of the Programme?
iv) 	Which organisations/personnel have been contracted to implement the Programme?”

4.44
THE MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (Mr Tress Bucyanayandi): Madam Speaker, this question No. 19/1/09 has something to do with the electronic cattle identification project and the Cattle Theft Prevention Project currently going on in Karamoja sub region. 

I would like to report that the electronic cattle identification project has been going on. Phases 1 and 2 covered all the districts of Karamoja sub-region. Accordingly, the total number of cattle that were tagged was 115,445. I have the table here that details what happened in each district and I will lay this paper on Table for record purposes. 
	
There was another question that is associated with this in regard to the charters affecting the project. I am also aware that there was the East Africa Police Chiefs’ Cooperation Organisation, which spearheaded the Protocol on the Prevention, Combating and Eradication of Cattle Rustling in East Africa. Uganda ratified that protocol and it on going ; it is being implemented by the Anti-Stock Theft Unit and the police. It is going on very well.

Another question related to this was how much was spent on this. I would like to inform the House that about Shs 2.3 billion was spent on consultancies, mobilisation and equipment in the last five years since 2010. 

Madam Speaker, the impact of this exercise has been great within the context of reduction in cattle rustling as well as improved regional security. This is because cattle rustling was cutting across borders and that aspect has now been contained. 

The final issue was on the ministries or implementing agencies. First of all, that project over the last five years has been implemented by Government - Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries cooperating with the Ministry of Karamoja Affairs as well as the local governments in the seven districts constituting the Karamoja subregion. They were assisted by an Israeli expert or consultancy known as Israel LR Group company that provided the consultancy services. I beg to submit, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: I do not know whether hon. Cecilia Ogwal will have a supplementary. However, my interest is on item No. 6 (b) (ii). I do not know whether that convention has been domesticated by his House.

MR BUCYANAYANDI: I would not be sure. I will find out. 

THE SPEAKER: Okay. Let us have the supplementary question by hon. Cecilia Ogwal. 

4.46
MS CECILIA OGWAL (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Madam Speaker, when we ask these questions, we always expect the sector ministers to also update the House on how far the country has gone with the implementation of some of these international treaties that we enter into. 

It is a commitment and the only way we show that we are committed is to have the matter domesticated through this Parliament. May we also know from the minister how soon this treaty will be brought to Parliament for domestication? Thank you. 

MR BUCYANAYANDI: Madam Speaker, as I had just mentioned, please, permit me to go and consult and then I will be able to report back. I will do that. 

THE SPEAKER: Okay. Honourable members, is there anyone standing in for hon. Otada? 

QUESTION 21/1/09 TO THE MINISTER OF FOREIGN AFFAIRS

4.47
MS CECILIA OGWAL (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo): “(i) Could the Minister update the House on the number of treaties/charters the African Union has adopted since 2002?

(ii) 	Of these treaties/charters adopted by the African Union, which ones has Uganda ratified?

(iii) 	What are the proposed treaties/charters under discussion by the African Union?

(iv) 	What efforts is Government making to consult Ugandans on the proposed treaties/charters?”

4.48
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS (REGIONAL AFFAIRS) (Mr Philemon Mateke): Madam Speaker, the first question is about an update to the House on the number of treaties/charters the African Union has adopted since 2002. I would like to outline the treaties and then mention those that have been ratified and those that have not been ratified.

1. The Protocol Relating to the Establishment of the Peace and Security Council of the African Union. It was adopted on 9 July 2002 and came into force on 26 December 2003. It was signed on 9 July 2002 and the date of ratification –(Interruption)

MS CECILIA OGWAL: As the owner of this question, and the question was given to the minister beforehand in anticipation that he would prepare to submit the answer to the House, I beg to have a copy of the reply to this question so that we can follow what you are submitting. I have checked my iPad but the answer has not been uploaded there. So, may I have a copy of your reply?

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, I would like to bring this to the attention of your office and the Commission; our IT department should be more active. The iPads are down and we have been trying to link up with them, but we are told that they have left. I think that when the House is sitting and there are such technical issues, they should be around to help us.

THE SPEAKER: Have they left before 5.00 p.m.?

MR OKUPA: Yes! We have tried to send a message but we have been told that they have left. The Alfresco application that we are supposed to use is off. We are therefore finding problems in accessing the information.

THE SPEAKER: The Clerk should ensure that all staff are here especially when plenary is taking place. Is the answer coming?

MR MATEKE: Madam Speaker, we were asked how many treaties and charters of the African Union were adopted since 2002 and ratified by the Uganda Government.

1. 	Protocol Relating to the Establishment of the Peace and Security Council of the African Union. It was adopted on 9 July 2002 and entered into force on 26 December 2003. It was signed in July, 2002 and the date of ratification is 20 March 2004.

2. 	African Convention on the Conservation of Nature and National Resources (revised version). This was adopted on 1 July 2003 and signed on 18 December 2003. The responsible ministry is the Ministry of Water and Environment.

3. 	African Union Convention on Preventing and Combating Corruption. This was adopted on 1 July 2003 and came into force on 5 August 2006. It was signed on 18 August 2003 and ratified on 30 August 2004.

4. 	Protocol to the African Charter on Human and Peoples’ Rights on the Rights of Women in Africa. This was adopted on 1 July 2003 and it came into force on 25 November 2005. It was signed on 18 December 2003 and was ratified on 22 December 2010.

5. 	Protocol of the Court of Justice of the African Union, which was adopted on 1 July 2003 and it came into force on 11 February 2009. It was signed on 18 December 2009 and the responsible ministry is the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs.

6. 	The Protocol on Amendments to the Constitutive Act of the African Union. It was adopted on 11 July 2003 and it was signed on 12 December 2003. The responsible ministry was the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs.

7. 	Protocol to the Organisation of African Union Convention on the Prevention and Combating of Terrorism. This one was adopted on 1 July 2004 and it was signed on 6 December 2004. The responsible ministry is the Ministry of Internal Affairs.

8. 	Protocol of the African Union Non-Aggression and Common Defence Pact. It was adopted on 1 July 2005 and came into force on 8 December 2009. The responsible ministry is the Ministry of Defence.

9. 	Charter for African Cultural Renaissance. This was adopted in 24 January 2006 and the responsible ministry is Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Affairs.

10. 	African Youth Charter, which was adopted on 2 July 2006 and it came into force on 8 August 2009. The responsible ministry is the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Affairs.

11. 	Protocol is the African Charter on Democracy, Elections and Governance. The date of adoption was 30 January 2007 and entry into force was 15 February 2012. It was signed on 16 December 2008. The responsible ministry is Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs.

12. 	Protocol on the Statute of the African Court of Justice and Human Rights. It was adopted on 1 July 2008 and the date of ratification was 10 March 2004. The ministry responsible is the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs - (Interjection) - We do not have it here; we shall bring it. 

Madam Speaker, ours is a coordinating ministry and there are some ministries that do not take time to find out how these things are implemented.

MR OKUPA:  Madam Speaker, the issue that we are raising here is that the date the minister is reading is not in the schedule, which was passed on to us. Before we go into issues of the responsible ministries, if he does not have it then where is he reading the date of 30 March from? He does not have it and we also do not have it but he has mentioned it. Please, can we harmonise this before we go forward?

MR MATEKE: Madam Speaker, I am giving you the information that we have in the ministry. 

13. 	Statute of the African Union Commission on International Law. This was adopted on 4 February 2009. The date of entry into force is 4 February 2009. It has not yet been signed and the responsible ministry is Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs.

14. 	African Charter on Statistics. It was adopted on 4 February 2009 and the date of entry into force is not indicated yet. We are going to whip the responsible ministry. The date of signature is 22 January 2014 and Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is responsible.

15. 	Protocol on the African Investment Bank. The date of adoption is 30 June 2009 and the date of entry into force is not yet indicated. It has not yet been ratified. The ministry responsible is the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, which has to do the needful and update us with ratification and signature.

16. 	African Union Convention for the Protection and Assistance of Internally Displaced Persons in Africa (Kampala Convention). This convention was adopted on 23 October 2009 and it came into force on 6 December 2012. It was signed on 23 October 2009 and ratified on 29 January 2010. The responsible ministry is Ministry of Foreign Affairs –(Interruption)

MR OKUPA: Honourable minister, can you correct that because we are seeing the date of signing being in 2012 and the date of ratification is in 2010? Can you give us the correct dates? You cannot ratify before you enter into a commitment? – (Interjections)

THE SPEAKER: That is the bench for technical officers and that is why he is going there.

MR MATEKE: My technocrats have advised me that the coming into force can come after signing.

17. 	Revised Constitution of the African Civil Aviation Commission. It was adopted on 16 December 2009 and came into force on 11 May 2010. The date of signature is 12 May 2010 and it was ratified on 29 January 2010.

18. 	Revised African Maritime Transport Charter. It was adopted on 26 July 2010. It is not yet in force and has not been signed. We are going to whip the Ministry of Works and Transport to do its work.

19. 	African Charter on Values and Principles of Public Service and Administration. The date of adoption is 31 January 2011 and date of signature is 14 March 2013. It has not yet been ratified and is under the Ministry of Public Service.

20. 	Agreement for the Establishment of the African Risk Capacity (ARC) Agency. It was adopted on 23 November 2012. The date of entry into force is 23 November 2012 and the responsible ministry is the Prime Minister’s Office.

 21. 	African Union Convention on Cross-Border Cooperation (Niamey Convention). It was adopted on 27 June 2014 and the responsible ministries are Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Ministry of Internal Affairs.

22. 	Protocol on Amendments to the Protocol on the Statute of the African Court of Justice and Human Rights. It was adopted on 27 June 2014 and the responsible ministry is Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs. 

23. 	Protocol on the Establishment of the African Monetary Fund and the Statute of the African Monetary Fund. It came into force on 27 June 2014 and the responsible ministry is Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. 

24. 	African Charter on the Values and Principles of Decentralisation, Local Government and Local Development. It was adopted on 27 June 2014 and the responsible ministry is Ministry of Local Government. 

25. 	Protocol to the Constitutive Act of the African Union Relating to the Pan African Parliament. This one was adopted on 27 June 2014 and the responsible ministry is Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs.

I will now go to No.2 - the number of treaties adopted since 2002 that Uganda has ratified. Uganda has to date ratified only five of the African Union treaties adopted since 2002. For ease of reference, kindly refer to the above template.

The third question was about the prospects of African unity as envisaged by the forerunners. One, the vision of the founding fathers of African unity through the Organisation of African Unity (OAU) - the forerunner of the African Union - was inspired by the Pan-African movement and underwritten by a common goal to promote understanding and cooperation among African states in response to the aspirations of brotherhood, solidarity and unity transcending ethnic and national differences – (Interruption) 

MR SSEWUNGU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am seeking for your indulgence. Question time is limited and this answer might take all that time. Wouldn’t it be procedurally right that we receive copies of what the minister is reading and then maybe next time, we come back and ask questions? Otherwise, I am worried that questions might not be completed, according to our Order Paper. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, you should circulate the answers to all the Members. However, we have a matter of concern relating to non-domestication. You have said that they have ratified five but none has come here for domestication. Maybe you could answer that because that is what Members are interested in. Why haven’t you brought the treaties for domestication?

MR MATEKE: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I promise this House that we are going to circulate copies of this document. Regarding the second concern, we are going to submit the relevant information on paper and it will be circulated in due course; most likely, early next week. 

Two, there are many objectives - those are the founding fathers of the Organisation of African Unity - (Interruption)

MS CECILIA OGWAL: Madam Speaker, I am representing the person who has raised these questions. I have listened to the minister and I have also seen the submission, a copy of which has been given to me. It will be unfair to those Members present to listen to the submission when they cannot follow exactly what the minister has put down.

Madam Speaker, reading through what the minster has written concerning Agenda 2063, which is a new concept for building new Africa and some of the pertinent issues for continental development and integration, I feel that the ministry needs to put in more thought. This is a very scanty document and I think that it is not worthy for this Parliament to address its mind to it.

Secondly, Madam Speaker, it is very disappointing to hear from the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, who is the main custodian of all these treaties that we signed, that out of the 25 treaties that he has highlighted, only five have been ratified, since 2001. Some of the treaties are very crucial, to the extent that if we do not ratify them, it exposes us to criticism and condemnation abroad. 

I happen to have been privileged to lead a delegation to the Pan African Parliament and there are times that I would whip my Members to get out of the session because of the sensitivity of the matter, which would be discussed during that session. Some of those matters are so condemning and yet it may not be our fault. It is the fault of the main ministry, which is not doing its work. I do not see how this Government would not ratify, for example, the treaty on defence. We survive on regional peace and stability; how can we not ratify all those sensitive treaties? It means that somebody is not raising that issue to the attention of the authorities who ought to have handled those matters.

Madam Speaker, it is very upsetting and disappointing that the Ministry of Foreign Affairs is not doing its work. I am so surprised that you tell me that there is this treaty, which has been signed and there is no ministry, which is taking care of that treaty. Why did you go there to sign and where did you deposit the documents if there is no ministry, which is even in charge? We are not serious, Madam Speaker. 




I am not here to condemn anybody; I am just saying that we have seen what has been submitted and it is very upsetting and disappointing. It is this Parliament to take charge and tell the ministries, which are responsible for treaties and international commitments, to be serious.

Madam Speaker, you sit on many of those international organisations and you know that even when it comes to meeting our financial obligations, if Uganda does not meet its financial obligation, there are certain things that we are not allowed to do. 

In Pan-Africa, if we do not meet our financial obligation, we cannot lead some of the committees. When you go to ACP-EU Joint Parliamentary Assembly, Madam Speaker, you know that Uganda should have had the first woman to sit on the bureau of ACP-EU Joint Parliamentary Assembly. However, because Uganda had not fulfilled its financial obligation, we could not do that. 

Therefore, it is very important that the Ministry of Foreign Affairs goes back and brushes up this document. I appreciate that you have done your best in trying to highlight some of these issues but there are too many gaps. I appeal that you  go back and polish up the document and have it uploaded onto our iPads so that we may share with you this valuable information. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, almost by coincidence, in the closing days of the Eighth Parliament, we requested the Minister of Foreign Affairs to come here and give us a report on ratification and domestication. 

Now we are also in the closing time of the Ninth Parliament and we are asking - Honourable minister, hon. Cecilia Ogwal has said that she gets embarrassed but you know as a Speaker, sometimes I sit in those meetings so out of respect for me, they put the items on Uganda in an envelope and they say, “Madam, this is the report on your country.” Ratification in Tanzania is at 80 per cent, Kenya is at 70 per cent.

Honourable minister, we would like to direct you to convene all those ministries: gender, justice, finance and others so that you can set a schedule. How can we as a country continue not ratifying and domesticating? Yes, I think we need the foreign affairs minister to convene his colleagues and give us a timeline as to when these Bills will be brought here.

5.20
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank hon. Otada who has been well represented by hon. Cecilia Ogwal, for having asked these questions. What I would like to say is that the concern has been taken on, but I would also like to say that we have been ratifying and domesticating treaties but maybe we need to speed up.

As I listened to submissions, it was as if Uganda is not doing anything at all. I also know that some of these treaties have got financial implications and, therefore, Government has been moving very cautiously in ratifying. You ratify then you know that you will be fully involved; you have to pay.

I would like to commit that we will look through the pending treaties to be domesticated and ratified and pick out –

THE SPEAKER: Ratify and domesticate. Ratification is not sufficient without domestication.

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: We really need to look through this list and agree that this is very important and urgent; and I agree with Finance that the implication will be tenable rather than domesticating and ratifying without being sure that we shall be able to – (Interruption)

MR MAGYEZI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. We have heard the report of the minister and in his report he clearly said and pointed out the five treaties, which have been ratified since 2001. This is 14 years down the road and the minister, at no point, said that any of these treaties have been domesticated.

The Government Chief Whip stands up to tell us that Government has been domesticating and ratifying these treaties. I am wondering what Parliament should think because this is a Ministry in charge of our Foreign Affairs. We are participating in the African Union but 14 years down the road, not a single treaty has been domesticated for our application here. 

Now somebody is telling us that Government has been doing it and that we only need to expedite. Madam Speaker, what do we take from here? Are we in a serious process? I thought this question was actually very important and it calls to order our participation in the African Union. If it is true that our domestication of these treaties is expensive and it has financial implications, I think we should pull out of the African Union if we cannot afford.

Let us get something clear. Which treaty has been domesticated? Can it be laid on the Table instead of being tossed down and up in this Parliament?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, when the Government goes to discuss and negotiate, you are the ones who go. You understand the objectives and agree with colleagues that we sign these treaties. Honourable Government Chief Whip, I think we should try to improve our performance. Let us know of those you said we signed in error.

MR MATEKE: Madam Speaker, I have heard the views of the House. This subject was given to me this morning but I promise that early next week, I shall submit full information, which this House needs to know. My technical staff is here and we are going to explain as to why some ministries have not ratified and signed. We are going to whip them, maybe for a meeting as soon as possible, so that we give you comprehensive answers.

MR NIWAGABA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to know from you whether the minister should not come up with a comprehensive ministerial statement in respect of this matter to enable Members to debate it because it raises serious matters, especially matters of laxity on the part of Government. 

I beg your indulgence, Madam Speaker, that you direct the minister to transform from a question and come up with a ministerial statement explaining which treaty has been ratified, which one has been domesticated, which ones have not and why, for us to debate.

MR OKUPA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Like most of the colleagues have stated here, I sit in the Pan African Parliament and we just came back on Sunday. 

Madam Speaker, you came to the Pan-African Parliament last year and His Excellency, President Yoweri Museveni, gave a commitment on this matter because he was invited as a guest and this matter was raised.

THE SPEAKER: I think he was invited because we were the ones who are non-compliant.

MR OKUPA: Yes, that is why he was called there. We had a separate meeting with him as the Ugandan delegation and he did promise – because they are the ones who signed the Protocol to the Constitutive Act of the African Union relating to the Pan African Parliament. The Pan African Parliament is supposed to transform from an advisory to a legislative body and they did sign in Malabo in June 2014 that within 18 months, the members of the Pan African Parliament would be elected like the EALA members with effect from this year.

However, it is so embarrassing that after all that commitment, we have not yet – because it needs a minimum of 28 countries. We are now standing at about 15 countries only. The 18 months are about to end and we would be having a different Pan African Parliament by the end of this year. 

Therefore, please help us to speed this up because we keep raising these matters. There is another one here where hon. Onyango Kakoba is the Chairperson of the Committee on Human and People’s Rights. They keep bashing Uganda because we have not played our part. Please, help us.

I had even expected the Minister in charge of Investments, hon. Ajedra - I have seen your ministry here and you have also not done your part because you are the responsible ministry on the issue of the Protocol on the African Investment Bank. What is the status? What is your problem? You should be able to tell us because that is your docket.

Therefore, Madam Speaker, I would like to agree with hon. Niwagaba that the minister be given time; a week, to bring a comprehensive statement. In addition, our Committee on Foreign Affairs must take up this matter seriously and summon all these ministries here and we see where the problem is. We must work together in order to resolve these issues otherwise we get embarrassed in the international fora where we go. We even cannot stand for some positions due to these limitations. Last time, you had to stampede us here to pass a law on financial issues very fast because we had not done our part and delayed because of laxity.

I would think that, that would be the way to go; that next week the minister brings a comprehensive statement. If it is not satisfactory, the Committee on Foreign Affairs must take up this matter and summon the responsible ministries together with the coordinating Ministry of Foreign Affairs to handle this matter. Thank you.

MS KAMATEEKA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to agree with my colleagues that we need a comprehensive statement. 

The honourable minister has admitted that he received the information he has this morning and hon. Cecilia Ogwal did observe that the minister is just giving overall information and yet we need details. For example, some of the treaties may have been ratified but we had reservations on some of the protocols. We need to know which protocols we have not ratified or those we have reservations on, the reasons why we have not ratified them and what it is that we are doing.

Madam Speaker, I think we have not fully ratified the protocol on democracy as well as the Abuja Protocol and so forth. We need those details so that we can be able to debate this issue once and for all and chart out a way forward as to what it is that we should be doing so as to make sure that we ratify and fully domesticate some of these protocols. Thank you.

MR SSEWUNGU: Madam Speaker, I also thank the minister. When I raised the other matter that we get the report individually in our pigeonholes, I saw the minister was suffering. Indeed, the minister has been genuine to tell us that he got whatever he was reading this morning. As a professional teacher, I had already noticed it and that is why I stood up. 

Madam Speaker, would it be procedurally okay for us to withdraw the whole submission on our Hansard because it is already in the Hansard and I do not know - You see, what is interesting is that the chief whip has admitted why they are failing to ratify and domesticate; that there are financial implications and this is a fact.

Countries like Kenya have left out ratification; they just domesticate according to their Constitution and indeed they move very fast. If a chief whip tells you, Madam Speaker, that they are fearful because of financial implications – most of these agreements need money. Yes, in signing, we are very fast but when it comes to implementation, we are slow.

Let me give you an example. Uganda has already constructed a very expensive high commission in Kenya whereas those in Europe are all collapsing. When you look at the returns from these different countries, between Kigali, London and others, the difference is very high but that is how we are moving.

Therefore, my procedural issue, Madam Speaker, is about expunging what the minister has given us from the Hansard. This is because he has admitted here that his staff from the ministry gave him what he was reading this morning. The man has everything in his brain but what was given to him is what he is reading very reluctantly. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

MR DOMBO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. This matter was raised on this Floor under the rules that govern questions. Those rules are very limiting to have constructive engagements on what the minister has been raising. It is against this background that one colleague proposed that if this matter was brought under the rules that govern ministerial statements, it would give this House and Members enough time to debate a statement from the ministry and it would provide better information. 

That is the only thing that hon. Niwagaba raised, which we feel would be helpful to the ministry and also to the country because on Women’s Day, the President informed the country, and it is common knowledge that South Sudan has been admitted to the East African Community. The President encouraged people to go and trade. Do we just walk there or do we have to operate under legal and administrative frameworks, which have been agreed upon in protocols so that we can go there and do effective business?

Therefore, Madam Speaker, I would like to raise a point of procedure to support what my colleague raised that the current rules limit us in engaging under question time yet if it came under a ministerial statement, we would do justice to this statement. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, first, I want to dispel the notion that these questions were brought yesterday or today. When we were opening Parliament last week, I informed you that there are 56 unanswered questions and that every day, questions would be reflected on the Order Paper. These are old questions and I think even before the minister went there, they were in that ministry. There is nothing new here. They have been there and we shall continue to put them on the Order Paper so that you can explain Government policy to enable our people understand what to do.

However, I would like to pick up the suggestion of hon. Dombo and hon. Niwagaba that the minister should come back with a comprehensive statement on this issue. I also want to encourage the Prime Minister – of course, he cannot direct the Cabinet but I think someone needs to take charge of this process since it seems that nobody is in charge. 

The Ministry of Gender and Culture can go and sign and later keep it in their office. The Ministry of Works also goes and signs and put in their office. The Ministry of Finance Planning and Economic Development people go and sign and put in their office. Who is doing the collecting and follow-up? Mr Prime Minister, do you have something to say?

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I support the proposal moved by hon. Niwagaba and seconded by hon. Dombo. When I stood here and said that we had been doing some work, hon. Raphael Magyezi probably thought that I was misinforming this House. But I said that given an opportunity, I could present a full lorry of treaties that have been ratified - (Interjections) - yes. I was going to task the Ministry of Foreign Affairs to do this even without what hon. Wilfred Niwagaba had proposed. But since the House is supporting hon. Wilfred Niwagaba, I do not have to be the one to instruct but the institution.

Therefore, Madam Speaker, on the specific concern you have raised about who is in charge when treaties are being signed, what I know and I have experienced is that when it is time to sign any legal document outside, the ministry of justice staff are present always. It is in our rules that you do not just go alone and commit a country without a legal backing; the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs and that of foreign affairs are key players. Sometimes the ambassadors represent the ministers at such meetings. You cannot single-handedly as a minister commit a country. 

Therefore, we have to touch base again with the ministry of justice to ensure that once that is done, Cabinet is brought on board before we follow the other procedures of domestication. 

5.40
THE SECOND DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER (Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali): Madam Speaker, Government is finally coordinated at the Office of the Prime Minister. If you want something, tell the Prime Minister and then he will take care of the rest. So do not worry much. Just tell the Prime Minister what you want to be done and that is when you will be in the right position. There are several bodies under the Office of the Prime Minister. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I believe the concern of the Members has been noted; it is not starting today. It was there in the Eighth Parliament and now in this Ninth Parliament. Yes, we want a statement but I think the Prime Minister should take charge of the process of codifying what should be done and in what order because when everybody finishes signing, they go to their homes. Yes, the officials from the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs are always there but after signing, what happens? That is the question. We ask that the Prime Minister takes charge of this process but we also need a comprehensive statement on all these issues. Thank you very much.  

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE AND INTERNAL AFFAIRS ON THE PETITION BY THE FORMER PRISONS OFFICERS OF KASESE DISTRICT LOCAL GOVERNMENT

THE SPEAKER: The committee chairperson? Deputy Chairperson? Okay, next item.

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON PHYSICAL INFRASTRUCTURE ON THE MBARARA BY-PASS, MBARARA-NTUGAMO-KABALE-KATUNA ROADS AND MITAANO AND NTUNGWA BRIDGES IN KANUNGU DISTRICT

THE SPEAKER: Yes, chairperson of the Committee on Physical Infrastructure. Please use 15 minutes to present and the other 15 to debate. 

5.42
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON PHYSICAL INFRASTRUCTURE (Mr Ephraim Biraaro): Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

The report that I am going to present is from the Committee on Physical Infrastructure and is dated July 2014. 

Before I begin to present the report, I would like to inform the House, Madam Speaker, that we have five other reports of almost the same date. I would like to seek your indulgence, Madam Speaker, that a mechanism should be devised on how these reports should be presented to the House because we are soon closing the Ninth Parliament in which they were generated and we shall have a lot of problems and blame, if they are not presented during this period.

However, this is a big report and I am going to do everything possible to have it presented in a very short time.

I request to begin from page 3 of the report – (Interruption)

MS KARUNGI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to seek your indulgence that for us whose iPads have not been well connected get hard copies of this report so that we are able to follow very well because this is a very important report. Thank you.

MS KAMATEEKA: Madam Speaker, I am perturbed by the fact that this report is of July 2014. I know that it is important as a parliamentary record for it to be tabled. However, is it possible that the chairperson can give us an update because since 2014, this bypass has been under construction and a lot has really happened? Is it possible that we can maybe combine two reports in one? The chairperson should give us an update of what is happening right now so that at least as we look at the report of 2014, we know where we are. That is my submission.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, unfortunately, she is not allowing the chairperson to present his report. Additionally, this matter has been appearing on the Order Paper as business to follow. 

We owe the committee a duty to let them speak about their findings. I think it will be unfair if we do not allow them. How big is your report, chairperson of the committee? 

MR BIRAARO: Madam Speaker, with regard to the first question from hon. Elizabeth Karungi, when this report was generated, it was uploaded instantly in 2014. I think that some people could have taken advantage to download it on their iPads then so that even if the network had a problem, they could still access it.
Secondly, I do not know whether we could have enough stationery to circulate the hard copies. I am just in a dilemma on that.

In regard to hon. Jova Kamateeka’s concern about updating – if I had enough time, I would as and when I reach a paragraph that has had some adjustment, simply say what has taken place. For example, when we wrote the report, the Mitaano Bridge was impassable and had collapsed. However, I now understand that procurement has started and administrative reviews have been carried out and the bridge is under construction. The report talks of –

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Karungi, are you protesting?

MS KARUNGI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Actually, the reason as to why I wanted a hard copy – and I am sorry about it – is that Mitaano Bridge is already commissioned and we are using it because it is complete meaning that the committee chairperson does not even know. I beg to get a copy because my iPad refused to open.

MS SSENINDE: I thank you very much, Madam Speaker. We, first all, appreciate the fact that the committee did its work and probably it was because Parliament had a lot of work and so the report did not come on time.  

However, if we allow the report to be presented now and we debate it, we shall be debating something that has been overtaken by events. I would like to humbly beg that in view of the importance of this report, can we give the chairperson say, one day or so for him to try to compile some updates so that we debate something that is concrete and real? That will help us to progress well in as far that issue is concerned. Madam Speaker, I just beg for your indulgence.

THE SPEAKER: The Clerk can assure us that the problem will be solved because we no longer have a budget for some of these things, such as producing 250 copies because we agreed to use our iPads. I do not know whether the Clerk will be able to do that. 

Okay, chairperson of the committee, Mitaano Bridge has been commissioned so you leave that one. You don’t have to go into what happened? Why it broke? How long it has been broken? I think that would help us. You do the latest executive summary on the final position.

MR BIRAARO: Madam Speaker, I find it a difficult job because I had prepared myself to read the report to the salient paragraphs. But in the event that Members want the most recent version, I think I will try my level best to look at a paragraph and the concerns. But what would be important is also for Parliament to know the passage of how these events occurred because some of them need recommendations to deter the reoccurrence of certain situations. For example, when we talk about delays in procurement, they are ever occurring and the House should be concerned.

I am concerned about the passage and the routes through which these things come to be concluded; so I am at crossroads. 

THE SPEAKER: The Members have the report on their iPads. Summarise and update on the latest position.

MR BIRAARO: Madam Speaker, I am beginning with number four on page 3, findings:
The findings from this report are presented below. The average unit cost of construction of Mbarara Bypass was Shs 4.373 billion per kilometre for the 40.5 kilometres. For part of Ntungamo Road, the average unit cost was Shs 3.139 billion per kilometre and for the reconstruction of the 59 kilometres of Mbarara-Ntungamo road. For the reconstruction of the 65 Ntungamo-Kabale-Katuna Road, it was at Shs 3.66 billion per kilometre.

Recommendations 

The committee recommends that the Government should immediately conduct comparative studies of the average unit cost of road construction works in the region and lay them on the Floor of this Parliament.

Two, in the interim, Government should immediately provide reasonable average unit costs that guide the various implementing agencies in executing the various categories of road works across the country.

Compensation 

The committee found that at the time of the committee’s visit a total of Shs 15.87 billion, which was 89 per cent of the total Project-Affected-Persons had been out for land compensation totalling to 137.518 Acres. This translated into an average cost of Shs 140,945,000 per acre of land in that area.

The valuation report for the entire road project from Mbarara to Ntungamo-Kabale-Katuna, excluding Mbarara Bypass indicated that they were 2,276 Project-Affected-Persons (PAPs) who required a total of Shs 13.490 billion to be compensated.

At the time of the visit, 1,876 PAPs had been paid a total of Shs 12.66 billion. Here we are talking about the cost of the land per acre being very high at Shs 114 million per acre of land.
The recommendations are:
    1. The committee is appalled by the high cost of compensations that the Government is paying for acquisition of road corridors across the country and demands that Government should explain these figures and the criteria it uses for setting the compensation rate.
    2. The committee strongly condemns the piecemeal acquisition of land and recommends that UNRA should improve upon its long term planning for compensation requirements by early acquisition of land for all future construction projects. This land should be secured and systematically demarcated, starting with the major corridors across the country.
    3. A roadmap for the systematic demarcation and acquisition of all road reserves in the country should be provided, stating the timelines for completion of this work.

Madam Speaker, I am going to skip that one because that is an overview and the table on page 6 follows, telling us about the whole story about the Mbarara Bypass.

Let us go to page 7 on committee observations and recommendations

Omission of Road Works from the Contract
There is a big story about this one, Madam Speaker, because we found that a certain junction from Mbarara, which was the old road between Mbarara and Kabale at Ruti was left alone and instead they had to buy another piece of land which created like a ring. We found this quite unnecessary.

So, the committee urges UNRA to always ensure that all its road and infrastructure designs are adequately scrutinised, and reviewed for any omission that might be critical to the project and design light.

Two, the committee demands that the construction of the new road section should be discontinued immediately. I have an update on this that even when we shared this report with them, they continued for reasons best known to themselves and so Government has incurred a high and unnecessary cost.The existing road be developed to connect to the bypass.

Furthermore, the committee recommends that the relevant investigative organs of Government such as IGG should take immediate interest into investigating the reasons why the new road section has been proposed leading to wastage of resources rather than utilising the already existing one. I think on this, investigations have not expired. The fellows at fault can still be held accountable.

Acquisition of the Gravel for the Project

The committee was informed that the contractor was having difficulties in obtaining gravel for the project due to the high price the land owners were demanding. The contractor was in negotiation with the land owners though the impasse had affected the project progress.

The committee recommends that given the difficulties that contractors face in obtaining good materials for road construction, the negotiation process should be facilitated by UNRA and the Chief Government Valuer.

UNRA should adopt a policy of securing ball-pits with good material close to the project roads to ease acquisition of good gravel for future projects.

Madam Speaker, I am passing the table below because Members can read it at their own pace. Let me go to committee observations and recommendations on page 9.

The committee strongly recommends that UNRA should develop a compensation plan that targets early acquisition of land for road projects that have been planned for improvement.

Madam Speaker, what we detected here was that fellows within Government departments - the moment there is a plan - go to areas where plans have been targeted and buy that land then sell it to Government, which we termed as, “insider trading”. They target projects, set the price inside, go out and negotiate and get the money. The recent example is where two cousin brothers were claiming for some compensation from UNRA.

Furthermore, the committee urges Government to release the resources for compensation early so that the corridors are demarcated and secured in time for the start of road works.

The project counterpart funding, which is often used for compensation purposes should be released in time for early compensation of the corridors for the construction projects.

Independent Midterm Review
The committee lauds the initiative of the European Union to partner with UNRA and the Government in promoting quality standards of the infrastructure projects.

The committee encourages other infrastructure funders and financiers to share and learn from the EU initiative of promotion of value for money through these audits both during and after the construction is completed.

Power lines to be relocated and land for utilities compensated:

Madam Speaker, this one is very important for Members to learn. The committee was informed that due to the need to widen the road, part of the way leaves along the power lines and the land accommodating utility lines was expected to be acquired for the road project. 

However, the committee was concerned about the compensation for such land and whether the Uganda Electricity Distribution Company also qualified as Project-Affected Person (PAP) and was to be compensated for its land, yet being a Government entity such land shouldn’t have required compensation.

Madam Speaker, what we found here was that land where electricity and water passes was also compensated for as a project-affected person. We were wondering where that money went and why it was done so.

As a result, the committee strongly condemns the piecemeal planning for infrastructure development and urges the different stakeholders to co-ordinate their efforts better.

An effort should be made to co-ordinate all stakeholders, including Government entities, and ensure that land is availed for all utility services on major transport corridors.

Protection of Compensated Land in the Area

Madam Speaker, you find that if land is compensated like it was on the Northern Bypass, it is not secured. Sooner than later, when the road is up for expansion, you find that new land is being acquired yet such was compensated for earlier.

In that regard, the committee recommends that UNRA should make efforts to ensure that all the acquired reserves are mapped, titled and adequately protected from any further encroachment.

The committee commends UNRA for the initiative to sign the MoU with National Forestry Authority (NFA), but urges that the process be expedited to plant trees along all the major corridors as and when they are secured.

Engagement of Local Engineers on Construction Projects

The committee strongly recommends that UNRA should insert clauses in the construction supervision contracts that require all externally sourced consultants to attach and improve the capacity of at least three local engineers. This requirement should be enforced for all construction supervision contracts exceeding a certain amount.

Madam Speaker, here we were concerned about the local content. Our people are not given room to any project yet when expatriates go away, we are left with nothing in terms of technical expertise.

UNRA Project Managers

The committee strongly recommends that UNRA increases the involvement of its entire staff in order to promote the equitable sharing of responsibility of supervision. UNRA should consider according more responsibilities to UNRA staff at the various stations rather than relying more on the staff at the UNRA headquarters.

Madam Speaker, you find a UNRA staff at the headquarters is in charge of about seven projects yet staff, for example, in Jinja, Mbale, Luweero and Mbarara are just redundant and not learning anything.

Reconstruction of the Ntungamo-Kabale-Katuna Road

Madam Speaker, we have the table showing you the chronology of the project. It goes on until page 13. I will get to page 14 for the committee’s observations and recommendations

Observations and Recommendations

Madam Speaker, the committee observed that the project intended to repair rather than reconstruct a 2.35km stretch of road in Kabale Town between the Katuna junction and Kabale-Kisoro-Bunagana Road. However, this link is in a very poor condition yet traffic on it is very high. 

It should be observed that failure to reconstruct this section will leave a “sore eye” in the on-going road project and this section would deteriorate very fast. However, I have been told that this one was incorporated in the contracts. I do not know the updates yet. 

However, the committee at that time strongly recommended that funds should be appropriated for the immediate reconstruction of this road section rather than the option of repair and a new surface dressing that had been earlier planned. This section should be integrated as additional work and awarded to the same contractor immediately.

Secondly, we had recommended that the reconstruction should be immediate before February 2015 when the main section of Kabale-Kisoro-Bunagana road was expected to be completed.

The Project Schedule

In our first recommendation the committee strongly urges UNRA to prevail over contractors to provide all the necessary construction equipment as per the supplied bidding list and contract agreements. Contractors that fail to provide all the necessary construction equipment should be penalised for failure to fulfil all contract conditions.

Madam Speaker, the committee discovered that contractors parade some borrowed equipment but when the project is supposed to commence they disappear. This is why we have got projects not being completed on time; it is due to contractor non-compliance in terms of capacity.

Secondly, the committee strongly urged UNRA and project consultants to ensure adequate and proper supervision of the projects under their charge in order to observe project timelines and cost targets.

Independent mid-term Review

We have already looked at this one, but I am going to recommendations. We have already talked about the European Union initiatives and I think I can leave that one.

Corporate Social Responsibility by the Project Contractor

The committee inspected a portion of a road to Rubaale Town Council in Ntungamo District, which was constructed by Reynolds Construction Company (RCC) as part of its corporate social responsibility. The road leads to a health facility and has greatly improved the wellbeing of the people in the district.

The committee commends RCC for the responsibility undertaken to construct a road as part of its corporate social responsibility.

The committee urges UNRA to promote similar practices among road contractors on projects across the country. However, here in particular we commended the efforts by hon. Naome Kabasharira who approached RCC and prevailed upon them to do this work. It was not only RCC which did it but also hon. Kabasharira prevailed upon them and was instrumental in that project.

Provision of Pedestrians Crossing along the Road

The committee was concerned that there was – and still is –inadequate provisions made for pedestrians and cyclists and parking in inhabited areas, especially urban centres along the road. Failure to make these provisions endangers the lives of pedestrians, cyclists and other road users in the area. This affects the businesses as the trucks and other goods vehicles find it difficult to offload merchandise in such areas.

The committee strongly recommends that UNRA should review the plans with a view to integrate adequate pedestrian and cyclist walkways and parking lanes in the inhabited areas along the roads.

Madam Speaker, what we found – and which is also still ongoing – was that on many roads the contractors do not give pass-ways for people accessing the existing trading centres until the road is finished. Moreover the project is delayed, which causes people to suffer; they fall in ditches and die and/or sustain injuries. 

The pedestrian and cyclists crossings should be provided at the same time as the project is being implemented and at convenient intervals.

Mitaano and Ntungwe Bridges 

Madam Speaker, the chronology is very long but Members can read through I am going to read the recommendations, which we had given at that time.

Administrative reviews – page 17:
The committee observes that the administrative reviews and actions by discontented contractors, especially Messrs. Prime Contractors, affected the construction of both the Mitaano and Ntungwe bridges by over a year. 

The committee recognised that whereas the contractors reserved the right to appeal in case of perceived or real unfairness, the process of administrative reviews had been abused as was the case in this instance. The contractor insisted on appealing despite not having good grounds to justify such actions. These actions by the contractors perpetuated the suffering of the people in the Kanungu area.

However, the committee notes that the works on both bridges have since commenced and contractors have been awarded contracts to work on the bridges.

Recommendations

The committee strongly recommends that punitive actions should be instituted against contractors who wilfully abuse the administrative review procedures.

A legal provision should be provided to deter those who may wish to maliciously stall the bidding process.

Lack of Weighbridges

Madam Speaker, I think this one is important. The committee observed that the collapse of both the Mitaano and Ntungwe bridges resulted from the overloaded trucks from Hima Cement Factory ferrying cement to Kanungu and other areas in the region, especially Congo.

The committee observed that these trucks are inadequately monitored for compliance to actual load limits on this road section. UNRA has procured mobile weighbridges which it is using in the area, but the committee observed that these are inadequate to cover the entire area. 

UNRA also informed the committee that they have urged Hima Cement Factory to self-regulate its trucks and ensure compliance to the weight restrictions.

Recommendations

The committee strongly recommends that UNRA should prevail upon Hima Cement Factory Limited and other companies to acquire weighbridges and regulate the weight of their trucks at the factory outlet.

Furthermore, UNRA and other Government agencies should establish the functional permanent weighbridge for the area and ensure that trucks traversing the area are weighed for weight compliance. This is in view of the recent discoveries of other minerals in areas like Buhweju and Kabale that have increased the volume of trucks operating there.

UNRA should constantly evaluate the structural integrity of the bridges and determine their capacity to withstand heavy loads. These bridges, Madam Speaker, were constructed in 1954 and had not been checked for any compliance over that time.

Madam Speaker, that is the end of the report and the names and signature of the Members who signed are there attached. I had laid the report in its original form and the copies of the minutes of the committee sometimes back when we first mentioned it.

Madam Speaker, I beg that this report be adopted by the House.
Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Mr Chairperson. We would like to thank you and the committee for the work done. Of course, there has been a long delay, but finally your report is out and it is accessible to the public. 

I would like to propose that we set time next week to debate it. You know, Members have just finished elections and I do not want to keep them here late. We can discuss it next week.  

However, before we do that, there is a matter you mentioned about, “Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR)”. Why should the hon. Naome Kabasharira go to plead? Corporate social security should be built into the contract. Suppose they had refused? I know they agreed and did it, but a Member of Parliament should not plead for it. For instance, I have had to write to Kakira Sugar Work and all those sugar companies in Busoga to let them know they have destroyed our roads and they should come and do them. But this should be part of the contract. They have all those big trucks; they run them every day. Obviously, there is an effect. So, as a country, we should take more interest in institutionalising; it is not a question of choice on those contractors.

MR BIRAARO: Madam Speaker, thank you very much for that concern. I was equally concerned and I took it up with the Executive Director of UNRA and the Operational Manager. At least they told me that for every road contract they are awarding, there is another one kilometre of a similar road given to that locality. I don’t know whether they are doing it or not. But that still requires a follow up. It can easily be cheated upon or carried out. I also wonder whether one kilometre is enough as CSR.

THE SPEAKER: CSR is tokenism and as a country, we should take the initiative. They are taking away free money.

MR MAGYEZI: Madam Speaker, I would like to make a proposal to the chairperson of the committee. Since we are going to debate the report next week, could he go to the sites so that next week, he is able to update us? For example, the completion of some of those roads was supposed to be in 2014, but some of us can see that the roads are not even three-quarters done. Therefore, it would be good, at the time of the debate, if the chairperson of the committee is current with what is actually on the site. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Mr Chairperson, I do not know what you say about this proposal.

MR SSEMPIJJA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Let me add something small. We had thought that the content would be overtaken by time, but what has been brought up in this report is still pertinent. 

I would like to add to hon. Raphael Magyezi’s proposal that if the chairperson can, one of these days, stop at Lukaya, he would get to know that we needed to have a review of what has been done on the Lukaya - Kamengo contract.  Lukaya Town, as you rightly mentioned in the report, has no parking space. The shoulders were poorly made and collapsed in a few days.

Therefore, reviewing works and looking at what has been done after the completion of the works is very important as the chairperson mentioned. So, I request the chairperson to, before we come back next week, stop in this town, which has always been known to be a stopping centre for people in transit. Thank you very much.

MR KWIZERA: I would like to make two comments. The first one is on road compensation.  When you talked of an acre to be compensated at Shs 114 million yet you had also mentioned project-affected-persons - this compensation is not per acre. Projected-Affected-Persons have houses and other property on their land. Therefore, they are not compensating for land per say.

Secondly, the small road between Kisoro and Mbarara was taken over by Government and it is due for completion.

THE SPEAKER: Mr Chairperson, we need to neaten this report. Can you take off time -

MR BIRAARO: Madam Speaker, I appreciate hon. Raphael Magyezi’s concern. It was actually in my thinking, but you know the challenges we have been going through. When we wanted to get to the ground is when we went into our game, which incidentally, I lost.

THE SPEAKER: You went to “Masaka”? (Laughter)

MR BIRAARO: Madam Speaker, we shall try to see if within next week, we can get one or two people, together with UNRA or the Ministry of Works and Transport and delegate them to give us a report. Of course, this is just to check what UNRA may theoretically give us because we know if we request UNRA, they will give us an update, but we need to confirm empirically what is on the ground.

As for the hon. Vincent Ssempijja’s concern about Lukaya - that is where I pass every day. Madam Speaker, I need to also inform Members that road has big problems.  One morning, I left Kampala but by the time I reached Katonga Bridge, I had met 11 accidents because of the slipperiness of the road. I raised it with the Operations Manager of UNRA, but nothing has been done. They have given us a lot of technical explanation, but which are not forthcoming.

And on PAP, hon. Eddie Kwizera, you are actually right but, we are saying that on average - and with the Mbarara Bypass, we were very particular - there were not very many buildings. The road was passing in the farms and/or wilderness. Even then, Shs 114 million per acre of land is still a subject of investigation.

THE SPEAKER: Much as the debate will start next week and we expect a final update from the chairperson. For now I will take just two or three people and we get an update.

Honourable members, yesterday I had indicated that the Inspector General of Government is not happy that we have never debated her report. So, let me ask the Chairperson of the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs to lay the report so that we can debate it next week. The vice-chairman or any other Member of the committee can lay the report.

6.17
MR HAMSON OBUA (NRM, Ajuri County, Alebtong): Madam Speaker, I am holding brief for the Chairperson of the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs. I beg to lay on the Table the Report of the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs on the Inspectorate of Government Report for the period of 1999 - 2006.

Madam Speaker, I also beg to lay the report of the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs on the Inspectorate of Government reports covering the period 2007-2012. I beg to lay.

THE SPEAKER: Let the committee make an executive summary for purpose of the debate. Just give us the highlights; not today, but when we come to debate. 

Okay, honourable members, I would like to thank you very much for your participation. The House has been adjourned to Tuesday next week at 2.00 p.m.

(The House rose at 6.18 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 15 March at 2.00 p.m.) 

