Thursday, 24 March 2016

Parliament met at 2.07 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this sitting. Members, you recall that a sad event occurred on Tuesday in Brussels, the capital city of Belgium. Brussels houses many international organisations, including the European Union, the headquarters for the Africa, Caribbean and the European Union (ACP-EU), the secretariat of African, Caribbean and Pacific Group of States (ACP) is also in Brussels and several other things go on there. 

On Tuesday, there was an attack in several places in Brussels and by this morning, it was confirmed that 32 people had died. The last one died this morning. The condolence book is open at the Embassy, I signed it this morning and honourable members, if you have a moment, you can go there and sign this condolence book.

We express solidarity with the Government and the people of Belgium on this tragedy that has occurred to their country. They call on the world community to respond to this threat with more seriousness because it is becoming too much.

I had led a delegation to Brussels that same week where we had a meeting of the ACP-EU. I also addressed the European Parliament on the issues of elections in Uganda. I arrived on Monday and they had just arrested some of the terrorists who had escaped from the attack in Paris and they had been residing in Brussels. That is when we discovered that they had been hiding there; there had been an attack where they were residing and they escaped.

It turned out that they were preparing a series of attacks in Brussels and that has happened. We stand in solidarity with the Belgian people and those who have died. I ask the House to stand and we observe a moment of silence.

(Members rose and observed a moment of silence.)

2.09
MR STEPHEN MUKITALE (NRM, Buliisa County, Buliisa): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. I stand here to inform the House on a matter of national importance. Tragedy befell Buliisa on Tuesday night.

There was a storm, which destroyed more than seven schools including seed schools, primary schools, staff quarters; a maternity ward in Butiaba subcountry, an outpatient department (OPD), 12 churches - the reverend survived but over 200 canoes found their way into the lake and about 20 capsized. We have so far recovered 18 bodies; about 40 people are still missing. Police marine and other local authorities have been moving up and down. We have posted the report on Government infrastructure, which has been destroyed. We are also trying to put together a report on affected families, because over 100 of them have been affected. They are in dire need; we have been trying to contact the Ministry for Disaster Preparedness and Refugees to give them some assistance.

This wind was very disastrous; it was after 11.00p.m., when people were sleeping, but those who were in the lake capsized. This was a terrible disaster and we are calling upon the Office of the Prime Minister and all those who can lend a hand to help fix this problem.

The schools should be running and we are wondering, given the Government procedures of procurement, they are saying it may be difficult to start putting back some of the timber and the roofs any time soon.

We are in dire need and we call upon the Office of the Prime Minister and all Government departments to come and help. I have posted to all Members of Parliament a report of the Government infrastructure which has been destroyed and we are trying to get more details of the programme –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Do you want to contribute on this? Honourable minister, you have heard about the things that have happened in Buliisa, is there a statement you would like to make to that effect?

2.12
MR LATIF SSEBAGALA (DP, Kawempe Division South, Kampala): Mr Speaker, time and again, I have tried to remind you about the petition of the people of Kawempe North Constituency - three years down the road, the petition has not been handled by this Parliament.

When you look at the business to follow for the last seven months, it has been No. 10. My worry is that we may go into the Tenth Parliament when this petition has not reached the Floor of Parliament.
I am kindly requesting you to see how we can handle it and ensure that this petition which has been here for the last three years is heard. That is the only way the people we represent can build confidence in us - by bringing their petitions and having them handled in time as per our Rules of Procedure.

We have been waiting for three years and it almost cost me my campaigns. They were telling me, “You took us to Parliament, we presented our petition, but we have not seen anything going on. Mr Speaker, my humble appeal is that the people of Kawempe North Constituency be heard through the petition I presented.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, is the chair of the Committee on Natural Resources here? Is there any Member of this committee in the House? Honourable member, I will take this up and at an appropriate time, I will make communication to you as to what the next step will be on this petition. 

I remember, I stated the need to respond to this petition and free the people of Kawempe from the kind of stress that they face as a result of this pending issue that is affecting them. However, honourable member, you know the procedure; you should have come to see me first. 

2.15
MS OLIVIA KWAGALA (NRM, Woman Representative, Iganga): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for allowing me to raise this issue regarding the office of disaster preparedness.

I was subjected to writing to people who have been involved in disaster preparedness in Iganga District and I respected the instruction of the minister.

He advised me to go to the commissioner. Now it is a year, and no response has been made. I went to the minister three times and he referred me to the commissioner. I think that approach was humble, but I have not received any response and the people are still waiting. When we pass budgets for such areas and communicate such problems, we expect some response, even if it is written, saying that responsibility would be taken. However, I have never received any such communication.

Therefore, Mr Speaker, I feel that was too much for me and the minister should give an explanation here. I have tried to handle it on an amicable ground; however, up to this day, I feel those people have been unfairly treated because that disaster was a serious one.

The former Minister of Internal Affairs rescued the police with 100 iron sheets in Iganga Town after their roof had been blown off. However, up to now, those in villages have not received any response. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I hope somebody is taking notes on this.

2.17
THE MINISTER OF GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL AFFAIRS (Mr Wilson Muruli Mukasa): Mr Speaker and honourable members, I have taken note of what my colleague from Iganga has said. Indeed, disasters are terrible; I will make this known to my colleague of disaster preparedness and then he will see what appropriate action to take.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: There is also Buliisa

MR MURULI MUKASA: Mr Speaker, we certainly heard from the media and we have just heard from the honourable member from Buliisa about this disaster that struck the area. We have taken note and my colleague, the Minister for Disaster Preparedness and Refugees will come up and see what appropriate action to take. However, we strongly sympathise with the people of Buliisa for what has happened. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members from Buliisa and Iganga, could you put this in writing to the minister and copy it to the Speaker’s Office so that we can follow it up quickly? 

2.18
MS HARRIET NTABAZI (NRM, Woman Representative, Bundibugyo): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity to inform this country about the tragedy that is happening in Bundibugyo.

Mr Speaker and honourable members, it is sad that the people of Bundibugyo are undergoing a lot of unrest and running up and down because of unknown thugs, as I would call them, who are killing people and displacing them to camps. As we talk now, around 13 people have died since yesterday and others are still under critical conditions in hospital.

A gang of people came and attacked one of the houses of the chairperson LCIII in a village; a man who did not win the elections - they killed a child and some of his relatives, hacked his wife and started killing people in the village. The police came to the rescue of those people in the night, but still, they could not see the enemies because they had left.

My humble call is that a deeper look into this matter be done because since the election of the chairperson LC V, killings have been going on; burning of houses and many injuries have occurred. I, therefore, wonder whether the security people have investigated this problem and known what exactly the issue is.

We may call it a post-election problem when it is not. I am not a security personnel, I am a Member of Parliament. However, there are people who are professionals in this; they know how to establish the facts. I call upon the Inspector General of Police (IGP) because as we talk now, he is in Bundibugyo, he went this morning, but I think he delayed –(Interruption)

MS OSEGGE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to emphasise this and inform this House about the insecurity in the country. I was supposed to have brought a statement to this House this afternoon. Of late, there has been an increased rate of insecurity. About two weeks ago, a UPDF soldier attached to the National Civil Aviation Authority, who is resident in Soroti Flying School, picked up his gun and gunned down seven people in Soroti Municipality at a drinking joint purportedly after having an argument.

About two days ago, there was another incident by thugs and I am told soldiers are being identified as part of the attackers. I would like the Ministry of Defence or Ministry of Internal Affairs to inquire into this matter. As we go towards this festive season, some of these occurrences are likely to increase and we know that we are supposed to secure our people and have them enjoy the festive season in peace.

I would like to inform my sister that it is not peculiar to Bundibugyo. Maybe the magnitude might be higher there, but it appears that it is occurring all over the country and people are taking advantage of the unrest and anger following this election period. I would like to ask the ministry in charge to take action

MS NTABAZI: Mr Speaker, it is quite a big problem because it is not only happening in Bundibugyo but in Kasese and the whole of Rwenzori region. Therefore, the ministers for Internal Affairs and Defence, whom I know are doing their work, need to put in place a committee particularly to look into the matters of Rwenzori. This is not a light issue because people have been killed. The offenders are people living among us; even if you look for them, their houses can be found; you can even know where they live, although they would deny it. The motive and the issues should be dug out seriously instead of taking them lightly. 

Mr Speaker, people are in camps with nothing to eat. They left their food in the villages. It is not like it was during the time of the ADF where people fled and were being kept by the army. This is something that rises all of a sudden; today, they are in this village and tomorrow they are in another. You do not know which village is to be attacked next.

My request is, much as we are treating election anger, we should also urge security not to relax; they should go deep because the enemy may take this opportunity to attack the country – even though we know this is just something tribal.

I am requesting the security agencies to go deep into this matter before another external enemy takes advantage of this situation.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Any comment from the minister? We should take note of these issues that have been raised.

2.25
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. We had recently started celebrating total peace in the country. However, when we hear pockets of insecurity where people are losing life, as Government, we cannot sit down. I wanted to assure colleagues, Members of Parliament, that whenever such occurrences appear, the police begin investigations. 

Therefore, I will inform the minister concerned to make sure that they brief Cabinet and Parliament about the measures they have taken. I know that every Thursday, there is a security meeting in the Ministry of Internal Affairs which goes through the security situation of the country. I will inform the minister concerned – (Interruption)

MR NZOGHU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also thank the Government Chief Whip for giving way. All of us are Ugandans and all of us are supposed to respect the laws of this country whether we are civilians, police or the army. The situation, especially in the Rwenzori, is being misrepresented.

First of all, what happened, particularly in the Rwenzori region is that during the elections, the army and the police took sides to the extent that they openly campaigned for parties of their choice. Even in the clashes that have happened, it would be in the interest of this country to have an independent team – not the police or army. This is because the police and the army are the ones who are shooting people, especially in Kasese –(Interruption)

MR SSEBAGGALA: Mr Speaker, when I look at the Order Paper, I see that we have a statement by the Minister of Internal Affairs regarding the deaths in Kasese District. I believe what my colleague is talking about and others rotate around that. Are we procedurally right to continue debating this matter when the statement is about to be presented, after which we shall have time to debate? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member for Kawempe, you are right. This matter was supposed to have come yesterday in which case we would have had a debate on the deaths in Kasese District. However, this has come on the sides from Bundibugyo and other issues and Members were just chipping in. 

The proper order for this debate would be when the minister makes a statement. We do not expect a clear response until we get a statement from the Minister of Internal Affairs on the issues pointed out. We will extend it to Bundibugyo.

2.28
MR MILTON MUWUMA (NRM, Kigulu County South, Iganga): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance. As the Secretary General of the Parliamentary Forum on Population, Food Security and Development, I would like to make use of this opportunity to inform Members that the commitment and intervention for partnership of members and NAADS in fighting food insecurity in this country is ready. I request Members that as we move upcountry for the Easter festivities, you move along with maize seeds ready for planting because the rains have started. 

Mr Speaker, even if the morale of most of us could be slightly low, with hunger and famine, we need to remain committed to this course and ensure we deliver these maize seeds to our voters. My humble request is for Members to check on their emails and also liaise with the office downstairs so that we are able to pick these seeds from the suppliers.

Different Members will be picking from different suppliers as it has been. Therefore, this afternoon just liaise with the office of food security, which includes me – (Interruption)

MR OKUPA: Thank you, Mr Speaker and hon. Muwuma. You know what we have all been going through. We are all financially strapped. Is there any provision for transport, because you are not mentioning anything about transport? (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Maybe those are matters you will find out once you get there.

MR GILBERT OLANYA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The clarification I would like to seek is that our supplier, Victoria Seeds, had their headquarters in Gulu. However, we learnt that they closed the office which was in Gulu. I do not know which supplier is going to give seeds to us who come from Amuru, Gulu and Nwoya. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, I think those are details that you can get from the office.

Honourable members, this House will rise at 5.00 p.m. to allow the Members travel upcountry for purposes of celebrating with their people.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON POLICE ACTIONS LEADING TO DEATHS IN KASESE DISTRICT

2.30
THE MINISTER OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Ms Rose Akol): Thank you, Mr Speaker and honourable members. This is a statement regarding the issues that are happening in the Rwenzori sub-region, specifically Bundibugyo and Kasese.

In the recent past, there have been a number of violent incidents in Kasese and Bundibugyo districts. Some of these have been reported in the media. This statement is to inform Parliament and the country about the suspected causes of these incidents and the actions that have been taken and are being taken to ensure protection of life and property as well as maintenance of law and order. 

Bundibugyo Incidents 

Mr Speaker, after the 24 February LCV elections, there were clashes resulting from dissatisfaction with the election results by some candidates and their supporters. The violence started in Busengerwa Village in Busaru Subcounty where one person was killed. This led to retaliatory attacks in Busaru, Ngamba and Kirumya sub-counties, leaving 15 civilians dead, including children as young as four years; four others were injured and 139 houses set ablaze. 

Following the incidents, 80 suspects were charged with murder in the High Court sitting in Fort Portal on 11 March 2016. They were subsequently remanded. The person suspected to have started it all was arrested in Busaru Subcounty, Bundibugyo District. The hunt for other suspects is still on and the investigations continue. 

Kasese District

On 9 March 2016, the Electoral Commission conducted elections for LC III chairpersons as well as mayorships for subcounties and town councils throughout the country. On 10 March 2016, at around 5.00 p.m., a group of about 20 youth suspected to be Royal Guards – Esyomango – led by Baluku Kahuju armed with knives, batons and sticks attempted to attack Kithoma Police Post, but they were repulsed by the police. A report on this attack was registered under Kithoma SD 16/10/3/16. The police post was reinforced. 

The intention of the attempted attack was to acquire arms by disarming the police men. The attackers were identified, among others, as Maliki Noah, Zaliya Maliro, Rubende, Kahuju Baluku, Bukombi Isaac, Gadiki Kighoma, Kyamwangala James, Mikidadi, Nyamingi, a resident of Butera, Baluku, Kirere, Sibayarwa Wilson, Ntomera Wisborn, Biratte the father of Wisborn, Gideon Kule, Kalume Joshua, Kabya Samuel, Kake Ezekel Kake Isaleri, Wayakwa James, Nason Sagion, Musalira Jockus and Bwambale Gideon. 

On the night of 10 March 2016, at around 8.00 p.m., a day after the elections of LC III chairpersons, a joint motorised patrol of police and UPDF while patrolling lower Kendahi cell, Kikongo Ward, Hima Town Council was attacked by over 30 persons armed with machetes, knives and clubs. Four UPDF Soldiers were stabbed, two of them critically injured. 

The attackers again tried to grab their guns. In reaction to this, the patrol unit fired in the air and on the ground in a bid to scare them off. The attackers instead charged on; unfortunately, two of the attackers were shot in the process. The rest fled. The injured soldiers were rushed to Kilembe Hospital for first aid. The following day, they were referred to UPDF Second Division Hospital in Mbarara; two are still in critical condition. 

The four UPDF Officers injured are: CPL Sentongo Mose, CPL Otobbe James, Lt.CPL Katuramu Hanington and Rwothengeyo Robert attached to 305 Brigade based at Kavera Hima 

Mr Speaker, later the same night, at about 9.00 p.m., a group of arsonists torched a house of one Kamanyire Ali. Kamanyire is a known supporter of one Tom Wabukombi who was one of the candidates, but lost in the LC III elections in Hima Town Council. His tenants are said to have supported his rival candidate, John Katuura, who won the elections. 

Following this incident, the RPC Rwenzori East was informed of the situation and requested for reinforcement. The Inspector General of Police sent a Field Force Unit under the command of Commissioner of Police (CP), Opolot Jacob. 

On 11 March 2016, at around 1.00 p.m., a team of Police and UPDF officers led by CP Opolot Jacob, while on a pre-deployment assessment mission in Kasenyi village, Buhuhira Subcounty, was attacked by a group of about 20 youths armed with machetes, knives and clubs. They stabbed SPC Mbusa Joel, critically injuring and disarming him of his firearm. They also stoned CP Opolot Jacob, fracturing his right leg. In accordance with the rules of engagement, the security team fired shots in the air in a bid to scare them off, but the attackers became even more aggressive. In self-defence, the team opened fire, shooting four attackers and recovering the gun that had been taken from SPC, Mbusa Joel.

CP Opolot Jacob and SPC Joel were rushed to Kilembe Hospital. They were later transferred to Mulago Hospital for further treatment. 

The attackers who were killed are Kake Ezekiel, Bwambale Sajin, Wayakwa James and Kirerembwa Jokas. What is common to them is that they were members of a militia group linked to Obusinga Bwa Rwenzururu cultural institution calling themselves “Kirumiramutima” (strong-hearted). 

It should be noted that the Omusinga has got official royal guards, like any other king, given to him by and based on agreement with Government. Three suspects connected with the attack have so far been arrested and are helping the police with Investigations.

Mr Speaker, on the morning of Saturday 13 March 2016, again, unknown people set ablaze the house of the GISO of Kyabarungira Subcounty in Kasenyi village as well as houses of eight other persons who are his relatives. They also torched a butchery and a drug shop in the same area. We have information that criminal gangs are being incited to attack GISOs, other persons working with the security agencies and their properties in Kasese District.

Mr Speaker and colleagues, it is worth noting that prior to the 2016 LC III elections, on 9 March 2016, there were widespread threats and intimidations, not only in Kasese District, but throughout the subregion against voting for certain candidates. In the case of Hima Town Council, we are investigating reports suggesting that if the elections went in favour of one particular candidate against the other, there will be bloodshed. In fact, it was because of similar reports that there were increased patrols in Hima Town Council where one of our patrols was attacked.

Members will probably recall that on the night of 9 March 2016, supporters of one candidate, contrary to the electoral laws, declared their candidate the winner and started celebrating in Hima Town. The following day, on 10th March, after the final tally of valid votes cast, the Electoral Commission declared the other candidate as the winner. In reaction, the loser’s supporters assembled at his office in Hima Town Council and subsequently, incidents of attacks on our security personnel started. Joint UPDF and police reinforcements have been deployed in all affected areas.

In spite of the above mentioned incidents, and while Government regrets the deaths of the attackers, I wish to assure the public that we shall continue to ensure the security and safety of the Rwenzori subregion and the country as a whole. We caution those misleading the youths into engaging in reckless and meaningless attacks on the security forces and other innocent people to desist from this criminality. Otherwise, the law will catch up with them. 

I also call upon the Obusinga bwa Rwenzururu cultural institution as well as other cultural institutions in the region and in the country to cooperate with security forces to engage, particularly the youths against getting themselves involved in violence. They should ensure that business life and the life of ordinary people in Kasese District and the sub-region as a whole goes on normally without disturbance from irresponsible, reckless and dangerous criminal activities. I commend the security forces who repulsed the attackers and saved a number of lives and property. 

Lastly, we empathise with the affected families and other people whose houses were burnt and plantations cut down. Investigations into this matter are ongoing and whoever is found culpable shall be brought before the courts of law. I beg to report.

Mr Speaker, I was supposed to have read this report yesterday, therefore, it does not include incidence that happened between yesterday and today where again, a number of people were hacked to death. I would like to report that investigations are going on. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister, for this statement. This ministerial statement attracts debate and it starts now. Can we agree on how much time we will take so that we see how to proceed? Is it three minutes for each Member or if the Members are few, we can use unlimited time? We have agreed on unlimited time, but there will be final time that I will call this to a close. Can we start? 

2.34
MR WILLIAM NZOGHU (FDC, Busongora County North, Kasese): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The people in the Rwenzori subregion are peace loving people and the scenarios that are occurring in this region, particularly in Kasese District, are being misreported. 

One, since the incident happened, the Minister of Internal Affairs has never gone to Kasese to find out what exactly happened. 

Two, the Inspector General of Police, who was relaying the information, only addressed journalists in a hotel called Sandton. He has not even reached the scene of crime. 

Three, Buhurira Subcounty, which the minister is talking about, is in my constituency. What happened was that on 11 March 2016, two police pick-ups drove from Kasese heavily loaded with soldiers and the police. They went straight to Kasenyi in the afternoon hours. When they reached there, they found a group of young men resting under a tree. These two police pick-ups had two GISOs: One of Kyabarunga Subcounty called James Mulhumbira and the other from Buhurira Subcounty called Sam Katikiro. 

When the pick-ups arrived in Kasenyi, James Mulhumbira moved out of the pick-up, together with one soldier who had masked himself under the command of Opolot. When they moved out of the pick-up, the GISO and the soldier went straight to these young men who were seated and started pointing at individuals that the soldier should shoot. He said, “Shoot this one” and he was shot. He died on the spot. He pointed at four people and they were all killed and died on the spot. 

The clip that the police released shows the people in that trading centre reacting to the killing of their relatives. The relatives asked why their innocent people had been killed. Contrary to what the honourable minister has reported, you can see that in that clip, there is nothing like a machete. I only saw one person picking a piece of wood trying to defend himself. I can also see that the police were shooting in the air, as they were about to set off, trying to scare away the people after having killed those four people on the spot. That is what happened in Kasenyi, not what the honourable minister is reporting. 

Secondly, in Hima, there were two candidates who were running for the position of mayor. Both of them were NRM. One of them is the incumbent called Katuura and the other one is called Tom Wabukombi. 

During the NRM primaries, Tom Wabukombi won but he was rigged out by Katuura. When Katuura rigged the election of Tom Wabukombi in the primaries, the people who vetted Tom Wabukombi resented that. Wabukombi reported the matter to the Electoral Commission in Kyadondo but they never listened to him. He therefore decided to contest as an Independent, but NRM-leaning. 

When it came to election day, the results, which were tallied by Tom Wabukombi’s team indicated that he had won. Katuura’s team also tallied and said that they had won. Therefore, there was controversy between the two camps. 

When the registrar of Kasese finally declared Katuura as the winner, Tom Wabukombi’s camp refuted the results. Tom Wabukombi was given security by the Regional Police Commander so that the two rival camps - because there was friction and chaos in Hima Town Council to the extent that Katuura was being guarded by the army and the police. 

In effect, Tom Wabukombi also said that he needed security to protect his life. He was given these escorts in Kasese Town but when he reached Hima with his security, the Hima OC disarmed the police who had been given to Tom Wabukombi. That is where the fracas started from in Hima.

There is something that I would like to put clearly on record: the supposed militia in Kasese is a concoction. This is because the people who were killed were residents of that trading centre. The GISO, who was pointing at the people to be killed, also comes from that trading centre and it is reported that they had conflicts previously. 

When we went for the burials, we were told that the families of the GISO and those of the people who were killed had previously held family meetings to resolve their personal conflicts. It appears that the GISO was trying to use his power to humiliate the other people whom he had conflicts with. That is what is on the ground. 

I do not want the situation to end up like that of 5 July 2014 where the people who commanded those attacks handed themselves over to Government and they were not arrested. They instead went for people who these commanders recruited. That is what is happening in Kasese. It is the police and the army who are killing civilians and turning around to say that people are armed with machetes. That is not true, Mr Speaker. 

I would like to bring this to the attention of Government: one, the people of Kasese would like Government to protect their lives and property. 

Two, the framing of the institution of Obusinga bwa Rwenzururu and the people of Rwenzori has gone on for long without any basis. It would be fair and in the interest of all of us as Ugandans to respect and stop framing the institution and the people of Rwenzori for actions, in which they are not involved.

Three, I would like to ask Government and especially Parliament to constitute an independent team to go to Kasese, Bundibugyo and Ntoroko and report their independent findings to Parliament. This is better than massaging and trying to misrepresent the situation on ground. That team would help to diffuse all these baseless lies that the minister and the Inspector General of Police have been relaying to the public.

I would like to inform you, Mr Speaker, that when the IGP had a meeting with His Majesty, the King of Obusinga bwa Rwenzururu, they both shared ideas. The Inspector General of Police realised that the information that his officers had given him was baseless. He even apologised to the king and he said that he had been misinformed. 

I do not why the people who are propagating this are not taking time to share and consult the leaders. The information is simply cooked up somewhere and relayed to the public. What is the motive of this? 

The constitution of an independent team to go and do thorough investigation and report back to Parliament would end all these lies. I would like to put it on record that the people of Kasese, as is being reported, are not interested in propagating chaos. By the way, when the people of Kasese voted, they voted for candidates who had been nominated by the Independent Electoral Commission, which was appointed by His Excellency the President of Uganda. They did not make any mistake in this. All that is happening is simply emanating from the elections and people think that they can use this opportunity to confuse the region and also mistreat opponents who participated in the elections.

Therefore, Mr Speaker, I would like to inform this House and also tell Ugandans that it is very unfortunate that the statement, which the minister has read, and the information, which the IGP has been relaying is baseless and unfounded. It is aimed at framing the people of Rwenzori and the institution of Obusinga bwa Rwenzururu. An independent commission should be constituted, Mr Speaker. I beg to request.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, listening to the minister’s statement and also listening to the response from the Member for Busongora North, there are two contested sets of facts, which cannot be resolved by this House. No amount of debate, even if we debated for five days, can harmonise these two positions.

I am inclined to think that the proposal made by the Member for Busongora North could be a way forward, except that it could be with modifications. Instead of putting an independent team, we have a committee of Parliament that is responsible for this sector and it is well represented by different sides of the House. It could be a vehicle, which could look at this and come back and inform us on a more independent basis rather than what the minister and the Member for Busongora North have said. This will bring us to a more informed position on this. This is by way of guidance and it might help us.

If we just erupt here in anger from the Members representing Kasese, and they are on both sides of the House, and try to debate here, it might not lead us anywhere.

2.58
MS WINIFRED KIIZA (FDC, Woman Representative, Kasese): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for the statement although it is a misrepresentation of facts. I would request that the select committee or the committee of Parliament does not narrow down on issues in the minister’s statement only but begins from 19 February 2016.

This is because when we talked in Parliament here, we talked about shootings and deaths that started on 19 February 2016. I do not dispute the facts that hon. Nzoghu has reported. When you look at the minister’s statement, one would think that by the time of elections, Kasese was in total disarray and that there was a lot of confusion.

Just like he has said, I would like to put it clearly that the night after the elections of LC III chairpersons in Buhurira Subcounty, where the killings took place; people were celebrating and dancing with the winner. I really could not imagine a situation where gangsters, thugs and attackers in the name of “Kirumira mutima” could have gone to attack a subcounty.

Can we come up with this committee, like my colleague has suggested and it looks at how events unfolded, starting from 19 February 2016 up to maybe last night? Find out what happened not only in Kasese but also in Bundibugyo. This is because what is being presented here is showing some seeds of discord to the people of this country. Seeds of tribalism are coming up and personally, I do not like it. Seeds of hatred are being planted, which I do not like. They are also trying to show that the leaders are bad; the cultural institutions are terrible and therefore, the believers of these institutions must also be hunted.

Let us put a committee in place that is going to unveil the mystery behind this. By “massaging” these issues, pointing fingers at each other and possibly covering up what could have been the underlying facts that are bringing up this discomfort may not be the answer. Let us find a committee, put it in place, facilitate it and I pray that it acts as fast as possible. Let it not act like other committees of Parliament that we have been putting place to go and investigate a matter and then it takes forever to report back to Parliament.

If we do that – I remember that there was a committee that was put in place to go and investigate the matters of the Balaalo. The Balaalo became the talk of the day and dragged on from the Eighth Parliament to the Ninth Parliament. The late hon. Sam Njuba is the one who was leading that committee and he died before he could present his issues. The Balaalo continued to be a contentious issue in this country.

Can we ensure that this committee is facilitated and it reports back to us so that we can forge a way forward and we lead this country peacefully? I beg to move.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, can we task our own committee so that we can hear from it? A select committee has its own issues.

3.00
THE MINISTER OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Ms Rose Akol): Mr Speaker, I would like to inform the House that we accept the guidance that you have given. There is a committee that is responsible for this particular area and it should therefore be tasked to go down there. 

As Government, we have nothing to hide. In 2014, similar eruptions emerged and what we want is for this matter to be investigated and we come to a conclusion once and for all, if it is possible.

In addition, regarding the issue of rigging of elections, there are so many allegations about this across the country but we should not resort to fighting. Is there war in other places where allegations of rigged elections exist? No. So why is it in Kasese? This shows that the matter is more deeply rooted than what we are seeing. This is what we need to know so that a lasting solution is found - (Interjections)- I do not take information.

MS OSEGGE: It is good manners, when you are discussing a matter of national importance, to accept information, especially as a minister. This is because you need to know what is going on. Thank you. 

Mr Speaker, I appreciate the decision that the House has arrived at and I think that it is the best way to go. However, I think we need to add a few issues to this because it is not just about Kasese and the Rwenzori. There has been a cry and the honourable minister can testify to this and as a country, we must be serious on the role of men and women in uniform.

When it comes to elections, these men and women take sides openly and if we are going to hide our heads in the sand and talk about a few occurrences in different places – I think the minister can testify to this because the names that keep coming up and are attributed to her issues in Bukedea, were associated with men in uniform: soldiers, the UPDF and the police. I think that as a minister – (Interjections)- if she is honest enough, she will testify that she was badly harassed by these people, even as a minister. I think it can do us justice if we are open about this, face the facts, admit where we have gone wrong and bring these people to order –(Interruption)

MR NASASIRA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The item on the Order Paper is about the minister’s statement on Kasese. The procedure is that the Speaker can allow people to elucidate on that particular statement. Therefore, is it procedurally right for hon. Osegge to start bringing in issues of campaigns, elections and violence in other parts of the country at this material time when we are discussing a ministerial statement?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the information I have is that this matter was raised in the previous sitting of this House. When the matter was raised and in the process of concluding the debate on that particular matter, the minister was asked to make a statement on whatever happened in Kasese. That statement has been made, following what had been raised in the House.

Now, the facts that have come out from the statement are strongly disputed by the Members coming from Kasese, especially the two Members who have spoken. The best way to handle this is to let an institution of this House look at it broadly and come back. However, we cannot enlarge it because the issue of Kasese was the one that was raised in the House and the people of Kasese want a response. If we are to enlarge it, it might have to wait for the Tenth Parliament because it will be a huge responsibility for the committee to handle. I was going to suggest a time frame within which this committee should come back to the House and bring the facts and I was going to suggest two weeks. 

After Easter, we can issue the letters instructing the committee to start immediately and after two weeks, they should report back to the House so that we can deal with it. That is my proposal as a way forward so that we can conclude this matter in a more refined manner.

MR OKUPA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Yesterday, you tasked us to handle the policy statements as fast as possible. I am wondering whether the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs will not be derailed by those instructions you gave of handling the policy statements before 14 April. 

From that point of view, I would like to propose that you appoint Members to constitute a select committee so that the sessional committee is not bogged up due to the time frame because as you said, the Ninth Parliament must conclude before the final Budget is read. 

Therefore, I would propose that you use your discretion and appoint members who will not be bogged down by the work of the policy statements. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think it is important that our own committee examines this because almost all the select committees that we have created here have had issues. We do not want an issue of confidence to creep into this. That is my advice. 

What we can do is to allow the committee – because we are going to take about two weeks debating the reports from the committees. We can then allow the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs to be the last to report on whatever they are going to do. My concern is that we need a proper and established institution of the House where we can call people to order.

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: Mr Speaker, I am not objecting to the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs. However, I would like the House to know that the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs, a few months ago, presented an elaborate report to this Parliament about the conflicts in Kasese, which report was comprehensively investigated. Resolutions and recommendations were made and they were adopted. 

Therefore, to task the same committee to re-do the same work – (Interjections)- listen to me. I have read the statement of the minister and I have also listened to hon. Nzoghu’s statement. Those of us who are in the committee will realise that the issues that they are trying to raise are almost similar. There is nothing new: the Rwenzururu attacks and land conflicts are the issues and they have been long standing.

Therefore, all we have to do is to study the committee report but if you would like to investigate in order to come up with something new, you definitely do not need the same committee.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, this is about a factual thing that happened on the 19th and thereafter. It is not about a global thing that happened in Kasese but about an event that started on the 19th and rolled over. People have died and that is what is in this statement and that is what was requested by the Member who raised this matter. It is a very specific issue on what happened.

You can hear from the minister’s statement and the response from the honourable member for Busongora North and the Member for Kasese District that it is a factual contestation that we are seeing. Therefore, it is not about the global issues of Kasese, it is about what actually happened and who is responsible for this. The commitee can do this quickly and come back and advise us because this is a very specific issue.

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. From what hon. Muwanga Kivumbi has told us, it further justifies that the committee that has been handling this kind of work continues with it. I think it will even shorten the time frame as it will be like a continuation; same area and same people. I do not see any contradiction whatsoever. Let the same people now concentrate on this assignment. I agree with you, Mr Speaker, that we should not widen. However, we are also not throwing away the other reports that Members are raising. It will be very useful because we need to handle this situation since this country decided that every after five years, we shall go for elections.

Now, if people begin killing each other after elections, we will be negating what the gallant sons and daughters of this country did. Therefore, the information that hon. Muwanga Kivumbi has given justifies your suggestion that the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs handles this matter but narrows it to Kasese and Bundibugyo. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we are doing this in the interest of trying to come up with something that is debatable on what happened in Kasese. If there was concurrence with what the minister has said, we would not have sent anybody anywhere. However, since there is contestation of the facts in the minister’s statement and that of the Members from Kasese, let the committee go, look at it and come back in a short time. I think the committee would be better placed to handle this since they already know the grounds and the people involved. Can we move on with this? 

Therefore, on Tuesday, we will give proper instructions to the committee, commission them and give them two weeks within which to come back to this House. If they do not want to send the whole committee, that is their choice. If they want to send half of the committee members to go and investigate, it is still their choice for practical purposes.

Therefore, it is referred to the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs to study with clear instructions starting from Tuesday next week. After two weeks, they should report to the House so that we can be able to understand what happened in Kasese. Thank you.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE DELAY IN GAZETTING SOME MEMBERS-ELECT FROM KASESE DISTRICT

3.16
THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr Kahinda Otafire): Thank you, Mr Speaker and honourable members. Mine is a simple task. When we got inquiries from Members of Parliament as to why elected Members of Kasese have not been gazetted, we got in touch with the Chairman, Electoral Commission and Mr Speaker, I am pleased to inform the Members of Parliament that the Chairman, Electoral Commission has written to me concerning the same. 

It reads: “This is to bring to your attention that there was a delay due to unforeseen circumstances in gazetting election results of some of the constituencies” - meaning it is not only Kasese but the whole country.

“However, the compilation has been concluded and the results are yet to be published and shall be published very soon, in any case not later than Tuesday next week and they will appear in the Gazette.

The commission regrets any inconveniences caused to the elected Members of Parliament and the electorate.” 

I beg to rest my case, Mr Speaker.

MR OKUPA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to inform the honourable minister that if you saw the Gazette that came out on 3 March 2016 there are inconsistencies and mistakes. There are losers whose indicated votes are more than those of the winners. I have seen two or three, so you could bring this to the attention of the Independent Electoral Commission.

Our colleague here, hon. Omara, has more votes than the one who has been declared in the Gazette as the winner. That is one example.

MAJ. GEN. (RTD) OTAFIIRE: Granted. Mr Speaker, I am not the one who invented the word “error”. When I was born, it was there and I am here and it is still there. When I am gone, it will still be there. If there are errors and omissions and submissions in the gazetting, they will be corrected. 

I do not think the sun will stop coming from the East because there have been errors in the Gazette. We regret the inconveniences caused to the elected Members and we shall duly correct the mistakes and life will go on. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR NZOGHU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the minister for his response but I also expected, in his response, a report to this House on whether there was any criterion that was used in gazetting some results and leaving out others.

For the case of Kasese, the constituency results, which were declared earlier, have not been gazetted and those ones which were declared later have been gazetted. I expected the minister to state whether there was any formula or criteria used on who to be gazetted and who to be left out.

Secondly, when you look at the line-up of the various constituencies, our results were transmitted on the same day and our constituencies and results follow each other. Therefore, what is it that guided the separation of the results to say that we pick on Busongora South, Kasese Municipality and Bukonjo East and then leave out Bukonjo West, Busongora North and Kasese Woman Member of Parliament?

Mr Speaker, I would like to put it on record that Bukonjo West constituency results were declared much earlier than all our results but Bukonjo West has not been gazetted. I wanted the minister to explain that so that we know for future guidance.

THE DEPUTY SPEKAER: Honourable members, the commitment from the Electoral Commission, as communicated to us by the minister, is that it will not be later than Tuesday. There were errors but they are going to correct this and those who have not been gazetted will be gazetted not later than Tuesday. What else can you say to that?

MS OSEGGE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. We cannot take this very lightly because the Uganda Gazette is an authentic and official document. If there are discrepancies, which have been there for the last so many weeks since the Gazette came out, someone can use it and go to court. This is not a simple issue as you seem to take it.

We have to make sure that this is cancelled in the public either by public announcement to say that the first Gazette was faulty -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, they do a gazette supplement on the same thing.

MS OSEGGE: I do not know the language, Mr Speaker. Thank you for that.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is really not for us to debate -

MS OSEGGE: But we need to say it out.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The institution that has the mandate to declare elections and gazette them is the Electoral Commission. It has not done so and it is saying that there were some technical difficulties as to why some of the results were not gazetted and they are going to do them latest by Tuesday next week. Members, can we leave this matter? We have other business, please.

MR KWIZERA: There is something that you have said that the Electoral Commission has the mandate. That mandate is within the law and the one who created the provision for gazettement had a purpose. If you do not create a gazette and people know how many days within which you can go to court - I have information that when they created the Gazette, they never made it public. They actually made it selectively and kept it and that is why Members are raising these issues.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: They never did what?

MR KWIZERA: They created a Gazette for some constituencies, gazetted some Members and left out others. When you go to the Uganda Printing and Public Corporation, you will not find it. However, if you use other means to go to the heads of printing in Entebbe, they can give you a copy privately and that is the problem. Therefore, it is not a simple matter that Members are raising and that is the information you should know.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, honourable member. Let this House not be misled. I asked for a copy of the Gazette this morning and it has just been brought to me now here. I asked for it like an ordinary citizen. I said, “Go and get for me a Gazette from UPPC in Airlines House.” They went bought a copy and brought it. I did not go there as Speaker or anybody else.

Please, let us not malign institutions in this House because they make it public. They have a shop in Airlines House where they sell gazettes publicly. Let us accord these institutions the respect they deserve by not making statements that might make them look like what they are not.

LAYING OF PAPERS

MINISTERIAL POLICY STATEMENTS FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2016/2017

3.24
THE MINISTER OF COMMUNICATION & INFORMATION COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY (Mr John Nasasira): Mr Speaker, I wish to lay the Ministry of Information and Communication Technology ministerial policy statement for financial year 2016/2017 comprising of vote 020; Ministry of Information and Communication Technology and vote 126; National Information and Technology Authority, Uganda. I beg to lay.

Mr Speaker, I lay this policy statement today, after 15th March, because we had to wait for clearance from the Equal Opportunities Commission on compliance to gender and equality requirements, which was received on Wednesday, 16 March 2016. This was also because we had to comply with the provisions of the Public Finance Management Act, 2015.

Subsequently, we had to print and provide the required hard copies of the document for submission to Parliament and I would like to lay the letter explaining that to you, Mr Speaker. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that policy statement from ICT.

3.25
THE MINISTER OF WATER AND ENVIRONMENT  (Prof. Ephraim Kamuntu): Mr Speaker, in accordance with Section 13(3) of the Public Finance Management Act, I beg to lay the ministerial policy statement to Parliament for the financial year 2016/17 covering votes: 
019 - Ministry of Water and Environment 
150 - National Environment Management Authority 
157 - National Forestry Authority 
122 - Kampala City Council Authority 
302 - Uganda National Metrological Authority 
501-850 - Local government conditional grants. I beg to lay. 

Mr Speaker, this policy statement is being laid today after the legal requirement of 15th March because the soft copy of this statement was submitted to the Office of the Clerk to Parliament on the 9th. However, immediately after submission, the ministry received communication from ministry of finance concerning approval of a new vote. Therefore, additional work needed to be done; we did that and based on this correction, it took a bit of time. Also getting the hard copy published by the printers delayed the submission of the final policy statement of the ministry.

Mr Speaker, kindly accept my apologies and your indulgence by allowing this ministerial statement to be laid today. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that ministerial policy statement.

3.28
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TRADE, INDUSTRY AND COOPERATIVES (INDUSTRY) (Mr Michael Werikhe): Mr Speaker, I wish to apologise to you for having failed to lay the ministerial policy statement for the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives for the financial year 2016/17 before Parliament for discussion of its detailed estimates on time as required by the Public Finance Management Act, 2015. 

Upon doing an electronic submission and the subsequent system upload of the soft copy of the ministerial policy statement on 15 March 2016 and later on, the submission of a hard copy on 17 March 2016, the ministry delayed to present it before the august House. This delay was regretfully caused by the following:

One, was about the granting of a vote status to the Uganda Export Promotion Board and the transfer of Kiira EV Car Project to the ministry vote at the last moment during the finalisation of the detailed budget estimates. Colleagues will recall this is one of the chief resolutions passed by the august House in its report for the last two financial years.
Two, as we observed yesterday, was the unavailability of the political leadership due to the retreat at Kyankwanzi; that is why we apologise to the House. 

Therefore, Mr Speaker, consider my apology and allow me to present to you a copy of the ministerial policy statement for the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives for the financial year 2016/17. 

In accordance with Section 13(3) the Public Finance Management Act, 2015, I beg to lay at the Table the ministerial policy statement for the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives of the following: 
    (1) Vote 015 - Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives
    (2) Vote 110 - the Uganda Industrial Research Institute
    (3) Vote 154 - the Uganda National Bureau of Standards
    (4) Vote 306 - Uganda Export Promotion Board for the financial year 2016/17. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. Honourable minister, the quality of your policy statement is quite - I do not know whether it reflects on the status of finances of the ministry but it does not quite look like what we are used to receiving as Parliament. 

MR WERIKHE: There is a copy, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, honourable members, let the records capture the ministerial statement from the Minister of Trade. 
That is the last policy statement we have received – can I confirm from the Clerk whether all the policy statements have now come in so that I can make guidance on how we proceed?

MS ONGOM: Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. We received apologies from the ministers who have been laying their ministerial policy statements late, after the 15 March 2016. If you heard from his statement, he said that one of the issues that made him to present it today was that he was at Kyankwanzi.

Mr Speaker, while in this House, we agreed that honourable ministers should take issues of Parliament and issues of Government as important. 

Therefore, which of these was a priority? Was it being in Kyankwazi or laying policy statements on the Floor of Parliament? So, which one was more important? 

Mr Speaker, we already agreed on that and I feel that next time, they should take this as a matter of priority. (Applause) They could lay it then proceed to the National Leadership Institute (NALI) when need arises. Thank you so much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That was a procedural point. Does the Government Chief Whip want to rule on it? 

Honourable members, I think the minister could have had better reasons other than going to Kyankwanzi, in that letter. He should have left that reason out as there was a better reason justifying the delay.  Have you seen how you took yourself into a dangerous corner? 

I think the justification he gave, even without the absence of the political leaders, was sufficient for this House to receive this. Anyway, let the records capture that. 

Okay, we will confirm by Tuesday next week whether all the policy statements have come in so that I can allow the Opposition shadow ministers to present their alternative policy statements. I had given a deadline of 30 March 2016, but if we have received all of the policy statements, that deadline no longer applies. The work of the opposition will have to start on Tuesday so that they finish on time to enable the committees do their work properly. Thank you very much.

LAYING OF PAPERS

REPORTS AND OPINION OF THE AUDITOR-GENERAL ON THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30 JUNE 2014 FOR DISTRICT LOCAL GOVERNMENTS

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can we adjust the Order Paper to handle this motion? Hon. Rosemary Seninde, can we deal with the motion and lay the papers later? Or should we lay the papers now? Okay, proceed.

3.40
MS ROSEMARY SENINDE (NRM, Woman Representative, Wakiso): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I beg to lay on the Table reports and opinion of the Auditor-General on the financial statements for the year ended 30 June 2014 for the following district local governments: 
        1. Bushenyi District Local Government
        2. Isingiro District Local Government
        3. Mitooma District Local Government
        4. Rukungiri District Local Government
        5. Buhweju District Local Government
        6. Hoima District Local Government
        7. Kiryandongo District Local Government
        8. Kyenjojo District Local Government 
        9. Butaleja District Local Government
        10. Kibaale District Local Government 
        11. Ntoroko District Local Government
        12. Ntungamo District Local Government
        13. Buliisa District Local Government.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, let the record capture all those reports and opinion of the Auditor-General on the financial statement for the year ended 30th June, 2014 for district local governments.

REPORTS AND OPINION OF THE AUDITOR-GENERAL ON THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30 JUNE, 2014 (TOWN/MUNICIPAL COUNCILS

MS SENINDE: Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table reports and opinion of the Auditor-General on the financial statements for the year ended 30 June 2014 for the following towns and municipal councils:
    1. Mbarara Municipal Council
    2. Bweyale Town Council
    3. Rwebisengo Town Council
    4. Kasheshero Town Council
    5. Kyenjojo Town Council
    6. Kanara Town Council
    7. Hoima Municipal council
    8. Kabale Municipal council
    9. Kakumiro Town Council
    10. Ibanda Town Council
    11. Hamura Town Council
    12. Kambuga Town Council
    13. Bugongi Town Council
    14. Karago Town Council 
    15. Kagadi Town Council
    16. Kijura Town  Council
    17. Bushenyi-Ishaka Municipal Council
    18. Kibuku Town Council
    19. Kabuyanda Town Council 
    20. Isingiro Town Council 
    21. Busia Municipal Council 
    22. Manafwa Town Council 
    23. Bukwo Town Council
    24. Kibaale Town Council
    25. Ntungamo Municipal Council 
    26. Muhanga Town Council
    27. Nyahuka Town Council
    28. Kabwohe–Itendero Town Council
    29. Budaka Town Council
    30. Bulegeni Town Council
    31. Benyiny Town Council
    32. Karugutu Town Council
    33. Butunduzi Town Council
    34. Rubona Town Council
    35. Bulisa Town Council
    36. Mpondwe Town Council and
    37. Mpondwe–Lubiriha Town Council 

Mr Speaker, I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture all those 37 reports and opinion of the Auditor-General on the financial statements for the financial year ended 30 June 2014 for town and municipal councils.

These entire reports stand referred to the Committee on Local Government Accounts for handling within the framework of the law and reporting accordingly. Thank you.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT SEEKING TO PUT MORATORIUM ON ISSUING LICENCES TO PRIVATE COMMERCIAL DEALERS IN FOREST RESERVES

3.45
MR MUHAMMAD MUWANGA KIVUMBI (DP, Butambala County, Butambala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. From the onset, I wish to a little bit amend that motion to say, “Motion for a Resolution of Parliament asking Government to streamline the management of forests in Uganda,” other than asking for a moratorium, which would be the only prayer; that would have limited the scope of debate in this Parliament.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is that amendment seconded? We have to put that on record. It is seconded by Members from Nyabushozi County and Oyam District. Thank you. You can now -

MR KWIZERA: The motion would have been amended to “ask Government to streamline the management of the forestry sector,” maybe, but as you know, we have an Act of Parliament, which is an operating law on how the forest sector is managed. So, I do not know if we are going to debate in disregard of the existence of that law to streamline this sector.

Secondly, there is a moratorium by the President; an Executive Order actually stoppingcommercial dealers in the forests. That order is still on. But also this very Parliament adopted a report from the committee to ask the President to waive the Executive Order to allow NFA to function fully. I do not know if we can be guided on that, Mr Speaker. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Well, there is no doubt that there is a law and not one, but several laws that relate to the management of forests in this country. The fact that this motion is coming could be testimony to the fact that there are still gaps in the management issues that this House needs to debate and address.

I think that is the purpose of this motion because if there were no gaps in the legislation, its application and its management, this motion would not have arisen.

I think that the Member who has brought this motion has brought it within the framework of the rules and I will allow him to present the motion and when seconded, he speaks to it. 

However, the motion stands accordingly amended to read: “Asking Government to streamline the management of forests in Uganda.” That is the substantive motion now.

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: Mr Speaker, I move under rule 50 (1)(k) of Our Rules of Procedure. The motion reads: 

“WHEREAS Article 237(2) of the 1995 Constitution of the Republic of Uganda mandates the Government or a local government as determined by Parliament and law to hold in trust for the people and to protect wetlands, forests and game reserves, national parks and any other land to be reserved for ecological and touristic purposes for the common good of all citizens;

AND WHEREAS Parliament enacted the National Forestry and Tree Planting Act 2003, to ensure that forests and trees are conserved and managed in a manner that meets the needs of the present generation without compromising the rights of future generations by safeguarding biological, diversity and environmental benefits that accrue from a forest and trees;

FURTHER AWARE that Section 13(3)(a) of the National Forestry and Tree Planting Act directs that the national forests shall not be destroyed, damaged or disturbed except in the course of carrying out activities of sustainable management of the reserved forests;

COGNISANT that sections (5)(1)(a) and (2)(a) of the National Forestry and Tree Planting Act, 2003 mandates the National Forestry Authority to develop and manage all central forest reserves and to inspect, monitor and coordinate local governments in the management of their respective local forest reserves and produce reports on the state of local forest reserves;

NOTING that the National Forestry Authority has abdicated its responsibility of protecting national forests from encroachers and charcoal burners;

ACKNOWLEDGING that Article 245(a) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda mandates Parliament to provide the measures intended to protect and preserve the environment from abuse, pollution and degradation;

NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved by Parliament of Uganda, duly convened and sitting today as follows:
    a) That the sector minister lays before Parliament a status report on all central and local government national forests, parks and game reserves.
    b) That a moratorium be put in place on National Forestry Authority and local governments from issuing any further licenses to private commercial dealers in forest products until the minister presents a regulatory framework.
    c) That the minister presents a law against bush and charcoal burning. And 
    d) That Parliament constitutes a select committee to inquire into the management of forests in Uganda.”

 I beg to move, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the motion seconded? Yes, it is seconded by the Member for Nyabushozi, Member for Mityana North, Member for Bukoto East and Member for Oyam District. Would you like to speak to your motion, briefly?

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: Mr Speaker – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, I noticed that you have made amendments to the text that had been submitted to the House. So you might need to explain some things as you go on.

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: No, the text has not changed.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But the text I have does not have the point on the select committee.

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: Alright, I will check. Mr Speaker, Uganda’s forestry cover reduces by 90,000 hectares annually. A large portion of the forest loss and degradation occurs on private land, which constitutes about 64 per cent of the area of Uganda’s forest cover. Seventeen per cent consists of central forest reserves, 18 per cent national parks and wildlife, 0.85 per cent is jointly managed by the National Forestry Authority (NFA) and the Uganda Wildlife Authority (UWA), 0.03 per cent is local forest reserves, managed by local governments. Some of the key causes of forest loss include: conversion to agriculture, charcoal-burning and urbanisation. 

At this rate of deforestation, without interventions with ambitious targets, Uganda’s current forest cover of 3,594,462 hectares will be no more in about 40 years – that is by 2055. The current population of 36 million people in Uganda results in a high pressure on the environment and natural resources. With the projected population of 130 million people by 2050, this will certainly increase the rate of forest loss and environmental abuse, if not checked.

Firewood provides most of the energy used to meet basic energy needs for cooking and water heating. Limited accessibility to electricity and the high prices of petroleum products, particularly kerosene, constitute barriers to a reduction in the demand for firewood. 

It is imperative to note that trade in biomass especially charcoal is a large contributor to the rural economy. The per capita consumption of firewood in rural and urban areas is 680kg per year and 240kg per year respectively. The per capita charcoal consumption is 4kg and 120kg in rural and urban areas respectively. 

Fuel wood is the most highly consumed primary fuel with annual consumption of about 28 million tonnes of tree biomass. Another 16 million tonnes of wood are annually transformed into 1.8 million tonnes of charcoal using highly inefficient kerosene. 

Tree-cutting for fuel, when aggregated with timber demand, does not correspond with regeneration, afforestation and reforestation hence a deforestation rate of 1.8 per cent per year in Uganda. Eighty nine per cent of the population use biomass as a source of energy.

Alarming challenges in the forestry sector include:
    (a) The five-year performance contract for National Forestry Authority expired in 2009. No performance review has been undertaken hence the authority is operating without performance targets.
 
    (b) Illegal logging is, by far, the biggest contributor to the increasing forest loss. While there are a number of legal controls on illegal timber harvesting and trade, these have not salvaged the forests from destruction. Illegal timber constitutes over 80 per cent of timber sold on the Ugandan market and public bodies account for 20 per cent of the timber market. 

By this I mean that even the Government of Uganda is using illegal timber in its own buildings during construction –(Interjections)– 20 per cent of the timber that the Government of Uganda uses is illegal. That is how alarming this can be, given the fact that 80 per cent of the timber on the market is illegal timber. So, there is a great possibility that Government is itself culprit to illegal timber dealings. 

    (c) On 18 December 2013, a final review of forestry regulations, which have been in a draft form since 2006 was undertaken. It is worrying to note that up to now, the Solicitor-General has not gazetted the regulations, which are geared towards improving forestry planning, forestry research, collaborative forest management, regulation of private and community forests, tourism in forest reserves and trade in forest products in Uganda. This has contributed to ad-hoc management of forest resources.

    (d) There are uncoordinated activities between the National Forestry Authority and local governments in the management of forests especially in licencing, de-gazetting and allocation of land titles. This is mainly attributed to funds accessibility. 

Over the years, district forest services do not have facilitation from the central Government and expect funds under donor projects hence the NFA’s access to funds has seen it outstretch its influence into operations, which ideally is a preserve of local governments. This has adversely affected management of forests in Uganda.

    (e) The lack of updated data on forest cover that is essential for effective planning and management. The last factual forestry statistics were released in the Biomass Technical Report of 2009. It is on this basis that over the years, it has been reported, without updated statistics, that Uganda’s forest cover reduced from 24 per cent, in 1990, to 18 per cent of the land area at a deforestation rate of 1.8 per cent per year.

    (f) There is no inventory of private and communally-owned forest cover yet they cover the biggest portion of Uganda’s forest cover, at 64 per cent.


    (g) There is no publicised data bank on forest related products for local consumption and export so as to improve planning and the regulation of the sector.

    (h) The National Forestry Authority is marred with corruption scandals.

With immediate urgency-
    a) Review the performance contract of NFA that expired in 2009 and a new performance contract be effected;
    b) Conditional grant for local governments should be availed to improve the financing for forestry extension services and management;
    c) Forestry regulations should be approved after comprehensive consultation with relevant stakeholders such as legislators, civil society organisations, among others;
    d) Forest cover mapping should be undertaken and boundaries clearly demarcated, accompanied by a comprehensive valuation for each forest in Uganda. This is grossly lacking;
    e) Decisions to exploit forest resources should be governed by the public trust doctrine, existing legislations and technical input so as to inform political decisions but not the opposite.

Mr Speaker, I beg to move. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable member, for moving this motion. So is the motion seconded? Do you want to speak to the motion before I then propose the question?

3.58
COL (RTD) FRED MWESIGYE (NRM, Nyabushozi County, Kiruhura): I thank you, Mr Speaker. I stand to support the motion and agree with what my colleague, hon. Muwanga Kivumbi, has said. What he has said is actually the reality. The reality is that there are no sufficient laws and regulations. Even if they were there, the rate at which our forests and trees are being destroyed in this country is worrying. 

The other reality that he has cited is that it is abnormal that such an important resource has no governing board since 2009.

Although there are regulations and rules, we have failed as a Government to control charcoal burning or to put alternatives that can mitigate this dangerous situation.

But also it is reality that if we do not control our forests or if we do not plant more trees and put forward incentives to attract Ugandans to plant forests, our water bodies will disappear and the future generation will be at a big risk. I thank you very much, Mr Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I thank you very much. Honourable members, the motion before the House, and which I now propose for your debate, is the motion of this House asking the Government:
    a) To streamline the management of forests in Uganda and specifically that the sector minister lays before Parliament a status report on all central and local government national forests, parks and game reserves.   
    b) That a moratorium be put on the National Forestry Authority and local governments from issuing any further licences to private commercial dealers in forest products until the minister presents a regulatory framework.
    c) That the minister presents a law against bush and charcoal burning. 
    d) This Parliament constitutes a select committee to carry out further investigations on this matter and report.

Honourable members, that is the motion for your debate and debate starts now. However, I would like to ask the honourable member to say something about the motion before I properly open the debate.

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: After consultation, I move to drop the last prayer.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Which is?

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: The one on setting up a select committee because of the fact that this Parliament is about to wind up; there won’t be enough time to do that sort of investigation.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay. So the motion is accordingly amended and proposed resolution (d) that this Parliament constitutes a select committee is accordingly dropped for practical reasons. Let us proceed with the debate and debate starts now. 

4.02
MR FRED BADDA (NRM, Bujumba County, Kalangala): I thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the honourable member for moving this motion, which I support.

However, I would like this House to take caution not to put in place legal frameworks or laws that will be very difficult to implement. This is because as we talk, there are a number of laws relating to environment and forestry sectors but these laws are not being efficiently implemented and so we must be very careful as we tell Government to bring these laws.

As you all know, I come from a geographical area of Ssese Islands which is naturally a forest area. As Ugandans, we are mandated to protect and preserve the forests. But we are also mandated to sustainably use the forests. That is why some forests are called “development forests”; it is because Ugandans are supposed to use forests for energy and also as a source of materials for building. 

Given the fact that Uganda is still a poor country, there is nowhere we can avoid using forests; the catch word should be that we use these forests sustainably. To say that we stop or that we make laws against charcoal burning when we do not provide an alternative may be difficult. 

As Ugandans, we are all supposed to replant the lost bio-diversity. There is an international incentive in form of a carbon fund that is given to people to make sure that they replant. I would like to request the minister to tell this House, the steps that he has taken to explain to Ugandans how they can access this benefit of the carbon fund that would be an incentive to Ugandans to plant more trees.

Mr Speaker, the minister should explain what has been a catalyst to depleting forests in Uganda.

Government has been slow in implementing the laws to stop destruction. For example, there are about 26 towns that are sitting on forest reserve land. The minister has taken over 15 years without swapping this land or taking action. The end result is that land that has been identified for swapping is being depleted completely even when it is being swapped for a forest reserve. Even the land where these towns are sitting is being destroyed. Such towns include Mbarara, Arua, Kalangala and so many others. They are sitting on land, which is supposed to be a forest reserve but the minister has been sitting with this arrangement yet these towns have already fulfilled the requirements for swapping. It is now over 15 years but no action is being taken. Uganda has ended up losing land that is supposed to be a forest reserve. That is why we need to put in place laws that will be implemented and secondly give people information about the incentive of the carbon fund. Government should take lawful action to protect forest reserves, for example, by swapping land where towns have been built with land for forest reserves. Thank you, Mr Speaker. I support the motion.

4.06
MS LUCY AJOK (FDC, Woman Representative, Amuru): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I also want to thank the mover for coming up with this very important motion. 

As a person representing the people of Amuru, I am very happy because it is one of the districts that have suffered the menace of charcoal and bush burning. As leaders, we are constrained because when you begin to tell people that bush burning is bad - we do not have anything to back us up. Therefore, this is really important and I call upon all the Members to support this motion. 

I come from Amuru and my home is just by the roadside. Sitting at home, it cannot take me 30 minutes without seeing a lorry of charcoal passing.  I was wondering whether after two or three years, there will still be trees in Amuru District. 

This motion will also help us conserve very important tree species; I am talking about the Shea tree - in Acholi we call it Moya, which is being cut for charcoal burning because it has the best charcoal. It is being cut down yet it has cholesterol-free oil, which is medicinal; it is being destroyed. This motion should help us to conserve some of these trees.

The motion will also help us encourage our people to plant more trees. I want to loud the initiative of the Archdiocese of Gulu, under the leadership of Archbishop John Baptist Odama, who has continuously encouraged the people of GANAL region, the greater north, to plant trees. Every year, there is what we call the peace week where people are encouraged to plant at least 10 trees. Also at every baptism that is done at every Catholic Church, a child is required to plant at least five trees in commemoration of that baptism. These are some of the activities that we should encourage the people to engage in. 

Growing up in Amuru, there was a very thick forest called Karadima but after one year, this forest was no more. They had cut down all the pine trees. Someone talked about trees that are planted as a one-off thing - they can never come back once destroyed. So how do we also, through this motion, encourage people plant more indigenous trees - the Mvules - trees that are slowly but surely getting finished.

Mr Speaker, I support this motion with all my heart and strength and I hope all the other Members will join me in supporting it. Thank you.
 
4.11
MS GRACE KWIYUCHWINY (NRM, Woman Representative, Zombo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to start from where my colleague from Amuru has stopped and specifically talk about the peace week during which Gulu Archdiocese organised a competition for tree planting and Nebbi Diocese comprising of Zombo and Nebbi took a trophy because they planted over five million trees in that one year.

I support this motion and specifically that there should be a status report on central Government and local government forests. This will help us to understand and to know how far we have come, since this Act was put in place in 2003. We will be able to determine whether we have performed according to that Act; and whether it has guided us to plant more trees and really protect our environment. 

It will also help us to fight against the negative climate change seeing that temperatures have risen very high even in areas where it used to be cold. 
But I want to observe that during these periods, the National Forestry Authority has done more evictions of people from these forest reserves than planting trees.

In Nebbi and Zombo, we have over 6,000 hectares earmarked for tree planting but since this Act came into place, I can bet if even more than 100 hectares have been planted. I have been wondering why. If in other areas of the country, trees are being planted by NFA officials, why are they not being planted in Zombo too? I see more burning of the forests; I see less planting; and I see less involvement of the community, save for the church like it has been mentioned. What is happening? Where are these trees being planted?

During my childhood there were a lot of trees; there were natural forests; even artificial forests. But all have been cut now and less have been planted. Where is the money for planting trees going and why are trees not being planted in Zombo specifically?

Having said that, for the action requested by the motion mover that there should be a moratorium on licensing private commercial dealers in forest production, I would rather say this should be left because even the presenter, said that 80 per cent of the forest products are illegal. We would rather put more strategies to fighting the illegality than fight the commercial dealers who are paying taxes to the Government and where we get revenues to do Government activities. National Forestry Authority (NFA) should give us what they have done so far in fighting the illegal activities in forests and what more strategies they have in place than fighting an area that brings in revenue.

Otherwise, I would like to thank the mover of the motion once again as I continue asking where planting is taking place if it is not in Zombo District. Thank you.

4.15
MR GODFREY KIWANDA (NRM, Mityana County North, Mityana): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to join my colleagues in supporting this motion and thank hon. Muwanga Kivumbi for bringing it.

Two years after we had just begun this term, together with some members on the Committee on Natural Resources, we travelled to Australia and we visited a state called Perth. When I entered my room, there was a warning on the wall, “Before you use this water, ensure it is cold.” I said to myself, “I am not going to turn the hot water on” then I called the hotel man. He said whether I turned the cold water to warm, there was such a thing as cold water. You had to be sure that that water is really cold or warm because they do not have cold water unless one went with a refrigerator. Growing up, I knew you either ask for cold or hot water. However, in their country because the temperature is too high, I found it very strange. 

This year, I tried my taps but I could not get cold water in the house. The environment is changing in our country at a very high rate. What is the cause? We have destroyed our country. There are no forests and forest reserves. The mood of planting trees has gone so down. People are talking about seedlings. I grew up planting trees in our village. However, we are not even provided with seedlings. There are natural trees. In Buganda we have Mutuba tree. All the plots of land commonly known as kibanja were surrounded with Mutuba tree. All the villages were cool. Now, what is taking place?

The whole country is becoming hotter every day. Last time, I read in the papers that Uganda is 13th most beautiful country; I wondered where these people were getting these kinds of reports. I wish they had done this report some years back. We would maybe be the second or third.

We must do something. When you go upcountry, there is no control of bush burning; papyruses are burnt and this increases temperature day after day. I wonder whether we have a law about this. Hon. Kwizera was saying that there is already a law. I want you to quote one on bush burning. Are we not implementing them?

Somebody once said that we are very good at enacting laws but implementing them is our biggest problem. If there is one honourable minister, it should be put in practice. Otherwise, we are destroying a tree where or a branch where we are seated. 

There must be massive education against bush burning. I worked in karamoja for about three years but you would move for many kilometers when the bush is burning. First of all, you are burning the environment, the young trees and old alike. Somebody burning a bush is worse than somebody cutting a tree for charcoal. This is because somebody cutting a tree for charcoal will select a mature one. However, for bush burning, all the young and mature trees are going. 
Unless we do something about this, our environment is being destroyed, Mr Speaker. Sanctions should be put against these people. Government should get involved at LC I level. Can my chairperson LC I implement something about bush burning? Of course, in the due process, we have even destroyed our crops due to bush burning.

On the issue of forests, every home should develop a forest. Whenever we talk about forests our minds go to NFA. This must change. We must begin thinking about our homes and start having these artificial forests there. When someone talks about a forest, you think about a forest reserve. Actually, our homes should be forest reserves themselves. How many trees do we have in our compounds?

Mr Speaker, we should have a deliberate move to plant trees. I am very happy about what is taking place in Gulu, by Bishop Odama. This should be emulated in the whole country. Hon. Ruth Nankabirwa is reminding me about Mityana Diocese.  There should be a deliberate move to plant trees.

Recently, the minister was talking about the day of celebration. How do you celebrate when the whole country does not even know? The minister was telling us only those people who attended - that actually indicates the way we think about forests. The only people who might have heard the information about forests are the ones who attended the function. It should not be like that. If we are celebrating forests, the whole country should be in celebration.

We should mobilise everyone to get involved in this. Mr Speaker, our indigenous trees should be preserved. I know we have the excitement of eucalyptus, pine and we talk about money. I know we need money because we all work to get money. However, what about the environment? We might work for it now but the next day, we have many diseases and spend a lot of money to treat the people.

I do not know whether that local participation is covered in this motion very well. The local people should get involved in this. Leave alone concentration on NFA and national forest reserves, everyone should get involved.

I urge every Member and I know forests do not even segregate colours. I mean we all enjoy forests irrespective of colour - blue, green or yellow. We all need forests in our country. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

4.24
MS SANTA ALUM (UPC, Woman Representative, Oyam): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank hon. Kivumbi for bringing this motion. I rise to support the motion that Government should streamline the management of forests in Uganda because of the importance that forests play in our lives.

Uganda is a blessed country because we were given natural forests by God. I think that was because God loved us so much that He saw the importance of forests and gave us free and abundantly. However, what are we doing as the current generation to preserve and protect it for the future generation?

Traditionally, trees have been known as a source of traditional medicine and protecting our environment and climate. As the minister comes before Parliament to bring a status report on the central and local forests, the minister should also do us a favour and explain to this Parliament what strategy the ministry has taken to preserve these forests. What actions or activities does your ministry have which can be seen, for example, in my district?
I really do not see much that the Government is doing on the ground. The central Government together with the local governments need to make sure that we have forests and replace what has been cut down. Alongside the status report, I would like the minister to also show us what is happening on the ground and at various levels of government.

Secondly, Mr Speaker, I also support the prayer that the minister presents a law against bush and charcoal burning. However, the question that I would like to ask as we go forward with this is: what is the alternative source of energy for cooking that the Government has put in place? This is because I know very well that people burn charcoal for cooking and yet we have better sources of energy, which can help the common man or rural woman. Other countries have adopted these cleaner sources of energy for cooking. 

As Uganda, what strategy do we have to help our women to use cleaner forms of energy for cooking? We are blessed as a country because we have a lot of solar energy but we are not using it. The little that we are using is just for lighting our houses. What about for cooking, which contributes a lot more towards the destruction of the environment? What alternatives does Government or the ministry have to help our people?

The most important issue I would also want to see the Government or the ministry intensify is the sensitisation about the importance of forests. Let the common man know the importance of forests vis-à-vis preserving our environment. Let the common man know that the cutting of trees will directly affect him now and even the future generation in terms of climate change, temperature, uncoordinated rains and floods that we are seeing. I believe that if our people are sensitised, there will be a change. 

I urge Government to get involved and link up with local governments. Yesterday, the minister told us that some of this work is for local governments. I do not know whether you have inter-ministerial linkages to handle a very important topic like this, which affects generations and generations. We have inherited a very good environment but we are destroying it. Why can’t you link up with the Ministry of Local Government, put your heads together and make sure that local governments get heavily involved in the issue of forests, which is really a global concern? It is not only for Uganda but for the whole world.

There was another issue about the formation of a select committee, which was dropped. I was not in support of dropping this select committee idea. This is because it would have helped in the short run. In the long run, I believe that like other parliaments in other parts of the world, we shall need a committee in charge of climate change because the problem of climate change is real and is everywhere throughout the world.

Other governments in the world are really moving very fast and doing very many things. Parliaments have committees in charge of this issue to do oversight and make sure that the budget fully covers the issues of climate change, including the forests.

Mr Speaker, I would like to thank the mover of the motion and pray that these resolutions are adopted. Thank you very much.

4.29
MS FLORENCE NAMAYANJA (DP, Bukoto County East, Masaka): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to join my colleagues to thank the mover of the motion, hon. Kivumbi. However, something is disturbing me. This is not the first time we are talking about forests and the destruction of forests on this Floor. Everybody seems to be speaking helplessly about the topic as if we do not know what is happening. Someone somewhere is responsible. What is going on is known even to the minister.

As you move from Masaka towards Mbarara, all the trees have been cut and the national park has been encroached on. You cannot tell us on this Floor of Parliament that these things are just coming up. Somebody is responsible. Authority has been given. Who is responsible for this? The minister must come and explain. I think it is high time we stopped hiding facts and told the truth. If something is going wrong and somebody is not taking responsibility, let us tell that person, “You are failing in your duties”. 

When you talk about climate change, you are also talking about the forests and the environment. When you talk about the institutions of this Government such as NEMA, NFA and the ministry in charge of natural resources, everybody knows what is going on.

Mr Speaker, what disturbs me is seeing people come here to speak as if they do not know what is happening. Recently, in my constituency, the wanainchi came out to fight for one of the forests, which NFA had given out, and they won. Those were people who do not even know how to read and write but they know the importance of forests. What about the people putting on ties and holding positions to the level of ministers; they just come to lament! (Laughter)

Mr Speaker, I think if someone is failing and letting down Ugandans, it is high time we told them off. (Interjections) Someone is saying most of them are putting on yellow ties but I will not say that. (Laughter) Those who are responsible should actually come out and resign. The whole authority is failing; NEMA is failing; NFA is failing; the ministry is failing and we come here to lament. There is nothing that is going to be said here which is new –(Interruption)

MR SSEBAGALA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Thank you, colleague, for giving way. We were a little safer before NFA came in. Before NFA came in, we had beautiful forests all over the country. However, when we introduced NFA, we gave them authority to destroy our forests.

MS FLORENCE NAMAYANJA: Thank you for that information and that was just for emphasis. Mr Speaker, if we are to live on to the next generation, I beg the mover of the motion not to drop the bit of investigating. This is because it will lead us to find out the rot that is going on within Government. It is the Government officials who are letting us down. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

4.34
MR JAMES KABAJO (NRM, Kiboga County East, Kiboga): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I also join my colleagues in thanking the mover of the motion. While I generally agree with his concerns, I would say that for pragmatic reasons, I only support parts of the motion that he has brought. 

I support part (a) in its entirety. It is about the minister bringing the status reports on all our national forest reserves. However, when it comes to part (b), which is about a moratorium on issuing licences to commercial dealers, I have a very big question mark. I know we have several industries in our country, especially the construction, furniture, paper and other industries, which depend on forest products. Knowing the inefficiency of our people, if we put a moratorium on issuing licences until the minister comes up with a certain legal framework, supposing the minister takes six months to come up with that legal framework that we would like, what happens to these industries? 

What is more likely to happen during that period is that we shall go back to black market - what they used to call magendo- because people will continue building houses while the furniture and paper industries will also continue with their activities. Therefore, they will go underground and continue trading in those items illegally and we shall lose a lot as a result. You can only imagine what will happen in such a situation.

On part (c), I support outlawing bush burning. Generally and even scientifically, it is very injurious to the environment. I would have supported the outlawing of charcoal burning but unfortunately, because I am pragmatic, I have a problem with it. According to the Uganda National Household Survey carried out by Uganda Bureau of Statistics, 95 per cent of Ugandans use biomass for cooking. That means that only five per cent of Ugandans are using other energy sources like electricity and gas for cooking. My question is: when you say we put a stop to charcoal and wood for cooking, what happens to the 95 per cent of Ugandans? What will they do? Will they starve?

The same survey also says that 31.4 million Ugandans cook using biomass, that they cook using three stones and firewood - kyoto. These are real issues. Personally, the motion wakes us up and demands us to quickly find ways of reducing our dependence on charcoal for cooking. We need to increase the amount of electricity that we generate in this country, for example, and reduce its price so that it becomes affordable to Ugandans. 

Middleclass Ugandans, for example the ones in this room, should be using electricity and gas to cook. However, I would challenge most of them, including Members of Parliament, to tell us whether at home there is no charcoal stove, which is being used to prepare the food you are going to eat this evening. If you cook using charcoal at home, how do you even start saying that we ban it? Therefore, I have a real problem. Whereas on one hand I would have agreed with you, practically speaking, I find it very difficult.

My honourable sister said a lorry of charcoal passes after every 30 minutes. I agree with you. What is the choice? A truck of charcoal passing after every 30 minutes means that the whole of Kampala is cooking using charcoal. People in all the towns where these trucks are going to deliver their merchandise are using charcoal for cooking.

To conclude, I do not support part (c). I also do not support part (b) especially saying that we put a moratorium on commercial licensing. In part (c), I support only the outlawing of bush burning. I do not support the outlawing of charcoal burning because as of now, we do not have energy alternatives in this country. However, I support the proposals to improve the situation so that more Ugandans can use better sources of energy for cooking such as electricity and gas.

4.40
MR EDDIE KWIZERA (NRM, Bufumbira County East, Kisoro): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I partly support the motion and disagree with some parts.

Honourable members, we have to be realistic when we are discussing the issue of the forest sector because it is our life. If we are discussing our life, there should be no politics or political parties. I realised that when campaigning, many Members of Parliament and other leaders, who I do not want to mention, encouraged people to go to the forests instead of telling them to leave the forests. What is that? Is that politics or your future? Why would you encourage people to enter forests in Elgon and Mayuge? Instead of looking for votes from the people, you are telling them to go and destroy the future. We should be realistic when we are discussing issues of forests.

I am a member of the Committee on Natural Resources and I am the chairperson of the Parliamentary Forum on Climate Change. We influenced the committee and this Parliament adopted something to the effect that whenever there are major constructions taking place in the power and road sectors, there must be a corresponding component of margin planting. However, I have not seen any margin planting on all the roads in this country. 

Actually, I would like to ask the minister to write a brief to the President asking him to also talk about margin planting of trees, like it is done in China and European countries, whenever he talks about road construction. It is useless for you to construct roads from here to Entebbe or Jinja when you do not know that you have destroyed the environment. The 21-kilometre road from Bweyogerere to Busega is in a wetland because we wanted to avoid compensating people. However, it has so far affected the people there; everybody is suffering the consequences of flooding because of poor planning.

It seems when some of our ministers travel, they do not learn by using their eyes. That is why in some management circles, we say there are too many leaders but there is limited leadership. You cannot fly to Dubai for a holiday, where you have forests in town and yet it is a desert, and you come back here but do not plant trees in your own farm. You clear the farms instead of planting alternative trees. 

Honourable colleague from Nyabushozi, you should see the extent to which they have depleted that forest and yet they say they have developed. You cannot develop with the number of cows you have on a piece of land and you have destroyed forests. Therefore, honourable ministers, help us to emphasise the issue of planting. We are blaming the NFA but are we giving them enough resources? Do we have the money? Are they supported? When you come here and fragment the sector by creating NEMA, Uganda Wildlife Authority, NFA; don’t you know that these people beg from the same donors? If you had called it the natural resources management authority, you would have got more funding than having three or four different entities looking for money. Therefore, let us not blame them when we have not given them sufficient resources. 

Many people are saying that we should decentralise. We have seen the effects of decentralisation. Some people came here for kingdoms; those effects are in these forests. Some kingdoms own forests and they have decided to turn them into personal property and they have destroyed them. My colleague, hon. Muwanga Kivumbi, would have a sector in Buganda Kingdom, for example, where the Kabaka would talk about planting trees but not to degrade because of the need for money to finance some of these kingdoms – (Interruption)  

MR KIWANDA: Mr Speaker, I do not always rise on points of order but this one has really touched me. Is hon. Kwizera in order to drag the name of the Kabaka into forest destruction yet last year, the Kabaka launched a serious campaign of tree planting and he personally went to plant trees. Is hon. Kwizera really in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think the honourable member now has good information from the Kabaka, that the Kabaka is actually planting trees.

MR KWIZERA: I am very grateful. When we are decentralising, we should be mindful. Should we decentralise the forestry sector? At an appropriate time, I will move an amendment saying that all forests should be managed centrally instead of fragmenting them. 

If you look at the capacity of different districts, including Kisoro, in managing the forests in their area, it is very bad. It is not easy. Therefore, local governments should have a linkage with the central Government and funding should be adequate. Honourable members, when we talk about the use of charcoal, I think - (Interruption)

MR OKUPA: I would just like to seek clarification from hon. Kwizera. If we have a body managing forests called the National Forestry Authority, which one is decentralised? At least, I know that in Kasilo, the six forest reserves there are managed by NFA and not the district. 

MR KWIZERA: We have central forests and local government forests. By the way, honourable members, for your information, most of the forests that are destroyed are under local governments. Where we have central Government forests which are mismanaged, it is because of limited resources in opening and maintaining those boundaries. Like hon. Okupa said, both the local and central forests should be centrally managed for proper planning. 

Mr Speaker, I do not think that there is any Member of Parliament here who does not use charcoal. We use charcoal not because we want to but because the alternative is very costly. Why can’t we look at the price of charcoal or its uses against the power tariffs? Yesterday, the President was talking about the cost of power in Uganda being very high. If I were the President or the Minister of Energy, I would have resigned because how can the President not know why the power tariffs in Uganda are very high? Bujagali power is very high and the President did not know. 

Because our power sector is mismanaged and the tariffs are very high, people tend to find an alternative by using charcoal. Can we have affordable power so that we reduce on the use of charcoal? The capacity to use power is also limited because if Members of Parliament use charcoal, what about the councillors at subcounty level? 

Therefore, among the primary issues we should have as priorities – when the Government prioritises rural electrification and road construction, it is high time that restoration of our forests is included. It should attract adequate funding instead of allowing forests, which are managed by the central Government, to become a source of funding because the more they destroy forests, the more money they get. In the law they operate under, section 70 on finances allows them to give licences and in return they get funds for their operations

Can we give them enough funds and they stop issuing licences to run their operations? If you say no licences without an alternative to the forestry sector, the situation will get worse. We would rather ask them how much money they want in order to manage the forestry sector and then we provide it. If we cut down on what they are supposed to be legally doing, we must provide an alternative for them. 

Mr Speaker, I thank hon. Muwanga Kivumbi for the motion. It should be supported by all Members except where it will be impossible for Parliament to implement. I thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, this debate has taken a while. I am going to limit the time now. Will three minutes be sufficient? We will use three minutes. 

4.51
MS ANGELLINE OSEGGE (FDC, Woman Representative, Soroti): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise to support the motion but I would like to widen it a little bit and bring it closer to us. 

While I acknowledge the fact that we are policy makers, sometimes we need to begin with ourselves. If I asked a question here about how many of us have compounds without concrete - many of us have concrete compounds in Kampala here without a single tree – (Interjections)- please protect me, Mr Speaker. Members will have an opportunity to speak.

You have travelled to China and Dubai, for example; if we perceive the problem of climate change the way we seem to express it, our actions should also be consistent. You cannot have high walls around your houses instead of planting natural fences and trees along the road and you are here talking about policies and tree planting. Let us begin with ourselves. 

Mr Speaker, I know it is important to look at forests on the overall, but what are we doing? I read a report that said that the Sahara Desert is moving southwards at a rate of three kilometres per annum. That was about 10 years ago. I would like to tell you that not too long ago in the months of December and January, I had to abandon sleeping in my house in Soroti; I had to sleep in a tent pitched in the compound because of heat. That shows you the impact of the environment on the climate that we are talking about. Therefore, we cannot isolate this issue and say that we just need to plant forests. It is good to plant forests but what else feeds into the climatic change that we need to address? 

In Teso, we have many swamps and we can all testify to this; swamps have been turned into rice growing farms and this is again affecting the environment. If we want to preserve the environment, we need to widen this and look at all areas that affect it. This will help to improve the climate in this country.

What is the Ministry of Water and Environment doing about preserving our swamps? Most of the areas have a problem of water because the swamps are dry. When you cultivate rice in a swamp, three to four seasons –(Member timed out.)

4.55
MS ELIZABETH KARUNGI (NRM, Woman Representative, Kanungu): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also would like to join my colleagues to thank the mover of the motion. It was long overdue. 

Recently, we were in Kyankwanzi but I could not believe how hot it was. This means that we need to do something as fast as possible, as representatives of the people of Uganda and as people who love to see our country move forward.

I would like to appreciate some areas. When we are in the field, there are some districts where you find trees but there are some areas where you wonder whether the leaders have taken interest and whether they remember that our lives depend on the fresh air that comes from the trees. I therefore would like to implore the minister – I have not read that Act concerning forests and wetlands well, but I would like to request that we look at it again and in case some provisions are not there, we add them.

We could make it mandatory that in all places where we have schools, churches and mosques, trees are planted. It would also be prudent to plant along roads that go through valleys and corners because in most cases, when the rainy season begins, some areas are eroded – (Interruption)

MS ONGOM: Thank you for giving way. I would like to inform the Member that as Members of Parliament and leaders of the people, I think we have tried through one of our colleagues. We have been given trees to go and plant and also to distribute to our people. However, the trees are sometimes distributed late and they dry or sometimes when you go to receive the trees, they say that they are for sale and cannot be given out. 

Our people are very willing to plant trees if we educate them and sensitise them on planting trees. They are more than willing but the problem is with the National Forestry Authority. Another problem is with the Ministry of Water and Environment. People are building in the wetlands and they are filling up the wetlands with murram. What are you doing to arrest the situation, as a ministry?  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are you now debating, honourable member?

MS KARUNGI: Thank you for the information, honourable member. The leaders I was referring to are the leaders at a lower level, and I beg that we always accept to take those trees during the rainy season or when we think that they can really –(Member timed out.)

4.59
MS PHYLLIS CHEMUTAI (Independent, Woman Representative, Kapchorwa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the mover of the motion and I support it. It is true that the rate of destruction of forests in Uganda is very high and it has worsened because of the fast rate at which the population of Uganda is growing.

My proposal to Government as a way forward includes the following: In Kenya, there are some policies which were adopted and they are working very well. In Kiswahili they say, “Ukikata miti moja, panda mbili”, meaning that if you cut one tree, you should plant two. This is working very well for the Government of Kenya. I, therefore, would like our Government to emulate such a policy. It will be of much help because the fast rate of destruction without replacement of trees will take Uganda nowhere. It will increase desertification in this country.

The other way forward is for Government to encourage agro-forestry. I support the Members who have said that every piece of space should be used for tree planting. Otherwise, with the increasing population, the pressure on land and space is becoming too much. Therefore, agro-forestry could be a solution. We should plant our crops alongside the trees so that it can also help to serve the people as the demand is high. 

I would also encourage Government to look for species of trees that take a short time to mature because indigenous trees take very long to mature. We therefore need trees that can be grown within a short time so that it can also help solve this problem.

We need to encourage tree planting along the river banks. There are many rivers in Uganda which do not have trees within the 10-metre stretch that was demarcated for tree planting in order to stop the destruction of the river banks by soil erosion. Many river banks are still empty; no trees have been planted. We need to plant trees along these rivers. 

Like many of my colleagues have said, we need trees in our compounds. I am happy to announce that when you come to Kapchorwa, you will think I live in a forest. My compound is full of trees. I would like to encourage all of us to do the same. (Member timed out.)

5.03
MR KENNETH LUBOGO (Independent, Bulamogi County, Kaliro): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also thank hon. Kivumbi for moving the motion. However, I would like to request the mover of the motion to consider dropping the resolution in which he is seeking to have a moratorium put on issuing of licences – resolution (b).

In your submission, you accepted that 20 per cent of the people seek licences - they are law-abiding - and 80 per cent do not. However, in our resolution, we are saying that let the 20 per cent also be stopped from harvesting from forests. I think we are not doing the right thing. We should instead seek to cut down on the 80 per cent. The 20 per cent are trying to do it legally; why are we again going for those who are trying to abide by the law? I, therefore, request that we kindly consider dropping that resolution. I thank you for amending the title of the motion so that it does not carry the subject of a moratorium as it did before. I am pleading with you to drop resolution (b).

The second issue is on the third resolution, which is for the minister to come up with a law against bush and charcoal burning. I wonder whether we should carry this resolution ahead. I do not know if we have found out that this law has financial implications and that is why we are saying that the minister should bring this law. Otherwise, if it does not, we can bring it up as a Private Member’s Bill. We have seen how much time it takes for ministries to bring laws here. Why are we leaving it to the minister to bring a law which we can do by ourselves? Therefore, I would like to propose that we reconsider resolution (b) and carry on with resolution (a).

Mr Speaker, according to the statistics of 2010, we have over five million rural households in the country. If we are to look at mandatory re-afforestation - compulsory replanting of trees by the different households in the country- and if each household plants two trees, it would mean 10 trees planted per household per year. Honourable minister, are you considering coming up - (Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Chief Opposition Whip, you have three minutes.

5.06
THE CHIEF OPPOSITION WHIP (Ms Cecilia Ogwal): Mr Speaker, I would like to appreciate the motion. I also would like to clarify for some Members who are uncomfortable about dropping of the select committee to handle the investigations. Honourable members, you are aware of the culture of Parliament that as we move to the next Parliament, there is no possibility that we can carry all the baggage. I, therefore, think it will be very good for us, because this is an important motion, to cause Government to start action. We must give them something which can be done. If we are going to urge that a select committee be put in place, then that select committee will be for this Parliament; we are not going to move with that select committee to the next Parliament. Therefore, what we have agreed on will be adequate for now, to allow the Government to put in place some mechanisms to streamline the management of the forestry sector and to give us regular reports.

However, what really disappointed me was that some people still feel that Uganda should continue to use charcoal because there are no cheaper options. Now, if we, Members of Parliament, are still advocating at this time for the use of the charcoal, it means that we have not outgrown that mind-set. We now have briquettes, solar and many other energy forms that we can use. Of course, you will say they are too expensive for the rural people, but that is what you should charge the Government to do. Task the Government to come up with cheaper options rather than lamenting. How can a Member of Parliament lament? You should task the Government and be exemplary as a leader.

I use briquettes in my House; I do not use charcoal and I am training some old women at home to use briquettes and other things because I am trying my best to stop them from using charcoal. Let us adopt a proactive and positive approach rather than lamenting. We are not going to charge this Government. I know one day we are also going to be in Government; – (Laughter) – do not ask us to do everything. Let us do what we can afford to do and all of us should take charge to sensitise our people.

The Government should also not make things secret by saying, “we celebrated the World Forest Day recently in Serere”. We should be doing it in the entire country. The people of Dokolo should - (Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, hon. Ogwal. That is why I gave you three minutes. Please, let the minister conclude so that we can take a vote on the motion. I will have one minister because we need to conclude this. You have limited time. 

5.10
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WATER AND ENVIRONMENT (ENVIRONMENT) (Ms Flavia Munaaba): Mr Speaker, I would like to thank the mover of the motion for giving us an opportunity to debate forestry issues and report them on the Floor as a topical concern. I would also like to appreciate the Members who contributed to the debate, which has enriched our work.

Issues of streamlining the management of forests are very important and the ministry is considering them. Currently, we have different kinds of forests under different organisations; the district forestry services handle the local forest reserves and the National Forestry Authority handles the central forest reserves. We also have the Uganda Wildlife Authority, which handles the national parks, and the private sector that handles the vast majority of the forests - which is 70 per cent - on private land. Therefore, I agree with the motion that we need to streamline forest management and indeed we need another mechanism that will encourage other actors to work besides the ministry and its organs.  

Concerning the issue of the status of forest reserves, I have with me reports from different areas. One is from the local forest reserves and also the status of encroachment on the central forest reserves. I did not have enough time to get one from the national parks. These reports give us a picture of their status. If we talk of central forest reserves, for example, they are categorised according to ranges: we have the lakeshore range with an area of 180,000 hectares and 60,000 of that has been encroached on, leaving 33.7 per cent. Mr Speaker, that is the rate of encroachment– 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, do you now want to present the statement?

MS MUNAABA: No, I was just mentioning it a bit because I cannot –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, that is the subject of the report- that you go and do it in a comprehensive way and then you bring the document and lay it before the House.

MS MUNAABA: I would like to state that the status is known but we did not have enough time to compile the reports to be able to have a comprehensive statement. We shall do that at a later time and lay it on the Table as requested.

On the issue of a moratorium on leasing out forest reserves, this was dealt with in 2007 by His Excellency the President when he directed the ministry to stop leasing out forest reserves. Since then, no new forest reserves have been leased out to private tree planters. However, those who had been given leases before have continued to plant. In the central Busoga forest, for example, planting has been extensive with up to 50,000 hectares planted and that is what we want. 

The National Forestry Authority has not been able to cope with the replanting of most of the forest reserves or even the rate at which the degradation is taking place. They are working together with the communities through a programme called collaborative forest management. Here, the communities that have degraded forests are working together with the NFA to regenerate or replant the forests. However, because of the little manpower and resource, this effort is not moving as fast as we would want it to. Also, the deforestation rate, which is being done at all levels by almost every one of us, even those cooking with charcoal, is too fast and we need to take more steps beside what we expect the Government to do. 

Members of Parliament can afford to use gas and electricity. They can also afford to design home-grown charcoal, for instance from garbage; instead of asking KCCA to come and pick it up, it can be turned into charcoal briquettes so that the matooke can be cooked with charcoal since it is very traumatic to tell someone who enjoys eating matooke to stop steaming it the way it is supposed to be steamed. We shall be able to expound on this in the report that we made. 

Efforts are being made by the ministry to ensure that there is also tree planting for charcoal purposes. My ministry is also engaging with the Chinese Government to introduce bamboo for energy because bamboo grows very fast. It can also be used to produce gas and other types of energy including the charcoal that we know, but in a more renewable and less polluting form. 

On the last statement, the senior minister is going to add something.

5.17
THE MINISTER OF WATER AND ENVIRONMENT (Prof. Ephraim Kamuntu): Thank you very much. Yes, we work as a team. I would like to add just two things. 

Honourable members, look at the structure of our economy so that you can understand why people are using charcoal. The structure of our economy is still of a least developed country, with the sources of energy for the population being predominantly wood fuel. As it becomes the cheapest source of energy supplied, it leads to cutting of wood for charcoal. Therefore, if you want to change that by taking the cause and effect approach, you will need to change the structure of this economy. 

That is why economic transformation, as a vision of this country, becomes a compelling exercise for every one of us. Until this is addressed, it is difficult to stop people from using charcoal as the only cheapest source of energy. Therefore, if we want to save charcoal, we have indeed to tackle the structure of the economy by lifting the economy from a peasantry economy to a modern economy. That is the challenge that we all have.

The second issue is also structural. I was pleased by the contributions from the member for Kiboga and hon. Kiwanda. There is this challenge of leadership by example; for instance, we have in the ministry this concept of greening the economy and it demands that each and every one of us take it upon themselves as an example - if you have land, its boundary must be marked by trees so that you have a green belt. It was raised on the Floor.

We are discussing with the Uganda National Roads Authority the possibility of working jointly with us so that road reserves from Kisoro to Nimule - you can imagine if you planted trees along these reserves, how many trees will you have planted as a way of recovering the forest cover? There is an example in Kasese where trees have been planted on both sides of the road reserves.

Thirdly, I think it was hon. Osegge who mentioned this - if Christians planted trees at every church to remember the birth of Jesus and Muslims at every mosque planted a tree remembering the birth of Prophet Mohammad, it would be fantastic. Supposing you now planted a tree remembering your birthday, on your wedding anniversary or the day you were elected Member of Parliament, how many trees would you plant? Kakungulu did it; why can’t we do it? That is leadership by example or being creative to recover the forest cover which is receding.

Mr Speaker, the economy of Uganda is basically dependent on natural resources. We do not have a choice, and I thank hon. Muwanga Kivumbi for moving this motion. We do not have a choice; it is in the Constitution. The Constitution demands protection and preservation of these natural resources for us and future generations. It is a moral issue; we have to plant trees and protect the wetlands for us and the future. In that spirit, as a ministry we will do everything possible but we need to work together because it is not a partisan issue. Nobody should be left behind when it comes to preservation of our environment. 

If I could raise this on the Floor of this House - take water, for instance; Uganda is endowed. It is a country gifted by nature. Can you imagine it rains in Uganda? You have been to Dubai, Qatar and all these places and you see how these people cherish a drop of water. However, when it comes to Uganda, it rains and people have corrugated iron sheets but individual effort of harvesting rain from the roof of your house into your tank - When these issues are raised, it also becomes a gender issue. Who makes decisions at family level? I have no doubt in my mind that if the women were making decisions at family level, there is no way a man would have a corrugated iron sheet roof and put a garage for his car and does not make a provision for a water tank. How can this happen? It is amazing how those simple initiatives can make a difference. 

I would like to thank Members for their contributions. I can assure you we have listened. If it requires a report, we shall bring it down here and if there is anything else, you are the appropriators. The National Forestry Authority complains that sometimes they have tree planting funds, sometimes you want seedlings to plant, sometimes the law says there should be self-financing when they want to sell you seeds but you demand them for free; it is a vicious cycle, which we must really break. I thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, thank you for this debate. Time has come for us to take a decision. I now put the question for your decision that the motion asking Government to streamline the management of forests in Uganda be adopted in the following terms:

(a) 	That the sector minister lays before Parliament a status report on all central and local government national forests, parks and game reserves. 

(b) 	That a moratorium be put on the National Forestry Authority from issuing any further licenses to private commercial dealers in forest products until the minister presents a regulatory framework. I think it was amended to include local governments.

PROF. KAMUNTU: Mr Speaker, I have a letter from the President, which my colleague referred to. This is dated July -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can we just pass a resolution supporting that?

PROF. KAMUNTU: I would like to inform Members that the President directed the minister and let me read it: “…You put an announcement on the radio halting the selling, leasing of the forests to individuals by the National Forestry Authority in the entire country and this takes effect immediately...” and it has been on. It is lacking enforcement but there is a moratorium.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can we make a statement supporting the Executive Order so that -

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: Mr Speaker, I think this is a crisis. If there is a directive from the President, then you have failed him totally. What is going on around the country is total destruction of forests -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Should we adopt the motion as it is?

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: It will reinforce the position of the President -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the resolution is that a moratorium be put on the National Forestry Authority and local governments from issuing any further licence to private commercial dealers in forest products until the minister presents a regulatory framework. The minister is saying “Aye” and the chief whip is saying “No” – (Laughter)

THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): What is happening now after the presidential directive? Is the National Forestry Authority issuing licences? [Hon. Member: “Yes”] Are you sure? Can you lay on the Table any new licence that was given after the presidential directive?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, let us not split hair here; the minister in charge of the sector has said it is okay. That means he is aware of what is happening. Can I put the question to this? The minister says it is okay; so, who are we to say it is not okay?

(b) A moratorium be put on the National Forestry Authority and local governments from issuing any further licence to private commercial dealers in forest products until the minister presents a regulatory framework. Therefore, the burden is on the minister to present a regulatory framework so that this sector is regulated properly. I put the question to that.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: (c) The minister presents a law against bush and charcoal burning. I put the question to that. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I now put the question that the motion asking Government to streamline the management of forests in Uganda in the terms provided in the details of the resolution be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)
Motion adopted. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, I had said the House would rise at 5 O’clock and it is now half passed 5 O’clock. This House stands adjourned to Tuesday at 2 O’clock.

(The House rose at 5.28 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 29 March 2016 at 2.00 p.m.)


