Tuesday, 15 March 2016

Parliament met at 2.55 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

	COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR	

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to today’s sitting. Today was a deadline for the Government submission of policy statements and I am glad to see a number of them on the Order Paper. However, if there are those who have not yet brought, they should deliver them here before 5.00 p.m. this afternoon so that we can commence work.

I would also like to slightly adjust the Order Paper to enable the Parliamentary Commission to lay their policy statement. (Ms Winifred Kiiza rose_) Thank you. Hon. Kiiza, you had something to raise.

3.00
MS WINIFRED KIIZA (FDC, Woman Representative, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for according me this opportunity. I would like to use this moment to congratulate you upon your victory; it is our victory and the victory of this House. (Applause)

I would also like to welcome our colleagues back from that electioneering exercise, which was not an easy one but life is the most important thing. The fact that we are alive, despite all the hurdles that we went through, we still give glory to God.

Madam Speaker, I am rising on a matter of national importance in regard to what has been happening in Kasese. The media is awash with stories of killings and some falsehoods with some little truth in what is being portrayed. I wish to report exactly what is happening in Kasese. 


Since 19th February, we have lost seven Ugandans in Kasese District; three of whom I would say are purely out of election related violence, and four out of mismanagement and misuse of our police forces. Many other people including the security personnel are in hospital nursing serious injuries resulting from these clashes.

Madam Speaker, like I said, beginning from the 19th February, at Nyakasanga tally centre in Kasese District, at around 3.00 p.m. people were excitedly waiting to receive the results of the candidates they had elected. But the results were not coming out and the crowd became very excited and charged awaiting the pronouncements of the returning officer. Until the Regional Police Commander, Bob Kagarura, ordered his police officers to throw tear gas canisters to the crowd that was outside the tally centre.

The police were ordered to go and beat up people. In the process of beating Ugandans who were waiting for the declaration of the people they had elected, Kagarura ordered the police to even shoot.

In the process, a 14-year old Muzamir Kule was shot dead. What was unfortunate in this matter was that the people were flogged as they were running away from the havoc that was caused by tear gas. In addition to that, live bullets were fired at them as they were running and a police officer shot at this young and innocent Ugandan at short range.

Unfortunately, while giving a statement, the police deceived the public that it was a stray bullet, which hit the boy as he climbed the tree. But at the scene there was no big tree, which anyone could have climbed to observe what was in the tally centre. It was a total lie! SSP Kagarura, the Regional Police Commander of the Rwenzori sub-region, is the one who ordered the shooting of the boy.

On 9 March 2016, people went to vote their LC III leaders. Of interest was the election of Hima Town Council, which had three candidates for the post of the Mayor. There was the FDC candidate, an Independent and the NRM candidate. The Independent NRM leaning candidate came about after the mismanagement of the NRM elections. What is important is that I think the people were interested in voting the Independent but the election was rigged. There was a lot of ballot stuffing and malpractices and the people were not satisfied with the outcome of the election.

By evening, the Independent had won according to the tally centre but by the next morning, the NRM candidate had been declared the winner so the people were in a state of confusion as to who won and who did not win. 

As they were trying to question that, the Regional Police Commander (RPC) ordered the police to disperse the population with tear gas after which the army took control of Hima Town Council, with their vehicles moving around the town and dispersing whoever was coming to either celebrate or question the declaration of the NRM candidate. So, Hima town was deserted then.

However, in that process, the candidate who was the people’s preference was taken away by the Regional Police Commander (RPC). They called it preventive arrest. They claimed they wanted to prevent him from inciting his supporters to demonstrate. They transported him from Hima to Kasese town and his supporters were left wondering what was happening to their candidate.

In the process of the supporters wanting to find out where their candidate had been taken, tear gas was sprayed at them and they were forcefully dispersed. However, when the situation was getting back to normal in the evening of 10th March, people came to the office of the candidate and started wondering whether he had come back or not. It was coming to 7.00 p.m. The police together with the army came in a police vehicle. It was getting dark but the lights on their car were not turned on as they approached the office of the candidate. They found people wondering what had happened to their candidate and they started throwing tear gas canisters to disperse them.

In response, these people started throwing stones at the police. The police chased them with their car and on foot. In the scuffle, the police shot two people dead and drove them to the mortuary. That was on 0th March.

In the morning of 11th March, people were still wondering who had died and the police was not giving any statement.

On Friday afternoon of 11th March, the police were commanded by the RPC Bob Kagarura and a one Jacob Opolot - the one who was in Mbale causing mayhem; I am made to understand that he was equally chased from Bukedea having caused mayhem to the people. They also commanded an operation and went deep in the mountains of Kasese around 40 kilometres from Hima Town, under the guidance of the Gombolola Internal Security Officer (GISO) of Buhuhira Subcounty, to Buhuhira.

Madam Speaker, on reaching the sub county, the police jumped off their cars, got down and started shooting people on the instructions of the GISO. The GISO just pointed at whoever he chose and police shot. These people were at a small trading centre in the village and the people they were seated with in the small trading centre, I think as a way of also showing their displeasure and knowing that they had no way out because they did not know who these people had come to kill, they started holding stones to throw at police officers.

What is hurting is that this situation has been misquoted by the Inspector General of Police (IGP) and the police in general. The IGP reported that these people whom the police attacked were attackers and he has referred to them as militia of Rwenzururu Kingdom called “kilhumiramuthima.” 

What I would like to make very clear is that the Rwenzururu Kingdom under the leadership of His Majesty Omusinga Charles Wesley Mumbere has no militia that has intentions of attacking this country. The term “kilhumiramuthima” is a Rukonzo word meaning a terrorist. So, when you would like to refer to the Al-Shabaab, in Rukonzo, we do not have Al-Shabaab but we call them “kilhumiramuthima”.
Therefore, when you refer to them as militia, then you do not understand the language. There is no militia called “kilhumiramuthima” and related to the cultural institution. 

Madam Speaker, what should be made clear and what I would like the country to know is that, we are realising that our police are being misguided and are doing things unprofessionally. What came out when we went to the place of scene in Buhuhira is that the persons whom the GISO was pointing at are members of a family that the GISO’s family had been having wrangles with for close to four years now and the community has been trying to resolve these wrangles.

The GISO went to the police and told them, “These are the people who are grouping up to cause mayhem and they are coming to Hima” yet Buhuhira has no relationship with Hima. The only relationship is that Buhuhira and Hima are in Kasese District. Buhuhira has a different leadership and Hima has a different leadership. In no way could people have come from Buhuhira to go and disorganise people in Hima.

You actually cross two sub counties to move from Buhuhira to Hima Town Council. 

Therefore, Madam Speaker, what the IGP is referring to as malitia related to the Obusinga bwa Rwenzururu is a concoction of himself and we would like Gen. Kayihura to withdraw the statements of continuously referring to Mumbere as a person who wants to fight Government. 

It is belittling the king and bringing the leadership and institution in disrepute for people to keep imagining that Mumbere is a killer; and for Government to continuously insinuate that the Bakanzo want to secede  from Uganda -  (Interruption) 

MR NZOGHU: Thank you, Madam Speaker and hon. Kiiza, for giving way. First of all, I would like to congratulate you, Madam Speaker, for having gone through because if you had not gone through, I would have been disappointed and you know that I appreciate you very much. (Applause)

During your tenure of office as Speaker, you have demonstrated reasonable maturity and neutrality and you are not a partisan Speaker but a Speaker of the Parliament of Uganda for which I commend you. I would like to congratulate you for going through elections successfully despite people fighting you in your party, NRM.

Madam Speaker, I would like to add a few things; first, that there were two police pickups that went to Buhuhira in Kasenyi Trading Centre and found young men seated under a tree, near a butchery. No sooner had these two police pickups, which were loaded with police and soldiers arrived in Kasenyi Trading Centre, than James Mulhumbira, the GISO of Kyabarungira Subcounty got out of the pickup with a soldier who had masked himself and started pointing at whoever he wanted shot.

Five people were shot and four died instantly. Therefore, when these four people died the butcher man, who was closer to the scene of crime, got out of his butchery with a machete, which they are showing in a clip. I would like to put it clearly that these people were simply seated under a tree and they had no machetes. The person who had the machete came from the butchery to rescue his relatives who were innocently being shot.

What is shown in the video, Madam Speaker, is that these people were coming with machetes and chasing police. No, these people were responding to the bad actions of the police after police started shooting innocent Ugandans.

Secondly, when the IGP flew to Kasese, he landed at Kasese Air Field and straight away went to Sandton Hotel and he has never met the leadership of Kasese. Madam Speaker, as you realise, most of the leaders in Kasese lost their seats and these are the people whom Gen. Kayihura is meeting and are giving him the wrong side of the story.

He reached at the district and never met us and we thought that if he went there, he should have met both sides in order to get a balanced perspective to this whole matter.

I would like to conclude, Madam Speaker, that the people of Kasese do not have any intentions whatsoever of seceding from Uganda but what the people of Kasese did in 2016 elections, was to vote for one of the candidates who is also a Ugandan and he is not even from Kasese and there is no crime in people voting a candidate of their choice.

There are also concoctions that there are rebels in Kasese; whenever we have elections in Kasese, Dr Kiyonga is on record for misguiding Government and alleging that there are rebels who are in Kasese. Yet in actual sense, it is a creation of individuals who have selfish interests in this.

I would like to put it on record that in Kasese, there are no elements of rebel activities and the people who were killed were royal guards of the kingdom of Obusinga bwa Rwenzururu and they were killed in their own village because the kingdom has royal guards in most of the villages. 
When you see the actions of the police on the scene of crime, you see that it was pre-planned because, when they arrived there, they had no single leader of the area apart from the GISO who is also from a different subcounty. That GISO is from my subcounty not in the subcounty where the crime was committed –(Member timed out)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, this is not how we debate. Please, conclude.                       
         
MS KIIZA: As I conclude, Madam Speaker, I would like to make it very clear that under no circumstances has the king of Rwenzururu Kingdom ever wanted to destabilise the operations of the country.

Secondly, it is unfortunate that Gen. Kayihura insinuated that the opposition leaders in the districts were part of the rebel engagements that caused the attacks. I just want to make it clear that when he refers to the Opposition leaders – we are happy that the majority of the people who won in Kasese were members of FDC; actually it is the NRM that is in the opposition side in Kasese. (Laughter) So, you cannot win and then begin fighting against your own victory. So, if he is referring to Opposition leaders, then it is possible that it is the NRM leaders who are causing disharmony and mayhem in Kasese. So, Gen. Kayihura should mark his words.

What I also want to make very clear is that the tribal sentiments in Kasese are being engineered by Gen. Kayihura himself. When it came to the attacks of 5th July last year, Kayihura went and met the Basongora at a funeral and told them, “I am going to arm you so that you can defend yourselves against the Bakonzo.”

Even in the recent skirmishes, Gen. Kayihura met the Basongora and told them, “Don’t worry; I am going to take care of your interests.” And yet, the matter is not a tribal matter. Gen. Kayihura has a particular interest and I would request that Government takes a special interest in the issues of Kasese by meeting the leaders so that we can harmonise our positions. 

I do not see why an IGP comes to an area where he thinks there is trouble and he does not interact with the leaders. You only see him on television accusing the leaders whom he has not met; he has not even crosschecked with them and he has not even been to the scene of crime. He is just addressing the press from a hotel after getting his report from the informers who want favours from him.

Government is not going to be run on favouritism and on reports that are misleading and causing confusion in society. The Kasese people are peace-loving people and we are sad that Government can just go and shoot people under the guise of diffusing rebellion, which does not exist. People are saying, “We are watching what the actions of Government will be.”

Madam Speaker, what may be very important, is for us as the leaders of Kasese to inform this Parliament that we are taking a court action against the individual perpetrators of these killings. We are not taking the police institution to court but the individuals who shot dead our loved ones. They caused commotion and mayhem in Kasese and yet, people were in peace.

I would like to thank you and also ask the minister to give us a statement in regard to this because now everybody looks at the Kasese people as killers; we have been portrayed as attackers, as rebels and yet there is no rebellion whatsoever in Kasese. Some of these attacks are post-election violence cases while others are concoctions where police are helping individuals to sort out their own scores in the name of rebellion.

Madam Speaker, I implore Government to take serious interest in the matters of Kasese by meeting the leaders and interacting with the cultural leaders. It is unfortunate that Gen. Kayihura goes to meet the Omusinga after labelling him a rebel and a sponsor of rebellion in the region. And I do not think that brings harmony – after labelling me a rebel and a perpetrator of violence and then, you come for talks! What do we talk about yet you are already biased against me?

Madam Speaker, I would implore this House to get interested in the matter and the Minister of Internal Affairs should give us a statement.

THE SPEAKER: Okay. Honourable members, we spent 25 minutes on this issue and yet we have other work to do. I do not know whether anyone from the Government side would want to talk now but they have also been ambushed. (Laughter)

Therefore, I want to ask the Minister of Internal Affairs to come to this House with a formal statement on this issue. (Hon. Fungaroo rose_) That is when you, the Shadow Minister will speak. Why don’t you wait until the statement comes? - No, no, no.

MR FUNGAROO: Madam Speaker, this is very important. Thank you very much. As Shadow Minister of Defence and Security, what we should expect from the Minister of Internal Affairs, given the frequency of the excessive use of force and the possibility of its recurrence, is this: Under what circumstances should force be used and what amount of force? Do the police have control over the use of force?

World over – even the United Nations Security Council has principles on the use and control of force. Here in Uganda, we see people being shot and force being used excessively without control. This House should ask the Minister of Internal Affairs on the use and control of force; does Uganda have any principles that guide police in this?

Finally, examine all corners of the country; you will realise that what happened in Kasese is not an isolated case. For example, in Obongi, you would think there was war. Thank God I am still alive; we have our own story to tell. The UPDF and police fired bullets as though there was war in Obongi; they wanted me out but I thank the people of Obongi for their resilience. They told the UPDF: “If you are for Uganda, you are on our side but if you are for NRM, tell us.” There is something wrong in the use and control of force in Uganda. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Okay. Honourable members, as I said, I am asking the Minister of Internal Affairs to come and present a statement on this issue of Kasese. The second issue is what hon. Kiiza started with – the delay in releasing results.

I would like the Electoral Commission to take that matter very seriously; the tension between the times of our local tally – that is because by midnight we have our local tally. The public wants to know their leaders because they elected them but the Electoral Commission takes time without declarations. I was declared on Saturday at 5.00 p.m. and yet by midnight, on Thursday, I had known my results.

Fortunately, their Minister is here; please, tell them to improve on that issue to release tensions among the population.

3.25
THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Maj. Gen. (Rtd) Kahinda Otafiire): Madam Speaker, I am much obliged and will inform the chairman of the Electoral Commission about your concern. But I also thought I would make an addendum and say that only recently, this House declared the Electoral Commission “independent”. And as an independent body, I hope they will make submissions to you, Madam Speaker, and also make an explanation appropriate to their conduct. Thank you. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, Minister. It is true that they are independent but they must receive the complaints from the public about their work; they should listen.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON GOVERNMENT INTERVENTION TO COMBAT HEPATITIS B

THE SPEAKER: Minister of Health? Are they here? They are not. Let us go to item no. 4.

LAYING OF PAPERS

MINISTERIAL POLICY STATEMENTS FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2016/2017

THE SPEAKER: The Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development - Can someone take that up and try to speed up our work. Can someone lay the ministry statement? The second and third are also for the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. 

MS CECILIA OGWAL: Madam Speaker, I am rising on a procedural matter.

The Minister of Heath is supposed to make a statement on the Hepatitis B prevalence and what interventions that the Government has taken and the current status. Since the minister is not here, I am ready with a statement from the perspective of what we see and what is happening in the country. (Laughter) 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Ogwal, there are questions that we asked the minister to answer like which districts are affected and how much money or quantity of vaccines are available. I do not think you have those answers. You will read your statement when the minister comes.

MS CECILIA OGWAL: Madam Speaker, I can almost anticipate what the minister is going to say - (Laughter) - and I will agree that we give the minister a chance. However, I am also ready to give this Parliament information in regard to what is happening as far as Hepatitis B is concerned.

As for the document that must be laid by the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, in the absence of the minister, I can ask my shadow minister to present the document. (Laughter) May I ask one of the shadow ministers to present - 

THE SPEAKER: No. Let me ask one of the Members of Cabinet to present. We shall listen to your statement later.
	
Honourable members, are those papers here? 

HONOURABLE MEMBERS: Yes.

THE SPEAKER: Can’t the ministers lay them?

THE SPEAKER: The Minister of Education, Science, Technology and Sports - 

3.30
THE MINISTER OF EDUCATION, SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND SPORTS (Maj.  (Rtd) Jessica Alupo): Madam Speaker, in accordance with section 13 of the Public Finance Management Act, 2015, I beg to lay on the Table the following ministerial policy statements for the financial year 2016/2017 for Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development:
    i)  The Uganda Revenue Authority
    ii) Office of the Auditor-General 
    iii) The National Planning Authority 

3.32
THE MINISTER OF EDUCATION, SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND SPORTS (Maj.) (Rtd) (Jessica Alupo: Madam Speaker, in accordance with section 13 of the Public Finance Management Act, 2015, I beg to lay on the Table the ministerial policy statements for the financial year 2016/2017 for Ministry of Education, Science, Technology and Sports comprising of the following votes:
    a) Vote 013 - Ministry of Education, Science, Technology and Sports
    b) Vote 111 - Busitema University
    c) Vote 127 - Muni   University
    d) Vote 128 - Uganda National Examinations Board
    e) Vote 132 - Education Service Commission
    f) Vote 136 - Makerere University
    g) Vote 137 – Mbarara University
    h) Vote 138 - Makerere University Business School
    i) Vote 139 - Kyambogo University 
    j)  Vote 140 – Uganda Management Institute 
    k) Vote 149 – Gulu University 
    l) Vote 301- Lira University 
    m) Vote 303 – National Curriculum Development Centre
    n) Vote 307 – Kabale University 
    o) Vote 308 – Soroti University.

THE SPEAKER: I thank you very much, Minister. So, item No. 4 (A) I, II, III and VII have been laid. Let us go to item No. 4 (IV) on agriculture.

3.33
THE MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTY AND FISHERIES (Mr Tress Bucyanayandi): Madam Speaker, in accordance with Section 13 of the Public Finance Management Act, 2015, I hereby submit the ministerial policy statement and budget estimates of the agricultural sector for the financial year 2016/2017 for consideration and approval by Parliament. I beg to lay.

I also, in accordance with the Public Finance Management Act, 2015, hereby submit the ministerial policy statement and budget estimates for the Kampala Capital City Authority for the financial year 2016/2017 for consideration and approval by Parliament. I beg to lay.

THE SPEAKER: I thank you very much, honourable members. All those policy statements are sent to the sectoral committees to expeditiously examine and report to the Committee on Budget. There is the Parliamentary Commission policy statement.

3.35
DR MEDARD BITEKYEREZO (NRM, Mbarara Municipality, Mbarara): Madam Speaker, I would like to lay on the Table the ministerial policy statement for Vote 104 – Parliamentary Commission for the financial year 2016/2017. 

THE SPEAKER: I thank you very much, the Chairperson of the Committee on Health. This policy statement is sent to the sectoral committee for discussion and report back. 

STATUTORY INSTRUMENT NO. 6 OF 2016 - THE INSPECTORATE OF GOVERNMENT (TERMS AND CONDITIONS OF SERVICE FOR STAFF) (REVOCATION) REGULATIONS, 2016

THE SPEAKER: The Minister for Justice and Constitutional Affairs.

3.36	
THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Maj. Gen. (Rtd) Kahinda Otafiire): Madam Speaker, I think there seems to be some confusion about responsibilities because the Inspectorate of Government does not fall under our stewardship; it is with the President’s Office and especially the Department of Ethics.

We do not handle the Inspectorate of Government so, Madam Speaker, with your permission, I would beg that the appropriate department be required to table this. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: All we are requesting is that it be laid. Can I ask hon. Bitekyerezo to lay that statutory instrument?

3.37
DR MEDARD BITEKYEREZO (NRM, Mbarara Municipality, Mbarara): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the statutory instrument supplement No.6 that is Inspectorate of Government (Terms and Conditions of Service for Staff) (Revocation) Regulations, 2016.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. It will be sent to the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs for their comments.

 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30 JUNE 2014 TOGETHER WITH THE REPORT AND OPINION THEREON BY THE AUDITOR-GENERAL

3.39
DR MEDARD BITEKYEREZO (NRM, Mbarara Municipality, Mbarara): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the reports and opinion of the Auditor-General on the financial statements of the following entities for the year ended 30 June 2014:  

    i) Uganda Broadcasting Corporation
    ii) Uganda National Roads Authority
    iii) Health Service Commission
    iv) Uganda Communications Commission
    v) National Drug Authority
    vi) National Water and Sewerage Corporation
    vii) Amnesty Commission
    viii) Uganda Coffee Development Authority
    ix) Uganda Investment Authority
    x) Kilembe Mines Limited
    xi) Uganda Export Promotion Board  
    xii) Uganda Embassy, Rome
    xiii) Ministry of Internal Affairs
    xiv) Law Development Centre
    xv) Rural Communications Development Fund
    xvi) Uganda Air Cargo Corporation
    xvii) Uganda Blood Transfusion Services
    xviii) Directorate of Public Prosecutions
    xix) Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development
    xx) Nyabyeya Forestry College
    xxi) Joint Clinical Research Centre
    xxii) Uganda Heart Institute
    xxiii) Kampala Capital City Authority
    xxiv) Ministry of Education, Science, Technology and Sports
    xxv) Ministry of Defence
    xxvi) Uganda Industrial Research Institute
    xxvii) Uganda High Commission, Kigali
    xxviii) Butabika National Mental Referral Hospital
    xxix) The National Women Council
    xxx) Mbarara University of Science and Technology
    xxxi) National Council for Higher Education
    xxxii) National Bureau of Standards
    xxxiii) Uganda Tourism Board
    xxxiv) Ministry of Water and Environment Joint Partnership Fund
    xxxv) Management Training and Advisory Centre
    xxxvi) Busitema University
    xxxvii) The National Youth Council
    xxxviii) The Energy Fund.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable Chairperson of the health committee. In my communication, I had indicated that the ministries that had not yet presented should do so before 5.00 p.m. and about 10 of them have now sent in their statements. Therefore, I will ask the minister for education to lay them on the Table.

3.46
THE MINISTER OF EDUCATION, SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND SPORTS (Maj. (Rtd) Jessica Alupo): Madam Speaker, in accordance with section 13 of the Public Finance Management Act, 2015, I beg to lay on the Table the ministerial policy statements for the financial year 2016/2017 for the following:
    i) Ministry of Foreign Affairs
    ii) Office of the Prime Minister; Vote 003
    iii) Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development; Vote 017 and Vote 123
    iv) Ministry of Local Government; Vote 147 and Votes 501 to 797
    v) Ministry for the Presidency; Votes 001, 002, 107, 112 and 159
    vi) Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development; Vote 012 and Vote 156
    vii) Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development; Votes 008 and 130
    viii) Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs; Uganda Human Rights Commission

Madam Speaker, I beg to lay. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable minister. All those statements are sent to the relevant committees, bearing in mind that by 28th April, we should have passed the Appropriations Bill. I would really like to ask our committees and the ministers to cooperate and work very quickly so that we beat our deadline. Thank you.

3.50
MS WINIFRED KIIZA (FDC, Woman Representative, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker. You mentioned, when I made my submission, that the Minister for Internal Affairs should come up with a statement but you did not allocate a date for it so that we can remind the minister to lay this statement. I would like to know when you think this statement should appear on the Floor of the House.

THE SPEAKER: I am looking at Tuesday next week. Therefore, the minister should be here to advise us on what happened in Kasese and what Government is doing about it.

QUESTIONS FOR ORAL ANSWER

QUESTION 26/1/09 TO THE MINISTER OF EDUCATION, SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND SPORTS

3.51
MR GILBERT OLANYA (Independent, Kilak County, Amuru): “Would the minister explain to the House the measures Government has instituted to ensure that both Government-aided and private schools have lightning arresters?”

3.51
THE MINISTER OF EDUCATION, SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND SPORTS (Maj. (Rtd) Jessica Alupo): Madam Speaker, I do not have a prepared text now. May I request that I come with it next week?

THE SPEAKER: Can’t you be ready tomorrow? Honourable ministers, do you know that we have about 50 questions pending?
MAJ. (RTD) ALUPO: Madam Speaker, the reason I am saying that is, we are still discussing with the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development on how to find money, which can be included in this financial year for us to speak authentically about the money we have found for the lightning arresters.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, we will give you until next week to respond to this question.

CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON COMMISSIONS, STATUTORY AUTHORITIES AND STATE ENTERPRISES ON THE AUDITED ACCOUNTS FOR PUBLIC ENTERPRISES

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, as you remember, we had received the report but it was very voluminous and Members asked for time to be able to internalise it and then make submissions. Therefore, let us use the next 45 minutes to complete that exercise.

Hon. Kabajo, you are so quiet today. You normally talk about financial issues. Aren’t you ready?

3.54
MR PAUL MWIRU (FDC, Jinja Municipality East, Jinja): Thank you, Madam Speaker. When the report was presented, Members had an opportunity to reflect on it. Now that it seems they appreciate the contents of the report, I propose that the same be adopted as presented.

3.54
MR WILLIAM NZOGHU (FDC, Busongora County North, Kasese): Madam Speaker, since hon. Ssemujju took over office, he has been presenting very clear and precise reports on the Floor, which reports you cannot challenge. I wish to support the mover of the motion that this House adopts the report of the committee under the chairmanship of hon. Ssemujju Nganda. I beg to move.

3.55
MR JAMES KABAJO (NRM, Kiboga County East, Kiboga): Madam Speaker, I am a Member of the committee and I have no doubt that the report is a good one. However, I am cognisant of the fact that many Members on the Government side may have wanted to make some contributions and they are absent as they are currently in Kyankwanzi.

I would beg that we finalise this report next week when our colleagues are here so that they can also contribute; I am sure they also have something to say about this report.

3.56
MR IBRAHIM NGANDA SSEMUJJU (FDC, Kyadondo County East, Wakiso): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. When we presented this report, the request from Members was that they needed to internalise it. This report was again put on the Order Paper. When you called for it, nobody stood up to debate. Hon. Kabajo knows the volume of work before our committee and I do not think this Parliament can continue in this way. There was an opportunity when all of us were here and you asked if there was a Member who wanted to debate but nobody was willing. My view is that this report should be adopted so that we can process more reports.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have a parliamentary calendar and we all knew when we would be here. We have actually had three opportunities to speak to this report. My only other comment would be to the Government. I do not know who to address now but there are delays in appointing boards of directors and the institutions run on their own schemes. I would like to appeal to the Government to improve in that area. 

The motion is that the question be put. I put the question to the motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: I put the question that the report of the Committee on Commissions, Statutory Authorities and State Enterprises be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE AND INTERNAL AFFAIRS ON THE PETITION BY FORMER PRISONS OFFICERS OF KASESE DISTRICT LOCAL GOVERNMENT

THE SPEAKER: Chairperson of the Committee on Internal Affairs? Let us go to the next item.

MS CECILIA OGWAL: Madam Speaker, there are some issues that have been pushed aside such as the petition, which should have been presented by the Minister of Internal Affairs who has been aware of this all along. If you remember, this matter should have come last week but it has been pushed to this week -

THE SPEAKER: Which one?

MS CECILIA OGWAL: The petition, which has been on the Order Paper for quite some time and this time, the minister is not in. What is the fate of that petition? Are you still going to put it on the Order Paper to block other business? We must decide what to do. Can we just delete it from the Order Paper? If these people do not want to work, maybe the committee could do that instead of the minister bringing the petition. 

I tend to feel that Parliament is being strangulated because the ministers were aware that all this business would be coming. They were aware of the deadline of today in as far as the budget process is concerned, for the presentation of the ministerial statements, but they are still not here. What are we going to do about this gap? 

Madam Speaker, you are doing your best and some of us, Members of Parliament, are here to make sure that Parliament functions. However, if the Government side is trying to strangulate the institution of Parliament, what do we do about this pending business? Madam Speaker, I beg to be clarified.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the items will continue to appear until they are answered. 

CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON PHYSICAL INFRASTRUCTURE ON THE MBARARA BY-PASS, MBARARA-NTUGAMO-KABALE-KATUNA ROAD AND MITAANO AND NTUNGWA BRIDGES IN KANUNGU DISTRICT

4.00
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON PHYSICAL INFRASTRUCTURE (Mr Ephraim Biraaro): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Last Thursday when we presented the report, Parliament felt that the committee should go back on the ground and get updates. This is because the report was dated 2014. From Thursday up to today, is a very short time and we have not been able to go to the ground. 
However, I tried my best and got in touch with UNRA and they sent me their updates on how far the projects have gone. I have tried to share the information with all the Members on their iPads. I have, therefore, sent out the information in regard to all the projects in the country. I added a comment that Members can use that for our discussion today. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, as you recall, our directive was for the chairperson to go back and spend the weekend checking on the roads. He says he has not been able to do that but he has an update from the Uganda National Roads Authority. If the items are on your iPad, you are free to debate.

MS ALASO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am just seeking your guidance. Is the update that the chairperson has talked about something that the committee has considered and is, therefore, an official addendum to the old report or is it a raw report, which has not been verified by the committee and has now been brought directly for our consumption? I would like that guidance so that we know how to proceed.

THE SPEAKER: I explained to you that he has not been able to follow our directive but he has got information from UNRA and I asked you what we can do.

MS ALASO: Madam Speaker, that means that we do not have an updated report. Our committees work for us and they should verify that information from UNRA. If we wanted a raw report from UNRA, we would have asked the minister to bring it directly. The fact that we tasked the committee to look at the updates based on that specific petition means that it would be imprudent if we went straight to consider that. 

We would like to give the chairperson another three days for them to consider that and formally amend their report and bring it to the House. That is my proposal, Madam Speaker.

DR BITEKYEREZO: Madam Speaker, mine is not far from hon. Alaso’s submission. This Mbarara Bypass goes through my constituency and I remember very well that when hon. Biraaro was presenting, he said that there was overvaluation of plots and farms of people in Mbarara right from Mr Katanga’s place up to the Coca Cola factory.

Madam Speaker, bearing in mind that what hon. Biraaro is giving us are just reports from UNRA but not from his committee members, I was of the view that we give hon. Biraaro and his committee some time to go on the ground and find out exactly what is happening. This is because things have changed since 2014. If he is going to give us a report from UNRA and we base ourselves on that report to take some decisions, we might be misled by UNRA because they would also like to get off the hook even when they have made mistakes. 

Those evaluations and overvaluations are done by those people not the Committee on Physical Infrastructure. Who knows, there might be a conspiracy to cause fraud by giving exorbitant settlements so that they can share it among themselves. That is why I beg you to give hon. Biraaro and his team time because this is a matter that involves a lot of money. Uganda National Roads Authority (UNRA) has a lot of money, which goes into these projects. Let him go and together with his committee come back with a report. Thank you.

MR NZOGHU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am a member of the Committee on Physical Infrastructure and I also double as the Shadow Minister for Works. In those scenarios, we have not had an opportunity to scrutinise that information, as members of the committee.

Secondly, given the time that we have spent campaigning, and I know very well that from the time we started the campaigns up to election time our committee has not been summoned to handle any particular activity, I would plead with you, Madam Speaker, that the chairperson of our committee be asked to find time and invite the members of the committee so that we can ably give our opinions and forge a realistic way forward. As hon. Bitekyerezo suggested, it would be proper and prudent that the Members go back to Mbarara and see what is there. Thereafter, we can be able to report appropriately. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, the House still requires you and your committee to go and review the status. We welcome the information from UNRA but we can use it after looking at your report to this House.

MR BIRAARO: Most obliged, Madam Speaker and honourable members.

THE SPEAKER: Please, find time and convene your committee.

Honourable members, on behalf of the House, I would like to welcome students and teachers of Najjera High School. There they are. Happily, one of their MPs is here, hon. Ssemujju Nganda, and the other one is hon. Seninde. They have come to observe the proceedings in Parliament. You are welcome. (Applause)

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE AUDITOR-GENERAL ON THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30 JUNE 2013 VOLUME II, CENTRAL GOVERNMENT (ENTITIES WITH A QUALIFIED OPINION – VOLUME III)

4.08
THE VICE CHAIRPERSON, PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (Mr Paul Mwiru): Thank you, Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues. This report was presented before this House and the Members requested for time to internalise the report to be in a position to pronounce themselves on it and enough time was given. 

Madam Speaker, we seek your guidance on how to proceed. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we were due to give our comments on this report, so I am waiting. Can I put the question?

4.09
MR WILLIAM NZOGHU (FDC, Busongora County North, Kasese): Before you put the question, I would like to move a motion formally. Madam Speaker, considering the time that we were given, especially we on this side who normally have an opportunity to scrutinise the reports even before they are brought here, this side is satisfied with the report and given that even the other side has no objection, I wish to officially move a motion that the report be adopted.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion is that the question be put on the report of the Auditor-General on the financial statements for the year ended 30 June 2013, volume II (central Government) and those on qualified opinions. I put the question. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: I now put the question that the same report be adopted by this House.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

MS ALASO: Madam Speaker, I seek your guidance again. We have presented so many reports from the Public Accounts Committee and I see that reports from the Committee on Local Government Accounts and COSASE have also been adopted. However, not even one Treasury Memorandum has been given to us by the Executive. Therefore, is this House engaging in an exercise in futility? This is because the committees and the House spend their time, resolve and adopt these reports, transmit them to the Executive and there is no action taken. 

Madam Speaker, maybe the Executive had better tell this country whether they are interested. As has been earlier on pointed out, these reports come with very serious recommendations, which require timely action. Most of them even have a bearing on the very mandate of the accounting officers. We have even adopted reports in this House saying, “So and so is not fit to be an accounting officer” and we do not get any feedback from the Executive. Is it that they are ignoring us? 

The only way they would inform this country of action taken is by issuing Treasury Memoranda to the effect that they have taken action. Those Treasury Memoranda would then be re-audited by the Auditor-General. We have not seen even one in two and a half years of going through this exercise where we sometimes sit over the weekends. Madam Speaker, it is demotivating unless we get an assurance that these reports are taken seriously.

MR SSEMUJJU: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Part of the problem is also the transmission of the decisions of Parliament. We presented a report here on Coffee Development Authority and at that time, the Secretary to the Treasury wrote to Parliament saying that there were no reports upon which they could issue Treasury Memoranda. I received a letter from the Office of the Clerk asking me when I presented the report and when it was adopted. 

Therefore, Madam Speaker, as you guide the House, I want to give the information that sometimes, the transmission of the decisions of Parliament is not complete.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the custodian of the records of Parliament is the Clerk and not the Members because the Members change. Therefore, I do not expect the Clerk to write to anyone to say, “When did you handle this?” Therefore, Clerk, you will have to list all the adopted reports and write to the ministries concerned because the Treasury Memoranda are supposed to be here within six months.

Please, inform them that the way the budget will be handled will also be determined by how the ministers have responded to our recommendations. We want them before the end of April. Thank you very much.

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON LEGAL AND PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS ON THE INSPECTORATE OF GOVERNMENT REPORTS 1999–2006

THE SPEAKER: I do not see them. Let us go to the next item.

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON LEGAL AND PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS ON THE INSPECTORATE OF GOVERNMENT FROM 2007–2012

THE SPEAKER: I do not see the chairperson of the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs. I want to convince Princess Kabakumba as she is a senior member of that committee - (Laughter) 

MS KABAKUMBA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The committee is ready with the report but the clerk to the committee has our copies, although they are uploaded on the iPads. In that case, I am in a fix on how to proceed. If I could be given some time, I could try to track the clerk to the committee. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: We defer that to tomorrow. Honourable members -

MR NZOGHU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. When I look at the Order Paper, we seem to be reaching a point of adjournment. However, I want to raise a procedural matter before you adjourn the House so that you could possibly guide this House and this country. This matter I would like to raise concerns gazetting of parliamentary and other lower level election results. 

Madam Speaker, parliamentary and presidential elections were conducted on 18 February 2016 and after two and a half weeks, only a few constituencies were gazetted on 3 March 2016. The presidential results on the other hand were gazetted on 1 March, much earlier than the results of us who had been declared winners as early as 19, 20 and 21 February. The procedural matter that I would want to bring to the attention of this House is: why is it that the presidential election results, which were declared much later than parliamentary election results, were gazetted faster? 

Secondly, even when they delayed to gazette the results for the parliamentary elections, which were done on 3 March 2016, they only considered very few constituencies; most of the constituencies were left out. In Kasese, for example, they picked out only three constituencies, which are Busongora South, Bukonjo East and Kasese Municipality. They did not gazette Bukonjo West, Busongora North and Kasese Woman MP and yet we were declared winners on the same day. Therefore, the question is: what is the right approach to this and what is the procedure for gazetting? Why are they not gazetting the rest of the people who have been declared as winners? Where is the problem? 

Madam Speaker, I think it is very unfortunate and unprofessional that up to now, most constituencies, woman Members of Parliament and results of other elections that have been conducted have not been gazetted –(Interruption)

MS ALASO: Hon. Nzoghu, I would like to give you information in regard to the Gazette of 3 March. What happened is that even for those ones that were gazetted on 3 March only one copy was produced and left in the manager’s office. It was on the 12th that copies became available to the public. After gazetting, you have 30 days to petition. Therefore, if you were waiting for the Gazette and intended to use it, as provided in the law, you were made to lose 10 days because they hid the gazette. This is how scandalous that gazetting process has become. I just thought I would give you that information. 

MR NZOGHU: Thank you, hon. Alaso. Madam Speaker, it would be prudent for Government to inform Ugandans who voted and those who were voted for. It is not a courtesy to be gazetted; it is a function of legality. It is actually this Parliament, which approved that money. The money for gazetting elections at various levels is there. Therefore, they have no excuse. Besides, we paid additional money, which was not accounted for.

Therefore, Madam Speaker, I would like to seek your indulgence to guide the majority of these people who have not yet been gazetted on how we are proceeding and why the gazetting has not been done. I thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: We shall direct the responsible minister to come here and explain to us what the status of gazettment of the Members of Parliament is. This is because it affects the rights of the participants. If they could do that by next week, we would really be happy.  

I would like to ask the Minister of Education, Science, Technology and Sports again to help the Government and lay on the Table the policy statement for the Ministry of Tourism. It has just arrived here.  

LAYING OF PAPERS

4.21
THE MINISTER OF EDUCATION, SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND SPORTS (Maj. (Rtd) Jessica Alupo): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the ministerial policy statement for 2016/2017 for the Ministry of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities, votes 022 and 177. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, Minister. It will be sent to the sectoral committee concerned for perusal and report back. 

Honourable members, we have happily convinced hon. Kabakumba Masiko to sit in for the chairperson and the vice-chairperson of her committee. She will present those two reports on the Inspectorate of Government.

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON LEGAL AND PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS ON THE INSPECTORATE OF GOVERNMENT REPORTS 1999-2006

4.22
MS KABAKUMBA MASIKO (NRM, Bujenje County, Masindi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Let me take this opportunity to congratulate you on your victory and also extend the same to my colleagues who will be joining the Tenth Parliament. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much.

MS KABAKUMBA: I have two reports to present and I will start with the report on the Inspectorate of Government of 1999 to 2006. This report can be accessed on your iPad; you can kindly look through your documents.

Under Article 231 (1) of the 1995 Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, the Inspectorate of Government shall submit to Parliament at least once in every six months a report on the performance of its functions, making such recommendations as it considers necessary. Therefore, it is under this that we received the reports.

Methodology

We met the affected local governments and ministries and cross-examined them on what was indicated by the Inspector General of Government.

The committee observed that:
    1. When an officer is dismissed from service basing on the IGG’s report and he takes the district to court, the responsibility for compensation is on the district and not the Inspectorate of Government. This has been a challenge.

    2. Some of the recommendations made by the Inspectorate of Government are difficult to implement. A case in point is demotion of officers where there are no vacancies below their rank. 

    3. The law is silent about where two institutions of Government make different findings on the same issue. This is especially the Inspectorate of Government and the Office of the Auditor-General. There is need to harmonise this position on which findings should prevail. 

    4. Some of the recommendations of the IGG are not clear and leave districts with a difficult situation on how to deal with them. An example is where the IGG recommends that appropriate disciplinary action should be taken when in actual sense, it amounts to dismissal. 

    5. Many reports of the Inspector General of Government have not been considered by Parliament since 1999. As a result, at the time of considering these reports, many of the witnesses could not be traced. Some had died or retired while some issues had been overtaken by events. 

    6. During the period covered by this report, that is, 1999 to 2006, neither the presidency nor the local authorities had submitted a report to Parliament on action taken on the recommendations of the Inspector General of Government in accordance with Article 231 (4) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda.

    7. The Inspectorate of Government should be commended for regularly submitting reports to Parliament in fulfilment of its constitutional mandate. 

There are general recommendations and I think it is important that I go through them very fast. The committee recommends that: 

1. 	The Inspectorate of Government should hold workshops and seminars with district service commissions and other stakeholders to share the challenges faced in implementing the recommendations and to find a way forward on how to implement them.

2. 	The Inspectorate of Government should stop using vague language in its recommendations. The use of words such as “appropriate action” makes it difficult to implement the recommendations.

3. 	His Excellency the President should submit annual reports on action taken on the recommendations by Government in fulfilment of Article 231 (4) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda as amended in 2005, which provides thus: “The President or any local authority referred to in clause (2) shall at least once every year cause a report to be submitted to Parliament on actions taken by the President or the local authority on reports submitted to the President or the local authority by the Inspectorate of Government, for the information of Parliament.” Similarly, the local authorities should also do the same. 

4. 	The Inspectorate of Government should be availed more funding for strengthening its fight against corruption, graft, abuse of office and white collar crime.

5. 	Where monies are recovered as a result of the IGG’s recommendations, the funds should be remitted to the inspectorate’s account in Bank of Uganda rather than being held in local government accounts where they may be subjected to further abuse.

6. 	The recommendations of the IGG should be acted upon as soon as they are made to avoid the intervention of time and other circumstances such as retirement, resignation and/or death.

January to June 1999
 
Fraud and Compensation for Properties Destroyed during the Construction of Mityana–Mubende–Fort Portal Road.

The IGG recommended that Government should immediately pay the 157 bona fide claims with evaluated forms. The 125 bona fide claimants whose evaluation forms got lost should be compensated with a token of a minimum of Shs 200,000. The Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development should also cause the evaluation of the 36 unvalued forms of bona fide claimants and compensate them immediately. This was the recommendation of the IGG. The committee was informed that the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development does not have any outstanding claims on the construction of Mityana-Mubende-Fort Portal Road. 

The committee observed that: 
    1. The recommendation did not indicate the names of the claimants. 
    2. There was no record at the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development and the Inspectorate of Government about the claimants.
    3. The officers who handled the matter have since died and the only one remaining was dismissed from the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development.

The committee recommends thus:
a) 	That Government should improve on the system of record keeping so that such important documents are not lost; and 
b) 	The bona fide claimants be compensated.

For the next six reports, that is, January to June 2000, July to December 2000, January to June 2001, July to December 2001 and January to June 2002, the committee scrutinised the reports and found no outstanding issues in all of them.

July to December 2002 

Incompetence and Mismanagement of the Education Department by the District Education Officer in Tororo District 
Following complaints and subsequent investigations by the IGG into the conduct of the district education officer, Mr Mac Oguttu Were, the IGG recommended that he be dismissed for incompetence and mismanagement of the affairs of the district education department.

The committee was informed that the district service commission mandatorily retired Mr Mac Oguttu Were from the teaching service. The committee noted the action taken.

Irregular Recruitment of Deputy Chief Administrative Officer of Mayuge 

The IGG recommended that the deputy Chief Administrative Officer, Mr Batamye Julius, be dismissed from public service and the post be advertised to enable a competent and qualified person to be appointed as soon as possible. They recommended that a total of Shs 3,303,187 be recovered from him, being money fraudulently obtained from the sale of plots and in respect of drawing acting allowances and inflated salary payments. 

The committee was informed that the officer, Mr Batamye Julius, took the district council to court and the matter was still pending. The committee was also informed that politicians were interfering with the work of the chief administrative officer who is supposed to be in charge of disciplining public servants together with the district service commission. 

Mr Batamye Julius was retired from public service during the recentralisation of appointments of chief administrative officers and is no longer an employee of Mayuge District.

The committee recommends that Mayuge District takes positive steps to have the case, which has not been heard since 2010, concluded. 

Alleged Mismanagement/Embezzlement of Shs 50 million meant for Capacity Building in Tororo District

The IGG recommended that the district service commission takes disciplinary action against the assistant chief administrative officer, Mr Orono Francis Xavier, with the view of having him dismissed for misappropriating Shs 13,325,700. The district service commission informed the committee that they received evidence that Mr Orono Francis Xavier’s accountability for Shs 2,500,000 was satisfactory. The officer was reprimanded and an order made to recover the money. 

The committee observed as follows:
    1. The district service commission reduced the IGG’s recommendation from a dismissal to a reprimand and the amount of funds misappropriated from Shs 13,352,700 to Shs 10,825,700.
    2. The recovery had taken over five years.
    3. The IGG was not informed of the alteration of the recommendation. 
    4. The altering of recommendation was setting a very bad precedent, thereby impairing the effectiveness of the inspectorate.

The committee recommends as follows:

1. 	Institutions should not alter recommendations made by the Inspectorate of Government as provided for in Section 21 of the Inspectorate of Government Act, 2002.
2. 	Institutions should, before making any alterations to recommendations by the inspectorate, consult with the inspectorate.  
3. 	Institutions should report back to the Inspectorate of Government on actions taken by them in regard to its recommendations.

In the report of January to June 2003, there were no outstanding issues. Let us move to the report of July to December 2003, which had one or two outstanding issues.

July to December 2003

One of the outstanding issues in this report is the abuse of office by the Assistant Town Clerk of Masaka, Mr Charles Katerega, in awarding tenders for the construction of toilets in Kimanya/Kyabakuza divisions.

The IGG recommended that this assistant town clerk be dismissed for altering the bid figures for the award of tenders for the construction of toilets in Kimanya/Kyabakuza divisions in Masaka Municipality. He did this by altering the contract sum from Shs 22,850,400 to Shs 24,650,400 without authority, and the difference would be used for his personal gain.

The committee was informed that the district service commission agreed with the findings of the IGG and that the Assistant Town Clerk, Mr Charles Katerega, wilfully perpetrated financial irregularities intended to cause financial loss. The district service commission thought the dismissal of the officer as recommended by the IGG was too severe since this was his first breach of discipline; the officer was cautioned.

The committee observed that the district service commission altered the recommendation of the IGG despite the fact that they had found enough evidence supporting the recommendation. The officer was retired from service due to lack of academic qualifications in 2005.

The committee recommends that the IGG’s recommendation be implemented without any alteration.

January to June 2004 

Alleged Corruption in tendering the Construction of Roads in Busia Town Council

The IGG recommended that the town treasurer, Mr Stephen Mugeni, be dismissed for fraudulently paying Shs 19,460,000 to M/s Mega Engineering Company. 

The committee was informed that the district service commission advised the council to recover Shs 19,460,000. Although the council recommended a surcharge and dismissal, it neglected to follow the procedure of obtaining the Solicitor-General’s “no objection” required by the Human Resources Management Manual for Local Governments. The district service commission, therefore, decided to recover the money to save the district from being sued for wrongful dismissal.

The committee observed that: 
    1. Several districts have been sued for wrongful dismissal while implementing the recommendations of the IGG. 
    2. The district service commission changed the recommendations of the IGG. 
    3. There is no evidence showing recovery of funds as recommended. 
    4. The town clerk resigned and became a Member of Parliament. 
    5. This matter has been over taken by events.

The committee recommends that in future, district service commissions should promptly implement the recommendations of the Inspectorate of Government. 

Alleged Corruption and Abuse of Office by the Town Clerk of Kibaale Town Council, Mr Kandole Simon Peter

The IGG recommended that the chief administrative officer of Kibaale submits the file of the Town Clerk of Kibaale Town Council to the district service commission to be dismissed from office for abuse of public property under his charge, irregular withdrawal of Government fuel from a petrol station for his personal use, and not following the laid down procedures while processing payments for his ICSA training and burial expenses; a total of Shs 2,140,695 to be recovered from him. 

The committee was informed that there was no financial loss to recover from the officer because according to the Auditor-General’s report on Kibaale Town Council for financial year 2002/2003, which was the basis of the financially related aspects of the IGG’s report, the town clerk had not caused financial loss and had no unretired advances.

The committee recommends that where there is evidence of criminality, the IGG should prosecute rather than recommend the dismissal of staff. The committee notes that where there is a conviction against the officer, this should be tantamount to a dismissal.

Two Councillors to vacate their offices in Tororo for Conflict of Interest

The IGG recommended that two councillors should vacate their offices for conflict of interest with the chief administrative officer. The committee was informed that no resolution was brought to the council and the matter was never handled. 

The committee observed that the councillors lost in the elections of 2006 and were never returned to the council. The then district chairperson also lost the election.

The committee recommends that the district councils should, in future, adhere to the law and implement the recommendations of the IGG promptly.

Report of July to December 2004 

Alleged Mismanagement of Boda Boda Tenders in Kampala District

The IGG recommended that contracts of companies that had won tenders be terminated and more competent companies be selected. Kampala City Council informed the committee that the collection of tax on boda bodas was halted on the advice of the Solicitor-General. Subsequently, contracts to all the companies, which had been awarded tenders to manage boda boda services in the four divisions of Kampala, were suspended.

The committee learnt from the new management of Kampala Capital City Authority, that many different measures had been undertaken to streamline the operations of boda bodas in the city. The measures include registration of all boda bodas and allocation of stages.

The committee recommends thus:
a) 	Kampala Capital City Authority should consult with all the stakeholders in an effort to streamline boda boda operations in the city.
b) 	The relevant parliamentary committee should also take note of this issue.
c) 	The Solicitor-General should always be consulted on issues touching the award of tenders.

The Existence of Ghost Teachers on the Teachers’ Payroll resulting in the loss of Shs 328,240,555 in Kiboga District.

The IGG recommended that money be recovered from all the 63 teachers who were earning inflated pay totalling to Shs 328,240,555 and that the district education officer be disciplined because of the occurrence of the inflated salaries.

The committee was informed that Shs 174,654,180 had been fully recovered and that the recovery of Shs 47,049,469 is ongoing. The IGG exempted four teachers after they appealed and amount is Shs 38,645,842. Two teachers died and the amount they owed Government was Shs 10,792,973. Ten teachers absconded from duty after the issuance of the report with funds amounting to Shs 1,061,045.

The committee observed that the teachers who were affected by the recovery have sued Kiboga District Council for the recovery of inflated salaries. The original documents of the confessions made by the teachers are with the Inspectorate of Government. The evidence of recovery was presented.

Recommendations 

1. 	The committee recommends that the Attorney-General joins Kiboga District Council as defendants immediately since the district was implementing the recommendations made by the IGG.

2. 	The Inspectorate of Government should avail the confession documents to Kiboga District Council for submission to court as evidence.

3. 	The district should apply for third-party proceedings in case the Attorney-General fails to join them and they lose the case.

4. 	Since the matter is before courts of law, no further recommendations can be made.

5. 	The Committee on Local Government Accounts should interest themselves in this matter.

Mismanagement of the National Medical Stores and the Harassment of the Corporation Secretary

The Inspectorate of Government recommended that the general manager of National Medical Stores, Mr Robert Rutaagi, be removed from office for flouting procurement regulations while the corporation secretary, Mr Asuman Kiyingi should be reinstated to his job since no explanation was given for not renewing his contract.

The committee was informed by the Ministry of Health that the term of office of the general manager in question ended and was never renewed while the corporation secretary, Mr Asuman Kiyingi, joined politics and is now a minister of state.

The committee observed that the recommendations were overtaken by events before they were acted upon. 

Irregular Payment of Salary, Existence of a Ghost Teacher and Misappropriation of UPE Funds by the Head Teacher of Naluko Primary School, Iganga

The IGG recommended that Mr Charles Kyeyago, the head teacher of Naluko Primary School, who received excess salary and maintained a ghost teacher on his payroll, be dismissed and the ghost teacher be deleted from the payroll.

The committee was informed by the chief administrative officer of Iganga that Mr Kyeyago Charles was dismissed and Mr Abraham Kitawulwa, the ghost teacher, deleted from the payroll. Mr Menyha, the District Education Officer, who irregularly appointed Mr Kyeyago Charles, was retired in 2009. The committee observed that Mr Menyha retired five years after the recommendation had been made to retire him in public interest.

The committee recommends that Government institutions should implement their decisions as soon as they are made to avoid the intervention of time.

Warning to the Bugiri District Service Commission for not following the right Procedures on Promotions

The IGG recommended that the district service commission of Bugiri should be warned for breach of Public Service Commission regulations on appointment of head teachers and advised to follow the right policy and procedures in place when effecting any promotions.

The committee was informed that the district service commission had been advised to follow the right procedures when effecting promotions, and the head teacher of Nkiza Primary School, who had been promoted without the required qualifications, was retired. The committee agreed with the actions taken by the chief administrative officer. 

Inflated Payroll of Nankoma and Bugiri Primary Schools 

The IGG recommended that the former head teacher of Hidocha Primary School be dismissed for false accountability, embezzlement of UPE funds and stealing public funds by signing for salaries of a dead teacher.

The committee was informed that the commission decided to retire the said head teacher in public interest. The committee observed that the commission had altered the recommendation of the IGG in retiring him in public interest rather than dismissing him. The committee agreed with the position of the commission.

Report of July to December 2004

Misuse and False Accountability of UPE funds by the Head Teachers of Hidocha and Bugiri Primary Schools 

The IGG recommended that the Bugiri Primary School head teacher be dismissed for falsely accounting for UPE funds. The committee was informed that the district service commission decided to demote the said teacher, Mr Mulinda Patrick, from head teacher grade I school to head teacher grade III school and he was severely reprimanded. He was eventually retired from service.

The committee observed that the district service commission inquired into the recommendation before it was implemented for fear of being sued. The committee was satisfied with the action taken.

Inflated Teachers’ Payroll by the in-charge salaries and head teacher of Nankoma and Bugiri primary schools

The IGG recommended that the in-charge salaries, Mr Wilson Hangube, and the head teacher of Nankoma Primary School, Mr Masege Tegiike, should be dismissed for inflating the teachers’ payroll and for their involvement in the embezzlement of these funds.

The committee was informed that the head teacher of Nankoma School, Mr Masege Tegiike was demoted and reprimanded and directed to refund Shs 965,676. The appointment of the in-charge salaries, Mr Wilson Hangube, was terminated. The committee observed that the Shs 965,676 was recovered from his salary during the period of interdiction. 

The committee recommends that the IGG’s recommendations be implemented and the relevant parliamentary committee should follow up this matter.

Irregular Use of UPE Funds for Payment of Ledger Books and Overpayment by Shs 987,600 to Ruzibi Enterprises Limited 
The IGG recommended that Bugiri District administration should recover the Shs 987,600 from M/s Ruzibi Enterprises, which was an over payment on the supply of 338 ledger books. In addition, the district should blacklist the company. Ruzibi was given –(Interruption)

MS CECILIA OGWAL: Madam Speaker, I rise on a point of procedure. We have got copies of this report. The most important thing is that we have not discussed the reports of the IGG for a very long time. I wonder whether it is really useful for this Parliament to read all the reports starting from 1999 to 2006 and then 2007 to 2012. I do not think we need to read all that. 

Madam Speaker, procedurally don’t you think it would be proper for the presenter to just give us the highlights of what the IGG recommended and what actions were taken? This is because Parliament is just to be informed. We are not the implementers of the IGG’s recommendations. Can you prevail upon the presenter to just summarise because we already have the report? Thank you.

MS OSEGGE: Madam Speaker, this may seem like untimely, but just to add to what the Opposition Chief Whip has said, I have been struggling to understand what impact Parliament is making by looking at the reports of the IGG.

When you look at the reports of the IGG, you realise that the recommendations are explicit and final in nature; they only require implementation. When you reflect on what we do in Parliament, we look at the same recommendations and say we are satisfied or not, or give advice. So, I wonder, where we feed into this? I also wonder if we are not impeding on the work of the IGG. Does this stop the implementing bodies from acting on the recommendations of the IGG? 

Madam Speaker, in my opinion, I think that this Parliament is overburdened. I do not know where this responsibility arises from. Even when you look at the responsibility or the functions of the office of the Inspector General of Government, there is nowhere that Parliament comes in. When you read through the functions of the Inspector General of Government, I do not see what role we have as Parliament in looking into the recommendations. 

I would like to propose that the report from the Office of the Inspector General of Government to Parliament be treated as information. Probably our relevant committee can follow up to see the level of implementation in our monitoring as Parliament; otherwise, when we go through these reports the way we are doing and then we also make our recommendations, it does not progress.

Madam Speaker, I would like to request that - if this is not backed by any law, because I have looked at the functions of the IGG, I do not see it - we would help ourselves by letting this proceed to the implementing bodies and we just treat it as information. Thank you.

MR KWIZERA: Madam Speaker, thank you very much. I would like to associate myself with the observation made by hon. Osegge. I would like to say that there are kinds of reports where you have action reports, which are not demanding Parliament to do anything. However, for the consumption of Parliament, in line with the discussions on policy statements, because if Public Service Commission reports that we recruited so many people, you do not have to do anything on it because already they are reporting on what they have done. The same applies to the IGG and the Judicial Service Commission.

Anyway, the relevant committees should take up that information so that when they are discussing those reports, they can form part of their debates. However, they can also come to the Floor of the House and say we found such things as imbalance in recruitment and noncompliance. Or maybe that the IGG has complained that although he recommended this, no action was taken. That is when Parliament can take it up; it must come from the committees; otherwise, it is very difficult for us to debate a report, which is just informing us. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the IGG is an officer of Parliament and is required to report to this House every year. That is in the Constitution. But we can review the level for participation of Parliament. However, as of today, I have seen some areas where we can advise the IGG, for instance, on making vague recommendations instead of appropriate actions. 

Let us listen to them; we will adopt them and those areas which require to be improved will be improved. For now, maybe I would ask hon. Kabakumba Masiko to just read the subject and the recommendations.

MS KABAKUMBA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for your wise ruling. As a committee, we faced the same dilemma. Reports ranging from 1999, and there were consultations, I believe our Chair didn’t tell us, including you, that we should clear this backlog. If these were current issues, you would make very interesting debates on these reports, but many of them have been overtaken by events. 

Madam Speaker, for the information of this House, when I was starting, I informed the House that the requirement by the Constitution - if you could go to Article 231(1) of the 1995 Constitution, maybe the framers of the Constitution at that time thought it would be easy, but it is a requirement by the Constitution that the IGG gives this House a report every six months. 

The Inspector General of Government has been complaining as to why they do these reports and present them to the House, but no decision or discussion is taken, hence the presentation of these two reports. However, I believe that after these reports, we shall be taking it over from 2013 to – (Interruption)

MS OSEGGE: Madam Speaker, I acknowledge what my sister is saying that Article 231 of the Constitution says, “The Inspectorate of Government shall submit to Parliament at least once in every six months a report on the performance of its function, making such recommendations as it considers necessary and containing such information as Parliament may require.” It does not tell us to debate it; I think it is still information. 

Madam Speaker, I am raising this, because Parliament is being looked at as being ineffective and we are making ourselves ineffective because there are things that we could do away with. There are things that we could just have as information and let other people or other agencies act on them.

I strongly believe that when you look at the functions of the IGG, we have no role debating their report; let it be information for us to do other things.

THE SPEAKER: But when you were reading the Constitution, you said something about the information that Parliament may require. How will Parliament require some information, when we have not examined the report? You cannot just say that the Clerk received it, thank you. Anyway, if amendment should be made, the Members of the Tenth Parliament will do that. Let us proceed.

MS KABAKUMBA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am in your hands and I beg to continue if you – I will summarise although all the reports are summarised. There is no single conclusion for all of them; I will endeavour to summarise. 

In the report on January to June 2005, there were no issues. Also, there were no issues in the one for July to December 2005. In the report of January to June 2006, there was an issue on the recovery of Shs 4,723,527 million from Mr Abraham Kizige for holding two offices at the same time. The committee was informed that full recovery was made. 

The next allegation was on the misappropriation of Local Government Development Programme (LGDP) funds by the former Subcounty Chief of Imanhiro Subcounty. The committee was informed that the subcounty chief and the accountant were retired from the service in the 2005 local government restructuring programme.

In the report of June to July 2006, there was an issue on corruption in Mubende District Education Office. The IGG recommended the recovery of Shs 62,821,500. 

The committee was informed by the Chief Administrative Officer (CAO) of Mubende that the district service commission retired the four public officers in public interest and management resolved to recover the money from their retirement benefits.

In the report of July to December 2006, there were no issues. 
In conclusion, the report of 1999 to 2006 covers that period and the next one is for 2007 to 2012. I beg to present, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, our presenter, for the work done by your committee. Are there any comments?

5.05
DR MEDARD BITEKYEREZO (NRM, Mbarara Municipality, Mbarara): Madam Speaker, I would be cheating myself and the people of Mbarara if I do not comment on this. I am very aware that the IGG of this country is a Judge of the High Court. In her wisdom, she knows the people who are eligible for proper prosecution, because some of the things in the report hon. Kabakumba read are crystal clear where people must be apprehended. 

However, to my surprise the IGG – maybe these are junior officers who just go to investigate and come back with some things that can maybe stop them from talking or writing well and they end up writing some funny reports.

Sincerely speaking, if a head master has been receiving ghost money for a ghost teacher - and the IGG is the High Court Judge - I would expect him to say, “This man was interdicted and gone.” And if the district service commission has failed to interdict and recover the money, the IGG still has the mandate to go and handle over that person to the district service commission. But I see a scenario where IGG goes – it is like a wonderful barking dog; it barks then later keeps quiet.

We have received this report, but I am leaving this Parliament with a lot of mixed feelings. One day, somebody I stood against claimed that I had not done primary seven yet I was among the first Bakiga boys to get four distinctions at primary seven without having gone to nursery school; so they came here and disturbed me. When I went to Rukungiri and brought for them things, they kept quiet. They had wanted Government to go through that work. I do not understand why they cannot interdict headmasters who have ghost teachers on their payrolls. 

And these district service commissions that are not respecting the IGG’s recommendations – because I expect the IGG to read these things before they are given to us. If the IGG is under us - I would like to request your office, Madam Speaker – since the Speaker of a Parliament is a judge material – and there is no question about it – even bigger than a judge - call her to your office and say, “You are giving us raw material.” Thank you. (Laughter)

5.08
MR GILBERT OLANYA (Independent, Kilak County, Amuru): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to appreciate the committee for the report presented. Much as hon. Osegge and hon. Kwizera are saying that majorly the IGG’s report is informative, there are areas where the IGG feels Parliament is very important, for example, where the report says, “There should be increased funding for the office of the IGG to operate.” 

Madam Speaker, this is where Parliament comes in. If the IGG is crying that the funding is less, it needs Parliament to deliberate and increase their funding. 

If you go to most IGG offices upcountry, you will notice that they are incapacitated because they have no funds to run their activities. Therefore, Parliament plays a very important role in ensuring that funding for the IGG is increased. Therefore much as it is informative, it is very important for Parliament to get involved in some areas in order for the IGG to function well. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: In the meantime, can I ask the Minister of Education, Science, Technology and Sports to lay one statement – I do not know for which ministry – no, I know. There is something I am checking on. East Africa? Okay.

5.10
THE MINISTER OF EDUCATION, SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND SPORTS (Maj. (Rtd) Jessica Alupo): Madam Speaker, allow me to lay on the Table the ministerial policy statement for 2016/17 from the Ministry of the East African Community Affairs.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, since there are no more comments. Yes, hon. Cecilia Ogwal?

MS CECILIA OGWAL: Madam Speaker, we are all aware of Section 13(13) of the Public Finance Management Act. I would, therefore, want to know from the Frontbench, which ministerial statement has not been presented. I assume that all of them have been presented because this is a requirement of the law.

I am interested in knowing whether all the ministerial policy statements will have been brought to Parliament by 5.00 p.m. today in accordance with the law. I beg to be informed by the Leader of Government Business in Parliament –(Laughter)– because this is a requirement of the law and I would definitely want Parliament to be doing everything in accordance with the law. Leader of Government Business in Parliament, please update us whether all the sector ministries have submitted their ministerial policy statements as required by the law? Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we are meeting the kind of situation we had when we were dealing with the army in the House. This Constitution, under Article 231(5) says, “Parliament shall discuss expeditiously any report submitted to it under clause (1).”
Therefore, how do we move? We have noted the disparity but let us take a look at it with the rules committee because either – I do not know whether I just say, “I have sent these reports” without comments from Parliament. We will have to look at it a bit more carefully - but Article 231(5) says something different – it is directing us to discuss it expeditiously. How do we discuss? Look at Article 231 of your constitution. 

That is why I said that we are meeting a situation where parts of the Constitution are in conflict with themselves. Let us look at them closely in the rules committee.

MR KWIZERA: Madam Speaker, most of these reports are actually recommendations by the IGG to Government. So, in the interest of Parliament, there is need to have something like a Treasury Memorandum where the relevant ministries can tell Parliament what action was taken upon the IGG’s reports. This is because if you discuss what the IGG recommended without knowing what Government did, we would be discussing with some gaps; there would be lack of information. Therefore, it would be necessary to inform Government that from this time the IGG recommended as follows, and we want to know what action was taken by the different sectors in regard to those recommendations. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Let us look at it with the rules committee and see how we can harmonise all these instructions – they are all coming to us.

MS CECILIA OGWAL: Madam Speaker, when you look at Article 230(1), it clearly states that, “The Inspectorate of Government shall have power to investigate, cause investigation, arrest, cause arrest, prosecute or cause prosecution in respect of cases involving corruption, abuse of authority or of public office.” 

This shows us that much as Parliament has a role to play, in the sense that we want to know how has IGG functioned – because IGG is a very powerful institution in fighting corruption, and it is very important that we allow it to work. 
Therefore, Parliament must appreciate the role of IGG by giving them the budgetary support that is commensurate with the magnitude of the work we want them to do. This is clearly defined. 

The IGG should be able to tell us that, “We have stumbled over this criminal or corrupt activities and these are the corrective actions we have taken.” This is because they have the power to arrest and even to prosecute. 

We are getting only reports of the corrupt officers yet we have not even been told whether these corrupt officers were arrested. The IGG has the power to arrest and prosecute yet we have not seen any evidence in the report. We need to engage the IGG to redefine their role. They must understand what they are supposed to do; otherwise, the way the presentation is done, it is like they are saying, “We do the investigation and we give it to Parliament.” And so Parliament does what? We want them to inform us that you discovered corruption and that you have dealt with it, you have arrested those people and recovered the money. That is what we want to hear, Madam Speaker and we are not going to start doing other people’s jobs. 

We have enough work in Parliament but people want Parliament to do the work of institutions that are already budgeted for to do so. This is very well defined in the role of the Inspectorate of Government. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, if we had not listened to the report, these issues would not have arisen. We now have material to present to the IGG and tell her that we see a lacuna here, or we should improve on it; it is beneficial.

May I invite the chairperson to present the next report? Honourable members, as we agreed, it is the subject and recommendations.

5.17
MS KABAKUMBA MASIKO (NRM, Bujenje County, Masindi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. As I present the next report, I would like to inform this House – you must have listened to some of the reports and there were no outstanding issues, which means that the IGG was able to handle with the respective departments the issues that were queried and were laid to rest.

What I am going to read are the issues that are still outstanding and I think that with time, as you said, the Inspectorate of Government will need your support to ensure that some of these do not stay for a long time on the files of the department.

In line with Article 231 (1) of the Constitution, indeed the IGG presented a report. I am here to present the second batch of the backlog of reports submitted to this Parliament between 2007 and 2012. I hope I will not over summarise.

The general recommendations almost remain the same. I now beg to read through the general recommendations and observations and then I will summarise the issues in the report.      
                 
General Observations 

The committee observed that:
    1. There is a lack of knowledge and understanding exhibited by most of the witnesses that appeared before the committee on how the Inspectorate of Government functions to recover money even where the individuals are willing to make a refund.

    2. There is a coordination problem hindering the proper management by some central Government institutions of their regional and district offices. The Government officials appearing before the committee often indicated that they were not aware of what was happening in areas far away from the centre; for example, when the Inspector of Courts appeared before the committee, he requested for more time to travel to Masindi to verify what had happened on the ground. 

    3. In the same way, the Minister of Education, Science, Technology and Sports informed the committee that there was a headmaster in a school in Eastern Uganda who they had consistently failed to trace. Therefore, there is some kind of miss-coordination.

    4. Some institutions and individuals that appeared before the committee claimed that they had never received copies of the reports where recommendations had been made for their implementation. 

    5. Some institutions such as the Uganda Police Force and some individuals only commenced action on the recommendations contained in the reports of the IGG after the committee’s invitation to appear and respond to the said unimplemented recommendations.

    6. Some of the individuals implicated in reports of the Inspectorate of Government are promoted even when action on the recommendations is still outstanding.

    7. Some of the recommendations made by the Inspectorate of Government are difficult to implement. A case in point is demotion of officers where there are no vacancies below their rank.

    8. Some of the recommendations of the Inspectorate of Government are not clear. I have already mentioned this.

    9. The Presidency is commended for the action report on the recommendations of the IGG contained in reports during the period of 2005 to 2013 submitted to Parliament in accordance with Article 231(4) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda and it is attached.

General Recommendations 

These are generally the same. The committee recommends that: 
    (1) The Inspectorate of Government should carry out more sensitisation programme.
    (2) The Inspectorate of Government should be empowered to ensure effective follow up of implementation.
    (3) More funds should be given to the Inspectorate of Government. This is for us, as Parliament.
    (4) The Inspectorate of Government Act, 2002 should be amended to provide for the timeframe for Ministries, Departments and Agencies (MDAs) to implement recommendations of the IGG. 
    (5) The Inspectorate should desist from using vague language in its recommendations. 
    (6) MDAs should not recommend people for promotions if they have outstanding issues with the Inspectorate of Government. 

January to June, 2007

The committee found no outstanding issues settled. 

July to December, 2007

The use of forged academic documents by No. 34890, woman police constable, stationed at Kabarole Police Station. 

Committee Findings

By the time the committee interfaced with the Inspector General of Police, the CIID had been instructed to investigate the matter following the committee’s invitation to discuss it.

The recommendation is that Parliament be furnished with the outcome of the CIID investigations into this matter.

The next issue was the alleged forgery of academic documents by a Local Administration Police (LAP) Constable in Ntungamo District. The committee found that Mr William Atukwatirire, a local administration police constable, had already disappeared by the time the LAP was integrated into the Uganda Police Force.

The recommendation, among others, is that Parliament be furnished with the outcome of the CIID investigations into the allegations and the disappearance of Mr William Atukwatirire.

Alleged Mismanagement of case No. CRB 1603/2006 by some Officers of Arua Central Police Station

The committee found that the case file was closed. The case involved a Congolese national who, instead of being produced in court, was released on police bond and was never traced again. 

All those involved were convicted but the committee notes that the fines prescribed by the Police Act are too low compared to the gravity of the case (s) and this calls for a review of the fines.

The committee recommends that the Police Act Cap. 330, be reviewed to update the fines and ensure that they are commensurate with the gravity of the crimes committed by errant officers.

Alleged Impersonation by a local administration police officer in Kiruhura 0704543461

The committee found that Gracious Taremwa, whose real name is Kenneth Nyakarangwa, used an O’level certificate belonging to his cousin called Gracious Taremwa to gain employment as a LAP Constable in Kiruhura District.

The committee observed that no action had been taken on this recommendation of the IGG since 2007. Parliament will require a report of the investigations.

The committee recommends that Parliament be furnished with a report on action taken following the investigations conducted by the Director CIID into the matter.

I think you should appreciate the work of the committee especially that it is raising these issues. Parliament should take them over and if Parliament so wants, the committee can carry on or the line sessional committee would be able to ask for these reports arising from my presentation. 

Erroneous Allocation of Plot 14(A) Ntinda View Crescent Naguru by KCC and Kampala District Land Board

The committee found that the demolition of the structures could not be effected in time because the matter was in court. The committee noted the action taken on the recommendation of the IGG. It was later demolished on 5 April 2014.

Alleged Unlawful Subcontracting of a Tender to Collect Revenue from Nakivubo Park Yard Market
The committee found that the matter in question is currently in court as M/s Equator Touring Services that had subcontracted the function of collecting revenue in the market to Kampala United Park Yard Cooperative Savings and Credit Society filed a suit contesting the termination.

The issue is still before court and it will be sub-judice to go beyond this. However, the committee recommends that there should be a close follow up on the matter for its conclusion. 

Alleged unaccountability of public funds by the Chief Magistrates Court, Entebbe and the recommendation is that the Chief Registrar should discipline the judicial officer as recommended by the Inspector General of Government in the report.

Alleged Forgery and Uttering of False Documents by the deputy head teacher of Sebei College, Teregesi Kapchorwa 

The committee found that that the individual in this case is Mr Chepskol Muhammed, who was irregularly paid Shs 8,975,498, in addition to his entitlement between 2001 and 2003. The committee recommends that no promotion should be effected for civil servants with outstanding issues and the implementation of the recommendations of the IGG should be done as soon as the report is out.

Report of January to June 2008

The issue was misappropriation of funds and misuse of fuel released to the DPC that is ASP police officer, for monitoring the referendum exercise.

The committee found that the said officer, AC Petongesi Fulgensi, received Shs 6 million from the Electoral Commission for security coordination in 2005. The officer diverted the funds for personal use.

The following action was taken: The officer was interdicted; he was charged and the DPP later discontinued the proceedings against the officer. The committee took note of that action.

In July to December, there were no issues.

January to June, 2009
Failure of the Solicitor General to Provide Legal Advice
The committee received proof from the Solicitor General that the advice requested was actually provided on time; so he has done his work.

July to December 2009

The issue was non-implementation of the recommendation to recover property from Hima Tea Factory. The committee observed that the officer who was implicated was a one ASP James Chemtai. The items were handed over to Rwenzori Workers HIV/AIDS Prevention Group and no criminal charges were preferred against Bruce Rwahunda. The committee observed that the police has delayed to act on a case that has been pending since 2009.

The committee, therefore, recommends that in matters of this nature, investigations should be handled expeditiously to facilitate the administration of justice.

January to June 2010

The issue alleged was irregular recruitment of the District Education Officer by Sironko District Service Commission. The committee found that the appointment of Ms Sara Bugosi as the district education officer was rescinded under minute 4(a) 175 of 2009 on the advice of the Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Local Government.

The committee noted the action taken and further observed that the recruitment of the district education officer has taken an inordinately long time which has negatively impacted on the performance of the district.

The recommendation, among others, is that the district service commission should immediately appoint a district education officer.

July to December, 2010

Alleged abuse of Office and Diversion of Funds by the Chief Magistrates Court in Masindi District

The committee observed that the dismissal of the then Chief Magistrate of Masindi District his worship Joshua Marouk, was not as a result of the implementation on the IGG’s recommendation but accepted it as an appropriate conclusion of this case.

Alleged Mismanagement of Government Funds by the Administration of Fatima Aloi Comprehensive Secondary School

The recommendations of the IGG are there and the committee received a detailed submission from Ms Adonyo Lilian Adong on the circumstances surrounding the utilisation of Shs 19,258,750 by then head teacher of the school. 

The committee noted that the funds were availed to her to relocate the school from a displaced people’s camp back to its original location where it had been displaced by the war. 
The committee was satisfied with the accountability received and recommends that this case be considered as concluded.

Alleged Diversion of Funds meant for Training new Recruits by then OC, Local Administration Police Ntungamo.

The committee found that the police expects, in cases where the IGG has conducted investigations, that he or she uses the findings to go ahead and prosecute the culprit. This was not done. The IGG is expected, therefore, to furnish the CIID with a case file or the CIID will have to initiate fresh investigations.

The committee observed that the District Service Commission Ntungamo is yet to take action on the examiner of accounts for failing to detect forgeries of accountabilities presented to it. 

The recommendation, among others, is that when the IGG investigates a matter, he should always take bold steps to prosecute the culprits identified.

Alleged irregular recruitment of Local Administration Police officer in Kiboga

The committee found that the law specifically in the Police Act, Cap. 303 clearly specifies the process leading to the termination of a police officer from the force.
The committee was not satisfied with the submission of the Uganda Police and the recommendation of the IGG continued to face implementation challenges on technicalities as it is the case in this matter. Therefore, the committee recommends that the IGG’s recommendation be implemented with immediate effect. 

There were no outstanding issues for the periods; January to June, 2011; July to December, 2011; January to June, 2012 and July to December, 2012. 

In conclusion, this report covers the IGG’s reports to Parliament for the period 2007 to 2012. The committee will commence on the 2013 to 2014 reports. This concludes the process of considering the backlog of Parliament with regard to scrutinising reports of the IGG. Until recently, reports dating as back as 1999 had not been scrutinised.  I beg to submit, Madam Speaker. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, our acting chairperson and your committee, for the work done. Any comments? Can someone then move a motion that we -

5.37
DR MEDARD BITEKYEREZO (NRM, Mbarara Municipality, Mbarara): I thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank hon. Kabakumba, on behalf of her team, for being the only person available in her committee to give us this.

However, I have a conviction that the IGG has the powers to investigate, arrest and prosecute. Why are they seeing some crystal clear cases that have punishments stated within the law but they cannot take action?

There are some things we normally fail to talk about because we do not want to be looked at as very bad people. However, I think this Parliament has to speak the truth. Should we also say that possibly some officers in the IGG’s office go and become swallowed up by the problems they find in the field and come back when their minds are completely mingled? What happens to them where they fail to prosecute people who have made obvious mistakes?

Madam Speaker, I know you are a very strong person; you have done things that other people are afraid to do. Is there a possibility in these remaining two months for you to have an interface with the IGG and you harmonise this so that we do not get some of the statements we are getting from these reports? They are discouraging to us.

If the IGG can fail to prosecute when she has got the mandate, what about Bitekyerezo who comes and speaks in Parliament like this? Won’t I be fought in the next election? Do you see what I mean? Please help us. Let the Office of the Inspector General of Government prosecute these errant officers because the mandate is theirs. Somebody has given them the power and the Constitution allows them to do something but they are not doing it. I do not know what is wrong.

What doesn’t she have? Doesn’t she have the car or fuel or the handcuffs? Something must be done. Madam Speaker, we should be informed and see what is happening.

I, therefore, wish to move a motion that this Parliament adopts the report from the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs so that we can go and prepare a day for debate. Thank you so much.

MS KABAKUMBA: Madam Speaker, you may recall that previously, the IGG did not have powers to prosecute. We did amend the law to give them those powers and I think they now need a lot of encouragement and to remind them that they should do their work. Probably, these reports were before they had those powers. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

5.41
THE OPPOSITION CHIEF WHIP (MS CECILIA OGWAL): Madam Speaker, I just want to draw the attention of the House to page 14 of the second report where there was willingness from the accused person to refund the money but the chief administrative secretary was not willing to pursue the issue.

I think that would lead us to look again at the effectiveness of the accounting officers in the various departments. If you read that particular story, this man has been misappropriating funds but along the way, he was transferred from one station to another and even promoted despite the fact that he had a baggage of criminal offences behind him. Therefore, I wonder what you expect us to do. I would have expected the IGG to take immediate action to stop this man from continuing to serve in public service when it is already observed that he is a criminal and does not know how to manage public funds.

As we go through the two reports, my observation and I think this is something Parliament should give second thought, is that whether the committee after receiving such reports from the IGG should be able to screen them and analyse them for us so that we know what to do with them. You have told us the story of how the committee stumbled on criminal offences and the committee has compiled a report of how it happened. We really do not know what Parliament can do.

What can we do, as the monitoring arm of Government? These are now post-mortem issues. Maybe the committee could help us to highlight the common issues which have been cited in the two reports and then we can now ensure that any future report beginning from such a time, the various departments must comply.

Madam Speaker, you have guided this House several times. I remember we used to have a lot of problems in submitting supplementary budgets but one time, you took time to write down what you expected the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to do to comply with certain regularities and laws before submitting our supplementary budgets.

Therefore, whether through the committee or directly, we need to prescribe the guidelines of how the Inspectorate of Government should present a report which can be useful to the House and also for us to restructure the department for effective management of public funds. I thank you.

MS KABAKUMBA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank hon. Cecilia Ogwal. However, if you look at the general recommendations of the committee, they are actually what you are asking for. The committee, for example, is saying that there should be a timeframe for whoever is supposed to act on the IGG’s recommendation to do so. There should be an amendment of the Act to provide for that and then we will not have all this. 

Funding for the IGG should also be increased. The IGG should empower its regional offices to follow up on recommendations that have been made. It is all in this report. This report has given more recommendations even beyond Parliament, recommending to other institutions of Government to ensure that they take the recommendations of the IGG seriously.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you so much. In sending the report to the Prime Minister and the IGG, we shall include the demand for a Treasury Memorandum on the recommendations made within six months so that we are able to make progress.

However, I really want to thank the committee on legal and parliamentary affairs because for reports of over 10 years, they really did a lot of work to bring us up to speed. I know that in the future since we are running fast, we shall go to the annual reports because the backlog has been cleared.

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON LEGAL AND PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS ON THE INSPECTORATE OF GOVERNMENT FROM 2007 – 2012

5.47
DR MEDARD BITEKYEREZO (NRM, Mbarara Municipality, Mbarara): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the committee’s reports be adopted.

THE SPEAKER: Is it seconded? Honourable members, the motion is that the question be put. I put the question to the motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: I now put the question that this House do adopt the reports of the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs for the periods 1999 to 2006 and 2007 to 2012.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Reports adopted.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have actually completed our agenda and I do not know whether it is useful to come tomorrow.

DR BITEKYEREZO: Madam Speaker, today I was prepared. If you look at the attrition rate of the Members of the Ninth Parliament, it is very high. I have a conviction that with the number of people who are not in Kyankwanzi, we can still sit and complete parliamentary business. Surely, we must finish what we are supposed to finish before we leave the Ninth Parliament.

For example, I have got two reports that I am preparing on the Cancer Institute Bill and the Heart Institute Bill. I would feel very uncomfortable to leave this Parliament before these two laws are made. I am 47 years old and very sure that very many people in this Parliament are above that age or slightly there. If we do not make laws to make sure that we have very good health services for these conditions which are going to affect us when we are out of this Parliament, we shall regret. 

I kindly request that if the Clerk could send messages very early to the Members tomorrow, we should sit and conclude some business. The work we have done today is great and if we had not done it today, we would have to wait until the new Members come. We have some laws to pass, on top of the budget. I kindly request you, Madam Speaker, to convene Parliament tomorrow.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the information coming in is that the rate of attrition is about 83 per cent. Let us invite the 17 per cent to come and we do some work. Clerk, please send out the messages so that they come and we do some work tomorrow.

MS CECILIA OGWAL: Madam Speaker, the Leader of Government Business did not answer my question. I wanted to ascertain that the ministerial policy statements have all been submitted by 5.00 p.m. today. This is because today is the deadline by law. The Leader of Government Business is evading my question.

MS KABAKUMBA: Thank you very much, Leader of the Opposition. Madam Speaker, I am not evading and I am not masquerading anyway. However, I know that Parliament has the record of how many ministerial policy statements have been presented to this House as of now. I would gladly request that that record be produced –(Interruption)

MS CECILIA OGWAL: Madam Speaker, the Leader of Government Business knows that she is addressing Parliament. She was the one who presented those ministerial statements. I am surprised that she is actually asking you and I to be able to ascertain what ministerial policy statements have been submitted by 5.00 p.m. and which ones have not.

I would like the Leader of Government Business to tell this House that the ministers have actually failed to submit the reports and we would like to know which ones have not been submitted. Is she, therefore, in order to assume that a Member of Parliament like me, who has been sitting here patiently watching her make presentations and lay documents at the Table, should know what she laid at the Table? Is she in order to imagine that I should know what she laid on the Table when I am asking her to tell me what she laid?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the statements were laid by hon. Alupo, the Minister of Education, Science, Technology and Sports. I only requested hon. Kabakumba, as a member of the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs, to present these two reports.

However, the Clerk will tomorrow give us an update on those that have complied and those that have not. The House is adjourned until tomorrow at 2.00 p.m.

(The House rose at 5.52 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 16 March 2016 at 2.00 p.m.) 

