Thursday, 5 March 2009

Parliament met at 2.53 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I welcome you and I want to inform you that in the public gallery we have students from Makerere University Business School, led by their guild president. Please, join me in welcoming them! (Applause) 

Hon. Members, the bad news is that our colleague, hon. Mathias Nsubuga, lost his dear mother yesterday. There is a service at Christ the King and burial is at Manja, Kiwangala, Masaka District at 2.00 pm. Let us observe a minute of silence; the mother’s name is Matilda Meeme.

(Members rose and observed a minute of silence.)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I find it proper to draw our attention to two laws namely the Rules of Procedure and the Budget Act. But before I do so, I take this opportunity to welcome on the Frontbench, hon. Perez Ahabwe, who has been sworn in as Minister for Local Government. I understand other ministers have also been sworn in, but I will introduce them when they appear. Congratulations and we wish you a successful tenure! 

Our rule 113 provides as follows, under the heading, “Reference of a Bill to a Committee: Whenever a Bill is read the first time in the House, it shall be referred to the appropriate committee appointed under the provisions of these rules. 

(1) 	The committee shall examine the Bill in detail and make all such inquiries in relation to it as the committee considers expedient or necessary and report to the House within forty five days from the date the Bill is referred to the committee.” 

This is the rule which governs consideration of Bills in a committee. I must say I have noted that a number of Bills have been lying with the committees for more the 45 days specified here, and that is why we did not see Bills coming on our Order Paper. Yesterday we had one which was due for consideration but for one reason or another, it did not come. But I know there are many others that are with the committee and, therefore, it is necessary that these rules are compiled with so that the committees expeditiously handle and bring their results to us so that we consider these Bills before Parliament is prorogued some time in mid-May. We have to prorogue Parliament to prepare it for the next session.

At the same time, while considering this, I want to draw your attention to the Budget Act especially Section 4, which provides that: “The President shall not later than the first day of April in each financial year cause to be prepared and laid before Parliament a three-year macroeconomic plan and programme for the economic and social development in preparation for final submission under (3).” That is the budget which must be brought in June. 

“The President shall not later than first day of April in each financial year and in preparation for final submission under Section 3, cause to be submitted and laid before Parliament indicative preliminary revenue and expenditure frame work of government for the next financial year.” 

Then it talks about submitting these documents to the appropriate committees of Parliament. The reason I am referring you to this is to show you that from next month, April, committees will be concentrating or working under the Budget Act. The Speaker has to submit whatever comes from the budget to the President for preparation of the final budget which will be presented in June. 

Therefore, it means that the time we have to dispose of the outstanding Bills and other important business is between now and April. Therefore, I appeal to the committees to work as much as they can to clear the Bills that are before them. We had given you some time thinking that you would clear but apparently, I have not received positive reports from the committees in respect of this particular subject. So, we may have to appeal to you to put in more hours in the committees so that some tangible results come out. That is what I wanted to inform you and maybe at the end of the day, we shall decide what we may have to do. 

3.03
MR STEPHEN TASHOBYA (NRM, Kajara County, Ntungamo): I thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity to appreciate your concerns, which you have several times expressed in the Business Committee that we should have these Bills out as a matter of priority. But as you appeal to us to expedite work in the committees, may I also ask the minister to help us to expedite this work because very many times we send out invitations to ministers to come and make presentations on these Bills and very many times they fail to appear and their input in some Bills is of paramount importance. 

I agree that we should have this work expedited but also call upon our senior colleagues, the ministers that when we invite them they should come and appear before committees or rather if they do not, we also have the liberty of actually presenting work without their input? Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: I certainly agree with you that committees have to work together with the ministers because most times these Bills are public Bills which are owned by ministers. Therefore, it should be a combined effort from both the ministers and Members of respective committee. I entirely agree with that. 

3.05
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Daudi Migereko): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank Ndugu Tashobya for the point he has raised. This point has been taken note of and we are in touch with the various ministers so that they can prioritize appearing before committees so that we can be able to expeditiously attend to matters that must be resolved by Parliament. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: By the way, I note that today we have many people in white. I do not know what is happening! But it is quite colourful. Let us get hon. Cecilia Ogwal.

3.06
MRS CECILIA OGWAL (Independent, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for your keen observation of the change of colours of the female colleagues. I was just going to stand up to explain why the women are in white today. 

On Tuesday, you gave us opportunity to talk about the Women’s Day celebration which is coming up on Sunday, and we are very grateful that the male colleagues joined us in expressing their concerns about the plight of women all over the world and in particular in Uganda. 

Mr Speaker, you heard with your own ears that many women who spoke voiced their concern over the increased violence against women and not only women but also children. So, we thought that instead of coming to this House to depress you with black, let us tell you that we are mourning because of the domestic violence - we feel coming in white is to say that, “Yes, we are mourning, but with hope”. We know that with white there is hope. We know that as we mourn, we are willing to reconcile with the people who are brutalizing us. We have hope that Parliament will change its attitude and that change will come from Parliament. I hope that the women in the country side will also borrow from us and put on white for those who can afford it. We also want to appeal to the women that on such occasions, we do not want women to put on colours which are identified with political parties. On matters of gender, we are all equal; we are suffering the same problems and it is important that Women’s Day should unite us. 

So I am appealing to all the women wherever you are to put on white; if you cannot afford white, put on black. But it will be very difficult for us to appreciate your design if you put on yellow, blue or black. So we are appealing to the women all over Uganda to stand with us united to fight against violence which has increased in our country. I thank you, Mr Speaker.  

3.08
MR ALBERT ODUMAN (FDC, Bukedea County, Bukedea): Thank you, Mr Speaker. We are moving towards the budget process and we are in the amidst of an issue of importance, which is the crisis that is affecting the global economy, and that is finding its way into our economy and having lasting impacts on the projected performance of the budget and the economy as a whole. 

This crisis is real and the impact is real. People lose employment, revenue collection in URA is dwindling and we have information to that effect. I know of companies in towns that have retrenched staff, including Barclays and GTV that collapsed recently. And I know even for Members here, the crisis has found its way into their pockets. So, countries are taking action; proactive actions to see how to cope with the impacts of this crisis. 

My concern as Shadow Minister for Finance is that government is not responding enough and I am here to ask from them when they are going to come up to the House to inform us of the impact and what government is doing to cope with the crisis. As you know, Mr Speaker, the provisions of the Public Finance Act - Section 10 of that Act requires that the Minister of Finance shall keep this House fully informed on the state of the economy and it is my contention that this House is not fully informed. Instead what is happening now is that groups of stakeholders are meeting here. For instance, the CEOs met two weeks ago to try to speculate on what the impact of this crisis would be on this economy. 

We have a Ministry of Finance that should be able to guide the economy on what the impact will be and what they are doing to prepare, to shock-absorb the impacts of this crisis. I want to know from the ministry when are they coming here with a statement to tell us what to prepare for in terms of the effects of this crisis because this is no longer a local matter, it is a global matter and we cannot pretend that Uganda will not be affected? Uganda will be affected because 30 percent of our budget is donor-financed. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Minister of Finance, do you intend to make a statement on this particular subject?

3.12
THE MINISTER OF STATE (INVESTMENT) (Mr Aston Kajara): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Government has in the past made a preliminary presentation to this Parliament on the Floor of this House on the possible effects of the credit crunch but that is not to say that we covered every aspect. But as I speak, the Ministry of Finance is studying in detail the effects of this credit crunch on the economy and at an appropriate time this matter is going to be discussed in Cabinet and within two weeks, we are going to present to this House in detail what the impact of this credit crunch will be to our economy and the measures government intends to put in place to ensure that this country is prepared to accommodate those effects, and also make sure that our economy does not suffer.  

So as far as we are concerned, this issue is being handled by government, and within two weeks time, we should be able to make a presentation on the Floor of this House. Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

3.14
THE SECOND DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND MINISTER OF PUBLIC SERVICE (Mr Henry Kajura): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to revert to an earlier item which had been raised by the honourable members who happen to be wearing white. White is normally a sign of hope, of cerebration and well being. And in that spirit, we have some news for the ladies as a contribution to their well being. I am told that it is also for the men, but essentially I do not see men in white; I can only see one. So this is a matter which is predominantly for the ladies, or honourable members who happen to be ladies.  

Yesterday in Cabinet we had a long discussion about the issue which has been before this House for a very long time in the past - I am sure we all know what it is. It is the Domestic Relations Bill. We had bold considerations of it and as far as Cabinet is concerned, we passed it. I thought we should inform the ladies and gentlemen that this matter which has been outstanding for a long time has so far gone through Cabinet; but it has yet to go through Parliament. I thank you. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: I think this ends the recognitions I received from people who wished to say something after the communication. Those with requisitions have already made their case.

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE EMOLUMENTS AND BENEFITS OF THE PRESIDENT, VICE-PRESIDENT AND THE PRIME MINISTER BILL, 2009

3.16
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PUBLIC SERVICE (Ms Prisca Sezi Mbaguta) Mr Speaker, I want to present a Bill entitled, “The emoluments and benefits of the President, Vice-President and the Prime Minister Bill, 2009.” I also wish to lay on the Table the Certificate of Financial Implications. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. The Bill stands committed to the appropriate committee as required by Rule 113 of our Rules of Procedure and we expect a report within 45 days from today.

PRESENTATION OF PAPERS

3.17
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (INVESTMENT) (Mr Aston Kajara): Mr Speaker, the Government of Uganda has negotiated an additional US $5 million from the IDA of the World Bank group to finance the cost of overruns encountered in the implementation of the sustainable management of mineral resources project under the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development. 

Mr Speaker, I wish to present a brief to Parliament on the proposal to borrow an additional US $5 million from IDA of the World Bank group to support the cost of overruns in the sustainable management of Mineral Resources Project. I beg to present.

THE SPEAKER: Let the matter be handled by the appropriate committee of Parliament and report promptly in view of what I have said earlier.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The minister wants an additional loan. But since we passed the initial loan, I think in addition to presenting the paper, he should have told us what the first loan did and what the gaps are. Despite the fact that they are going to the committee, it is important to indicate that at the time of presentation.

THE SPEAKER: The appropriate committee which is going to consider this matter is at liberty to call the minister to explain the outcome of the earlier grant.

CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE LOCAL GOVERNMENT ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE ON THE REPORT OF THE AUDITOR-GENERAL FOR THE YEAR ENDING 30TH JUNE 2001

THE SPEAKER: As you recollect, this matter started yesterday. Yes, honourable.

3.19
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Daudi Migereko): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The report was presented to this House yesterday by the Chairperson for Local Government Accounts Committee, hon. Abdul Katuntu. I made a prayer that this report be debated today. I have been in contact with hon. Katuntu and hon. Adolf Mwesige, the Minister for Local Government. There is an important regional meeting for Ministers of Local Government taking place in Kampala. They have requested that they be permitted to be in the House next week so that this report can be debated and they respond to matters arising from the report. I beg to request, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Next item.

CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE REPORT ON THE CONCERNS RAISED BY THE AUDITOR-GENERAL 
ON THE ILLEGAL DISTRIBUTION OF PUBLIC LAND

THE SPEAKER: Well, I expected a report from the ad hoc committee headed by hon. Nyombi, made up of hon. Katuntu and hon. Ben Wacha, among others. Actually I have seen a copy but I think the other day I was told that that ad hoc committee wants some additional changes. I think you have these copies. Unfortunately, we do not have any of the -  

MR TASHOBYA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Indeed, a report had been drafted by hon. Nyombi but hon. Katuntu and hon. Ben Wacha requested that we sit down and harmonise our positions and come out with a final report that reflects the views of everybody on the committee, and we are scheduled to meet on Monday at 11.00 a.m. and thereafter a report should be submitted in the course of next week.  

THE SPEAKER: Okay. Next item!

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT 
OF THE PARLIAMENTARY DELEGATION TO TANZANIA ON 
BENCH MARKING THE COTTON INDUSTRY MANAGEMENT

3.23
DR LASTUS SERUNJOGI (NRM, Kiboga County East, Kiboga): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I beg to present a report on behalf of the Sessional Committee on Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries on the findings of the parliamentary delegation on a study visit to Tanzania cotton industry which took place between 8th and 12th June 2008. The copies are being distributed.  

During the MTEF and budget framework paper of 2008/09 discussions with Cotton Development Organisation (CDO), the managing director of CDO informed the committee that the cotton industry in Tanzania will be a valuable case study on the management of the cotton sub-sector, and the committee adopted the suggestion and requested the Speaker of Parliament to allow the study tour.

Accordingly, the delegation which the Speaker nominated took the trip between 8th and 12th June, comprising Members of Parliament and the staff of Parliament and staff from CDO and this list is given in appendices 1(a) and 1(b). I am presenting this report in conformity with rule 30 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament.  

Mr Speaker, the objectives of the trip were: 

•	First, to benchmark the experiences in the cotton sub-sector management.
•	Secondly, to compare and contrast the effectiveness of Uganda’s and Tanzania’s legal institutional framework for regulating the respective cotton industries.
•	Also, to establish the status of production research, trends and basis on production, marketing and exports and achievements in value addition and roles of the private and public sectors in Tanzania.  
•	To get acquainted with major challenges and opportunities in Tanzania’s cotton industry and also to articulate the good practices and lessons learnt from Tanzania and recommend the improvements with Uganda’s cotton industry.

The Methodology

The delegation paid visits to a number of institutions and had discussions with directors and scientists at Ukiriguru Cotton Research Institute where the committee was briefed on the institute’s activities on cotton production research.

The delegation also toured the various cotton research laboratories. 

The committee also collected and studied literature on Tanzania and Uganda cotton industries for compilation of this report. 

At this juncture, Mr Speaker, allow me to lay on the Table a number of these documents which were used as references for further references by honourable Members of Parliament. They include: 

•	The Tanzanian Cotton Industry Act of 2001 - these are listed on page 22.
•	The Uganda Cotton Act, 2000.
•	The Seeds and Plant Act, 2006.
•	The Cotton Regulations, 2005 and Cotton Zones and Isolated and Segregated Areas Regulations, 2005.
•	The National Agricultural Research Act, and;
•	Agricultural and Zonal Competitive Fund of 2004.  

I beg to lay these papers on the Table.

The key findings are categorised as follows:

The socio-economic importance of cotton and production areas in Tanzania and Uganda:

Cotton is of social and economic importance in both Tanzania and Uganda. In the case of Uganda, there is a reference in Annex 2, table 1, which shows the production trends and earnings by farmers, ginners and lint exporters in Uganda since 1994, and the industry is a source of income to 2.5 million Ugandans.

Cotton is known as a traditional cash crop in both Uganda and Tanzania. It has got both forward and backward linkages for value addition into medical cotton wool, yarns and so on.

In Uganda today, cotton is grown in 49 districts as indicated in Annex 3 of this report. In Tanzania, more than 95 percent of the crop comes from the western cotton growing area, which is about 300kms along Lake Victoria and comprises: Mwanza, Shinyanga, Tabora and the rest. The rest of the crop comes from the eastern cotton growing area, which includes: Kilimanjaro, Manyara, Tanga, Mrogoro and Iringa regions. 

On structural reforms and their effects on the cotton industries of Uganda and Tanzania, the delegation noted that in both countries, liberalisation of the cotton sector coupled with sector structural reforms were geared towards refining the role of cotton in economic development. This led to increased private sector involvement in cotton buying, processing, value addition and exporting.

In Tanzania, the cotton sector was liberalised in 1993 culminating in a number of changes like the enactment of the Tanzania Cotton Lint and Sector Board Act of 1993, which later was amended to become the Cotton Industry Act, 2001. 

The reforms in Tanzania led to a number of developments, which appear in paragraph 4.2.3, for example, private buyers increased as shown. And in Uganda, the cotton sub-sector was liberalised in 1994 as provided for in the Cotton Statute of 1994 and Cotton Development Act, 2000. The following were the effects of these reforms:

The CDO, a regulatory body of the cotton industry was established in 1994.

The seed movement scheme was restructured. And NARO revised its breeding programme so as to cope with changes of liberalisation, the main one being putting on the shelve the SATU cotton type and leaving BPA, Bukalasa Pedigree Albar, as the only cotton type in production starting 1997. 

During the period 1995 to 2008 NARO released six improved BPA cotton varieties. 

The ginneries increased to 38 with a ginning capacity of over 500,000 bales. Annexe 4 shows the location of these ginneries and in fact the ginning capacity is about 1,000 bales. 

The CDO ensured that multiplication, processing and packaging of planting seeds were in conformity with seed certification requirements and the regulations contained in the Seeds and Plant Act, 2006. 

The planting seed services, seed cotton marketing, processing, value addition and export were privatised removing government monopoly.  

The private sector, which is the Uganda Ginners and Cotton Exporters Association (UGCEA) support to farmers, was introduced for inputs on planting seeds, insecticides and pumps. The government though started in 2001 to provide the planting seeds under the strategic intervention activities.

The Uganda lint held competitive positions at the international markets and earned premium prices. 

Organic cotton production started in 1994 with 100 bales intended to service a small niche market. This production increased to 13,000 bales in the season 2007/08 under unplanned expansion to West Nile, Northern and Eastern Uganda. 

The delegation noted that CDO had difficulty in effectively regulating some activities in the industry. This was especially while licensing appropriate numbers of private operators, the ginners. The Uganda Investment Authority also licensed some ginners under categories of investors without liaising with CDO. This led to over licensing and creating excess ginning capacity and uncontrollable competition in the industry (Annex 4).

Mr Speaker, paragraph 4.3 shows production trends in both countries, in Table 2. In 1990/1, Uganda’s production was 16 percent over Tanzania’s lint production. The table goes up to page 7. The peak of production was in 2004/5 season at 254,000 bales. 

As noted from that table, there were a lot of fluctuations in cotton production in Uganda. Page 8 onwards gives a summary of the reasons underlying these fluctuations. For example, in 1997/8 season, there were El Nino rains, which led to flooding and rotting of cotton. 

In 1998/9 there were the La Nino rains.

In 2003/04, we had an epidemic of bollworms and that was all over the world and it affected production in Uganda as well. 

In 2004/05 where we had 254,000 bales, this increase was a result of the increase in acreages, which was brought about by the attractive farm gate price of Shs650 per kilogramme of seed cotton in 2003/04. 

In 2005/06, production fell to 102,000 bales and this was because of the low acreage after the fall of farm gate price of Shs350 per kilogramme in 2004/05 season. 

In 2007/08, we had the lowest bales of 65,000. This is mainly attributed to the introduction of organic cotton farming in West Nile, Northern and Eastern Uganda where organic cotton yields fell due to lack of the following:

•	Lack of a guiding national policy on organic farming on which to base the necessary extension advice.
•	A lack of adequately tested and approved research packages and inputs, for example, fertilizers, herbicides and pesticides.
•	Lack of training of farmers on organic crop and pest management.
•	Lack of compensatory pricing for organic cotton in lieu of yield losses conducive for a farmer lured into organic farming. 

It is also necessary to note that in 2007/08, the conventional cotton fields had also low yields due to the collapse of the Ginners’ Support Programme on the provision of inputs and extension services. This collapse of the ginners’ input was due to, among others:

•	Appearance of ‘free rider’ ginners in the industry and high competition among many ginners for a small crop due to over licensing, leading to loss of focus on the need for quality planting seeds and lint. This situation was caused partly by the overlaps between CDO and Uganda Investment Authority on roles for the registration of private operators in the cotton industry. 
•	In 2007, we noted that potential sources of planting seeds were lost due to non-adherence to legal provisions and regulations of the zoning under the high competition for cotton
•	In 2008, 150,000 bales are expected season as a result of reducing on the expanse of organic cotton production and CDO having taken over the input and extension service provision.
•	The production fluctuation in Tanzania is shown in table 2 but the fluctuations there are mainly due to weather changes, under rain-fed conditions in Tanzania, poor farming practices -

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Serunjogi, are you going to read this report verbatim?

DR SERUNJOGI KATENDE: I was summarising -(Laughter)- I was sort of summarising. I will try to summarise.

In Tanzania the organic cotton is seen to be promoted by a single company and the farmers are trained on production packages for organic farming, including pest scouting.

On cotton research, Serere Research Institute in Soroti has the mandate for cotton research. It is funded by the NARO’s Council for the National Strategic Research but there are also competitive grants for some research on cotton.

Although there is no direct funding by CDO for cotton research, on occasion CDO comes in and provides some funds for example in the construction of the housing for the cotton processing equipment which was procured under the CSDP projects which assisted cotton much.

The core research is on breeding, agronomy and IPM but there are other projects handling non-core research on cotton, including testing biotech cotton and developing production packages for niche markets like organic farming and long staple cotton.

In addition, NASARRI which is Serere, undertakes the basic multiplication of improved varieties which include the breeders and foundation seed plots which it then passes on to CDO for further multiplication of certified and commercial seeds. 

NASARRI has well facilitated breeding and pathology laboratories but there is need for more support for other essential servicing laboratories. 

In Tanzania, cotton research is undertaken by Ukiriguru Research Institute in Lake Zone in Mwanza. The institute has got well-facilitated laboratories on various disciplines of research and cotton research is mainly funded through the Ministry of Agriculture, Food and Co-operatives.

In addition, funding of cotton research in Tanzania on research and vaccine multiplication comes from the Tanzanian Cotton Development Trust Fund. This Fund has got a steering committee and it is contributed to by ginners and other stakeholders.

The Cotton Development Trust Fund, in addition to research, supports provision of production inputs. It is worth noting that this successful model of seed multiplication in Tanzania was adopted from Uganda but it has excelled and the extension services in the districts are responsibilities of the local governments.

Observations and recommendations

The legal and structural framework: the committee observed that there were weaknesses in the legal frameworks and overlaps in the activities of the various stakeholders in the Uganda cotton sector. The Act and regulations need to be more binding and specific. CDO should be given political support to implement the law.

It is recommended that the Prime Minister should convene a meeting of the relevant ministries to review the harmonisation and strengthening of the laws, to provide for the emerging challenges affecting CDO’s regulatory/management activities.

The ministries proposed are on page 14 and 15.

It is also recommended that the legal framework should be strengthened for appropriate financing and regulating of the production and distribution of cotton seeds.

Further, it is recommended that the liberalisation policy should be revisited for balancing sustainable private sector and Government inputs in the industry.

On cotton production research, the committee recommends that government should increase both human and financial resources to NASARRI, or to NARO as such, specifically for the facilitation of research development on variety improvements, basic seed multiplication and other areas as specified on page 16.

But I would like to mention that it is very important that Serere gets an upgrading of the power supply to run the cotton processing equipment which was procured under the CSDP project and housing was provided by CDO. 

Further, Serere is lacking a fibre spinning laboratory which is very important if you are to improve the fibre quality of our cotton. The equipment for this testing was procured under CSDP but a laboratory which requires Shs 185 million was never constructed to house this equipment.

And there are other recommendations on page 16.

On production, the committee noted with concern the drastic decline to 65,000 bales from a peak of 254,000 bales in 2004.

The recommendation here is government intervention, for example on support of seed multiplication, processing and packaging, provision of subsidy on inputs to farmers, support on mechanisation of cotton production and arrangement for strategic support towards large scale cotton production for example the reforms of block farms and farmer groups.

I would like to say here that CDO has gone a long way in organising farmers into the Uganda National Cotton Farmers Federation. One of its mandates is to organise stakeholders into such groups. And also there are other recommendations of use of Government institution farms like prisons, schools and agricultural colleges as a way of beefing up production.

It is also recommended that CDO should institute a study or consultancy for developing reliable models or formula for determining appropriate pre-season prices for both organic and conventional cotton. And drawing from the Tanzanian experience, political supervision of the cotton sector should be emphasised.

Observations

On extension services, the committee had a number of observations, for example, CDO has got only one agronomist and six regional officers. These were working with extension service staff provided for by the ginners. With the collapse of UGCEA, this support of extension services leaves a big gap.

Recommendations

The recommendation on extension services is that the government should increase budgetary support with CDO and for more field officers and the restructured NAADS programme should embrace provision of extension services for cotton production. 

The NASARRI cotton scientists should continue training the CDO and NAADS extension staff and UNACOFFE farmers’ groups on the new production packages and provide information material as it was in the concluded Small Holder Cotton Rehabilitation Project (SCRP) and CSDP. 

Funding for Cotton Development 

The committee observed that there was a need to revive the Cotton Fund similar to the one which was in place in the 1950s. Mr Speaker, there was a Cotton Development Fund in the 1950s and that money was used to build the Owen Falls Dam under the Colonial Government. If we look at the archives of the Colonial Government which are in Entebbe, the facts can be found.

The committee recommends that the government should establish a Cotton Development Trust. The contributing stakeholders in the industry should include: government (CDO), the ginners, spinners, textile industry, cotton oil millers, soap manufacturers, lint exporters and local governments. The fund could be used to support research activities and eventually it could be used to strengthen and provide for farm gate price stabilization in seasons of poor international prices.  
 
On value addition, Mr Speaker, it is noted that Uganda exports more that 90 percent of its cotton in raw form. The committee recommends that the government should support industries in value addition and also look at the avenues of exports to neighbouring countries, which will cut off on transportation and maybe ploughed back into the farm gate prices.  

The government should advise and support the private and public sector to engage in value addition into products of medical cotton, wool, gauze, yarns, textiles (knitted and woven), garments, oils and various other products and by-products of cotton as seen on top of page 21.

Organic Cotton

On organic cotton, which is section 5.6, the observation was that at the international level, organic production is only 2.2 percent of the entire global production. It is a small niche and the management of organic cotton is very difficult in view of the various pests that are mentioned here: the diseases; the weeds et cetera. And also without appropriate price compensation, production becomes non profitable.

Recommendations

i)	The recommendation by the committee on organic cotton production is that it is not sustainable and therefore should be left to small levels of production for niche market requirements.
ii)	Whoever wishes to carry out organic cotton farming should adhere and conform to the guidelines of the sector regulatory body, which is CDO, for example, of the requirements for multiplication of planting seed. 
iii)	Also, organic production technology should be continued by NARO.
iv)	Very importantly, a policy on organic farming should be developed by the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries; this will be a way of curbing unnecessary exploitation of the farming community and ensuring premium pricing formula in lieu of yield losses incurred. 

Mr Speaker, with that summary -(Laughter)- I beg that this House do adopt the report. Thank you very much. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much for the summary of the report. I also welcome hon. Kiyingi and hon. Alupo to the change of address. You are welcome. (Applause) I put the question –

MR ODIT: Correction.

THE SPEAKER: Correction? Okay.

MR ODIT: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am a member of this committee but I want to clarify on one point which the vice-chairperson who presented the report included in his off cuff comment when he mentioned that the Cotton Fund was used in the 1950s to construct the Owen Falls Dam. He is not completely right but it is true that Lint Marketing Board had a share in financing the project. But Coffee Marketing Board and the Uganda Electricity Marketing Board at the time also had equal shares. So it may not be right for someone who is just reading the Hansard to think that it is only funds raised from the cotton sector that were used for constructing the Owen Falls Dam. Thank you. 

3.53
CAPT. EMILLY OTEKAT (Independent, Serere County, Soroti): Thank you, Mr Speaker, I would like to thank the committee for this very good report. I represent a constituency, which is involved in cotton production and Serere Research Station is based in my constituency. 

The committee shared experiences between Uganda and Tanzania Cotton sectors but one of the areas that interested me most is the way Tanzania supports research in the Cotton Sector by establishing the Cotton Research Fund. Since our committee was sharing experiences, I thought that it would be a very good idea to put the establishment of a cotton research fund as a very good idea for us to adopt here in Uganda. And when I read that particular section, there are contributions from the farmers, from the ginners et cetera and I thought since our biggest problem in research in Uganda is lack of funding, I would recommend that that also be made as one of the recommendations for this committee so that we can adopt it. Thank you. 

3.55
MR CHARLES ANGIRO (Independent, Erute County North, Lira): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I have some few observations to make here especially when we compare cotton production in Uganda and Tanzania. I started growing cotton when I was I think 8 years old and I know what it means when we talk of cotton. I was thinning it; thinning cotton is the most important factor and you do not know it. 

Uganda was far ahead in the 1950s and 60s as far as cotton production is concerned but today we have that big decline. One very important factor which has been ignored is the farmers’ cooperative societies. Where have you put these producers? The producers have been neglected, the societies have been neglected and nobody attends to their training, not even the Executive. 

Then when we come to the issue of licensing of ginners, I think the number of ginners you have here are fewer than it used to be because cotton used to be produced in almost every district of Uganda and there were so many ginners. I remember in Lango sub-region were the number of cotton doubled the number of ginners we have today because people were seriously engaged in production of cotton. But because people have been neglected in terms of marketing especially the price of cotton, they have given up production. 

Now when we talk of organic cotton which I actually have interest in, organic cotton in Lango under the Lango Organic Farming Promotion was well organized and therefore this is a lie. Organic cotton in the Lango sub-region was the second to California in 1979 in the world production and that is on record. 

I at one time put it before His Excellency the President to ensure that the organic cotton production in Lango sub-region is promoted by fighting the insects which we call Ngini-ngini. These insects have been responsible for cotton production in Lango sub-region since 1940s. And even the coming of the DDT and Dudu-Machi what have you done, have you killed these insects? They have, therefore, been responsible for reduction of cotton production in the Lango sub-region. So, the failure to do enough research and assist farmers led to the fall in cotton production. 

But as a patron of Lango Organic Farming Promotion, I have been following very keenly the recommendation on CDO. I think it was prudent that they should have recommended that the current CDO has over stayed in that office. What measures have been put in place or is there a law? 

Because if it is a permanent venture, then the story I can give this House is that when I visited the garden of organic cotton this season ending, I was shocked to see organic cotton being bought and spread on the ground which has never been the system. What the CDO bought in the Lango sub-region was no longer organic cotton. It was maybe a mixture of organic and conventional cotton. I do not know where we are going to sell this cotton, which was well organized by the Lango Organic Farming Promotion that has actually been neglected. 

So I think the recommendation here is that a new CDO should be put in place. That would have been one of the best recommendations that this committee should have arrived at because at the moment there is confusion in the CDO because it seems the office of the CDO also wants to be run as an investor in cotton. Their objectives and roles should be separated. If the office is complaining about the number of ginners now, the more ginners we have the more competition we have and the better the quality of cotton produced. If we do not want now competition in cotton production, then it means we are going to have a monopoly and who is going to handle the monopoly system yet we know that the cotton price has been a very big task? 

That is why I want to tell this House that during the next cotton production, we may get even much less cotton produced in the Lango sub-region and especially with this war of the organic farming promotion. And the CDO is going to cause many farmers to shift to other crops in order to earn their living. So, my strongest recommendation is that the CDO issue should be addressed. According to the farmers, we need a new CDO in that office. We want to know how many years should be for a CDO, a sitting CDO and then later a new one comes in? That has been a very serious measure that I think we have put under consideration. 

Otherwise the Lango Organic Farming Promotion has been training their farmers and that one has got records. We have almost 20 extension training officers who are well trained and are training our people. Some of them are pursuing degrees in managing organic cotton production. Besides organic cotton production, we have gone to organic simsim, organic red pepper et cetera in order to subsidise the cotton. 

Some money should be put, as another recommendation, to organic farming production in Lango sub-region or in other areas. Other areas that have come in to produce organic cotton came in much later and they went in the name of organic cotton production while actually they were buying conventional cotton and then terming it as organic cotton which was very unfortunate. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Hon. Members, an hour ago, there was an appeal by hon. Cecilia Ogwal appealing to Parliament to support their cause. I understand you have got some women who have come to address the same matter. Because of this, the organisers are asking me to suspend the proceedings for 10 minutes to go and receive your visitors who are waiting outside. The proceedings are suspended for 10 minutes. (Applause)

(The House was suspended at 4.03 p.m.)

(On resumption at 4.30 p.m., the Speaker presiding_)

4.30
MR NANDALA-MAFABI (FDC, Budadiri County West, Sironko): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I have looked at the report of the committee which visited Tanzania. 

First, I note the people who visited are different from the people who are presenting the report. I am getting worried; maybe it would be good if those who visited really agree that this is their report? Why am I saying this? 

MS WONEKHA: Mr Speaker, yesterday we received a report from the Committee on Local Government Accounts presented by the current chairman, who was not the chairman at the time the report was compiled. So what exactly is hon. Nandala saying?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, I am happy I have not said that those who signed - I am saying that if the delegation that visited were the ones who signed and you were presenting on behalf of those who visited, we would be more comfortable because even the Local Government Accounts Committee report that you are talking about was signed by the old committee but presented by the current one. These are two different stories. We are getting worried because if you look at this report, it looks like a CDO report. I can assure you that this is not the report of the committee that visited. In fact that is why I am saying that I would be very glad if the committee, which visited had come to own this report.

They have made fundamental recommendations but I will go to Table 1, Annex 2. I come with the experience of a farmer. As all Members are aware, I am the Chairman of Bugisu Cooperative Union, which deals in coffee and the problems of coffee are no different from the ones of cotton. I will explain why they are not different.

Uganda is an agricultural country and because of this, it means that its GDP is basically built by agricultural production. If that is true then the government, if it is pro-people, must make deliberate efforts to support the agricultural sector. However I am going to demonstrate that you are not doing so.

In 1999 we produced 117 bales and got Shs 29 billion. In 2001/2002, we produced 120 bales and got Shs 17.7 million. That means that as we produce more, we get less. You are saying that you are promoting production and that we must increase production but as we increase production, we make losses. I recall that there was a Coffee Stabilisation Fund, which I am yet to ask the Minister of Finance to bring back to Bugisu. 

It acted in the sense that during a boom season, the government would collect resources, put them in a basket and wait for a lean period. In this case, we have left farmers at the mercy of the world market or the dealers thus putting them at a big disadvantage yet we are telling them to produce more -(Interruption)

MAJ. (RTD) RWAMIRAMA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to inform my colleague, hon. Nandala-Mafabi that this season that ended, government provided funds to stabilise cotton prices to the tune of Shs 13 billion and that was for cotton only. So it is not true that we have left the farmers at the mercy of multi-nationals. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: All members recall that by the time government came to do this, it had become a parliamentary issue here and we fought to make sure farmers are helped. Why do you want to be informed of your role as ministers? Why do you want to be forced? Why don’t you see the world and the farmers? 

If you go through the tables you will discover that our farmers are being discouraged to grow more because the more they grow, the less they get –(Prof. Kamuntu rose­_)- I could give more information. Prof. Kamuntu, you have just joined the Ministry of Finance, relax! In 2003/2004 we produced 160 billion but we got 44. In 2004/2005, we produced 254 and got 37. You can imagine –(Prof. Kamuntu rose_)- you will get a chance to talk Prof. Kamuntu. So if this country were really for the poor, I am sure that we would have been supporting our farmers in crises. That is why it makes me conclude that this report is for CDO and not Parliament -(Interruption)

MS SEKITOLEKO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I was one of the members on the delegation that visited Tanzania and while there, we visited different farmers and organisations. The members of the delegation took time off to interact with the Ministers of Agriculture and the cotton-growing farmers and we spent a lot of time in the field. When we came back to Uganda, we sat as a committee and continuously discussed our findings. It is so disturbing when hon. Nandala-Mafabi keeps on insisting that this report is for CDO and not for the delegation that went to Tanzania. Is he in order to insist and yet he wasn’t even part of the delegation?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Nandala-Mafabi, they are saying that they are hurt with your insistence. Can you substantiate?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. On page 19, it says government should increase budgetary support to CDO. You are not saying that government should help the farmers. On page 19, it says that the committee recommends that government should increase budgetary support to CDO.

THE SPEAKER: No, you may disagree with the conclusions but why are you saying that you doubt the report and that it was not made by those who visited? On what basis?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, I am saying this because if you look at the report, it is more in favour of CDO than the farmers.

THE SPEAKER: No, you can say that it is not a good report. The two are different. Maybe if you were the one you would have insisted on another issue. They are hurt because you are not respecting them as the owners. You may not have to repeat it for you already made it. Please, proceed.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: The prices for CDO are more than the prices for the farmers. If you look –(Prof. Kamuntu rose_)- professor why don’t you give me time? As we are talking about farmers, we are talking about reducing poverty and to reduce poverty, you must produce and our farmers produce agricultural products. If a farmer goes to borrow money to produce cotton expecting a certain price, and when he goes to the market he cannot get that price, it means he makes a loss. 

If the loan he put in is his property, the property will go. We are talking about economic recess - even here when the farmers are making losses, it is government’s duty to come and help farmers not to put them at a disadvantage. You can even put more money in agriculture to the farmers in form of fertilizers, in form of farm inputs and maybe mechanising agriculture for the benefit of the farmers, but not leaving the farmers at the hands of the CDO and a few people in the market.

In East Africa, US $116.7 million is to be returned to the Treasury by UNRA because it has poor absorption capacity. US $27 million has been drawn from the Privatisation Unit and has been returned to the Treasury. US $18.6 million have been taken again from Stanbic by government micro finance. You can collect all this money and take it to Finance but you are not collecting any money to take to the farmer who is a taxpayer of this country. I think as Parliament we should become a bit serious about our farmers. We should support farmers -(Interruption)

MAJ. (RTD) RWAMIRAMA: Mr Speaker, I have listened to my colleague very attentively. Even after you have advised him, is he in order to say that government is insensitive to farmers when we are actually getting money to NAADS to cover all the sub-counties in this country? Is he in order to continue insinuating that government is insensitive?

THE SPEAKER: I think you said this before. It seems he does not believe you. That is why I think he is insisting that way.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. It is true –(Interruption)

MR ODIT: Mr Speaker, one of the reasons why I tend to agree with my colleague here is because some three or four years ago, CDO came before our committee of Parliament and demanded for support for the introduction of high yielding cotton in this country. Government failed to provide necessary resources to facilitate the introduction of this high yielding cotton and for that matter we would want the minister to tell us what stage, what level of preparation has government reached to prepare and introduce this cotton in this country because I know its yields is ten times what we are producing now.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, the problem in agriculture is so big and when I see my good former chairman of Committee on Finance saying NAADS, I just shudder. In our villages, every village has about 100 homes. A parish has about six villages. If you multiply that by six you get about 600 villages. If you are going to take only six houses, in a parish, it will take 100 years to finish one parish. Where will I be? (Laughter) We need a policy which will help us to enjoy all these benefits. What do we want? Farm inputs! What do we want –(Interjection)- Mr Speaker, for Prof. Kamuntu has just gone to the Ministry of Finance.

PROF. KAMUNTU: Mr Speaker, hon. Mafabi has a habit of misusing numerical data to make wrong conclusions and I draw your attention to Annex 2, page 1, Table 1. Hon. Mafabi, I would want to tell you that since 2001/02 the farmers produced 120,000 bales of lint and the price was 0.8 and the value was 17.76 compared to 2000/01 when they produced only 100,000 and got 27.

He would want to induce that the farmers should have produced cotton because they are losing money, but if you turn over the page you find that this time they produced 110,000 and the price improved. Do you realise that if government had discouraged production because of the previous low price they would have lost US $24.42 million?

Is hon. Mafabi in order to use numerical figures to make wrong conclusions? Second order -(Laughter)- in Prosperity-for-All, the six households are simply used as models for the rest to emulate. It is not that you are going to go six times 1,000 villages the way he is arguing, again using a numerical figure to draw a wrong conclusion. Is this honourable member in order to continue using numerical figures to draw wrong conclusions when the facts are six households, emulated and you can multiply and he knows the multiplier effect? He knows it.

THE SPEAKER: As I see, what actually he wanted to make are clarifications and these clarifications were resisted and what you are saying is that, it is out of order to resist a clarification that would help the House to understand. Proceed.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I think if we go by what Prof. Kamuntu has said, telling me I am going to earn Shs 1.5 million and when I produce I earn Shs 0.8 million, I think I have lost. Under normal circumstances, you would come up to cover the difference which I have lost because as a farmer, losing Shs 0.7 million of a dollar is a very terrible thing. And I would have expected Prof. Kamuntu to have seen that the dollar of yesterday is even stronger than the dollar of today. If you cannot see that in real terms, then I am worried about what you are going to do in Ministry of Finance.

As I said, we need to take a deliberate effort to support our farmers. Where there are losses because of inflation, the government applies treasury bills to mop up currency and also when farmers are losing, there must be an economic tool to be applied – a stimulus for production. You can say yes, you are going to lose but we are giving you A, B and C. 

In fact in Kenya the farmers have been told to sell their maize at a certain price and have been told they will get free fertilizers, tractors and seeds from government like you would also say, “This year you are going to make a loss but we are also going to give you the same”. But leaving our farmers at the mercies of the population is dangerous. Leaving our farmers at the mercies of CDO – I do not know when the CEO of CDO will ever leave that office because sometimes when you over stay in office, you become senile and incompetent. I am not going to accept incompetence to be transferred to the farmers. We are not going to appropriate more money for CDO’s office to make farmers poor. I thank you.

4.52
MR ABRAHAM BYANDALA (NRM, Katikamu County North, Luweero): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity and I thank Dr Serunjogi and his members for the report they have presented. The first point I have on this report is that cotton is an annual crop; if anything bad happens, it means people involved in that are in a problem. We do not have insurance capacity with our people in the rural areas, nor do we have capacity to fight nature. So if there is a catastrophe in a year, that year is gone for those farmers. I have a case of a relative who used to produce cotton, rains came and they ended up getting nothing. I have a very bad experience with cotton from that perspective.

Secondly, they are talking about organic cotton. Who is that who knows the organic cotton? Is this organic cotton or these are tricks to deceive people that they go into organic cotton growing? In case you go in organic cotton, let us assume it is there, it means you are tied on a few people who can buy that organic cotton. And we have also been told that this organic cotton needs a financial, compensation system. How can we go on with things which need compensation all the time? 

Let me now demonstrate how this cotton can be a problem to Ugandans. We have been told in the report that many of our small farmers from 43 districts are engaged in cotton growing. Let me give a small calculation. Assuming that in one acre of cotton you get 800 kilogrammes and that is the maximum I am told from the experts and the price is Shs 600 per kilogramme, which was the case this year. If that small scale farmer is engaged on ten acres in a year, he gets a gross income of Shs 4.8 million. And there are very few of our people in the rural areas who can afford ten acres.

Let me give you two acres which the majority can afford; 800 kilos an acre, Shs 600 per kilogramme, in a whole year, that fellow gets Shs 960,000 gross income. How can somebody survive on Shs 960,000 assuming the costs are zero? Nobody can. From that –(Interruption)

MR ANGIRO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. When you look at Annex 2, Table 1, be assured that in 1996/97 that quantity was realised by organic farmers. And then the failure in 1997/98 was as a result of taking to organic area in Lango sub-region wrong cotton seeds which was not meant for that area. When it was realised, the production increased in 1998/99. I am an organic farmer who has been growing this organic cotton. 

And then when you mention that they are deceiving the farmers to produce organic cotton, are you in order? What records do you have because I am a trained organic farmer and I have been doing it since 1997? Where do you get your information? Mr Speaker, is the hon. Member in order to deceive this House and then abuse the efforts of the organic cotton farmers?

THE SPEAKER: I think you wanted to give him information by analysing and for him to desist from what he is saying therefore, you have used a point of order but thank you for the information.

MR BYANDALA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. When I was speaking, I was giving figures which are not contestable; I was not just lamenting. Let him produce 800 kilogrammes per acre in two acres, you will get less than a million shillings. It is a statement of fact; you cannot change it. 

In other words, we cannot accept that our people continuously grow crops where they are going to remain poor and I am appealing to government that in areas where we cannot get engaged in large scale production let them get alternative crops for the farmers. We cannot afford to have our people earning less than a million in a year. What are they going to eat? Will they ever go to school? Will they ever put on a suit? All those districts growing cotton, please, change from cotton to something better, like fruits. Thank you very much.

4.59
MR WILLIAM OKECHO (Independent, West Budama County North, Tororo): Mr Speaker, I thank you very much for giving me this opportunity to talk about a subject of great interest – cotton.

I have seen the report that was written by the team that went to Tanzania. I have got mixed reactions to whatever is contained in it. The first thing that surprises me relates to the conflicting actions between UIA and CDO. It seems, in this report, that whatever UIA is doing frustrates CDO and the cotton farmers. When you get to page 9, the report talks about the possibilities of 2007/08 for cotton production and further says that UIA has been licensing many ginners for a small crop. According to the report, this has got an effect on the loss of focus on the need for quality planting seeds and lint. This situation was caused by overlaps between CDO and UIA on their roles in the registration of private operators in the cotton industry.

What makes it difficult for CDO and UIA to collaborate in running the ginners’ support programme and so on, which should actually be done concurrently - we know very well that ginners have been supporting the production of cotton inputs; their support has been appreciated many times. But what causes the conflict is the lack of coordination of the two organisations. It is important that people in the management of CDO and those of UIA collaborate in this very good programme of supporting farmers by using ginners’ finances as has been the case.

Secondly, Mr Speaker, in this report there is an insinuation that the cotton industry in Tanzania borrowed massively from what was going on in Uganda. The difference is that they applied the techniques that were being used here better. They developed them better to be able to promote their cotton production very well. So, after such a visit to Tanzania, it would be of interest for us parliamentarians to whom the report is presented to know exactly –(Interruption)

MR BIKWASIZEHI: I thank you honourable colleague and Mr Speaker. The case in Tanzania – I was part of this team – is that the cotton sub-sector is handled in the prime minister’s office. It is that office that sets targets to be met. The targets are then followed by the ministries that set strategies on how to achieve those targets. Consequently, the budgets for the various stakeholders are geared towards achieving those set objectives or targets; it is handled at that political level. That is why we recommended, in this report, that the Prime Minister’s Office takes keen interest in this sector and organises meetings with all the stakeholders to iron out all what has not gone right in order to boost cotton production. Thank you.

MR OKECHO: I would like to thank you for that, but I had got to that point. Anyway, I was saying that since the Tanzania Cotton Organisation borrowed from Uganda and now making better use of our knowledge, why doesn’t our Uganda cotton industry also borrow from it? My sense is that the team that went to Tanzania should have come out with clear and concise steps to be followed by CDO and all the other government institutions that handle cotton in Uganda or agriculture for that matter. This would enable us to strictly recommend that those be followed, it being a winning solution.

I know very well that quite a strong team went to Tanzania, but the recommendations that I see in this report do not give us concise steps to follow to enable us improve on our cotton industry. This would have been important because we have actually failed to get the Tanzanian organisation to give us such better advice.

Thirdly, let me say something on organic cotton. As we have seen in the report, 0.2 percent of the world is handling organic cotton. My sense is that in Uganda this was a kind of diversion to involve our people in organic cotton production. We would have better continued with our conventional cotton, which we all know has produced a lot of results for many of us and the country at large over time. I know the organic cotton thing might have excited people, but it would have been better to get back to where we started because we had already failed to handle even the small thing that we had started with.

MR ANGIRO: Thank you, Mr Speaker and my colleague for giving way. The information I would like to give is that, cotton production in Lango and Acholi has always been produced organically; we have not been spraying it. Cotton production in the Lango and Acholi sub-regions has been organically produced by the use of Ngini-ngini insects. It is a special organic cotton production method that you do not know. (Laughter) So I would like to invite Members to visit us and assess the efforts and effects of these Ngini-ngini insects in organic cotton production. Many Members in this House do not understand and they do not know. This has been especially in Erute and Oyam. (Laughter)

MS LAGADA: Mr Speaker, would the hon. Angiro please translate what this Ngini-ngini insect is for the rest of the Members? We do not follow what he is saying.

MR ANGIRO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I thank you my sister for your clarification request. I think I said before that these are black insects which are tiny in nature. They move in groups and live in groups to ensure that no pest can destroy crops in that area. They have been in Lango and Acholi for years and these people who brought the Dudu-machi and the DDT destroyed some of them but they are now multiplying. So, this is where the organic cotton originated from. Thank you very much. 

MR OKECHO: Mr Speaker, we have all been growing cotton in Acholi, Lango, Tororo and West Nile but we have never heard of Ngini-ngini in our cotton production in Tororo. 

This is a bit of information for you. In 1989 there was a cotton production campaign in this country, you remember? Who was the first in cotton production in 1989? It was my own family which actually ended up getting a tractor from the President for being the first in cotton production and we never used Ngini-ngini. This is a fact which you can check in the history of Uganda’s cotton growing. So I am telling you that this is a subject, which I know very well. I have been in cotton growing ever since I was born and production of cotton should actually revert to the traditional way that we have been using. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I do not want to overstress this point. It is important that we -

THE SPEAKER: On this side we will have hon. Dombo then we will have hon. Betty Amongi, hon. Cecilia Ogwal and then conclude.

5.09
MR EMMANUEL DOMBO (NRM, Bunyole County, Butaleja): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I have looked at this report as presented by the delegation. On the first page, it says that the managing director of CDO informed the committee that the cotton industry in Tanzania would be a valuable case study for the management of the sub-sector. This is a welcome idea. I would be happier in future if committees of Parliament undertaking research or field visits or cross-border visits, utilised our research department to establish the reasons why and where we want to go in order for us to come up with independent conclusions. 

The problem I have is that the managing director proposed the visit, she also attended the visit in Tanzania and I am not aware whether she did not attend the drafting of the report. But she is also attending the presentation. In order to conduct independent work as Members of Parliament, it would give more credibility to our reports to make the decisions when, where and why we want to go and conduct the visits. This would be very helpful -(Interruption)

MR EKANYA: Mr Speaker, I would like hon. Dombo to clarify which managing director he is talking about because to the best of my knowledge, I know that the one who is in office is illegally in office. Is that the one you are talking about? Her term has never been renewed. 

MR DOMBO: Mr Speaker, that is not within my mandate to clarify because I am debating the report of the committee. 

I want to seek clarification from the presenter of this report. When you look at the justification of why there was low production of cotton in the various years, there are reasons that have been given. Were these reasons given by the stakeholders in the sector or were they given by CDO? As Parliament, we must come up with recommendations which will help upgrade the performance of the sector and I would be more interested to find out if you cared to meet other stakeholders within the sector to find out how the sector is performing and the challenges that they are facing in order to make a conclusive debate.

Finally, I have been having a problem in my constituency. Every time the cotton season comes, there are many farmers who come complaining. They say that some ginners have been prevented from buying and operating in certain areas. I know that the sector has been liberalised and I want to find out whether this regulation of zoning is not indirectly going to create monopolies to the disadvantage of the farmers so that the prices are not competitive. We could easily create a cartel through zoning and disadvantage our farmers. I thank you, Mr Speaker. 

5.13
MS BETTY AMONGI (Independent, Woman Representative, Apac): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the committee for the report. 

I want to start with the findings of the committee which start from page 3. I want to deal with the issue on page 4, 4.2 under structural reforms. The committee indicated that in Tanzania, the cotton sector was liberalised and in 4.2.3, they indicate that the reforms in Tanzania led to the increase of private buyers from 10 during 1993/94 to 29 in 2005/06. 

On the same issue of privatisation, the committee found that this stimulated increased involvement of the private operators in cotton buying, the enhanced buying, ginning and exporting capacity created a competitive environment in the sector where producers’ prices rose to over 60 percent of free on board prices.

Mr Speaker, this is the fundamental to me: the issue we should start with is the question of privatisation. In comparison, the committee indicates that the privatisation in Tanzania is leading to competitiveness and this is the principle of liberalization. When you liberalise, you leave people to compete; you leave people to offer prices; you leave people to operate in a private sector and only create an enabling environment. What is the case for Uganda? 

The committee goes on, on page 5, the last paragraph and states: “The CDO ensured that multiplication, processing and packaging seeds were in conformity with  the seeds certification requirements and the regulation  contained in the ‘Seeds and Plant Act, 2006’ the ‘Cotton (Amendment) Regulations, 2005’ and the ‘Cotton Establishment of Zones and Isolated and Segregated Areas Regulations, 2005’.” 

Therefore, in Uganda as we talk there is no free liberalization of the Cotton Sector -(Prof. Latigo rose_)- the problem with professor is failing to live up to the title. Please, if someone is making a contribution, it is better you wait and differ. 

Zoning has led to the prices either being low or the prices being stagnant and demoralization of production by the farmers in cotton growing areas. 

There came a situation where people in Kenya, for example, wanted to come and buy organic cotton in the Lango sub-region but because of the zoning, they were not allowed to buy. You cannot buy from a zone that according to the CDO you have not invested in. That is not liberalization. 

So if we want to deal and more so in the comparison with the findings of the committee, the first fundamental we should address is liberalization. If we are going to liberalise, let us liberalise and let the private sector go where they want to go and buy where they want to buy if they want to invest in that area. Let as many people as possible invest in organic areas. Let as many people as possible invest anywhere they want to and then the prices will increase.

I am glad that the committee on page 15 recommends that there should be an overview. We must deal with the question of the policy on liberalization. And I hope that if this recommendation is adopted, we should go to the fundamentals and remove this whole idea of giving one person or one group an area; they determine their own prices and disadvantage the competitive principle of liberalization.

The committee also recommended that it would be prudent for CDO or the government to give prizes before the season or before the farmers start production. I think that is what we have been crying for. Maybe in their conclusion or recommendation they did not give the background within which that recommendation came from. 

I do not know whether in Tanzania that is the practice but I do agree with that recommendation that it is important to give prizes to the farmers prior to the production so that you will increase production, farmers will increase their yields and definitely it will increase production in the area. 

When you go to page 7, the committee made comparisons of the production of cotton in Uganda to that of Tanzania. If you look at that comparison you see that in Uganda the production has been low and fluctuating and yet the committee indicates that Tanzania got best practice from Uganda. Now, why is there this differentiation in the production if it is true that Tanzania has got better practices as compared to Uganda? What explanation would you give on the issue of Tanzania having increased production vis-à-vis our production which is fluctuating and always low? What recommendations would you give that we in Uganda can learn from to increase the production?  

And maybe to highlight, what are those best practices? You indicated the issue of only the CDO, which you said that they copied the CDO Act - something like that - but what are those best practices that they have copied and increased their production while in Uganda we have the best practices, which has been copied but our production is stagnant and in certain circumstances low?

THE SPEAKER: We have to curtail our contributions honestly.

MS AMONGI: Okay, Mr Speaker. As I conclude, I would like to get clarification from the committee, on page 14. The committee recommends legal and structural framework reforms for CDO. However, the committee goes ahead to say: “The CDO should be given the necessary political support to implement the law.” 

I would like to know – because I did not get the basis of this recommendation - is it that the committee realised that there is no political support to implement the law? Because you are saying CDO should be given necessary political support to implement the law. What is the problem now? Isn’t there political support? 

We know that we pass the budget for CDO. In many circumstances we have come on this Floor and talked about the misuse of money going towards cotton by CDO but now you are saying that we should give political support to implement the law. I want those clarifications. I thank you, Mr Speaker. (Mr Opange rose_)

5.23
MRS CECILIA OGWAL (Independent, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Thank you. I believe the man thought that being a woman, he should take priority. But I thank you, Mr Speaker for that correction. (Laughter)  

The issue of cotton is becoming a thorn in the flesh of Parliament. Every year we talk about cotton and we make prescriptions but nothing is done about it. What I want to say at the moment is that if the government cannot do anything to rectify the duplicity -(Interruption)

MS LAGADA: Mr Speaker, I see on page 24 of this report that hon. Cecilia Ogwal is a member of this committee. Is she in order to debate the report of her own committee?

THE SPEAKER: I did not know that. Wind up in a minute.

MRS OGWAL: Mr Speaker, we want to clarify this because you realise that this report was not brought to Parliament by the chairperson of the committee because we were not party at that time and that is why we allowed the then chairperson to read this report. I think the chairperson stood up to explain.

I was not part of that delegation -

THE SPEAKER: You should allow others who are not members of the committee to make contributions.

MRS OGWAL: I did not sign because I was not part of the committee and I don’t know what they discussed or what they found out.

THE SPEAKER: No, but they listed you anyway. Leave room for others, you are a Member of this committee; you will be following up these recommendations.

5.26
MR LOUIS OPANGE (Independent, Pallisa County, Pallisa): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Allow me to join the Members who have thanked the committee for going to Tanzania to study cotton production.

When you look at this report, it has brought out the factors that had caused the decline of cotton growing in Uganda. When you look at the practical aspects of the decline of cotton in Uganda, and when you look at page 8 of this report, in 1997/1998, we managed to produce 32,000 bales and the reason for the decline, according to the committee, was El Nino. 

In the following year, they said it was still the rains but the bales increased to 82,000. In 2003/2004, they said 40 percent failure was attributed to bale worm pest but the bales increased to 160,000.

The issue of declining cotton growing in Uganda is not actually a matter of climatic changes but the problem we have - towards the end of the Seventh Parliament we made a resolution in this House but it is unfortunate that it coincided with the period of campaigns and that resolution was not effected. When we returned, it was already taken up by time.

We raised the issue of politicising the growing of cotton, which is a strategic crop. This is a major problem in Uganda and has affected farmers. When you look at the pricing aspect, the cobweb theory explains it all and that is why agricultural produce faces fluctuating prices. 

When the price of cotton is say Shs 1,000, the next financial year you find that many farmers will dash to grow cotton, production will increase and definitely the market price will drop. The next production season, farmers will lose interest and definitely production will reduce. Therefore, the best thing to avoid all these aspects of pricing is for the government to have a stabilisation fund such that when the price declines, farmers are not left frustrated.

When you look at pages 8 and 9, the bales continued increasing up to a certain time when they declined drastically. Mr Speaker, the recommendations that are made here will not improve the issue of cotton production in Uganda. We are aware that conflict of interest cannot be ruled out in this issue of cotton growing and management. 

You can look at a situation where one is a board member of CDO for example and at the same time a ginner, has his ginnery somewhere and is a member of the Ginners Association. How can this group really work in favour of the farmers in Uganda? 

The issue of conflict of interest and politicising whereby when you look at page 14, they were saying that CDO should be given political will and support. I feel that CDO has all the political will and support.

In Pallisa and Busoga, CDO can afford to deploy the whole Police to control people from taking their cotton to places where prices are good as well as control the private buyer from buying in a particular place. This is where the problem comes. 

There was a time when hon. Migereko and his group in Busoga were buying cotton at Shs 1,200 and in Pallisa it was going at Shs 700. People were crossing from Pallisa to Busoga but they met a lot of resistance by roadblocks all over. That is why the other day they said poverty incidences in Pallisa and Teso sub-regions are frustrating. This is the problem that we have that in case a crop like cotton has a bad price obviously our people will not benefit.

In the Seventh Parliament we recommended that the CDO should be restructured to create a board assigned to handle cotton regulation, ginning and marketing. This will help. When one executive director is responsible for the regulation of cotton ginning and marketing, it will really help the improvement of cotton growing. 

Also, the Ministry of Agriculture should have a policy formulation and be - I remember in Obote’s regime it was the Minister of Cooperatives and Marketing who was announcing the prices of cotton. They should also announce the price early enough and not when farmers are harvesting. This will really give people incentive to grow cotton in this country.

Competitive buying under a liberalised economy improves the prices and farmers benefit out of competition. This business of CDO having interests in regulating cotton growing, in ginning and marketing will not solve the problems of cotton in Uganda -(Interruption)

MRS OGWAL: Mr Speaker, I just want to inform the honourable member that when it comes to fixing prices, the ginners’ association together with the CDO agrees on the prices based on the cost of the ginning. The farmers who are the producers of cotton are never party in determining the prices. 

Over and above that, every year until 2004/2005 season, farmers were being forced to illegally pay Shs 50 per kilogram of seed cotton purportedly for seeds and yet the government’s policy is to supply free seeds. So I just want to inform the Members that actually farmers have no voice, no control and CDO together with ginners are the ones driving the cotton sector to the oppression of the poor. Thank you, Mr Speaker.								MR OPANGE: Thank you very much for that information. Mr Speaker, we all love Uganda and cotton is part of life in Western, Northern and Eastern Uganda. Let us be sincere and come up with resolutions that can address the problems that are created as far as cotton development is concerned. We also request that there should be -

THE SPEAKER: I gave you five minutes.

MR OPANGE: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. There is also need for us to come up with a resolution urging government to put the cotton aspect on top of their agenda because for example these ginners always claim that they have invested in particular areas and that therefore, they are the ones to buy cotton in those areas. 

In Pallisa I have moved to almost every division and I do not see any demonstration farm or investment, which is taking place there but at the end of the season they say, somebody has invested in that zone. Cotton is a source of problems in this country and so we should address it otherwise it is going to be a security risk. This is because those who rely on cotton and are denied good prices will always smuggle cotton to areas where there are good prices. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

5.35
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (PROF. MORRIS OGENGA-LATIGO): Thank you, Mr Speaker and I thank the various Members who have made contributions to this debate. Allow me to give certain basic facts that probably many Members did not pick from the debate. 

The first one is the fact that in the early sixties, the cotton sector in Uganda was liberalised and the problem that the country faced was that the buyers would cheat farmers. You would go to sell your cotton but the person buying would put his foot under your bale and say, if you do not want to sell the cotton go away.  

Secondly, each year when the farmers would get cheated or when prices would fluctuate, the next year cotton production would dramatically decline and so what the government, which hon. Kamuntu served in its second term did was to support the formation of cotton cooperatives. Those cotton cooperatives then took charge of everything from how to organise the farmers, how to buy the cotton, how to sell to the ginners and even how to gin and eventually sell cotton as lint and seed for milling. 

I suspect that if you look at the data for cotton production in Kasese where the cooperative still works, cotton production in that region does not fluctuate very much because it is managed by their own people. That is fact number one.  

Fact number two that we must consider very seriously, is the question of zoning of cotton production. In the sixties, zoning was about the type of cotton grown. You had an area where you grew BP52 cotton and you had an area where you grew Satu. That was the essence of zoning. The current zoning, which I hear about is the zoning, which is walking on its head. (Laughter) It is not the zoning that we should be talking about regarding cotton. Therefore, the zoning that is being pushed in the cotton industry now is a recipe for chaos.  

Third is the question of organic cotton. In the sixties, you could have talked about organic cotton and the premise for that would have been that place where you grew cotton without inputs particularly insecticides and fertilizers.  Let me tell this House that I am an entomologist and I taught pesticides for many years before I came to Parliament. Right now if you went to buy one litre of an effective insecticide, which is an organochlorine, you would pay Shs 22,000 to Shs 30,000 per litre.  

There is no cotton farmer who is going to spend a cent buying that insecticide to spray and since nobody has subsidized the supply of insecticides, it is very dangerous for anybody to claim that organic cotton production is responsible for the decline in cotton production because all the cotton you have is essentially organic. There are no inputs to that cotton. I am a farmer. A bag of fertilizers now - and I have seen this report talk about fertilizers - a bag DAP fertilizers costs Shs 120,000. There is no farmer, where the poor depend on cotton in the North, who will pick a cent to buy fertilizers to put on cotton. So what is this problem? You say organic cotton is responsible for the decline in cotton production.

Allow me, Mr Speaker, to go briefly to this report. Just like in yesterday’s report, this report is supposed to talk about the visit to Tanzania. But as hon. Emmanuel Dombo pointed out, this is not a report about your visit to Tanzania. It is just about using your visit to Tanzania to justify what is happening in the Uganda cotton sector. (Applause) I will cite for you a number of pages. 

Yesterday I met the head of the Cotton Development Organisation. In the morning I had just got telephone calls from Pader District; there is a cotton group, Donovant that has been supporting cotton production in that region. One of the things they do is they have tractors. They open the land and you grow cotton but you also grow other crops.  

The critical argument is that Donovant is out-pricing competition. I do not understand the essence of competition. That somebody is out-pricing competition. To us, the cotton growers we are very happy. The day Donovant pays less; we will go to another person who pays more. But those who can remember, House of Dawooda came enthusiastically to promote cotton production. He worked with people, even gave credit support. Something happened and House of Dawooda had to abandon participation in cotton. I see the same thing happening on Donovant.  

MAJ. (RTD) RWAMIRAMA: Mr Speaker, I want to inform hon. Latigo that actually Donovant is not offering better prices than even the local farmers. When he engaged the local farmers and took organic cotton from them, he paid them less money for organic cotton. Actually farmers who grow conventional cotton in some of the areas in Lango and Eastern Uganda got better pay, this was Shs 700 against Shs 800.  

MRS OGWAL: I want to give you more information.  Not only did the House of Dawooda collapse, but we had a ginner who was a Ugandan and probably who was so progressive that he became the lead ginner in the country for 2003 and 2004, consecutively. That ginner, because he protested the imposition of cotton levy, he was forced to close. Not only did that company close, I think it was owned by a man called Sentongo from Buganda here; not only did he close Clark Cotton, which is an international cotton company, but he was also forced to close because Clark Cotton protested the manner in which CDO was managing the cotton sector. Thank you. 

PROF. OGENGA-LATIGO: When you go to the report, on page 6, bullet No. 2 talks about inputs, planting seeds, insecticides and palms. I come from Agago where we grow a lot of cotton. I have not seen anybody distributing fertilizers and insecticides for free.

Bullet No. 4 is saying that organic production started in 1994, and then the second sentence says, “This production increased to 13,000 bales in 2007/2008 season under unplanned expansion to West Nile, Northern and Eastern Uganda.”

Mr Speaker, the head of the Cotton Development Authority invited me to a meeting on Monday and I would want to go and discuss the cotton sector very closely with them. There is a lot of repeated claims of insects reducing yields. I am a very big entomologist; I trained Dr Sekamate for his Masters and his PhD. He is a cotton entomologist, he works as a consultant; we used to be consultants on cotton in Kasese and many other places. If we want to help the sector, let us not use reports such as these to mislead the country. 

This report cannot help us to improve our cotton sector. This is a report which is an attempt to suggest that organic cotton is the cause of the problem. That is not the cause of the problem. The cause of the problem is our neglect of the agricultural sector. The cause of the problem is the inability of CDO to do the things that they are supposed to do. There is supposed to be a Cotton Development Authority. If you develop the cotton sector, production will not fluctuate. That is my understanding of development, that there is progression.

In the 1960s, we had Lint Marketing Board. If the job was to wait for the farmers and would help them to market; if they got too much money, they would save that money so that they can compensate the price of cotton and stabilise prices. It worked, that is why people like hon. Okecho, people like me went to school because we used to get money to pay fees out of cotton. It can still work for us.  

Hon. Byandala, cotton can still work for us, but only if we do it right. In America they grow cotton, but they use fertilizers, they use pesticides and they use irrigation. Now if you leave the farmers to the mercy of nature and you claim that even what they are producing is not organic enough, what do you want them to do to call their cotton organic cotton?

So, it is well and good that they visited Tanzania, but this report is not about the visit; it does not draw lessons that we can learn from that visit. In my view, this report should be rejected. I thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: This ends the debate on this issue.

5.48
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ANIMAL INDUSTRY (Maj. (Rtd) Bright Rwamirama): Thank you, Mr Speaker.  I want to thank Members for their contributions. Like I said yesterday, the issues of agriculture are issues that touch all of us, and when we come here, it is good that we come with open minds to make sure that the people we represent do not get a raw deal. I want to start where hon. Latigo stopped.  

One of the ginners was mentioned and the good news is that we had a meeting in this Parliament in the Conference Hall last year to discuss and debate this issue to formulate a way forward with people who came from cotton growing areas. The same ginner –(Interruption)

MR ODIT: Mr Speaker, you requested the minister to respond to some of the concerns and his opening remarks, he said he wanted to start from where hon. Latigo stopped and the ending is open. I do not know how much time he is going to be given but I thought the best way would be for him to start responding to key issues that needed a response.

THE SPEAKER: I gave the minister three minutes.

MAJ. (RTD) RWAMIRAMA: Mr Speaker, the ginner referred to actually offered farmers Shs 650 when others were getting Shs 800 and it forced them to grow organic cotton -(Interjections)- yes, please these are the facts I have –(Interruption)

PROF. OGENGA-LATIGO: Thank you. I am sorry, Mr Speaker. You raised that matter and I did not answer because I did not want to tell you that the people who told you about the price being paid by that ginner were lying to you because they are paying my farmers Shs 800 a kilo and they are being attacked for paying farmers that rate when it was agreed that the rate should be about Shs 650. I kept quiet about it but if you want, we can drive to Agago tomorrow and you will find farmers and talk to them, not me, and they will tell you how much they are being paid.

MAJ. (RTD) RWAMIRAMA: Hon. Nandala- Mafabi, I have been in worse places than that. If you think that is not a place to go, I will go. 

Hon. Members, you raised the issue of ngini-ngini – ngini-ngini is localised. Secondly, it does not attack all the pests and so it cannot be used across Uganda. Therefore, we cannot bank on ngini-ngini. 

There are issues which I want to clarify properly like the issue of neglecting farmers. For instance, Hon. Nandala-Mafabi, you know government bailed out the cooperative union you head and they paid the loan -(Interjections)- yes, Shs 3 billion. We should not come to Parliament to distort the facts.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: If hon. Wonekha can say this I am worried. The Uganda Investment Authority took 619 acres in the centre of Mbale at Shs 5 million per acre from Bugisu Cooperative Union. That is where the Shs 3 billion came from. And if you compare that with Temangalo, we are the big losers. Is it in order for the honourable minister to misinform the House that we got free money yet they took our land at a giveaway price?  

THE SPEAKER: Many times I have found problems with points of order being raised and I have said the Chair will never rule on a point of order when it is on disagreement of facts. Because if I have to, I have first of all to verify the facts and ascertain who is telling the truth and who is not. Differences of assessment of situations should not prompt a point of order. A point of order should be very clear but when you say, “He is telling lies”, then he is going to say you are telling lies. How do you want me to resolve that? Anyway, it is not a point of order. You are giving him information of facts which he may assess and agree with and it is not for me to rule on. 

MAJ. (RTD) RWAMIRAMA: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for your wise ruling. Hon. Odit, you know I have shared a lot with you on this sector and you know the issue of BT cotton was not that actually government did not raise money but you know this has to do with the testing because you are introducing something new. We do not have a policy on GMOs and bio-safety. We do not have a mechanism but I want to inform the House that we are doing tests on BT cotton. Otherwise we could not come and introduce it without first taking care - we could easily have introduced something that we could not manage.

I have listened to many of the Members including one who said that the CEO of CDO is in office illegally. I am not aware of somebody who is in office illegally and I would be very happy if somebody brought a law here in Parliament or my office to find out whether there is somebody who is illegally in office. Otherwise as far as I am concerned, everybody is in office legally.

Finally -(Interruption)

MR OKUPA: Mr Speaker, I remember last year this issue of the CEO of CDO being in office illegally came up because he has been there for 16 years. I do remember the Chair directing the Attorney-General - I remember hon. Hilary Onek tried to fumble but failed to convince the House and the Attorney-General’s Office was asked to attend to it. But to date we have not received that response. Can the Attorney-General help us on that question otherwise this matter is going to continue re-occurring in this House? I appeal to the Attorney-General to have this matter clarified. 

MAJ. (RTD) RWAMIRAMA: I have taken the information but I also want to respond to hon. Betty Amongi that liberalisation does not mean anarchy. Likewise, when you say we have freedom of rights, you do not scrap off police; you do not scrap off security – there must be order. Cotton is a statutory crop, which is regulated under the law. That is why we have to regulate it. If there is a law in the statute that infringes on the stakeholders it should be brought forward and discussed for necessary amendments. Otherwise, I would like to inform Members that if we do not regulate, we may end up into anarchy; there is need to regulate.

On the issue of zoning, I would like to say that when we liberalised, the ginners started to support farmers. Unfortunately farmers would take loans and pesticides from the ginners, but at the time of selling cotton, they would sell it to other people in the market.

The other issue that relates to zoning is that we had to zone some areas where we got seeds to give to farmers. Otherwise, if we didn’t do that merchants would have bought off the cotton with the seeds and crash them together –

THE SPEAKER: No, please wind up.

MAJ. (RTD) RWAMIRAMA: It is the wisdom – I am surprised by some Members who advised me to recover seeds that had been fraudulently taken. I am also surprised that some of those Members are now saying that I should open up completely. This is a country that is governed by the rule of the law; we cannot run away from regulations for both human beings and otherwise.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you much. Hon. Members, I thank you for the contributions to this report. I hope that the committee concerned has taken note of your comments and reservations. I think it will go back to the drawing board to consider these reservations for a way forward to improve this particular sector. Thank you very much.

At the beginning of this sitting I drew your attention to the Budget process, which will start early next month under rule 113 of our Rules of Procedure in relation to Bills and how to handle them. 

In line with that I would like to remind you that under Article 79 the main function of this Parliament is to make laws, but I note that as of now there are over 17 Bills still with the committees. This means that we even may prorogue Parliament sometime in May when these Bills are still with these respective committees unfinished, which is contrary to our Rules of Procedure. 

Some of these Bills include: the Pharmacy Profession and Pharmacy Practice Bill; the International Criminal Bill; the Transfer of Convicted Offenders Bill, 2007; the Uganda National Health Research Organisation Bill, 2006; the Narcotic Drugs Bill, 2007; Ant Corruption Bill, 2008; the Political Parties and Organisations (Amendment) Bill, 2008; Regulation of Interception of Communication Bill, 2007; the Partnership Bill, 2008; the Geographical Indications Bill, 2008; the Contracts Bill, 2008; the Physical Planning Bill, 2008; and the Uganda Citizenship and Immigration Control (Amendment) Bill, 2009. The others include: the National Information Technology Authority Bill, 2008 and so forth.

You can really see that this is not a good position for Parliament. Although it is true that when you prorogue you can save, how many times are we going to save these Bills. So I am really appealing to you to comply with the rules: the committees with these Bills should commence sittings to at least produce two reports so that we can clear most of them; we need to show the public the Bills that we have enacted as Parliament. So my appeal is that from tomorrow you plan to produce at least half of these bills for us to consider before you plunge into the process of budgeting, which will start next month.

PROF. OGENGA-LATIGO: Thank you, Mr Speaker for the information you have given us. We know that many bills go to the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs and the Member who has been chairing that committee until very recently is here. Before he stops being a backbencher and a chair of a committee, it would be nice to hear from him what the real problems are so that we can follow up on the challenges that he has been facing. Hon. Kiyingi was looking –

THE SPEAKER: No, Leader of Opposition, these bills are not for only the Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Committee. For example, the National Information Technology Authority Bill is for ICT Committee, together with the Regulation of Interception of Communication Bill. The Narcotics Drug is for the Committee on Defence together with the Uganda Citizens and Immigration Control Bill. The others are for the Committee on Social Services. So there are a number of committees involved. Let us do something to produce reports on each of these Bills. And because of that I am asking you, between tomorrow and end of next week, to please produce something for the House to consider as far as Bills are concerned. With that we come to the end of today’s business. The House is adjourned.

(The House rose at 6.06 p.m. and adjourned sine die) 

