Thursday, 7 March 1996

The Council met at 2.30 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Chairman, Mr Cosmas Adyebo, in the Chair.)

The Council was called to order.
 
MR OMARA ATUBO:  Mr Chairman, I think most Members are on their way to Soroti to join women on the Women’s Day tomorrow.  Mr Chairman, as you can see, I do not know whether it is in order for us to proceed with a House which is virtually empty, without a quorum; and also a Minister who should be spearheading the Bill is absent, I believe he is already in Soroti.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Members, I have been having problems with lack of quorum, even without the Soroti activity taking place tomorrow; but I think it is in order for us to adjourn for 15 minutes.  We, therefore, adjourn for 15 minutes.

(Council adjourned and resumed after 15 minutes.)
       
QUESTIONS FOR ORAL ANSWER
               
MR KIDEGA ALAC:  Mr Chairman, it is question No.15 of 1996.

THE MINISTER OF INFORMATION AND BROADCASTING (Mr Paul Etiang):  Mr Chairman, hon. Members, I would first of all like to apologise to you for let coming, but I had a technical backup deficiency which unavoidably held me up in the office.  

Mr Chairman, question 15, for the benefit of Members who have not received it or seen it, it reads that sometimes in 1995 the people of Northern Uganda were informed that the radio transmitter in Bobi in Gulu District would resume work in 1996.  Could the Minister, the question goes on, inform the House what progress has so far been registered to towards the rehabilitation of this transmitter.  Secondly, if not, could he explain why the work has not commenced; thirdly, when does the minister envisage work will commence on this transmitter?  

Mr Chairman and hon. Members, first of all, I do not know who so informed the people of Northern Uganda; whoever gave that information or impression was either misunderstood or did obtain direct information from my ministry on the Bobi transmitter.  For the benefit of my Colleagues, maybe, a recap on the history of this transmitter needs to be mentioned.  Bobi Radio Station opened in 1972; it was in operation for over ten years during the difficult period in the history of our country; spares were particularly difficult to get and by the mid 1980 the station had broken down.  The insecurity in that area in the intervening years made it impossible to undertake any rehabilitation work at the station.  The ministry has had two studies conducted on how to improve an external radio and TV services in Northern Uganda and indeed throughout the country.  One was undertaken by Obicom

as I reported to the House last October, a South African company; and the other recently by the BBC under a contract with the World Bank.  The two studies, Mr Chairman, agree on several issues relating to the Bobi transmitter, namely as follows:  The use of satellite for the distribution of Radio and TV programmes countrywide should be encouraged.  Government has accepted this recommendation and negotiations are continuing with foreign bodies concerned in this project.  Secondly, the two studies state that it is not possible to cover the whole Northern region using one medium wave station at Bobi; it is estimated that Bobi will cover as it did before about 56 of the population in Northern Uganda, not a hundred per cent; and here Northern Uganda has intended, for the purposes of Ministry of Information coverage, is any region stretching from Arua to Kotido;  and yet inspite of that limited coverage which the station had, and if rehabilitated will have, the cost for rehabilitation along of the station is 900,000 dollars.  The two studies, Mr Chairman, also agree that the most economical method covering Northern Uganda is by use of VHF, otherwise FM transmitters; these used in conjunction with satellite distribution will provide a good quality audio-video signal throughout the regions; as I said, stretching from Arua to Kotido.  

The cost of providing both Radio and TV to Northern Uganda under this recommendation is just under 2 million dollars.  The Ministry, therefore, intends to use satellite in conjunction with VHF/FM transmitters to Lira radio programmes.  A model start has already been made for the Gulu area and FM transmitter broke down, which was installed there, from our meagre resources and we have procured spares for it recently, and it should be back in service in the next few weeks, if all circumstances, Mr Chairman, taken together permit.  I thank you.

MR WANENDEYA:  Point of clarification.  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  I would like the Minister to clarify on whether the cost of 900,000 dollars was competitive bidding or just official tenders to a few people and, therefore, when they are received that is the price.  The reason why I ask this question, Mr Chairman, is that there is a lot of corruption and some of the costs in most ministries in government are blown up because of a few percentage of commissions, and therefore, one would never get the actual cost.  Because in countries like Korea, Japan you can get really quite good prices, including China.  So, I want to know if the Minister got competitive bidding by public tender.  Thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  I think, hon. Minister, you can take note and then answer at once, because I can several Members wanting to ask you.

MR ONGOM:  Thank you, Mr Chairman.  I would also like the Minister to clarify or tell the House now what then is the future of Bobi station.  What exactly does the government now intend to do with that equipment which is there;  and if my memory does not fail me, I thought this question was in the ministerial statement last year, to the effect that this station was going to be rehabilitated.

MR TIVU:  Mr Chairman, the Minister has denied making a statement with effect to the question asked by the hon. Member.  May I know now from the Minister, in the event that we are soon going for elections and people are optimistic to view from all parts of the country the electoral exercise, what he has in place for the parts of the country which do not receive TVs to effect something so that we notice what is happening in other parts of the country for comparative analysis.  

MR KIDEGA ALAC:  Mr Chairman, it would appear as if when I put that question I did not make proper research; indeed, I did.  This statement was made in Gulu and the team had surveyed the area; he confirmed it, and I am happy that this House has supported me.  So, as to the authority of the source of my information, I think, I am covered.  Mr Chairman, I put this question deliberately because I was interested to find out, now that a very important election is coming, how are we supposed to inform our voters when we cannot rely on Kampala?  

Mr Chairman, hon. Peter was very clear on this point yesterday and the Minister did say that it was an administrative arrangement.  Now, if we cannot, Mr Chairman, get clear source of information for the people in Northern Uganda, then we may end up with a point where we cannot get correct information.  There were also rumours in Gulu and where else that the regional Post Office when it is fully functional, a transmitter will be put on that Post Office to relate news for the people in Northern Uganda;  I do not know also what happened to this, Mr Chairman.  Thank you.

MR ETIANG:  Mr Chairman, with regard to a question raised by hon. Wanendeya, seeking to know whether the estimated figure of 900,000 dollars was on the basis of a competitive tender.  I thought I was very clear in my statement to the effect that we have had two independent studies.  One study undertaken by BBC under the World Bank financing, which in fact, my Ministry benefited from the Ministry of Health, was popularly known as the first health project in the country.  That is an independent study financed by World Bank, which did require even any tender, because this was part and parcel of the aid that this country continues to have.  I would like to assure the hon. Member that the two independent studies concurring as they do is in respect of the parts that go to constitute a transmitter station.  The studies are available and I am prepared to let the hon. Member have a look at them to see how fair and competitive they are.  Otherwise, I want to assure him that none of the Ministry of Information official had any hand in determining those figures; they are by experts and the studies are available for the Member to satisfy himself.

MR WANENDEYA:  Point of information.  Mr Chairman, I think, most Members of this House and indeed a number of people in developing countries, know very well that the World Bank would want to blow up crisis of things and they would want to import some of these things from Western countries, and yet the technology in the far East is much cheaper.  So, what did the Minister do; did he crosscheck, if it is a public tender, did he go all the way to Japan, to the East, Korea and other countries, or is it only relying on the World Bank because the money is going to from them?  Is this where we sometimes take decisions without wide publicity and tendering?  Thank you, Mr Chairman.

MR ETIANG:  Mr Chairman, I cannot explain any more than the said following:  My ministry under the First Health Project financed by the World Bank is a beneficiary of the project that is being done under the Ministry of Health; it is under that project on matters relating to communications particularly radio broadcasting that a study was undertaken supervised by the World Bank of the tenders given by the World Bank, and it happened to be given the BBC.  So, if the hon. Member really want to know as to the details of this, he could actually come to the ministry and I show him.  I agree with him, maybe, some of these things are cheap in the East but the East is not financing; and if he is having in mind Japan and South Korea, both of them are members of the World Bank, and I am sure when this study was given there companies must have also bid through that system that had been set in motion.  The details of the whole project as it is, are actually, under the supervision of the Ministry of Health.  

The second question, Mr Chairman, was what is the future of Bobi?  Sometime in October last year I gave here a very long ministerial statement regarding the government’s intention now to involve satellite transmission for both radio and TV throughout the country as a once for all solution to the rest of problems of transmission we had here.  I did mention that they were 26 stations that had been identified on the basis of Obicom study, which incorporates Bobi into this system so that instead of Bobi transmitting from a Medium Wave, it will be VHF/FM covering an area of a radius of about 30 kilometres around it.  There will be other stations also, I think, two or three in the North that will cover the other areas, bringing a very clear audio/video signal for both TV and Radio.  That is the future of Bobi.

What do I have in mind for the North regarding TV transmission relative to the forthcoming elections?  I wish I could say that tomorrow, or next week there will be TV for everybody in Uganda, not only for the North, but for everybody in Uganda.  But I would be telling a lie in this House if I did that.  I know that the elections are here, but very, very unfortunately those elections will have to come and go without my getting TV to any places presently not covered; not only to the North but to all the other parts of Uganda do now have TV right now.  

Now, I would like to assure the original Member, on the rumours that he has heard in Gulu and rest of it.  First of all, I do not act on rumours, I wish he was precise in saying which technician exactly told him the information that he has now qualified in this question.  But I have sent there waves and waves of technicians to go and patch up the existing services for the benefit of the local people there.  Even right now as we speak, there is a team there, as I have indicated in the answer, that is actually arranging the FM transmitter on top of Gulu Post Office.  Now, I do not know which of these groups might have given the hon. Member information on which he has based his question.  Definitely I am not sharing his view that the House has -(Interruption)- out his question, because his question is definitely unsubstantiated and yet I have to get from the Member exactly who gave him this information so that I will be able to react accordingly.  To the best of my knowledge, nobody from my Ministry did so.  Thank you.

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE ELECTRONIC MEDIA BILL, 1995
     
(Debate continued.)

CAPT. GASATURA (Rushenyi County, Bushenyi):  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman, for granting me opportunity to contribute to this Bill.  I want to say from the outset that I support the Bill and appreciate the Minister’s effort and the effort of government to bring this Bill to the Floor of this House.

Before I say much on the Bill, Mr Chairman, permit me to comment on a document many Members, no doubt, have received from the Uganda Journalist Safety Committee who have petitioned your Chair, in your wisdom to refer this Bill to the Sectoral Committee.  Recently after passing the law for parliamentary elections we saw in the press inter-party cooperation committee, or whatever name, rejects the Bill.  Under the leadership of a member, a well respected and well known member, who himself is a Member of this House; I never once heard him stand up here to object to anything in that Bill, or suggest anything and we refused to listen to him, rather some of them got to another bush called BBC bush house and expressed their views there, rather than on the Floor of this House.  

We have in the past had no less than a President of the Uganda Law Society threaten our courts and President that if we do not behave as he wishes he shall tell then Gorbachev, President of Soviet Union, George Bush and other;  and now the Uganda Journalists Safety Committee were given opportunity together with others to attend sectoral committees, they never turned up.  Now, after all this work the Bill is again on the Floor of this House and it was not handed out yesterday, suddenly today 7th of March, they wake up and say please send it to the public and to the committee; enough of that, Mr Chairman.  They did not even give any single objection to the Bill, they just said send it to the committee.

AN HON. MEMBER:  Point of information.  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman, and I would like also to thank the hon. Member for giving way.  Mr Chairman, on a point of information, I would like to inform you in this hon. House that of late Ugandans have been taking this House for a ride.  Most Members who are not always satisfied - not members of the public who are not always satisfied with Bills being debated in this House, end up appealing in the wrong area.  Sometimes they go as far as appealing to the Executive, in this case the President; the President is not a member of the legislature, why do you not lobby Members of Parliament, instead of lobbying the President?  In any case after the Bill has already been passed by the House.  Even if the President is the Chairman of this House he is not a regular member of this House; why not lobby Members of Parliament?  This is the question, Mr Chairman.  Thank you.

CAPT. GASATURA:  Thank you for the information.  Mr Chairman, the Electronic Media Bill, 1996 seeks to provide for several things; one, setting up of a broadcasting council to licence, regulate radio and TV stations; to provide for the licensing of TV sales; to amend land consolidate the law relating to electronic media; to repeal the cinematography and TV licensing Act, and other related matters.  Mr Chairman, the electronic media is perhaps the fastest growing industry worldwide, and international competition in education, in the arts, in science is now being competed for through the influence of the electronic media; whether it be by now traditional computers, now we have the e-mail, and the other day the Internet, which has now become world net and soon our little computers will be consumed as part of the beggar net.  But more importantly in this Bill, Mr Chairman, I find one item quietly - though I think it is most fundamental, picking from the complaints of several Members; the provision for the licensing of TV sets; why are seeking to licence TV sets?  It is not an innovation, it is not the first time in Uganda and certainly not worldwide; we already have a law, except that with the inflation the fees fixed then are meaningless today.  

In other countries - I lived in Switzerland where every TV and radio set, every cat and dog are taxed, you pay a fee for them.  But here I find this very interesting and innovative from the Ministry of Information, in that the fees collected here from are to be applied for purposes, first and foremost, of provision of signal to every household within the territory of the Republic of Uganda, and no doubt a few homes neighbouring our border, unintentionally though that may be.  Mr Chairman, while many Members, and I recall a Member from Kalaki and one from Kalangala complaining about this TV set licensing, the Minister did explain to this House and to the committee that much of this money would be for purposes of hiring the satellite services from a South African company, unless hon. Wanendeya can come up with a cheaper far East company; but, Mr Chairman this South African company would be able not only to provide a TV signal to every part of the country, that would be UHF, but they would be able to provide VHF as well as FM signals for people all over the country to receive radio and television signals countrywide.  

I want to touch on the body of the Bill, Mr Chairman.  I did raise some complaints in the committee and I lost them and I will be happy to lose democratically but not without a fight.  I think some of the fines and penalties, especially, jail terms are excessive in my view, and I am thinking of Article 3 subpart 5;  Article 3 subpart 1, says that a person shall not install or operate a TV station, Radio Station or other apparatus without licence, and part 5 says that anyone who contravenes that commits an offence and on conviction is liable to a fine not less than 10 million shillings and not more than 30 million shillings or to imprisonment of not less than two years nor more than five years.  

Mr Chairman, I think these fines are excessive and whereas, indeed clearly we all agree a contravention would be an offence, I think, that the penalty far outweighs the offence.  In any case one can repeatedly fined and one can be fined and imprisoned.  I would think that a fine of not more than a million shillings or imprisonment not more than 12 months - and what kind of people are we talking about, Mr Chairman?  We are talking of people who are going to set TV and radio stations; we are talking of respectable people like you, Mr Chairman, some day when the Lord blesses you with a few dollars -(Laughter)- I meant a few million dollars, I think you already have a few.  Rather than keep a man or woman of such repute behind bars for not less than two years, I think, is a shame; he should be out and productive.  At the end of that sub-section, they say;  “and in the case of a corporate body, the persons liable are those who are authorised to sign any document of that body”.  

Now, Mr Chairman, I know lawyers have often jumped on us who are not lawyers, the lay men, and say leave the draftsmanship to those who can;  but I fail to understand, the persons who are authorised to sign any document of that body;  is this the cashier who receives your money and signs that document, any document of that body?  I think the Minister with appropriate draftsmen might want to look at that.  In Article 4.1;  ‘A proprietor of a TV station shall, upon satisfying the requirements of section 3, register his station with a media council’, and in Article 4.4 ‘A person who contravenes that subsection commits an offence and is liable on conviction to a fine not more than Shs.300,000/- ‘,and I looked for the offence in this Article 4.1, the offence is that if you have satisfied requirements of Article 3, and you fail to register, then you have committed an offence, notwithstanding that you have not gone into operation.  Again, Mr Chairman, I think that needs to be clarified.  Article 11.1(f) among the functions of the Council to arbitrate in consultation with the Media Council on disputes between operators of broadcasting stations; this assumes that there are already conflicts.  I would have preferred that to arbitrate in any disputes that might arise between the various operators -(Interruption)

MR ETIANG:  Mr Chairman, I would like just to give the hon. Gasatura information by way of reminding him how his committee so worded the clause in question.  During the committee’s debate on the Bill, I did bring to the committee’s attention that already of those stations that are operating there are disputes, and I gave details of such disputes at the time, and that is how the committee came to word that clause as it is.  Thank you.

CAPT. GASATURA:  I appreciate the hon. Minister’s piece of information, Mr Chairman.  I would also seek the Minister’s indulgence with the technicians again in Article 12, ‘The office of a member of the council shall fall vacant (a) due to the member’s inability to perform the functions of his office...’ I think, to me that leaves much room for improvement.  Does this mean that if the member has called and is unable to come to the office, the member’s office has fallen vacant, who shows him out?  

I would suggest, Mr Chairman, subject to other polishing by the technicians, that the Minister may remove from office a member of the Council on the grounds, and then go ahead and list, so that it comes to the Minister’s knowledge, and not just a one day called and he is unable to perform his functions on that day; and in Article 15 and I would want to read –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Try to wind up hon. Member.

CAPT. GASATURA:  Yes, I want to read Article 15 together with 21; Article 15, “The Council shall within three months after the end of each year submit the annual report on all activities to the Minister.”  and in 21; ‘...prepare annual estimates of accounts, not later than 31st day of March..’ that is three months after the conclusion of the year;  then in subsection 2 of 21;  ‘the books go to the Auditor General...’ and in subsection 3 the books go to the Minister, and in subsection 4, the Minister lays them before Parliament;  that takes nine months, and yet 15 the council within three months of the end of each year shall give the report of those activities to the Minister and the Minister within three months shall lay them before Parliament.  I think these two Articles could be co-ordinated.  I do realise that one is on all activities and the other one is specifically on accounts, but they could be co-ordinated so that the Minister lays them on together.  Again on penalties, Mr Chairman, 24 –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Please, wind up.

CAPT. GASATURA:  24 subsection 2, a fine not exceeding UShs 50,000 and 30 days;  I would suggest seven days, and in 28 subsection 4 instead of three months, 30 days.

Finally, on the First Schedule; broadcasting standards, 1. That any programme reaches broadcast, (a) does not promote violence - they call it the culture of violence; I do not know whether culture of violence is the same as violence itself.  I would rather it be, it does not promote violence; or ethnic, racial, I would want to add in racial or gender prejudice; and subpart (d) is not likely to create undue public alarm; and subpart (e) free from political partiality.  Mr Chairman, I find this very difficult, and this includes videos and private radio and TV stations.  Imagine the two gentlemen who have indicated their intention to stand as candidates for presidency of Uganda; hon. Ssemogerere and President Museveni -(Intejections)- and Ssemuju, yes, there are several others I am sure; and it is difficult for me to imagine that hon. Ssemogerere is going to make a video cassette and be politically partial to Ssemuju and Museveni.  The man must be given freedom; he thinks he is the best man to lead this country; so, he is going to talk about the best of Ssemogerere, so will the others.  So, I think, this one (e) is really unrealistic and unacceptable -(Applause)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Please, wind up.

CAPT. GASATURA: Yes, I would suggest that it be deleted.  Then rule 4 of the First Schedule, that where a programme which is broadcast is in respect for public office, then each contender is given equal opportunity on such programme.  The Constitution, I believe to the best of my knowledge, guarantees this on state media; not on private media.  If hon. Ssemogerere or Mr Ssemuju were to go to Radio Sanyu and pay their money; Sanyu should be under no obligation to give President Museveni equal opportunity unless he himself goes and bids for his own time. 

Mr Chairman, I wish to thank you again for your permission and kindness to allow me to contribute to this Bill.  I support the Bill. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  I now call upon the Minister to reply.

THE MINISTER OR INFORMATION AND BROADCASTING (Mr Paul Etiang):  Mr Chairman, first of all it is with great pleasure and happiness that I stand to wind up this stage of debate on this Bill, by expressing my very deep appreciation to all contributors to this debate; because all of them have supported the principles of the Bill, partly because, as I explained, that the Bill has been in the House, although under a different title, for many years; that the Members, actually, had time to debate the principles of the Bill.  So, to the Best of recollection the principle of the Bill is not at issue.  

There were, however, a few observations made about the proposed licensing procedure and licence fees for TV, the issue of public morality and the composition of the Broadcasting Council.  Other issues that had been specifically made relating to either the relevance or rendering of certain articles will, I think, be dealt with in the Committee Stage. 

On the licensing of TVs, the question was asked as to its necessity, and how the proposed TV fees were going to be collected, and that was the most serious observation among all those who questioned the viability of this.  I am glad that hon. Gasatura in his contribution has alluded to this as a necessity, in addition to what other Members had said yesterday.  Because I submitted that the majority of the contributors appreciated and supported the justification of TV licences and fees, namely because it is to provide financing for public service in a highly competitive and in the wake of liberalised airwaves, and that if we have to expect quality in service, as hon. Butagira said yesterday, followed by my Colleague hon. Mutebi Mulwanira, hon. Sserunjogi, and I notice that The New Vision did not, actually, get hon. Butagira correct; he is today reported as having opposed the licensing, when in fact he was fully supporting of licensing and gave the reasons that unless licensing is there we should not expect high quality in our TV services, and that we should be prepared to pay for it, particularly where most of the equipment and materials are imported;  that is a fact.  I did not know of any locally manufactured TV component in the country yet; even those that Sembule assembles, it actually assembles but does not manufacture them.  

There was one or two views advanced by hon. Mayengo whose main argument was what he alleged to be the impracticability of collecting the TV fees; I have nothing by the highest respect for my Friend Mayengo whose eloquence has always really held the House spellbound on many occasions that he has risen to speak.  Now, while the details of collecting the fees are not given in the Bill, I would like to inform him, they are indicated in clause 31, particularly sub-clause (b) of that clause.  In other words, the suggested law does not in any way claim to be foolproof; I do not know of any law which is foolproof, even in regard to tax collections.  He gave an example that in Kigali if you went to a duty free shop and bought a portable TV, he would bring it in his briefcase and take it home, how would all the authorities licensing TVs get to know about that?  Of course, the law is a law, you can even drive a DMC car along the road; you can speed without a licence for that car; you may not have all sorts of things that are legally required of that car, but you need only to be caught once and then the law would land on you.  That is my understanding of these things, in other words there is not a single in the country that I know that really expects to exert a hundred per cent observance of its provisions.  

My ministry, Mr Chairman, has already worked out proposals on collecting fees; these proposals are waiting for the council to be constituted, because as provided in the proposed legislation, it is that Council together with the Ministry that will have to work out the modalities of collecting these fees.  Incidentally, the Members admitted yesterday and the day before yesterday, the problem is not going to be on the new TVs because those are really going to be very easy to collect at the point of purchase or sell, but the problem is going to be on the older sets that are already in the market.  

Now, there are a number of ways of how to get the licences from those already in the market.  The first one is that, we have luckily enough, a very well structured administration in the country stretching down to the RCs upwards.  So, anybody really who would have a TV in the neighbourhood is likely to be known by the neighbours, and the RCs have got as members of law, a very good system of checking on others who tend to break the laws.  The other one would be the introduction of electronic magnetic -(Interruption)

AN HON. MEMBER:  Point of clarification.  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  The hon. Minister has told us about value of viewers licence or that fee, which we do very much appreciate and support, and then he is talking about how the technical officers are going improvise in collecting this money.  My point of clarification I am seeking is that, do you have in plan sort of a programme of sensitising the public as the VAT are doing so that when the process of collecting the fee starts you do not face these objections and what have you, we do not understand what you are telling us to contribute, because you told us that this money would improve on these radio stations and TV, which is very important, but before people start seeing the fruits, they need to be sensitised of what is going to happen, I do not know.  Do you have that programme with your technical people?  

Secondly, you are talking of, how are you going to know that so and so has got a TV, and you are saying there are local councils and what have you, they are going to assist you.  But when you look in clause 27 you are not putting a provision for your officers to use the presence of the local authorities; are you trying to say that you are going to bring an Amendment for that so that the local authorities can know that they are legally used to assist your officers.  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. 

MR ETIANG:  Mr Chairman, with regard to sensitisation, this has already been on since last year, in anticipation of the fact that this law would come in effect by the 1st of October; in the event it did not and consequently my staff discontinued sensitisation exercise, because on the second rescheduling which we had hopped that the law would come into force by 1st of January so as to enable us to institute TV licensing; we found that we were not in a position to do that up to now.  So, the sensitisation exercise that has been going on, at least, on radio and TV has been held in abeyance waiting for the passage of this law so that the sensitisation exercise will definitely precede the collection of fees, because it is a matter of public duty that the public is informed exactly why fees are being levied.  

Now, if only my Colleague could hold on a bit, but in response to his question that what my officials are doing in terms of the details for collecting fees or something like that; I did explain at great length in the committee and the hon. Member was in that committee, exactly what we had in mind, we intended to involve not only the RCs or the existing law enforcement agents in the country, but we were thinking in terms of involving the banks, UCB; or even now as it has turned up, private fees collectors.  

The committee when it got all these details did not find itself in a position to pronounce on the, that is why they are not available in the text as a detail; and it was left that it was an administrative matter, it is for the House just to say there shall be fees and then the details of that will the matter for the Council and the ministry concerned, and I think, the details of that I did not bring them with me, nor that the House needs to know these details at this stage, but I can assure the hon. Member that the details will be publicised and sensitised to the public before they are implemented.  

As I was saying, Mr Chairman, there will not be any problem with regard to licensing new TVs, the fees for these will be collected at the point of sell.  The old TVs will definitely be licensed over a period, and here I would like, perhaps, to recall to Members that when we established Uganda Revenue Authority four years ago, a similar remark was made to the effect that to get everybody who previously was paying income tax or whatever taxes would be an upheld tax.  

That expression was made, but I think Members would now be fairly happy that four years later the URA has done such a commendable job with a few exceptions, of course, on a few of them who have become  - but it has done such a commendable job that we are not now talking in terms of the country only have Shs.10 billion, or ten million dollars collected, but something like five times that; and I do not, of course, have any feeling that it will be any different from this, that this will take also sometime. 

I am sure Ugandans have become very responsible people, given the constitutionalism that we are now committed to.  Now, it is a matter of giving time and peace, and a culture of constitutionalism, Ugandans will be law abiding to the point of paying these taxes as demanded.

A Member expressed the possible inhuman practice in obtaining these fees.  I did share his view and fears, but again as I have just stated that, first of all, all machinery possible that is administrative will be put in place to ensure that such inhuman practices will be eliminated from our society.  Secondly, Ugandans themselves now are becoming aware as to what their security is all about so that they will not sit by and see an individual, even if that individual is an official, just indulging himself or herself in inhuman activities such as obtaining taxes in an unfair or barbaric means -(Interruption)

MR NTIMBA:  Before the hon. Minister was interrupted I believe he was going to embark on telling us on how people can use certain gadget to detect the presence of television sets, and I wanted him to throw more light on how this can be done, the practicability of this, considering the fact that the majority of our people leave in scattered areas.  You might find two TV owners living one mile apart, as opposed to if you drive through a street in Kampala which is one kilometre long and you can detect presence of one hundred plus TV sets.  So, I am interested in the practicability of it considering the fact that if you have got to drive around villages, to use these detectors you might be spending an enormous amount of money.  Perhaps the Minister could throw some light on this in the context of our conditions prevailing in the country.

MR ETIANG:  Thank you very much, hon. Ntimba, for reminding me about that.  You are right indeed when I was interrupted I was at the point of explaining that technology exists and it is easily available for detecting televisions that are switched on in a house from a remote point.  Now, it can also tell roughly how many TVs are on.  Now, this technology for the time being is only applicable principally in urban areas.  As I was explaining that for the rural places if TVs get there on the basis of say car batteries or something like that, it will be for our RCs and other local authorities to ensure this.  

Incidentally, the proposals that my ministry has in involving the local councils to collect this money is that each local council that will collect these fees a portion of those fees will be given to such local council.  So, that will be really an impetus to the local councils to help, first of all in one hand to encourage people owning TVs to increase their own revenue, and on the other hand to make sure that those people having TVs pay their fees in respect of which they as a local council will give them.  So, it is a very elaborate system which attractive to everybody, the administrator, the local council, the TV watcher, because the programmes will increase, as well as the country at large; because we will be able to have a self paying service; because as hon. Gasatura said the fees that we are interested in here is not actually to go to the general funds initially, but they are going to specifically pay for the services that, for example, satellite transmission will cost us; if it is going to cost us 2 million dollars, we say look this is the money the owner of a satellite is charging us and that is what we have got to pay!  

But, Mr Chairman, there was also another matter which Members addressed; what is it that constitutes public morality?  Members of the sectoral committee may remember that really we had a lot of debate on this subject, and I do not want to be simplistic about it, only to say that first of all as what constitutes public morality is on the basis of what our courts of law say.  Because it is our courts of law that can interpret what public morality is.  That is in accordance with the existing laws. 

I would, however, wish to concur with hon. Abu Mayanja the other when he was contributing, there is what he called that the Broadcasting Council may see itself along the way, requiring to set what he called transgration of parameters, as guidelines to those licensed to broadcast; I have no problem with that and the council within its mandate, as suggested, it will be given such guidelines without necessarily being the authority on what constitutes public morality; incidentally public morality is something as we have all discussed here;  what is public morality to us in Uganda may not necessarily be public morality in other cultures, and this is very much evident in the shows and dances that Members alluded to yesterday and the day before, and such as we have seen coming to the country given our open society as it is now.  

It will definitely be for the general public to be the final authority as to what constitutes immorality, and that general public has a unit, namely the family; that is what morality, actually - the first classroom for morality is the family, before a minor goes out on his own he must be sensitised exactly as to what constitutes public morality, at least, in the opinion of a family.  

While introducing the, Bill Mr Chairman, I stressed that the establishment of the Council is the main thrust of this Bill.

(Incomplete)

  











