Tuesday, 6 March 2012

Parliament met at 2.12 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala. 

PRAYERS 

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair) 

The House was called to order. 

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, you are welcome this afternoon. I hope the adjournment permitted the rules committee and the people concerned were consulted and their positions harmonised so that we can make steady progress, and hopefully complete the rules today.

I will make a small alteration on the Order Paper. I have just received communication from hon. Cecilia Ogwal, who should have been laying the papers on item No. 3 on the agenda. The letter says they will be available in the week beginning 19th March. So, that matter will not be handled today. The Order Paper is accordingly amended.

2.14
MR LUBEGA SSEGGONA (DP, Busiro County East, Wakiso): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I stand up on a matter of national importance and I am grateful that you have given me this chance and space to express the same.

Lately, the media have carried one big lead story about Members of Parliament standing here on the Democratic Party ticket, as having been thrown out of Parliament by an order of the High Court and more specifically, by a warrant of execution of an order of the hon. Justice Yorokamu Bamwine, Principal Judge, arising out of High Court miscellaneous cause No.217 of 2008, Ochieng Simon Peter, Kobwemi Gerald Abwooli, Tusiime John, Luyombya Paul, Lubega Hussein and Neolina K. Namugenyi. 

The background to this is that in 2008, the said applicants filed a miscellaneous cause in the High Court against the President General of the Democratic Party, the national executive committee of the same, the national council of the Democratic Party and the Electoral Commission. And subsequent to that application, the hon. Justice Bamwine, Principal Judge, ordered that the election of hon. Mathias Nsubuga as Secretary-General of the Democratic Party had not been conducted in accordance with the DP constitution. Subsequent to that order, the respondents filed an appeal in the Court of Appeal under which they obtained a stay of execution and then in accordance with the decision of the judge, convened a delegates’ conference in Mbale and again re-elected hon. Mathias Nsubuga and hon. Norbert Mao as President and other office holders. 

The notice of appeal was struck out subsequently, leading to the collapse of the stay of execution. However, the said order had been overtaken by events considering that a new delegates’ conference had been held and new office bearers elected. 

In a bid to execute the order though, the applicants applied to the deputy registrar of the High Court in charge of executions, who issued a warrant of executions to Fazaal Fatuma, a court bailiff, to cause the vacation of hon. Matthias Nsubuga and, I quote, “...and all those unlawfully elected by his faction of the Democratic Party.” By misconception, this order has been interpreted to mean that all office holders in various political offices, including Members of Parliament, councillors and others who received nomination forms of the party signed and endorsed by the Secretary-General, hon. Matthias Nsubuga have, therefore lost their seats in Parliament.

We have received telephone calls from across the country and people were in a state of confusion. I, therefore, wish to state before this honourable House that the grounds and procedures for removing a Member of Parliament, or any other elected leader for that matter, are clearly stipulated and it is only two-fold: The first is looking at the Constitution, where somebody resigns, dies, or crosses the Floor of Parliament, in a multiparty dispensation, from one party to another or from being an Independent Member to a party. This does not apply to any of us who were elected on the Democratic Party ticket. 

The second way a Member loses his seat is through the Parliamentary Elections Act, when an election petition has been successfully filed and litigated against a Member of Parliament, and the grounds therein again are clear and are lacking in ambiguity, particularly looking at section 63 of the Parliamentary Elections Act. It has a time limitation and it also has a limitation on locus standi who present that petition. Again, this situation does not apply to any of us. 

Mr Speaker, going by the very document itself, it provides, “...now, therefore, are directed to cause the vacation of hon. Matthias Nsubuga from the office of Secretary-General,...” that is No.1, “...and all those unlawfully elected by his faction of the Democratic Party in contempt and defiance of the said court order.” 

Hon. Mathias Nsubuga is a guiding factor in understanding the generic string within which you can cast the net - those that were elected with him. Secondly, elected by his faction, and I say “faction” in quotes because we were not elected by any faction of the Democratic Party, if there is any faction.

MR MUSINGUZI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The point of procedure I am raising here is that I think the Court of Appeal would be the right forum to really listen to this rather than this House. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, hon. Sseggona approached the Speaker’s Office and raised those issues that are raising lots of anxiety among many people in various constituencies represented by Members of Parliament from the Democratic Party. So, I allowed him to raise the matter and I would ask him to zero in on the specifics and final remarks on the issue.

MR SSEGGONA: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for the wise guidance. I am also grateful to my brother for the offer to provide advice, legal or otherwise, and I take it in good faith, with guidance that an appeal is only provided or preferred by a person who was party to the proceedings.


Mr Speaker, this warrant was among others copied to the Speaker of Parliament and the insinuation therein was that the Speaker of Parliament would be tempted to cause the vacation of the Members of Parliament whose names were not listed. I also wish to state, therefore, Mr Speaker, that the Office of the Speaker gratefully - and we express our profound gratitude to your office - came up with a response last night through the PRO that that is not how Members of Parliament are removed. 

Of interest also to note is that, this warrant has since been recalled by the same deputy registrar by the letter dated 1 March 2012. I also wish to state that the judge could not have anticipated before our re-election that we would be elected unlawfully and, therefore, ordered our vacation of our parliamentary seats before we are even elected. And if that is what the registrar could have meant, to which I say “No”, it would amount to an amendment in the ruling of the judge. 

In this spirit, therefore, Mr Speaker, first, I thank you for granting us this opportunity to make this statement and to guide the nation in a matter that caused anxiety. Secondly, to say, thank you to our colleagues that have expressed concern since this news came out, which was misleading, and to assure them that we are still here with you to conduct the business of this nation. Thank you, Mr Speaker. For God and My Country!

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. I think the particular matter does not raise debate; it is a matter of information. Hon. Badda, are you on the same point?

MR BADDA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I just want to seek your guidance. Since my honourable colleague informed this House that this communication was also sent to you, I think it would benefit this House to know your comment. Since this communication was sent to you because that is the other party, but as our head as Members of Parliament, we would be happy to know your comment on this matter.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, the matter was given as information and he explained to the affected people and I am sure the anxieties have kind of been lifted.

2.18
MR ANTHONY SSEMMULI (NRM, Buwekula County, Mubende): Thank you, Mr Speaker. In the last three weeks, I did raise an issue of national importance to do with the payments and the compensation of the veterans in this country. The august House was informed by the Deputy Prime Minister that the government would come and give an explanation, but to my surprise, during the last three weeks, I have never come across anything to do with the payments of the veterans on the Order Papers.

It is very good that the Deputy Prime Minister is around. Let him tell us exactly when the government is going to come up with a report because in our respective constituencies, we are being asked questions we are unable to answer and these people are so frustrated -(Interruption)

MS FRANCA AKELLO: Thank you honourable member for giving way. Mr Speaker, I rise to give some information to my honourable colleague who has raised the issue on the plight of veterans. About two years ago, Government through the Ministry of Defence, raised the expectations - war veterans in Acholi sub-region; they were told to fill forms and open accounts after being told that money was already available to pay all the war veterans -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are you talking about war veterans or veterans?

MS FRANCA AKELLO: I mean that one exactly, Mr Speaker. (Laughter) Veterans and their next of kin; the families of the deceased veterans from all walks of life. I want to give you an example; people of Agago District had to walk all the way to Pader because there was not a single bank in which they could open up bank accounts. So, all registrations and all accounts were to be opened in Pader. People walked all the way from Agago and all corners of Pader to the district headquarters of Pader for almost one month, to fill the forms and open accounts. Unfortunately, to date, as we speak, there are some people who had already opened up accounts, but they have not received any money on their accounts and their accounts have now been de-activated and moreover, opening accounts requires a little bit of money.

So, I thank the honourable member for raising this issue and I want to request that Ministry of Defence comes up with a serious statement that will cover - because I am very sure this never happened only in the Acholi sub-region. I thank you.

MR SSEMMULI: Thank you honourable colleague for that information. Mr Speaker, this is a very serious issue. Further, on the information my honourable colleague has just raised - actually the veterans are now frustrating the banks they opened the accounts in. Secondly, some of the banks, whenever they are approached by the veterans are now closing for the day - I do not want to waste time because this is a very serious issue! What we need -(Interruption)

MS ADONG: I thank you Member for giving way. I want to supplement the honourable member’s information, that we have vulnerable families who are next of kin to these veterans. During the registration process, they were asked to get letters of administration and you know the procedures of getting letters of administration. They wasted a lot of money and all of them are with letters of administration. Each time we go back to our constituencies, we get lines of people with letters of administration asking us to help them and ask the government when they are getting the money and we need that information. Thank you.

MR SSEMMULI: Thank you very much for your information honourable colleague. Now, as the Deputy Prime Minister is coming, I beg to lay another document that entails all the details of the veterans in Mubende District. They are 900 in number; this document contains the serial number, the Army number, their ranks, full names, location and remarks. Mr Speaker, I beg to lay this document -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, what document is that, who authored it and on what date was it written? We do not just take documents.

MR SSEMMULI: No, this document was given to me by the veterans’ association -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What is it? What is the title?

MR SSEMMULI: The important gist of the document is they have never been paid. So, in case Parliament wants to scrutinise or to verify, this is an authentic document.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, I do not think I will allow you to lay it.

MR SSEMMULI: It is list of veterans in Mubende District. So, Mr Speaker, I beg to lay this document. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, I think let me - Rt Hon. Leader of Government Business, this matter was raised two weeks ago and these matters are now coming up again. Have you taken any steps to deal with these matters finally?

2.31
THE THIRD DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER (Lt Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I first of all pray that my colleagues exercise patience.  I discussed this matter with the Minister of Defence this morning because I knew it would come up. The Minister of Defence told me he is working round the clock to prepare a comprehensive report on the issue. However, since the PAC report, he had been engaged as chairman of the Cabinet sub-committee as we all know and, therefore, that has interrupted his time. But he is working on this issue very vigorously and I pray – it is a very big exercise throughout the country and I think colleagues will bear with us so that we have enough time to work on that. We shall come with a report.

MR SSEMMULI: Mr Speaker, what we only need as the august House, is an explanation with a report because some of us do not know the kind of veterans who were compensated or paid off in many districts and respectively, in Buwekula Constituency. This is because we are being asked questions we are unable to answer. The Deputy Prime Minister told the august House that the respective minister would come and give an explanation. So, we need the actual date when the respective minister will come and give an explanation. 

DR EPETAIT: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The Rt Hon. Deputy Prime Minister has told us to be patient. This is not a new matter on the Floor. Sometime back, the Minister of Defence came to the Floor and told us that defence had concluded a headcount and that all the matters were being handled by the Ministry of Public Service. I am surprised that it looks like we are having a wall around again. I do not know whom we can now believe in; What the Prime Minister is appealing for that we should be patient? I do not know for how many more years, yet the Minister of Defence was saying they had handed over the matter to Public Service. Who is telling us the truth? Those veterans are very desperate and with their curses, something might go wrong with those who are responsible for their plight. We need a thorough clarification on this.

LT GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: I think we are saying the same thing. (Laughter) We have never diverted; we have never said anything contrary. I agree with my colleagues that what they are saying is true. Also, they should accept that what I am saying is true -(Laughter). Yes, because what else could they want to hear? So, the Public Service cannot work independently; they have to work together with Defence. So, for that matter, I once again appeal to colleagues to bear with us. We are not going to say tomorrow, or after tomorrow because it may be a very difficult time. Let us consult again and we shall come back when we are ready.

2.36
MR FRANK TUMWEBAZE (NRM, Kibale County, Kamwenge): Mr Speaker, thank you so much for giving me an opportunity to raise a matter of urgent national importance concerning my constituency. 

The matter I am raising is a matter we had petitioned the Prime Minister, but he had not had time to look into the matter. Since the matter concerns life and property, I feel the family I belong to, which is Parliament, should know the suffering of my people and the cry. Over the weekend, one person was killed. He was a resident in the area and also a staff attached to the Prime Minister. The matter concerns a land dispute between the residents of my constituency and the refugees department in the Office of the Prime Minister. 

The Minister of Disaster Preparedness visited our area on the 17th of February with a team of people. As leaders of Kamwenge District, we expected to agree on the way forward and resolve the disputes on that land, which had already been communicated in writing by the President. I had never thought that I could be intimidated in my constituency. But on the 17th of February, I was intimidated, I was booed by the minister and I felt resigned. We disagreed in that meeting in the office of the RDC. My colleague the Woman MP, the LC V and myself, chose to withdraw. We had no option but to write a petition to the Prime Minister. 

The team proceeded deep into the rural areas in the constituency without our presence and the people were met there. There was no message for them apart from being told that they were taking refugees. The question was, “You are bringing refugees to settle them where?” So, because there was uncertainty, we chose to go on a local radio in the evening as leaders, to calm down the population and reassure them that we, as leaders of the area, are still expecting a solution from Government as per the President’s directive. (Mr Sseggona rose_) Let me give you the details. I know you may know our area, but I will give in later. 

Two weeks later, as we were trying to get an opportunity to meet the Rt Hon. Prime Minister - because he gave us an appointment for yesterday, but he was unable to meet us - we heard bad news that again, the team from the Prime Minister’s Office moved into the area to prepare for the refugees. Unfortunately, as they were penetrating the villages, that innocent man was killed. 

Since then, a lot of talk has generated tension in the constituency. The Office of the Prime Minister has set and called the DPC that it is the leaders who incited people in their talk show of that day when we disagreed. Luckily, I met the IGP and I have told him that I am ready to be charged if they can pick that CD and listen to it. There is also a CD of our meeting with the minister. I have told him that they should listen to our CD, listen to the CD of the minister and his team, review the actions of the staff of that office and the Minister of Disaster Preparedness. Yes, you know the Minister of Disaster Preparedness colleagues. (Interjections) Okay, we will move on.

As I conclude -(Mr Sseggona rose_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, you are rising on a matter of urgent public importance. The information should be within your knowledge. You cannot take information before you have finished. Can you? Let him conclude then you can contribute positively.  

MR TUMWEBAZE: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for your guidance. As I wind up, in Kamwenge we are very peaceful people, and as leaders we are very calm. We are not known for inciting people, but I think we should be listened to when we have passionate concerns of our people. The death of that old man, Alfonse, could have been avoided because when Central Government ministers visit a district and you disagree in a meeting with the entire district leadership the area MP, Woman MP, LC V don’t you go back and find a solution, and ask, “What is this?” 

Now, I do not know why there is use of force in the department of refugees. How come the President listened to the petition that was presented to him in 2006, and offered a possible solution, which was to be implemented by none other than the Minister of Disaster Preparedness and Refugees in consultation with the local leaders of the area? 

Now, consultation between us cannot take place. We are being accused of inciting the people. But that is not the problem; we may be charged if need be, but we shall know who incited the people. 

So, my prayer to Government is that the petition of our people over that land should be looked into. There are bona fide owners of that land and the historic facts are there. Before the refugees came from Rwanda in 1964, there were indigenous people living on that land. His Excellency the President has recognized that fact and said that those should be separated from the resettlement scheme. We request Government, through the agency of the refugees, to recognize us instead of using force.

Finally, Mr Speaker, we are demanding for an investigation by the Office of the Prime Minister on certain officers who headed a survey exercise in Kamwenge in 2005 forcefully. They extorted money from people and left others outside the scheme, who had not paid the bribe. I raised this concern, but I was rubbished. The same officers are the ones giving very good technical advice to forcefully resettle the refugees. 

I feel pained that there is no sign of remorse from that office even after the loss of that old man. So, I appeal to Government and the Prime Minister, as he has promised to come down to Kamwenge and hear the issues of the people, let the investigations be thorough. I am happy the IGP has promised me that this will be investigated. Thank you so much. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the issue that has been raised is specific. So, can I ask hon. Sseggona to make a short statement then the honourable minister will respond.

MR SSEGGONA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The information I wish to give to the House is that this issue of refugees is becoming a bigger problem because we are putting refugees on one side of the scale and nationals on the other. I am aware that a similar problem is existing in the district of Isingiro where it is actually worse. Again, a life has been lost because the Government declared and gazetted part of the indigenous people’s land - over 80 square miles or more - and made it part of a refugee settlement camp. 

When these refugees come in with different cultures and different backgrounds, they wreak havoc in the area. What has made it even worse in Isingiro is that the name of the President has been dragged in. They are saying there that the President himself wants this land –(Interjections)– I have said, it is said that the President wants this land. I am giving information; you may wish to respond.

Finally, to my brother, I sympathize with you about the blackmail that you are inciting violence. Kindly understand that this is the life that some of us have been going through for the last ten years.
 
2.47
THE MINISTER OF DISASTER PREPAREDNESS AND REFUGEES (Dr Stephen Mallinga): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Since this year began, we have had an influx of refugees from the Democratic Republic of Congo coming to this country through Kisoro. At the moment, in that area, we have two refugee camps. We have a refugee camp at Nakivale and another one at Rukyenga. 

As we speak, we have had about 6,000 refugees from Congo entering Uganda. The transition camp is at a place called Nakibande, which is in Kisoro. From there, we have been transporting them by road to Nakivale and Rukyenga. These two camps are now full. So, we had to look for an alternative camp where the government owns land. Government owns land at Nakivale. It is slightly more than 80 square miles and it is gazetted, surveyed and Government has a title.

Government has a title of the land at Rukyenga; but I do not remember the acreage now. But we have a certificate of ownership declaring that it is Government land. We have a certificate of ownership at the place he is talking about in Kamwenge. The government owns 40 square miles – the land in question was ceded to the Central Government by the Omukama of Toro in 1964 and Government has owned that land since then. That land has been surveyed. It is about 40 square miles and the government has a title.

As you recall, in 1994/95 the refugees who were on that land returned to Rwanda. They were Tutsis who had come into Uganda after the incident of 1959, when the King of Rwanda was removed and a lot of Watutsi came into this country. They were in that refugee camp. As soon as the Watutsi left, some local leaders in the area, who had land somewhere else, rushed to that place and started claiming two or three square miles. But they did not effectively occupy this land. What they did was to bring in people from outside the area to cultivate the land and then they would claim a percentage of the crops –(Interjections)- I visited Kisoro, Rukinga and Nakivale and indeed these camps were full of refugees. 

The next alternative was the camp in Kamwenge. When I was about to go there, in about two days, hon. Frank Tumwebaze came to my office and said there was correspondence from His Excellency the President, which had been directed to the Minister of Disaster Preparedness, and that was my predecessor, last year. I then asked him why he did not put this into effect and he said it was about time for elections, therefore, we did not want to bring up the issue and I waited till now. Alright, I said okay, we shall have a meeting. Initially, we thought we would meet them on Saturday after my trip to the other three places, but the meeting was extended to Friday and it was communicated to him. 

As soon as I reached Kamwenge - this was my first time in Kamwenge - hon. Frank Tumwebaze, who had been humble when he talked to me, had turned into something else.(Laughter) He behaved in a very wild way; he attacked me right away when we were in the meeting. He said I had not informed him that there had been changes. I had spoken to him on phone -(Interruption)

MR TUMWEBAZE: Mr Speaker, I rise on a point of order, specifically on what the minister alleges that he called me. Is he in order to blatantly tell lies on the Floor of this august House, when clearly he accepted a meeting on the first day. None of us Members of Parliament were informed; we got information from the district informally and I took trouble to meet people to come to my office to confirm the meeting for the first day. I later heard that the meeting had changed to Friday. There is no formal communication and it is practice for ministers to copy to us when they are travelling into our constituencies, as courtesy. Is he really in order to tell lies for purposes of winning an argument?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, the Speaker was not party to the discussions you had with the minister. I am, therefore, unable to rule on who is telling the truth. I am not able to rule on that point of order but honourable members, I see this matter invading so many other matters. Would it not be proper if we let a responsible committee look into this matter more carefully because it is ‘my word against yours’ and that will not take this Parliament anywhere? I think, honourable minister, it may be proper for us to find a different forum where the details of this issue can be worked out properly and then brought to this House in an organized way, because it will not be helpful the way it is. So, would this not be proper for a committee of this House to look at this issue more carefully?

MR SSEBAGALA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. That is also a very good option, but I think the best way to do it is through the caucus. These days we have a clearing house – the caucus. It can be sorted out in the caucus and then you can come and report. (Laughter)

MR TUMWEBAZE: Mr Speaker, our plea is that the facts be looked into, but with your permission, allow me clarify one point – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, I think it would be better because you are going to raise it and then he will rise to clarify; and he will clarify; and you will clarify; until the cows come home. Can we take a decision that this matter be referred to the Presidential Affairs Committee so that it is handled more comprehensively and a report is brought here?

DR MALLINGA: Mr Speaker, I was interrupted in the middle. In my conclusion, I was going to request you, Mr Speaker, to refer this matter to a relevant committee of the House because what I had not mentioned is that after that meeting, the honourable member – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I will now rule you out of order. The decision is that we defer this matter for comprehensive handling by the Presidential Affairs Committee and we should give them a timeframe in which – 

MR TUMWEBAZE: Mr Speaker, I am very happy by the ruling that the Presidential Affairs Committee will look into this to hear the stories, but I am confused. As we speak, the IGP has deployed about 50 policemen and I thank him for that because the tension is high. The minister continues to alert people that refugees are coming and I don’t know where they are going. In this state, as we even wait for the committee, what is the way forward? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It certainly cannot come from the chair. Honourable minister.
 
DR MALINGA: Mr Speaker, I was coming to the most serious part of the presentation. Because of the incitement of the honourable member, a worker in charge of the camp was killed. He went on radio and incited the public to come out with all weapons and attack people – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I had already ruled on this matter that we are not going to have accusations and counter accusations in the House. The matter stands referred to the Committee on Presidential Affairs. They should examine this matter and come back to Parliament in two weeks. In the meantime, they should take remedial steps to advise on the way forward. The committee should take some preliminary decisions on how to guide action in that area. It is accordingly ruled. 

Honourable members, please allow me recognise in the public gallery this afternoon, a team of councillors of Lefori Sub-county, Moyo Local Government, led by the LC V Chairman. They are represented by hon. Alero Tom Aza, Member of Parliament, West Moyo Constituency. You are welcome! (Applause) 

Also, in the VIP Gallery, we have hon. Dr Betty Pachuto Udongo, former Member of Parliament. She is in the country to coordinate the International Business Investment Conference and Export, 2012 due to take place in Michigan in the USA from 25 to 29 April 2012. Please join me in welcoming her. (Applause) I urge you to participate in the activities she is trying to coordinate.

I would also like to recognize the presence of hon. Stephen Bamwanga, former Member of Parliament. (Applause)

Honourable members, we have already taken one hour of our time on these preliminary matters. It is important that we make some progress now. If there are any other matters to be raised, we will take only 10 minutes on them. I now allow hon. Beatrice Anywar and hon. Hood Katuramu – we will close this and move to the next item. I give each of them only three minutes.

2.50
MS BEATRICE ANYWAR (FDC, Woman Representative, Kitgum): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance. Last week, I organised a number of selected children suffering from the nodding disease to come for further medication at Mulago National Referral Hospital. 

Before I did that, I first made all the necessary consultations in conjunction with the State Minister for Health, Dr Achieng. I also consulted the President and local government officials, before it was agreed that the 25 selected children from the affected area be brought to Mulago for further investigation and treatment.

The movement was scheduled for Thursday last week. However, after making arrangements with one of the drivers for a truck at Wayo-Wayo, he was stopped from transporting those children to Kampala. When I inquired, I was told that the advice for him to pull out of our arrangements was from the LC V Chairperson of Kitgum District. And so, we could not transport the children on Thursday. We had to look for alternative transport before we finally got some driver from a place known as Homeland. But before doing that, I went to the LC V Chairperson to ask why he had done that. Because his response was not good, we almost exchanged bitter words. His argument was that I should not have transferred these children to Mulago Hospital because that looked a rebellious action, which showed that the government was not caring about these children.

However, Mr Speaker, this undertaking was in full agreement with the position of the President of Uganda, who is also the Chairman of NRM. So, for the LC V Chairman of Kitgum to say that I just wanted to portray the weaknesses of Government – I told him I did not have any politics in it. I just wanted the children to come for further investigations and treatment.

As if that was not bad enough, I had requested the LC V councillor for health to accompany these children. I also had talked to the district medical superintendent to allow some medial workers to accompany the children because of their condition – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, just say what finally happened to these children. Please, be specific for us to save on time.

MS ANYWAR: Thank you, Mr Speaker. On the next Friday morning the children took off for Kampala after spending a night at Kitgum Hospital. They were flagged off by the medical superintendant. They were in the company of the medical personnel. However, on reaching Gulu, that bus was impounded with the children being ordered to go to the Police station. At the time, I was attending a meeting on oil at Serena Hotel, Kigo. The information was so disturbing to the extent that I had to contact the health state minister. I also called the Third Deputy Prime Minister, who at last made efforts to have the children released from Police custody.

I would like to say that this act traumatised the children greatly. They had to reach Mulago Hospital at about 10.00 O’clock. That said and done, I would like to thank the Third Deputy Prime Minister and the Minister of State for Health for their effort in having these children brought to Mulago.

However, my issue in regard to this is: I would like to know from the concerned minister, who took such an inhuman decision to arrest children suffering from the nodding disease in Northern Uganda in order to stop them from coming for further treatment at a national referral hospital - and while they were at Mulago, some journalists who had gone to interview them were also arrested! Like I have said, those actions have traumatised these children so much. 

My prayer is that the officers who took such decisions be held responsible. Actually, this morning when the President visited these children, this issue was brought to his attention. These people should be brought to book no matter whether it was the LC V Chairman of Kitgum, Mr Luke Nyeko or any other person. We cannot afford to hold this. Everybody in the district is very bitter about his actions. Once again I pray that the Rt Hon. Deputy Prime Minister directs that these people be brought to book for their inhuman and ugly actions. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much too. Is there somebody responding to this from the front bench?

MR NDUHUURA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to say that what my colleague is raising is not a health matter. The children are at Mulago Hospital and being looked after very well. At least she is not complaining about that.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. I was in Gulu over the weekend and I would like to inform the House that the major concern among members of the public is: What about the other 3,000 children who are also affected by the same disease? Why have only the 25 been brought to Mulago Hospital?

Many people in Northern Uganda are also concerned about the net gain in getting only 25 children from Kitgum and leaving 2,975 children in other areas? 

With all due respect, I think as politicians, we should stop graveyard politics. (Applause) We should also, as much as possible, support the Ministry of Health than try to interfere or do their work.

MS ANYWAR: Mr Speaker, I rose on an issue of national importance. My Colleague holding the Floor is an MP from Northern Uganda, from a constituency where most people with the nodding disease are found. The concern I raised here was on the way these children were handled when they were coming. 

Secondly, the colleague is aware that I represent Kitgum District. What were brought were samples and not all of the affected children in Kitgum or Northern Uganda. Is he in order to deter my action as an area Member of Parliament, in undertaking to do what the people of Kitgum asked of me. And is he in order to divert the debate from what I had raised, that is, the inhumane treatment of the sick children being arrested? Is he in order, Mr Speaker?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, you rose on a point of urgent public importance. The honourable member also has people affected by the same ailment. He is equally affected. I think he disagrees with the way you handled it. I cannot rule on that really. (Applause)

MR ODONGA OTTO: Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. Last week Parliament passed a resolution that the Ministry of Health brings a supplementary budget to help everyone suffering from the nodding disease, and not only the 25, and we are bound by that resolution as Parliament. 

With your guidance, I would think it would be prudent for the minister to tell the whole country how far he has gone, maybe with partial or total implementation of the parliamentary resolution because as of now, the impression down there is that the focus is now diverting to the 25 as opposed to the 3,000. And this was the spirit this Parliament had when we were passing the resolution. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, we need to roll-up this debate. 

DR NDUHUURA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, and I would like to thank my colleague for giving way. The information I want to give is that last Friday, my senior colleague at the Media Centre together with the Minister of State for Disaster Preparedness did address the media about the steps we have taken. 

As a matter of fact, beginning yesterday, our people are on the ground in the Acholi sub-region training health workers. This training is going to take a few days and thereafter the treatment centres in the three districts of Kitgum, Lamwo and Pader, will be opened. Screening and treatment will commence. It is not only at the three centres where the activities will take place, but there will be outreach activities in the communities as well. 

Mr Speaker, I thought this information should be given. I also want to thank hon. Odonga Otto for his understanding because his district is actually the most affected of all the three districts. I would like to appeal to the Acholi Parliamentary Group, specifically the Members of Parliament from the affected areas, to really cooperate with us. We are at hand to give all the information that is required. We have developed guidelines and speaking points for the political leaders and all these will be issued to not only the Members of Parliament, but all political leaders, so that they can mobilise people to go to treatment centres to be screened. We shall keep the country informed of any developments as investigations go on. 

At Mulago –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, please finish. We need to move forward. 

DR NDUHUURA: At Mulago Hospital, the patients are being managed. A lot of investigations have taken place and we believe that the majority of the children will be transported back to their respective homes. A few serious cases will be left behind to be managed. I thank you. 

3.18
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR RELIEF AND DISASTER PREPAREDNESS (Mr Musa Ecweru): Mr Speaker, I just rise to supplement and confirm what my colleague has said and also thank hon. Odonga Otto. Indeed, we did address the press, the minister of health and myself. I rise to confirm that we have designed a multi-sectoral intervention to handle this challenge. We have invited a number of sectors and the Ministry of Health has been able to mobilise close to about Shs 1 billion. They are continuing to mobilise more resources. We in the Office of the Prime Minister have also been able to mobilise some resources because we were challenged as the ministry responsible for particularly the welfare of the people, given the fact that the families that are affected, their caregivers are all the time dedicated to the welfare of these children at the expense of fending for themselves. 

So, the Office of the Prime Minister, particularly Disaster Preparedness, has mobilised resources and organisations to look after these children in terms of feeding and everything to do with their welfare, and also take care of the caregivers. 

Food has already been dispatched to these districts both enriched food, what we call artemate, and fortified foods for acutely malnourished children. Other normal food has also been sent to support the families that are affected so that the parents can concentrate in looking after the children. That is the information I wanted to give. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. We need to make progress on the Order Paper. Honourable member, you had a pending matter, but I think you will raise it tomorrow. Next item. 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

REVIEW OF THE PROPOSED AMENDMENTS OF THE RULES OF PROCEDURE

3.20
THE CHAIRPERSON COMMITTEE ON RULES, PRIVILEGES AND DISCIPLINE (Mr Fox Odoi-Oywelowo): Mr Speaker, I beg to move a motion without notice in accordance with Rule 46(1)(g) that the House do dissolve itself into a Committee of the whole House to enable it consider the proposed amendments to the Rules of Procedure of Parliament. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question to the motion that the House moves into a Committee of the whole House. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Rule 116

THE CHAIRPERSON COMMITTEE ON RULES, PRIVILEGES AND DISCIPLINE (Mr Fox Odoi-Oywelowo): Mr Chairperson, we propose to stand over rules 116 to 119. The committee was tasked to study and make recommendations to the House. We are ready though the proposed amendments were not circulated to the Members. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN Do you have the amendments there with you?
 
MR ODOI-OYWELOWO:  Yes, I have. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN Can they be circulated meanwhile we continue with this? 

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO:  They will be circulated as we proceed.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Yeah, since the matter has already been proposed, we just see how to put them in perspective. So, we can proceed unless there is reason not to.
  
MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: We made fundamental changes to the rules in respect to this particular section. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: So, you propose that we circulate them. 

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: We circulate in the meantime.  

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Mr Chairman, now that they are here, should we really stand it over again? 

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Yes, Mr Chairperson. We stand them over and discuss them last.
 
THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Alright we go to Rule 125.
 
Rule 125 

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: We propose to delete sub-rule (2) and also delete sub-rule (3) and replace it with the following:  “Upon the expiration of 45 days under sub-rule (1) the House shall proceed to deal with the Bill without any further delay.” 

The justification is that by deleting sub-rule (2) we shall allow for extension of time. Committees will endeavour to handle Bills before them within the stipulated period, which is 45 days. This will make Parliament more efficient in its legislative role which is the primary function of Parliament. I beg to move.
 
THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: You are proposing deletion of both the existing sub-rules (2) and (3)? 

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO:  We replace sub-rule (3) with the following: “Upon the expiration of 45 days under sub-rule (1) the House shall proceed to deal with the Bill without any further delay.

MR KATUNTU: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I don’t see any mischief being cured by the amendment. You see a committee is given under sub-rule (1), 45 days within which to accomplish its work. But for some unforeseen circumstances, it is possible that the committee might be caught up by this particular rule. And the chairperson knows that, for example, the committee he sits on, the Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Committee, is quite a busy committee and sometimes there are other intervening factors.
 
So, I think we have proceeded well. The only problem is that sometimes committees, even those that are not busy, take their time. But with proper guidance from the Speaker’s Office – and I think all the committees have got this guidance or instruction that they must finish their job within 45 days. In case they can’t, then they come to this House and seek permission. I don’t see any necessity for deletion of sub-rule (2) or even sub-rule (3). 

MR TASHOBYA: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  I would like to add to what my colleague, hon. Katuntu, has submitted because the experience in committees is that at times it is beyond the ability and capacity of the committee to handle the Bills in the committees within the 45 days. For example, we are going in the budgeting season which engages all committees of Parliament. There are Bills that need intensive and extensive consultations like The Companies Bill, which has about 600 clauses, which requires wide consultations amongst different stakeholders. 

So, Mr Chairman, by taking in what the committee is proposing, we would be locking out people and institutions that are interested in the work we are doing. I would like, therefore, to agree with hon. Katuntu that the provision as it is, has sufficient mechanisms that the Speaker may accept or may disallow the extension of the time of 45 days. So, really, it is in the interest of Parliament and the committees in particular that we leave this provision as it is because to take the amendment would deny stakeholders the opportunity to do the job, and it would also deny Parliament to have investigative work done by the work referred to committees. 

For example, Mr Chairman, supposing this law was adopted the way it is, in the committee right now we have about 10 Bills, what would be the fate of those Bills? So, I really think and would like to appeal to my colleague, hon. Odoi, who happens to be a Member of our committee, that realising the work we do, and the input that we require, the committee concedes and we leave the provision of the rule as it is.
 
THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Mr Chairperson, upon those interventions, would you like to reconsider? 

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: We concede and proceed. These rules were basically meant to make Parliament more efficient. The rules committee is of the view that Parliament should continue to consider a Bill with or without the report of a committee after the expiry of the 45 days. But having listened to the able submissions of the hon. Tashobya, we shall concede.
 
Amendment 50

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: We propose to delete part XXIII and replace it with the following: The Estimates Budget and the Committee of Supply – Submissions of indicative estimates; Rule 128: “The President shall not later than the first day of April in each financial year, cause to be prepared and laid before Parliament, a three-year micro-economic plan and programmes for the economic and social development in preparation for the final submission under Rule 129. 
 
(2) The President shall not later than the first day of April in each financial year and in preparation for the final submission under Rule 29, cause to be submitted and laid before Parliament, an indicative preliminary revenue and expenditure framework of Government for the next financial year.
 
129(1) - The Speaker shall commit the indicative allocations to the Parliamentary Budget Committee and to its sectoral committee of Parliament that part of the preliminary indicative allocations that fall within its jurisdiction immediately after the submission of the preliminary estimates to Parliament by the President and the department. 

(2) Each sectoral committee shall consider, discuss and review the indicative allocations committed to it under sub-rule (1) and submit its report to the Budget Committee of Parliament not later than the 25th day of April.

(3) The Budget Committee shall scrutinise the estimates and the reports of the sectoral committees and submit its recommendations to the Speaker, who shall send the recommendations to the President by the 15th day of May.

(4) There shall be made to Parliament, by the Budget Committee, the recommendation submitted to the Speaker under Rule 129 sub- rule (3).

130 - The President shall cause to be prepared, submitted and laid before Parliament, in each financial year, but in any case not later than the 15th day of June in the financial year, estimates of revenue and expenditure of the government for the next financial year.

131 - Each minister shall cause to be prepared and submitted to Parliament a policy statement of the relevant ministry on the preliminary estimates submitted under Rule 128 and 129 by the 30th day of June each year.”

Mr Chairman, these are the proposed amendments.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: For 128 and 129? But you are proposing-

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: The deletion of the two rules.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: You are also proposing new rules under that part? That is 130, 131, 132, 133 up to 135 -

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Yes, up to 135. So, there will be consequential re-numbering.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: So, those will still fall under the same part -

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Roman XXIII.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Okay. Members, the proposals are as outlined by the chair of the committee. I think the substance of it is to bring in clearer terms what is in the Budget Act for guiding the rules on those issues. Any comments on this, Members?

DR EPETAIT: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I have a small amendment to make on the proposed new Rule 129 sub-rule (1). I propose that we delete the last three words “and the departments” and we just put a full stop after “President.” The reason is that it is actually the President who is making these submissions of the preliminary estimates to Parliament for all Government departments. So, it is irrelevant putting “and the departments” there.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: And then you are using the words “sectoral committee”. Do we have sectoral committees or sessional committees?

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: There are amendments or proposals to that; from “sectoral” to “sessional” committees.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Then it would have been appropriate, since the Committee of Supply falls under the same part, to move them together so that we can deal with them.

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: First of all, Mr Chairman, I concede to the proposed amendment by Dr Epetait.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Now your proposed new Rule 136 is still on the Committee of Supply, which still falls under the section. Do you want to move them all together?

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Mr Chairman, we intended to stop at 135 and then we handle 136 alone.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: You want 136 to fall under a different part? Okay. Honourable members, that is the proposal; that we delete the existing rules 128 and 129, and introduce the new proposals made by the chair of 128, 129, 130, 131, 132, 133. There is no 134 here. There is 133 and then 135. Is it the numbering?

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: There must be a problem with the numbering.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: So, 128 to 134 would now constitute the new part Roman XXIII of our Rules of Procedure as proposed by the chair. I put the question that the amendment proposed in the terms raised by the honourable chair of the committee do form part of the rules 128, 129, 130, 131, 132, 133 and 134 and stand part of the rules.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Amendment 136

MR TUMWEBAZE: Mr Chairman, I think I am not following the flow. I would like to propose an amendment on a standing committee. I do not know when I can come in. I am trying to move an amendment that creates a committee and I will give justification for it. I do not know where I can bring it in. I need to be helped.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No, that will not be here; that will come later.

MR TUMWEBAZE: Okay.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, if you look in our rules, Rule 130 is different.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Well, it is an amendment proposed by the committee that the new part XXIII constitutes all those rules from 128 to 134; the new part they have proposed. It is now in the rules if we finally adopt them. Mr Chairperson, you were now on the proposed amendment on Committee of Supply?

MR ODOI-ONYWELOWO: Mr Chairman, on the Committee of Supply we propose the following:
1.	“There shall be a Committee of the whole House designated the Committee of Supply to which shall be referred the annual estimates, any supplementary estimates and any Vote-on-Account.

2.	Upon an order of the day for Committee of Supply being read, the minister shall move that the House do resolve itself into the Committee of Supply for the purpose of:

(a)	enabling the President, Vice-President or a minister to deliver a financial statement; or
(b)	enabling the President, Vice- President or a minister to initiate a debate on the policy implied under the vote.

3.	In making a motion under sub-rule (2) mentioned in paragraph (a) of the sub-rule, the mover is entitled to refer to the revenue of Uganda, the manner in which he or she proposes the revenue shall be raised and in debating the motion, Members are entitled to refer to similar matters.

4.	Upon a motion proposed by the Speaker, the debate shall be adjourned for such period as the Business Committee may decide, and the resultant debate shall be limited to seven days exclusive of the proposal’s reply.


5.	On resumption of debate on the motion, the Speaker shall give the first opportunity to contribute to the position spokesperson on Finance to respond to the motion followed by the chairperson of the Committee on the Budget before recognising the rest of the Members for this debate.

6.	The House shall consider annual estimates either on motions moved under paragraph (b) of sub-rule (2) or in the Committee of Supply for a period not exceeding 15 days.”

Mr Chairman, we propose that we handle this jointly with the subsequent amendments because they relate to the same subject; those are our proposed amendments on Vote-on-Account.

138	Vote-on-Account.
“
1.	The House shall consider any Vote-on-Account in the Committee of Supply for a period not exceeding one day.

2.	If it appears to the chairperson that a Vote-on-Account is unlikely to be fully considered by the end of one day, he or she shall, at any time that he or she considers necessary to conclude the business relating to the Vote-on-Account, put the question necessary to dispose of the Vote-on- Account.

3. The House shall consider any supplementary estimates for such period as the Business Committee shall decide. 

139 -	Rules governing Committee of Supply when considering Vote-on-Account:

(1) When the House is in the Committee of Supply to consider a Vote-on-Account -
a)	any Member may move to reduce the amount of Vote-on-Account, but every such motion shall relate to any vote while considering Vote-on-account;

b)	when consideration of the Vote-on-Account has been completed, the Chairperson shall put the question that the amount proposed (amended if appropriate by any reduction agreed) be provided for the Vote-on-Account.

2. 	Any report of resolutions from the Committee of Supply shall, unless the House otherwise orders, be received and considered immediately upon a motion that the report be adopted.

3. 	No motion to recommit the report of the Committee of Supply may be moved except by a minister.

Rules covering Committee of Supply when considering annual or supplementary estimates:	
1.	The House shall consider any supplementary estimates for such period as the Business Committee shall decide.

2.	When the House is in the Committee of Supply to consider annual or supplementary estimates -

a)	any Member may move to reduce the amount of the vote of the estimates, and such motion shall take the form that ‘I beg to move that the sum of shillings ten thousand be reduced in respect to vote…’;
  
b)	the motion for reduction of the vote shall be moved when the sub-head to which the motion relates is under consideration by the committee;

c)	  where a motion to reduce the amount of the vote in relation to the particular sub-head has been agreed to or negatived, no further motion to reduce that vote in relation to the same sub-head shall be made;

d)	when a motion is moved to reduce a vote, the question shall be proposed from the Chair accordingly;

e)	when consideration of a vote has been completed, the Chairperson shall put the question that the amount proposed (amended if appropriate by any reductions agreed) be provided for under the vote;

f)	after a vote has been disposed of, it is not in order to refer to that vote in proceedings on a motion relating to another vote except for the purpose of examples or illustration;

g)	notwithstanding the rules relating to motions, any Member may ask for information relating to the details of any vote;

h)	on the last of the allotted days, the Chairperson shall,   at such time as he or she considers necessary to conclude the business on that day, put every question necessary to dispose of the vote then under consideration and shall immediately put severally, the questions with respect to the votes not yet considered, namely, that the total amounts of the votes outstanding be provided for services specified, and no debate shall take place on the questions being put.”

Mr Chairman, these rules are to bring in line our rules with the provisions of the Budget Act, 2001. The committee takes the view that we need to provide a procedural framework for the disposition of these matters. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable member, there are some issues. Section 139, then you go to – that part on page 35, there is a rule covering Committee of Supply when considering annual or supplementary estimates. The numbering there is non-existent; is that Rule 140?

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Mr Chairman, I notice that they are not numbered, but we shall consequentially number them.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: So, that will then be a rule itself?

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Yes, Mr Chairman.

DR EPETAIT: Mr Chairman, I proposed an amendment to Rule 136(5), where it states: “On resumption of debate on the motion, the Speaker shall give the first opportunity to contribute to the Opposition’s spokesperson on finance.” I would like to delete the words “Opposition’s spokesperson” and substitute them with “Shadow Minister for Finance”. I think that is what the committee meant and that has been the practice. Secondly, on Rule 139 - 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Why don’t we first deal with the first one? Maybe on the same sub-rule, where you said, “followed by the chairperson of the committee on the Budget before recognising the rest of the Members for this debate” would it be proper to suggest that before opening the debate?

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: We concede, Mr Chairman.

MR BYABAGAMBI: Mr Chairman, I support what he is proposing, but I would like to get some clarification on the Vote-on- Account; here we are dealing with figures – very complicated figures sometimes! Experience has shown that it is not easy to read the figures and you are giving it one day. Suppose we do not pass it within one day, what happens thereafter? What is the way out? 

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Mr Chairman, if the principle is acceptable, I do not think we will be opposed to the proposal to extend the time. The basic principle here is that we must dispose of these matters in an expeditious manner. For Vote-on-Account, the government actually needs our authority to expend that money. And I do not see any reason why we should have one week considering Vote-on-Account. But if any reasonable number of days is proposed, I will accept it.

MR KAKOOZA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I want to supplement hon. Byabagambi; the practice itself has shown that Vote-on-Account needs much scrutiny and sometimes – it is on record – the sector ministries go back to the committee and consult about the figures because most of the times, these are dictated or they are brought on the Floor by the finance minister. But when the figures are not in tandem, we always go back and consult. So, when you suggest only one day when you are dealing with Vote-on-Account for all ministries, I do not think it is practical. Why don’t we leave it open as it has been so that the consultations can be made. Remember, Vote-on-Account is one-third of the total budget of the sector ministries, which needs much scrutiny by Parliament. So, you can rush it – 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Hon. Kakooza, which one is the rule? Is that the exception you are citing or it is the rule? 

MR KAKOOZA: Yes, it is within Rule 139. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN What I am asking is the situation - why it has to go back to the committee – is that the standard practice or is it the exception?

MR KAKOOZA: The committee chairperson has said that it should be dealt with within one day.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: You have not got me; what I am asking is: The issue that it should go back to the committee, is that the standard practice or is it in exceptional circumstances that it is forced to go back to the committee? 

MR KAKOOZA: It is in exceptional circumstances. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: It is in exceptional circumstances. So, what you are saying is that the chairperson is proposing that we accept the principle that the rule should be that we do it on one day, but in exceptional circumstances, we can extend time to go to the committee. That is what he is proposing now. Would that be appropriate? In which case, the hon. Nandala-Mafabi is going to propose how to structure that amendment to accommodate the exceptional circumstances.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, having a deadline on Vote-on-Account is very important, but how many votes are you talking of? You must first of all consider the number of votes. How many votes are you looking at? They are very many votes and sometimes these votes are contentious. For example, recently, when we were trying to get money for paying for the electricity, we took days. So, what happens in such circumstances? This business of trying to restrict the date, with this number of votes, is very dangerous. We could say, “...within a certain period of time,” maybe two to three days. But saying, “One day,” will not be ideal and eventually you will have a paralysation if a vote has been rejected. That means the vote holder cannot get money. That is the proposal I wanted to make. 

But, Mr Chairman, on the earlier one where they talked about seven days - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, maybe on that, the Rt Hon. Prime Minister wanted to say something? Let us resolve that and then we move on.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I really do not think there is reason to debate because Vote-on-Account does not involve debating policy. It simply means Parliament giving approval for one quota of the estimates to enable Government to operate while Parliament is considering the whole budget. There is no debate about policy. There is nothing like that. So, really, it should not even take a day -(Interjections)– one-third? One-third, Yeah! 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I agree with you, Rt Hon. Prime Minister. What we are trying to put across is that we have got instances which we must quote here. One time we passed a Vote-on-Account, I think, for building a market and when it came to passing the budget it was rejected and the government came up and said, “You have given us a-third, so what do we do with a-third?”  Those are some of the reasons; we are saying that if it is a straight forward case, perfect. But there could be contentious issues and that is why we are saying that even with Vote-on-Account you do not just submit and people say, “Pass.” They must be looked at and a decision taken. So, that is why, Mr Chairman, we want to propose that it is good to have Vote-on-Account; we will never take a long time to debate it. But for better analysis, one day cannot be sufficient, but if we can do it in one day, well and good. But for purposes of public - supposing it is rejected? What happens to that figure they have refused? 

MR BYANDALA: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. For the years I have been here, this has not been done in one day and we do not need to worry because there is always urgency. As for Government coming to a standstill, MPs’ salaries are also under threat of not being paid. So, I think we do not need to have this one day. It will be done as quickly as possible but let us not tie ourselves on one day. 

MR KAKOOZA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. The best example is this financial year when Umeme brought the expenditures which were not in tandem with indicative figures. We had to go back to the committee and the budget committee sat, called the sector ministries and the figures were checked. It took four days in the committee. When you restrict yourself to one day it means - and by the way, the Vote-on-Account is taken after reading the budget. The Speaker gives a slot before the financial year ends and starts. 

So, it gives us lee way that the practice is that on that Vote-on-Account, after the budget is read, the Speaker calls Members of Parliament and passes those expenditures. But what is important is the scrutiny of the figures, which might not be in tandem with the indicative figures which are passed by Parliament and brought by the Minister of Finance.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, we have two types of expenditure: There is recurrent and development expenditure, and I do not agree with hon. Byandala who says that when we come here we need money badly. I think that is being simplistic because the budget is always read around 15th June and at that time we give about five days or so to make the votes or by 1st and by 30th June the expenditures of June have been taken care of - we are not aware. So, we are talking about the budget which starts on 1st July of that year. So, Mr Chairman, we should not be simplistic in this matter. 

What I wanted to propose is that we can say that for the vote on recurrent expenditure, because it is for purposes of day-to-day running, it can be done within one day and the vote on development at least within one week, for purposes of trying to harmonise positions before we can pass the Vote-on-Account. 

MS AKOL: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I basically know that when we come here to pass the Vote-on-Account, the purpose is to give Government an advance of one-third of the budget total that has been read by the minister. By that time we do not have the details which are normally presented in the policy statements in order to be able to debate in detail and even maybe propose cuts on the votes that were being given. So, we actually have no information even to say that we should cut the Vote-on-Account. 

I want to propose that the status quo remains that we still have to pass Vote-on-Account without question. After all, when we receive the policy statements and pass the total vote amount it still includes what was passed as Vote-on-Account. It is part of it and so really, to say that we are going to debate, based on what as at 30th June? By then the ministries and departments are trying to come up with the policy statements which have details on which areas this money will be spent. 

The cure I propose for this is really for us to bring forward the budget cycle, so that by 30th June, we as Parliament should have passed the budget so that we avoid Vote-on-Account. But in the current circumstances, we have to allow Government to operate; we have to pass that Vote-on-Account so that Government operates, and in one day, without question because the policy statements which are supposed to provide details will not be there for us to be able to have a comprehensive debate on any item on the vote. I thank you, Mr Chairman.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, I am making the last submission. I think we are assuming the issue is only money; and that is where we are making a mistake. To pass a vote there must be activities which are going to be implemented. By the time you come to the budget they will say we are going to pay x items at this rate and that becomes the total. So, what we have to pass on the vote is that we have to agree on two issues; first, that we have agreed on that activity; that we implement a third of the activities, and this is the money. So, the reason we are trying to put up - it is easy to identify recurrent activities, but it is very hard to deal with development activities. It is not per se on money.

MR BYABAGAMBI: Mr Chairman, after listening to my colleagues, I agree there is urgency in passing the Vote-on-Account, but at the same time, such a situation can arise that we do not really have to do it within one day. I am, therefore, proposing that it be passed within one day, but the Speaker may extend the time in case such an issue -(Interjections)- yes, so that we have an exit route in case it is not passed within one day.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, what we are dealing with is Article 154(4). “If the President is satisfied that the Appropriation Act in respect of any financial year will not or has not come into operation by the beginning of the financial year, the President may, subject to the provisions of this Article, authorise the issue of monies from the Consolidated Fund Account for the purposes of meeting expenditure necessary to carry on the services of the government until the expiration of four months from the beginning of that financial year or the coming into operation of the Appropriation Act, whichever is the earlier”.

That is what is called Vote-on-Account. So, it is a stop-gap measure. The Appropriation Act has not been passed, but Government has to operate. The authority is given to the President to issue money from the Consolidated Fund. Now we are seeing how to regulate this through the Parliamentary procedure called Vote-on-Account. How do we authorise it; the guideline is in the Constitution Article 154(4). 

Actually, in other jurisdictions, what they do is that they continue to carry out the expenditure based on the budget of the previous year. That is what happens in other jurisdictions, but that is not what our Constitution says. Our Constitution has moved away from that procedure of using the budget framework of the previous financial year to do the Vote-on-Account. Ours is specific that the President shall issue such money from the Consolidated Fund to allow Government operate within that period of four months depending on how soon the Appropriation Bill is passed. So, now what is being done is, we are trying to put a timeframe within which these discussions should take place.

MS AKOL: I just want to really make it clear to the House, Mr Chair, that the Budget Estimates book which has details, really comes way into the end of July/August. That is the book which has details of activities. Vote-on-Account is just based on the budget speech; on the total that has been given there and it is a real summary; it is an abstract. It does not have details of the activities which we are trying to say should be debated on so that we can delete some of them from the Vote-on-Account or the vote total.
 
I really want to concur with you, Chair, that it is based on this provision in the Constitution and the effect is to allow Government to operate smoothly as Parliament looks at the budget.

We can only look at this budget definitely, which has been read by the finance minister after policy statements have been brought by the relevant departments and normally, really, ask that by 30th June, these policy statements are in place. When we have not received these policy statements - actually, we are busy trying to receive them. On what basis then do we say, now that you see we need to time this Vote-on-Account based on the details; which details?  Policy statements are still coming, the estimates book is being prepared. So, really, the basis as provided for in the Constitution is what we should follow and I beg that let the provision remain as it is in the current rules. Thank you, Mr Chairman.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I had already picked hon. Kyamadidi, but can we take a decision on Rule 136 as proposed - Committee of Supply - because that one does not seem to be controversial. (Mr Nandala-Mafabi rose_) Do you have any amendments?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Yes, one amendment. In Rule 136, there is an amendment which was raised by hon. Epetait.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: That was taken.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Then there is also the seven days, which are these days?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Which part?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: That is 5(4).

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: 5(4). Page 64 or 34?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Well, these pages - some of us have it on 65. 136(4), it is even in italics.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Rule 136(4), seven days, yes.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Seven days. We are saying this should be sitting days because if you say seven days, they will count even Saturdays, Sundays and Fridays because these should be the days when Members are debating. These should be seven Parliamentary -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Seven sitting days.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Seven sitting days. The purpose is to avoid counting a Saturday when Members are not there and they say it was debated –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Or you will just say seven sittings.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Yes, seven sittings.

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Conceded.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that Rule 136 as amended do stand part of the rules.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Rule 136 agreed to.

Rule 138

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: We now come to Vote-on-Account.

MR KYAMADIDI: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I entirely agree with hon. Akol and my Prime Minister that Vote-on-Account needless to say, we do not need debate. The least of experience I have is that more of this debate will come in the ministerial policy statements that are given to sessional committees. That is when we consider serious business in terms of activities and the cost thereto. So, I think it is prudent that we appropriate in one day, the Vote-on-Account. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I put the question that Rule 138 stand part of our rules.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Rule 138 agreed to.

Rule 139

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Mr Chair, I beg to move that you put the question that Rule 139 do stand part of the rules.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, Rule 139 has been read and internalised by the Members. I put the question that Rule 139 as proposed do stand part of our rules.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Rule 139 agreed to.

Rule 140

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Mr Chair, I beg to move that you put the question that Rule 140 titled, “Rules covering Committee of Supply when considering annual supplementary estimates” do stand part of the rules. 

DR EPETAIT: Mr Chairman, I appreciate that most of the provisions in these rules are extracts from the Budget Act. But from experience, there is something that has been rather frustrating. If you see Rule 140(2)(a), the nature of a motion that any Member may move to reduce on any vote- “That any Member may move to reduce the amount of the vote of the estimate and such a motion shall take the form that ‘I beg to move that the sum of shillings 10,000 be reduced in respect to vote…’”.

Mr Chairman and Members, there are times when the Committee of Supply agrees that yes, there is some Shs 2 billion which should be reduced from a particular vote. But this particular provision does not give Members any leverage to do so. We are restricted to Shs 10,000. Imagine reducing Shs 10,000 from a vote when you have legitimately identified Shs 2 billion should be reduced. On that note, I know that the Rules of Procedure cannot be used to amend an act. I think there is need for us to re-visit the Budget Act so that Members can reduce as they deem fit. If that is accepted, I request that once we review or amend the Budget Act to remove the Shs 10,000 - just to remove the amount - once that is accepted, consequentially, the rules have to be amended.

I find that restriction of Shs 10,000 very frustrating. It has ever happened when His Excellency, the Vice-President was the Speaker of Parliament. We would identify Shs 5 billion and we are restricted to reducing by only Shs 10,000 and you start losing morale of even - all that intellectual work. 

MR SSEKANDI: Mr Chairman, honourable members, this practice of moving that motion the way it is moved is the standard practice in most of our parliaments. The significance of moving this motion is to show disapproval of the policy. You go into the mathematics of calculation, precision, but once you succeed in moving that motion, it shows on record that you have disapproved of the policy and it is very effective rather than going into precisions.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Additionally, the amount of Shs 10,000 was not substantially all the balancing of the budget. It is easier to adjust than if you do Shs 10 billion. So, can we move on?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, I am seeking clarification. Does it mean that now committees are redundant and cannot do anything when it has been submitted if you are going to pass this law? 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No, this is not for the committee. The committee can come with proposals for reallocation; all those kinds of things. Not so? You are talking about a motion that is on the Floor of Parliament as can be moved by a Member because what you are coming out with from the committee, the recommendation from the committee is different from the motion that a Member can move about the Shs 10,000. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, if it is a committee, this is a Committee of the Whole House; unless you are amending the rules now. We are told this is a Committee of the Whole House.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Hon. Nandala-Mafabi, the distinction is this; this rule is authorising hon. Namara to stand up and raise a motion showing displeasure with a particular policy. The effect of it is just the displeasure, not changing the figures. But the actual change of the figures is generated from the committees who examine and make recommendations about what money should be moved from where and taken where. Those ones will have come substantially as recommendations from the committees, but as the Committee of the Whole House, this motion as the Vice-President said, is to just show displeasure. That is the substance of it. So, there is that distinction. (Interjections) Are we together now? Are we together? (Interjections)

Honourable members, I put the question that Rule 140 do stand part of our rules.

(Question put, and agreed to.)

Rule 140 agreed to.

Rule 131

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Mr Chairman, we propose to amend Rule 131 in the following terms; first by substituting the word “sessional” with the word “sectoral” appearing in the head note and to re-draft the rule as follows: 

“1. The House shall have standing and sectoral committees as provided in this part of the rules.

2. 	The Vice-President, Prime Minister or a minister shall not be a Member of a standing or sectoral committee and if a Member of any such committee becomes the Vice-President or a minister, he or she shall cease to be a Member of the committee.

3. 	Except for the Business Committee, Appointments Committee and the Budget Committee, a Member shall not belong to more than two committees.” 

The justification is given. First of all, it is the view of the committee that the relevant committees here handle mandate that relates to specific sectors. They are sector related mandates, so the correct name for them should be sector-related committees, sectoral committees instead of sessional committees.
Two, we also thought we should make it mandatory for Members to belong to only two committees so that they are efficient in the discharge of their duties to the committees and to Parliament.

MRS AKOL: Thank you, Mr Chairman. The rules, by making it sessional – a sessional committee was termed as such because it was meant to run for a session of Parliament and that was one year. That is why it was called a sessional committee. So, I do not know whether the chair is trying to say that we have now done away with one-year sessional committees - maybe to say two or two and a half. But as long as these committees are one year, they are sessional. That is the basis from which I believe the word “session” came. To run for that session for which that committee is to operate, one session of Parliament, not a sector as you are trying to say, honourable Chair.

MR BAKKA MUGABI: Mr Chairman, thank you. First of all, I wish to agree and support the proposal by the chairman that the idea of naming these committees after a session of Parliament did not give any meaning. They are better called “sectoral” because we handle sectors. I find more meaning in that. But at an appropriate time ahead, the chairman should be prepared to accept an amendment maybe to shift from the tenure of one year to two and a half such that they are in tandem with the standing committees. But the clarification I wanted to seek is on Rule 131(3) which is almost similar to the old rule, but here you tend to mean that now a Member can be on the Business Committee, Appointments Committee and Budget Committee, but also be a Member of two other committees. Is that what you wanted to mean? 	
I find that unacceptable because Budget Committee is equally busy. You cannot be a Member of the Budget Committee and a Member of two other committees. I think we need to examine that. 

MR SSEKANDI: Mr Chairman, I support the amendment of changing from sessional to sectoral committee as the previous speaker has said because we deal with sectors. Actually, in some jurisdictions, what we call sessional committees are called portfolio committees. That is the nature of the job that such a committee carries out. I think it is better to call them sectoral committees or portfolio committees.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: I agree with what His Excellency said, but I also agree with what hon. Akol said –(Interjections)– they are both right. Hon. Akol said correctly that the reason why we chose the term “sessional” was to peg the life of these committees to a session of Parliament; that is why they were called sessional. 

Now, it makes more sense to call them “sectoral” as proposed or even portfolio. So, because both are right, I think we should call them sectoral committees, but give them a life of a session. You see, standing committees are also subject committees and they are in our rules; they are for two and half years –(Interruption)

MR ODONGA OTTO: Thank you my learned friend for giving way. Mr Chairman, it would appear that the issue of the tenure may as well be disposed of concurrently. I am a chairperson of a standing committee and I am not talking because I need more time; my term is two and a half years and I am not complaining. 

But we have been in Parliament for six months now and orientation is still ongoing. Now, to have a committee chairperson for one year of a sessional or sectoral committee in relation to what hon. Baka said is a very limited time to do reasonable business for this institution. 

So, since the Prime Minister is still on the floor, the information I want to give him is, wouldn’t you consider it an appropriate time to have the tenure of the sessional committees extended to two and a half years and that of standing committees and Parliamentary Commissioners should then go to the whole term of Parliament. I think this is the time to open up. (Laughter)

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Well, I recognise the effort by hon. Odonga Otto to lengthen his term as chairman of a standing committee. But those of you who were here before may recollect that previously, standing committees were for the whole term; they were for five years. We changed this, I think at the beginning of the term of the previous Parliament. The rational was that people perform and we put these people in place at the beginning of the term. Sometimes, we do not know them well enough. So, we should as Parliament have more time to look at their performance to see really whether we need to maintain these people in leadership of those sectors for the whole term or whether there may be need for change. 

Two, we thought there was sense in spreading leadership so that if hon. Odonga Otto was chairman of a standing committee for two years, we thank him for serving effectively for those two and a half years. Let us give another person a chance also to exercise leadership; that was the whole thing. That was for the standing committee.

For the sessional committees, I do not think two and a half years is a good idea because -(Interruption)

MR KYAMADIDI: Thank you, Prime Minister, for giving way. I would like to be clarified on whether there is any rule in our Rules of Procedure where you may not recall leadership of any committee at any one time you feel someone is incompetently handling the business you gave them. 

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Hon. Kyamadidi is right. The party can remove a person that it has entrusted with leadership responsibility at any time they feel there is need to do so. The party has no limitations under the Rules so it can exercise that –(Interruption) 

MR KATUNTU: I would like to thank the Prime Minister for yielding the floor. Under our Rules of Procedure, we proved how a chairperson can lose that seat. And the ground that a party can sack does not exist. In fact, previously, in the case of a colleague that I do not want to mention, the party that had designated him just withdrew him from the committee, but there is no way they could sack him as the chairperson. 

So, under the rules, the party does not have that authority to sack anybody. But the worry – Rt Hon. Prime Minister, I think is also not founded because there is no rule that says that you serve only one term. So, you can serve as many terms as your party has confidence in you as a chairperson of the sessional committee. And I have seen quite a number of colleagues who have served for more than one term, two or three sessions as chairperson. I am sure the colleague right in front of me served for a long term and he is my present chairperson of the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs. You can serve for as many years, as long as your party has faith in you. So, we do not have that rule and I do not think it is correct for us to entrench it; that the party can sack an individual from being a chairperson. In fact, they could sack you for doing well. (Laughter) 

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Well, my considerable respect for my brother Abdu notwithstanding, I would like to point out the provisions of the Rules of Procedure as they stand today. You may wish to turn to Rule 134(2). It reads as follows: “…the parties represented in Parliament shall designate through the Whips, membership to committees on the basis of party representation...” and 134(5) “Parties have powers to withdraw and relocate members from individual committees.” And 134(6) says, “The party or organisation in Government shall designate the chairperson and deputy chairperson…” So, I would like to invite Hon. Katuntu to study that a little more. So, the point I was making was that sessional committees or what we now call sectoral committees are really intended for the purpose of the session and for handling the budget, and budgets are annual. 

That was the rationale behind this. So, I see nothing wrong with calling them sectoral, but keeping them for one year. How we achieve that, we can do the formulation in the rules and call them sectoral, but give them one year as their term. Thank you. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, I think for the issue of chairperson and withdrawal, I will leave it to hon. Katuntu and the Attorney-General, but we have noticed so many things in these committees. Our current number of committee members is 30, but if you are there, you will never get more than 10. If you are lucky, you will get nine, but it is usually seven. The reason that Members always advance is that they have another committee to attend and this is really portraying the performance of Parliament in bad faith. I wanted you to move, maybe for this first session, to try having Members serving on one committee and if we go by that then we should consider the issue that hon. Baka brought, that all these committees are the same. Having two and half years would not be bad and we could give it a trial and see the difference. 

I believe if we do that - because all committees of Parliament are the same - Members will go where they are competent and we shall end up having each committee with maybe not more than 15 and in the process, there will be service delivery. Any Member is free to attend any committee. So, when you do not want to attend the finance committee that day –(Interruption)

MR KYAMADIDI: Thank you very much, honourable Leader of the Opposition, for giving way. I would like to concur with you and give you information that I am a member of the natural resources committee and we are almost completing a year. If by inference here it means that by June I will be relocated to some other committee, they have just brought Bills and I have started on Bills. It means after a year, which will be in June, some other group will come in and they will also be learning because 50 percent of us are new. What message do we send?

Honourable Leader of the Opposition, I would also like to agree with you and hon. Baka that it does no harm for a Member to be on a sessional committee, which is now going to be a sectoral committee, for two and half years and if you, the party, feel that the Member you designated to a committee has not performed to your satisfaction, at your will, pleasure or displeasure, you can always relocate them. I thank you. 

MR TUMWEBAZE: The information I would like to give is in support. Really, unless there is a legal technicality, we can be guided, but the argument by the Leader of the Opposition makes sense to me because as a chairperson - and many other chairpersons experience this - getting the quorum of membership is very cumbersome. I have sometimes to go and sit with the chairman PAC or COSASE and beg that can we not have a meeting today? Can you have it tomorrow? Yet we all have very urgent business to handle. Unless there is any legal technicality, I think I would be persuaded to buy that argument. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, I will give you an example. Why you see committees like PAC, Local Government and many other committees having backlogs, is a result of these issues because when you pass the budget on ministries, we are all here to sit and pass it. When it comes to auditing what we passed and how it has been spent, we do not want to look at it. That is why committees end up having backlogs and we can solve this problem if we go by that and the worst of it, which we are trying to find out, for example, our committees budget for 30 members, they request for money for 30 members and this money is put on the accounts of the clerks of the committees, if you are not aware and when you do not carry out an activity, the clerks of the committees take this money. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Hon. Mafabi, we need to make progress. On this particular rule, the issue that I see are proposals being made that a Member shall not belong to more than two committees and the definitions that have changed. The issue of the terms is not contained in this particular rule. 

So, can I deal with this particular aspect of whether a Member should belong to two or only one committee? Can you propose it formally and we deal with it?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, given the attendance of the Members of Parliament in committees, this big number of 30 is too much and all committees of Parliament are equal. I want to move that Members, with the exception of the Business Committee, the Appointments Committee and the Budget Committee, a Member shall not belong to more than one committee. The justification is to improve efficiency. 

MS NYAKIKONGORO: Thank you, Mr Chairman. Actually, I agree with the chairman of the committee that Members who belong to standing committees can belong to any other committee. I want to give you a scenario of the Appointments Committee. These are Members who usually sit to gazette ministers in a particular period. Will you just sit and wait until when there is another appointment of another commission? So, what does that Member do during that time? And in fact, one of the proposals that were rejected by Parliament was to give that committee more mandate to continue monitoring whatever the people they vet do and it was rejected. So, what does the Appointments Committee do? 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, the proposal is that a Member shall not belong – with exception of those other committees - to more than one committee. I now put the question to the proposal as moved by hon. Nandala-Mafabi.

(Question put and negatived.)

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Mr Chairman, I move that you put a question that Rule 131 be part of the Rules of Procedures.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I put the question that Rule 131 stand part of our Rules of Procedure.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Rule 131, agreed to.

Rule 132

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Mr Chairman, the committee proposes that under the sub-heading “standing committees” we insert a new paragraph (m) immediately after paragraph (l) to read as follows: “(m) the committee on Human Rights.” The justification is that a new standing committee on Human Rights should be created. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I advise that you deal with the entire rule before we debate it.

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Mr Chairman, the committee also proposes that we insert a new paragraph (n) to read as follows: “(n) the committee on subsidiary legislation.” The justification is to create a new committee on subsidiary legislations to enable Parliament track subsidiary legislations since this is a delegated function; we strongly feel that it has to be scrutinised. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, the proposal is to insert a provision in our Rules of Procedure for the creation of two new committees – the Committee on Human Rights and a Committee on Subsidiary Legislation, any contributions?

MS KABAALE: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I am of the view that the creation of a Committee on Subsidiary Legislation would be duplication of services because its duties can be done by the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs. Secondly, the duties of that proposed Committee on Human Rights are already being executed by the Committee of Equal Opportunities, which can also look at issues of human rights.

According to your presentation, you had recommended that they are removed. I do not know why you now want to retain them.

MR MWESIGE: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. From my experience as the former Chairman of the Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Committee of Parliament in the Seventh Parliament, I can testify that we had problems in handling reports of the Uganda Human Rights Commission because of the amount of work that is available to that committee. So, I fully support the creation of a Committee on Human Rights.
 
I, however, oppose the creation of a Committee on Subsidiary Legislation for the following reasons: Subsidiary legislation, by its nature is delegated legislation. Parliament cannot delegate the powers to make secondary laws to another body like the local governments, for example, then you fundamentally participate in the passing of those bye-laws.

So, the mischief, which this committee seems to be seeking to cure, is summarised in the proposed functions of the committee, Mr Chairman, on page 78. I do not know whether I am allowed to take you there. Anyway, in my opinion, all these problems can be addressed by the Office of the Attorney-General. I am saying this because when districts propose to pass ordinances, for example, they are supposed to be submitted to the Ministry of Local Government before being passed on to the Attorney-General to confirm whether those proposals conform to the Constitution.So, I do not think Parliament should give the powers to other bodies to pass secondary laws –(Interruptions)

MR EKANYA: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I also thank hon. Mwesige for giving way. I think the report should have gone further – because the focus of Parliament as regards subsidiary legislation, which has been our major concern - is based on statutory instruments and the regulations that come out of the Acts that are passed by Parliament. I am saying this because every Act that we pass requires a regulation to operationalise it.

What we have discovered is that in the past, some ministers delayed – in fact, I can even quote a number of – for example, the PPDA Act, where it has taken time for the Minister of Finance to come up with regulations. If the ministers ever come out, they usually deviate from the main law. This information is based on research done by our legislative department.

So, as Parliament, when we delegate you, we do not give you the mandate to create new laws. 

On that note, may I now seek information from you on how we should handle regulations? The Act requires that the minister prepares some regulations to operationalise any such laws. Those regulations are supposed to be laid on Table before they come into force. What are you proposing? Which committee should handle them? I am saying this because sometimes when they are referred to the committee, they take time, which causes us to begin blaming the Executive. That is what the Office of the Speaker wants to resolve.

MR SSEKANDI: Mr Chairman and honourable members, I personally would like to suggest that the functions of scrutinising subsidiary legislations are made as a result of the delegation given by the minister in the Act – the relevant sectoral committees should take over these functions. I actually contend that such committees would do better. For example, a sectoral committee dealing with agriculture should be responsible for scrutinising, if necessary, a subsidiary legislation made by the Minister of Agriculture, under the laws being governed by that ministry instead of having a separate committee. That is my view.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, the concern is very big on what is happening to these subsidiary legislations. For example, when you talk about the agriculture committee, you realise that they have not done it. So, if that is the case, we can now specifically hand over this mandate to a particular committee, either the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs or the Committee on Rules, Discipline and Privileges to deal with these subsidiary laws. If we do not do that, we are going to have a big problem to deal with.

MR KATUNTU: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I think all of us agree that there is need for Parliament to monitor subsidiary legislations to see whether they conform to the law. However, I am tempted to agree with the opinion of His Excellency the Vice President, because if a Bill went through a committee, then that committee would be more well versed with the facts that might have led to the enactment of that law. 

So, we can have this as one of the functions for all the committees – to study subsidiary legislations that have gone through the committee. We can only have this redrafted before approving it as one of the functions of a committee. I do not support the idea of having a separate committee to deal with them.

MR MWESIGE: I would like to agree with the opinion of the Vice President and that of hon. Katuntu. With due respect, if we are to follow the argument of the Leader of the Opposition, it would mean that all Bills – because they translate into law – would be handled by the legal committee because all Bills essentially become law. But because we have committees which deal with subject matter - subject matter committees; the Committee on Agriculture, the Committee on Health - they deal with Bills which relate to their subject matter. So, I find it proper that the committees in exercising their oversight functions over their sectors should look at this subsidiary legislation and make their ministries comply.

MR TASHOBYA: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. With due respect, I do not see the reason why we should put that function under different sessional committees. If you do that, you will be inviting a process of examination of these subsidiary legislations. The way it is now, there is nothing that stops a committee from inviting a minister or calling for a particular law or subsidiary legislation to be looked at by a sessional committee. But to put it down that one of the functions of a committee is to examine subsidiary legislation would go into a problem, which hon. Mwesige first talked about, of going into the delegated work given to local governments. (Interjections) Hon. Katuntu, you may not agree with me, but that is what I think. My view is that sessional committees can exercise that oversight function without necessarily putting it down as one of their functions in the rules. 

MR WADRI: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I want to invite us to look at what we are discussing in light of the experiences of other parliaments. I am very sure a number of us have visited other parliaments and have known what happens therein. In most parliaments that I have had a chance to visit, the responsibility of scrutiny of subsidiary legislation is that of the committee that is responsible for the line sector, in which case ours here would be the sessional committees. But I think what is more difficult for us at this stage to probably think about and agree on is, many subsidiary legislations have gone through and are in the ministries. Ministers responsible do not even bring it to Parliament for us to own as a Parliament and yet it is us who have given them the powers to come up with subsidiary legislation.  

So, I think as we make these rules, we must also make a provision for these ministers to be compelled to bring these subsidiary legislations to Parliament through the relevant committees because if that is not there, it is going to be very difficult for these front bench Members, the ladies and gentlemen that I see here, because they are very busy people. They might even forget and not take it seriously. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, we need to make progress. In the Seventh Parliament, that function was given to the legal committee. I remember that very well and I am sure hon. Mwesige, also remembers. I do not know whether we are talking about all kinds of subsidiary legislation, because we have three categories of subsidiary legislation. There is legislation that will give authority to the minister, and you really do not care so much because the details are not so material. For example, if you are talking about changing the currency points, which is nothing substantial. Then there is the one that when you bring it to Parliament, it is for information. But there are specific kinds of subsidiary legislation, for example, if you look under the privatisation statute, where it is expressly stated that those subsidiary legislation shall not come into force until approved by Parliament. Those kinds of provisions are there. 

Those kinds of subsidiary legislation must be laid before Parliament for their affirmative vote. If Parliament takes an affirmative vote, then the subsidiary legislation becomes effective. 

There is a category of subsidiary legislation which starts operating until Parliament says, “no that is wrong.” It is subject to a negative vote of Parliament. 

Now, are we saying that all kinds of subsidiary legislation of this nature, even the ones to do with currency points,
 because of changes in inflation, should come and be vetted by this Parliament or are we saying where Parliament knows that mistakes are likely to be made, it is provided in the law that the subsidiary legislation shall not come into force until it is approved by Parliament, in which case, the minister has no choice but to bring it to Parliament. So, I do not know whether we are talking about all these and putting them altogether as subsidiary legislation.

MR SSEGGONA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I just want to state that I am a member of this committee and to – 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Which committee?

MR SSEGGONA: The rules committee - and this is how we developed this idea. First of all, it started with the backlog that we established with the various committees. Secondly, with the greatest respect, obviously, it was also about the quality of subsidiary legislation that we have been saying; and thirdly, the inaction by the ministers and other relevant government officials in enacting the subsidiary legislations. 

Mr Chairman, we are looking at a situation where a minister is given the power to make subsidiary legislation. Take an example of the various employment laws that commenced in August 2006. Until late last year, there were no regulations and these Acts could not be put in place. 

Secondly, we are also looking at specialisation, which would give us quality in terms of compliance with the parent statutes. In many cases, I do not know whether ministers consult the Attorney-General’s chambers for assistance or not, but they make legislations that contradict with the parent Act. Primarily, -(Interjection)- I do not know whether hon. Byabagambi, by saying “No” knows the quality of legislations I am talking about. The point we are making is they make contradictory subsidiary legislations. 

As a follow-up of Parliament, because principally, we are the lawmakers, we are only delegating this function. We have a responsibility of following up that the person to whom we have delegated this responsibility has carried it out, and not only that, but also carried it out well in accordance with our directions. 

This committee we proposed is meant to be a specialised committee equipped with facilities and experts from amongst ourselves, and that is the reasoning behind this. 

MR ODONGA OTTO: Thank you, Mr Chairman. As of now, given what His Excellency the Vice-President stated, and given the argument raised by hon. Sseggona, I stand at a fifty-fifty position. The information I want to give is two-fold. Recently, hon. Amongi, Chairperson of UWOPA, raised in Parliament the extent of implementation of the gender equity and related issues since we passed the law, which, if you juxtapose her argument with what we are talking now, it means there is already a lacuna. 

We pass the laws but whether they can be implemented accordingly, is another issue. But more importantly, the information I wanted to give is that recently, we, three MPs and two other people, went to Luzira to visit hon. Godi and the regulation the Prisons authorities have passed for people to access Luzira Prison is not in the spirit of the parent Act.   It is now practically impossible - in fact, one of the ladies we went with was told that she was not allowed to enter the prison and yet she has been able to enter Parliament several times. 

So, Parliament needs to be a little proactive other than leaving people to become despots out there by passing all kinds of regulations, there would be need for a specialised committee which does not only deal with subsidiary legislation, but also probably tracks the progress of implementation of Bills that have already passed through the hands of this Parliament. That is the information I wanted to give my colleague. 

MR SABILA:  Thank you, Mr Chairman.  Mine is to support the amendment of the rules? The issue of having a committee on human rights is very necessary. When you look at the International Declaration on Human Rights and the African Charter on Human Rights, and also look at the Constitution, the rights of human beings are diverse and they are so pertinent. So, having a committee in place in Parliament to fight for the rights of human beings is of paramount importance.  And on top of that, it also helps us to decongest the other committees.

On the issue of subsidiary legislation, it would be prudent if committees looked into legislations from ministers, because all ministries fall under respective committees, but then a lot of work is left undone because of the busy schedule that Members have. It is proper to have a committee to specifically look at subsidiary legislations so that Parliament is not taken by surprise. Thank you, Mr Chairman.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, is there any disagreement on the issue on the committee on human rights in principle? 
  
HON. MEMBERS: No, amendment.
 
THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No, I know there can be an amendment, but I am asking about the principle; is it acceptable that we agree on the committee on human rights? 
  
HON. MEMBERS: Yes.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Okay, then let us have the discussion and resolve the issue of the committee on subsidiary legislation. 

MAJ. GEN. (RTD) MUHWEZI: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I am also a member of the Committee of Rules, Privileges and Discipline. The information I would like to give hon. Sseggona is in support of his argument that subsidiary legislations sometimes depart from the parent Act. The example is the regulations for the Law Council where they have completely changed the provisions of the Advocates Act and it is causing problems; it is still on the statutes books.
 
I have tried to communicate to my brothers in the Ministry of Justice to address that problem, but there is a living example and yet the regulations are the ones that affect the people after Parliament has passed a law. So, Parliament should find a way of resolving this mischief, whether it is by forming a special committee or putting a provision in every Act of Parliament concerning the subsidiary legislations made thereunder. They must first come to Parliament for approval lest there will be a big problem. So, there is definitely need to address the problem. Thank you. 

MRS BABA DIRI: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I rise to oppose the committee of human rights and the subsidiary law. First of all, we have just been talking about sectoral committees, which means, each committee is tagged to a ministry. Now, in the case of human rights, which ministry are we talking about that we are going to discuss policies and laws? 

Secondly, the Equal Opportunities committee is a standing committee. So, this other one is not necessary.

Regarding the subsidiary law, we should give time for this regulation to be put in place by the various ministries because the timeframe is too long for them to put the regulations in place. And after the regulations have been put in place, it is very important for the respective committees to be able to approve them so that they are in line with the laws passed. Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. 

MR RUHINDI: Mr Chairman, first, I appreciate the concerns raised by the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline, but I am not comfortable with the remedies they have proposed, namely; the creation of a specific committee on subsidiary legislation. I think we have not imagined or taken trouble to know how much subsidiary legislation is passed in a year. 

If you notice the number of Bills we pass here in Parliament in a year, it is an average of about 25 Bills. Now if you imagine the magnitude of subsidiary legislation passed, and you have to have a committee where ministers will have to appear, research undertaken and coming to Parliament for a go ahead, we may find ourselves creating the biggest type of bureaucracy that we do not want in our Government machinery.
   
My view is that certainly, we take the proposals made by His Excellency the Vice President and hon. Tashobya, which is just a re-awakening that in our sessional committees we should know that we have that added responsibility, and monitor to what extent that ministerial responsibility or delegated responsibility has been executed -(Mr Sseggona rose_) let me finish, please.  

Finally, this work is technical and the principal agency for drafting legislation in the Standing Orders is the Office of the First Parliamentary Counsel. This office is handicapped in terms of personnel. What we need to do here is to pass more money to have more staff and facilities in that department so that it can actually discharge or execute its responsibilities. That is my view, rather than creating another level of bureaucracy in our implementation machinery. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Learned Attorney-General, wouldn’t it be appropriate to pass an Act of Parliament to give general guidance on what should guide the passing and implementation of subsidiary legislation, so that you give some benchmarks on when to publish, when to distribute - things like that - so that we can deal with these issues? Honourable members, I am now constrained and need to put the question so that we make progress.

There are now two issues; the issue of the committee on subsidiary legislation and the issue of the committee on human rights, before I put the final question on the rule itself.

I am going to put the question that the committee called the Committee on Subsidiary Legislation be introduced in Rule 132 as proposed by the committee.

(Question put and negatived.)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I now put the question to the proposal that the committee on human rights be -(Mr Nandala-Mafabi rose_)- amendment to this particular one?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, we want human rights and we should also put the IGG reports because IGG reports are also part of the reports, which have not been examined yearly in this Parliament. I think we stopped in the Seventh Parliament. So, we should say, ‘...will be the human rights committee on human rights and IGG reports.’

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN Would they fall within the same subject matter?

DR EPETAIT: Mr Chairman, I think we would push that as a function under the human rights and that will be dealt with under Rule 69, which deals with functions of the Committee on Human Rights. Yes, some of the issues that the IGG deals with actually touch on human rights. If somebody’s name is deleted from a pay roll and -

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Chairman, when we talk of human rights, on the face of it, everyone would know what human rights is all about, but I am at pain and in difficulty that we would say the IGG report as a whole is handled by the Committee on Human Rights. Let us look at an aspect of abuse of office. For example, we know the nature of some people who have ended up in prison; some of our colleagues in relation to the IGG. It becomes very difficult to directly relate it to human rights. 

If you talk of human rights, we look at the Human Rights Commission; some people are following their claims endlessly. Even just giving them that mandate alone, they would somehow be overwhelmed. So, I would think that we should stick to the strict sense of the word and appeal to my colleagues that the IGG report can still be best handled by the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN Honourable members, the proposal is that we enlarge the mandate or name of the Committee on Human Rights to include the Committee on Human Rights and IGG. I put the question to that amendment proposed by hon. Nandala-Mafabi that we add IGG on this Committee on Human Rights.

(Question put and negatived.)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the Committee on Human Rights be included in Rule 132 as proposed by the committee.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR TUMWEBAZE: Mr Chairman, I would like to move an amendment to create a sub-rule in Rule 132, which came out after the consultation our committee had with the Auditor-General. I would like to move that we establish a standing committee on the value-for-money audit report called the Committee on Value-for-Money Accountability (VFMA). The proposed functions –(Interjections)-  Allow me to proceed and then you can decide.

Mr Chairman, the proposed functions -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Hon. Tumwebaze, did you bring this matter to the Chairman of the committee?

MR TUMWEBAZE: No.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Then we are not going to handle business this way. We need to have this matter discussed so that we know its implications.

MR TUMWEBAZE: But I will justify and then people listen to it. If you could allow me to justify -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No, I would not allow it from the Chair because the debate is not enriched; it is like a surprise.

MS AKOL: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I seek clarification with regard to this section that is now introducing new standing committees. In the committee report, there is a proposal to create a committee for East African Community Affairs and the committee recommended that with due consideration, the committee found merit in the proposal to create a separate committee for East African Community Affairs, but I do not see it as one of the new committees being created here.

The justification is - and I just want to give an example. In the Eighth Parliament, quite a number of laws were passed at the East African Legislative Assembly and where there is conflict, these laws override our laws. Nobody in this Parliament has a compendium of those laws that were passed at EALA. We have never even had an opportunity for those laws or Bills to be laid here on Table and yet the integration process for East African Community is really a concern for all of us and we really need to know all the matters that are going on at that level.

Right now, our Rules of Procedure prohibit the Members of EALA from coming and participating in any debate here. So, this will be an entry point for EALA members to present to that committee and then that committee handles all issues to do with the East African Community integration process and EALA conclusively.

Therefore, I seek clarification from the Chair on what happened. This was a very good proposal, which you accepted, but I do not see it as one of the committees, which you are proposing here. Thank you, Mr Chairman.

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Mr Chairman, first, I must appreciate the concerns of the honourable member. This was a bona fide omission on our part. The committee actually agreed that we should create a new committee for East African Affairs and when it came to the amendment of rules, there was an omission. We even reflected it in our report to the House and I undertake to correct that this evening.

MR EKANYA: Mr Chairman, thank you very much. I want to seek your indulgence on the issue, which was raised by hon. Tumwebaze. The Auditor-General visited the Speaker’s office because the volume of backlog – as the Vice-President is aware – has been alarming to the extent that Government agreed with the donors to support the accountability committees to clear this backlog under FINMAP. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Hon. Ekanya, the matter is procedural; it is not the principle. Can you bring it within the procedure – please, consult quickly and come back to me on this. I gave you a guide. Why are you now taking us back? (Hon. Nandala-Mafabi rose_) No, hon. Mafabi, not on the same matter.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, I want to be frank so that we understand one another. During the debate, that issue of value-for-money was brought up and it was heavily debated in this House – it is in the Hansard. Now, since it was debated, does it mean that it cannot be decided on? Because you are asking: “Did he appear before the committee?” But it was here in this House - heavily debated and the decisions were taken and we are waiting – 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: What were the decisions taken?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: The decisions which were taken were: At committee level, we shall decide whether to include it or not. (Interjection) Yes, it was here and I was here. And by then, it was hon. Kadaga presiding. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, I need the committee of the chairperson here; was this matter -  You have to guide the House on whether this matter, raised by hon. Tumwebaze, was debated in the House and some arrangements agreed during the general debate. Because I remember, for example, the amendment that was proposed by hon. Ruhindi on the issue of rescinding some decisions was raised in the course of the debate and I told you that I was following the debate. So, I am a bit – Yes, committee chairperson?

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Mr Chairman, to the best of my recollection, this matter was raised during the general debate; it was never a subject of discussion in the committee. And I have been trying to consult the other committee members; we do not raise very strong objections to the creation of this committee, if it will add value to the accountability process. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: If it is so, I then ask hon. Tumwebaze to state it properly.

MR TUMWEBAZE: Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the following do form part of the Rules of Procedure: Establishment of a standing committee on value-for-money audit; the proposed name of the committee is “Value-for-Money Accountability Committee”; proposed functions -(Interjections)– Identify it and then form your opinion, colleagues – proposed functions of the Value-for-Money Accountability Committee include: (a) to examine the value-for-money reports submitted by the Auditor-General in accordance with Article 163(5) of the Constitution and Section 21(2) of the National Audit Act and ascertain whether the corporations are being managed in accordance with the required efficiency, economy and effectiveness; (b) the Clerk shall receive the Auditor-General’s report submitted under sub-rule (1) and shall deliver the same to the Value-for-Money Accountability Committee; (c) the chairperson of the Value-for-Money Accountability Committee shall upon receiving the Auditor-General’s report under sub-rule (2) lay the report on the Table for purposes of debate by the House.

This is the justification: Article 163(3)(b) of our Constitution and Section 21(1) of the National Audit Act require that the Auditor-General should conduct value-for-money audit and report to Parliament in respect of any project involving public funds. Article 163(5) requires Parliament to debate, consider and report and take appropriate action on the report within six months after submission by the Auditor-General. However, the current accountability committees sometimes take long because of the backlog of the reports they have. 

Secondly, unlike financial audit reports – because there is a distinction between financial and value-for-money – unlike financial audits reports of central government votes, local government votes are provided for in the Rules of Procedure of Parliament. There are no specific Rules of Procedure regarding the debate of value-for-money audit reports. Consideration of value-for-money audit reports under Rule 154(1)(a) is limited to only commissions, statutory authorities and state enterprises; PAC considers only the financial audited accounts in Rule 148(2). Value-for-money audit reports are very expensive to undertake; they highlight current issues which require urgent attention of Parliament as their timely resolutions are very important in causing the Executive to take urgent corrective action on matters of efficiency, economy and effectiveness in the use of public resources.

The importance of parliamentary discussion and resolution, therefore, on value-for-money reports cannot be overemphasised as they shall contribute fundamentally to promote public accountability. Above all, it is to create a special committee that will handle value-for-money reports in time and inform Government on what prompt actions they can take as opposed to what is referred to as postmortem. The current status is that by March 31, 2011 – 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Hon. Tumwebaze, you need to wind up.

MR TUMWEBAZE: I am concluding, Mr Chairman. By March 31, 2011, the Auditor-General had submitted 28 value-for-money audit reports of which only one has been partially discussed todate by COSASE. In addition, another set of 10 reports shall be submitted to Parliament by March 31 this year. This will bring a total number of value-for-money reports to 38. And that is the rationale for the justification for the need of another committee – to expeditiously handle the reports and then allow intervention from Government. I beg to move.

MS AMONGI: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I support the proposal because I feel that the most important role this Parliament should play is the assessment of the money we pass from here – whether or not the impact is felt on the ground. Several times we have the Auditor-General’s reports – like hon. Tumwebaze has stated – they carry out value-for-money audit and the reason why that office was tasked with that role is to ensure that this Parliament is given the opportunity to see that the money passed here has been spent rightly. But I have not seen even for one day that this Parliament has debated that particular report. So, I support the proposal because it is vital for this House to know whether or not the billions of money we pass are actually spent correctly. In most circumstances, the actual output on the ground might even be less than 50 percent of what we have passed and yet we continue passing the money. Thank you.

MR MPUUGA: I thank you, Mr Chairman. I rise to support the proposal for this committee and I hope colleagues, without any doubt, will support the same. Over the last couple of weeks, I have seen Government projects in my constituency, including tarmac roads, melting away, schools falling apart in just a matter of weeks when it rained, latrines sinking in and bridges being washed away. These are clear signs of poor services yet all payments are done.

I know, for example, in COSASE, we have looked at many reports of the Auditor-General, but one particular impediment is that they were unable to establish how much of what we read has been actually delivered on the ground. And this House can only do justice to this country by putting more emphasis on delivering value-for-money because I am very sure we have not had a problem with spending money, but the problem we have is showing that the money spent, whether little or a lot, should actually translate into real value. And I hesitate to see a colleague saying this is a problem unless they are saying that indeed they are satisfied with the nature of work and the nature of reports of the various accounts from their constituencies about poor service delivery, poor infrastructural works and all that.

MRS AKOL: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I stand in support of the proposal by the Chairperson of the Finance Committee and subsequent submissions by hon. Mpuuga. The Office of the Auditor-General is an institution of Parliament and I believe as Parliament, we should support this office. It is true that these value-for-money audit reports that have been presented to Parliament, none, except one by COSASE, have come for debate on the Floor of Parliament. It is not by mistake. It is because currently, the Public Accounts Committee is totally engaged in a financial audit report -(Interjections)– yes, the magnitude of work is a lot. Value-for-money audit reports are very expensive reports. 

First of all, even to take on a value-for-money audit- (Interruption)

MR BAKKA MUGABI: You are talking of value-for-money audit and I seek clarification from you because when what we have been calling sessional committees go out to do their oversight work, they come back and say, “The work being done by a contractor is poor.” (Applause) They come back and report. When PAC had an issue with HABA, they said there was over-valuing, but the Government valuer has to go and establish because he is the one who is technical in that area. Now, this value-for-money audit committee – whatever you are going to call it - is it going to be composed of technical valuers who are going to go on ground and say, “The road we have just checked should have used Shs 3 billion, but it was given Shs 10 billion?” What are you going to say? 

What we say in Parliament here is that we think there was no value-for-money and then we report to the relevant authorities of Government to investigate. So, you need to clarify that one.

MRS AKOL: Mr Chairman, I think the issue here is not what the parliamentary committees do and what the Auditor-General does. The Auditor-General has a mandate and he produces his reports. What we are trying to cure is that we are supposed to abide by the requirements here that within six months -(Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, I want to first say that we as Parliament passed money in the budget of the Auditor-General specifically for value-for-money audits. Why did we do it? It is because we were saying he needs Shs 6 billion to do value-for-money audits so that we forget about financial audits, whereby it is a receipt accounting for the money. Now, when you go to the field as a Committee on Agriculture, you just see. You may be standing on a valley dam when you do not know. (Laughter) So, there will be the Auditor-General who will make the report for you using specialised persons in that area. And that is the report we are talking about. 

I will tell you that initially, I was one of those against this, but I can tell you that given what is being presented and the backlog, the only place where we can get real value is from the value-for-money audit report. I think I would ask you, from a professional view, honourable member.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Hon. Akol, please wind up and then I see how  we move forward.

MRS AKOL: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I want to thank the honourable Leader of the Opposition for giving that information. Now, we have value-for-money audits that have been completed by the Auditor-General. He appealed to us in the committee that if we do not find his reports necessary, then we should not allocate money for us to carry out these value-for-money audits because they never find time on the Floor of Parliament for debate. And the reason is the Public Accounts Committee. To tell you the truth, let us be honest, that committee, even with funding from FINMAP, has only managed to update its level of reports; they have audited-only financial reports. But the best report one can look at in terms of auditing is the value-for-money audit report. It is a report that will give you recommendations which are in line with any policy that Government may be trying to carry out. 

So, I really want to appeal to the House that let us assist the institution of the Office of the Auditor-General to do its work. We have given them the money and the mandate and they have produced their reports. We have regulations and we say within six months these reports must be disposed of. So, why can’t we help ourselves because we are the ones who have set these regulations? Let us assist ourselves to abide by the very regulations we have set so that these value-for-money audit reports are actually looked into. I thank you, Mr Chairman.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Thank you very much, hon. Akol. It seems everybody is speaking in support of the establishment -[Hon. Members: “No”] There seems to be, from those who have contributed - from the contributions I have heard, everybody is supporting the creation of this. Is there anybody - I want to listen to somebody who has a different opinion. If you have a different opinion - 

MR OGWANG: Mr Chairman, I do not agree with the issue before us on the value-for-money audit. Why? We have existing committees: PAC, COSASE and Local Governments Accounts Committee. I want to be educated. What do these committees do? 

MR AMURIAT: Information.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Hon. Ogwang, you will lose your chance. Please finish.

MR OGWANG: Now, I have heard arguments from colleagues and in my assessment, other than us creating more committees, why don’t we empower and strengthen the existing committees to do the work, which we would be able to do with value-for-money audit? 

I want to give an example; the Leader of the Opposition was giving an example that we might go to the field, look at a dam and think that it is a dam when it is a valley dam. What do we need to strengthen a committee to justify that that is a dam other than a valley dam? Does it need us to create another committee? We are becoming the way people were asking for districts. Today, we are beginning to justify the disadvantages of these districts. We are here -(Interruption)

MR KAKOOZA: Thank you, honourable colleague for giving way. I happen to serve on the Local Government Accounts Committee and we went into the field. The districts have PAC which reports to the Auditor-General. The external Auditor-General goes to the district; that is a cost. One Member said that value-for-money audit is expensive and we have committees which we can channel this money through, we strengthen them and they - it does not stop at value-for-money audit only.  

You have to hire expatriates and technocrats to find out that the shoddy work done in the district and by the way, Parliament does not have the capacity to do that. It goes beyond value-for- money audit. You must hire an engineer to go and see what the road has cost. Will Parliament also hire those expatriates to go to do that? We have already got the Local Government Accounts Committee, which goes in the field to make a verification account and report and support the committee report of the Auditor-General.

MR LUGOOLOBI: Mr Chairman, I think we have just been informed by the mover of this Motion that we have 29 reports that are pending consideration of PAC and COSASE, and PAC has only been able to look at half the report and about 20 more reports are soon coming. 

The question here is, does PAC and COSASE have the time to look at these very important reports in our quest to fight corruption, at a stage when we really need to address this problem of corruption? You see, we do not want to be looking at post-mortems. Let us look at projects when they are being implemented and address problems at that stage not a fait accompli situation. Mr Chairman, I thank you.

MRS EGUNYU: Thank you, Mr Chair. I am rising on a procedural point. May I know whether we are using functions of some committees to make new committees? Why have I said that? I am looking at the Public Accounts Committee; one of the functions of the Public Accounts Committee - it is rule 148; you can read (4).

“The Chairperson of the Public Accounts Committee shall, upon receipt of the Auditor-General’s report under sub-rule 3, lay the report on the Table for purposes of debate by the House under clause 5 of Article 163 of the Constitution”. 

When I finish that plus even others here, I go to the functions of the Committee on Local Government; that is Rule 155. When I finish that -(Laughter)- yes, I am now reading:

“The Chairperson of the Committee on Local Government shall, after consideration of the Auditor-General’s report and the reports laid before Parliament under sub-rule 4 lay the report on the Table of the House for purposes of debate by the House under clause 5 of Article 153 of the Constitution”. 

So, whoever says that reports have not been brought to Parliament for discussion, they are brought. I am rising on a procedural point; may I know whether we are using some functions of some committees, especially these two committees, to bring another new committee, yet these committees already exist with their functions? Is it procedurally right?

MR BAKA MUGABI: Mr Chairman, the proponents of this idea should also clearly explain why they decided to skip the procedure of going to the committee to take this very important idea such that it can be listened to in the committee before it is properly filtered to be brought to this House. Otherwise, what is happening is, stampeding Parliament with ideas that we cannot comprehend at this time; they should explain.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN Honourable members, there is a procedural point raised by hon. Egunyu.  You will recall that we used to have the Committee on Social Services; it has been split using the same functions and two committees have been created. What we are doing at the moment is reviewing the rules to amend them to see what is best for us to carry forward.
 
So, procedurally, we are moving properly, but the other aspect by hon. Baka is that issue I raised earlier and I was advised that the debate on the subject was conducted in this House and, therefore, issues raised and this is a process of concluding that debate. I am going to move to conclude this debate by putting this matter to vote.

Honourable members, the proposal-

MR AMURIAT: Mr Chairman, I rise to propose an amendment to a Motion moved by hon. Tumwebaze. I wish over and above the value- for-money audits to make an addition of gender audits, environmental audits -(Interjections)- allow me to justify -procurement audits, audits of treasury memoranda and audits of Government investments. 

I bring this recognising the fact that under section 13(1)(d), (e) and (f) of the National Audit Act, 2008, there is provision for those audits, including value-for-money audits. Now, looking at that scope of work - and I am speaking from a position of knowledge and experience as a Chairman of COSASE - if these functions which are not explicitly stated as functions of COSASE or PAC or even Local Government Accounts in our present Rules of Procedure, are included as their functions, then we are going to weigh these committees down and you will break their backs. 

Already, we have almost 30 value-for-money audits and several project accounts audits, which these committees over the years have failed to dispose of. It is, therefore, going to be a miracle to expect in this Ninth Parliament that these committees will be held or perform more differently from what the previous committees did. It is my submission that my dear friends, honourable colleagues, we sympathise -(Interruption)

MR EKANYA: I want to thank hon. Amuriat and I want to plead to this House that now under the Commonwealth and world over, fraudsters can manipulate the financial audit. In UK, in the US, and in the European Union, it is now value-for-money. In those countries, they do not call it only value-for-money, it is system audit. For example, one time, the Minister of Defence wanted to carry out reform in the Ministry of Defence to reduce the infantry and then acquire modern weapons. What the Minister of Defence did was to hire experts. How much human resource do we need? How many helicopters do we need? Does the system deliver results? Or in Parliament you say, how may staff do we need? Do we need to have this number of staff or we buy computers? That is what value-for-money or system audit is all about. You look at the system. Is it delivering the intended results or is it not? So, I want to plead with colleagues here – for example, the Auditor-General, as we speak now, has got funding from the European Union to test our systems; the road systems, the water system, construction which goes on in this country, the power system -  to look at the number of bulbs we need, for example, in this House. 

If you are going to build a new chamber, they will say instead of you putting this design of the structure, you need this kind of window so that -(Interjections)- the systems you have are effective. 

MR AMURIAT: Thank you very much, hon. Ekanya, and I would like to seek the indulgence of my colleagues –(A Member rose_) I will give you an opportunity – by saying that these are complex audits. They require a high level of concentration. When you mix them up with financial and management audits, you are not going to get value-for-money; you are not going to get good reports. Your people will gloss over issues, Members will gloss over issues and – by the way, this is where most of our money is lost. (Interjections) 

I would like to conclude by appealing to my –(Mr Byabagambi rose_)– well, I will take it.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable minister, on what point do you rise? 

MR BYABAGAMBI: Just a clarification. (Laughter)

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I must say that, of course, this point has not been really canvassed because we had not discussed it before in the preparations for the amendment of these rules. It is something even in the caucus; of course -(Laughter)- for us in NRM, we are democratic. We take positions of the party through caucusing. That is what democratic institutions do. Now, I heard what the mover said. Of course, I am also aware as others are saying that under the Constitution, one of the functions of the Auditor-General under Article 163(3)(b), says, “The Auditor-General shall conduct financial and value-for-money audits in respect of any project involving public funds.” 

Talking of PAC of Parliament as all of us know, – actually, its functions are dependent on reports from the Auditor-General. The assumption is that the Auditor-General has done his part, including that aspect of value-for-money -(Interjections)- because this is effected. But I did not want to shut down what the honourable member who moved the motion was saying; so, I thought, therefore, for that reason and for another reason which I am going to give you now, Mr Chairman, that we could stand over the matter. Give us thought and consideration on this side in a democratic way -(Interjections)- [MR AMURIAT: “Mr Chairman, can I conclude my submission?”] (Interjections)(Mr Sseggona rose_)

MR SSEGGONA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I have the greatest of respect for the Rt Hon. Prime Minister. But sincerely, for 80 percent of the time we were debating these issues; he was not in the House. Is he, therefore, in order to come in at the last hour and derail the debate? 

MR AMURIAT: I would like to conclude my submission by reminding Members of the obvious, and that is, we have a specific life in this Parliament. If we have to cover business, we should make it easy for ourselves. By concentrating business in these three accountability committees, you are going to bog them down. I recognise that the Rt Hon. Prime Minister would like to go back to the caucus and I hope that you will appeal not to emotions -(Interjections)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable member, please wind up. 

MR AMURIAT: Not to emotions or sentiments, but to reason, informing these accountability committees. All of us mean well for this nation; we mean well for this Parliament; and indeed we mean well for the committees of Parliament. Let us not stop them from working; let us not over-burden them.

I thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I beg to move. 

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: I did not rise on a point of information or anything like that. I rose in order to make two suggestions. One; the one I have just made that you know, we do not have to rush things –[HON. MEMBER: “But we have been debating for one hour.] No, it is not true that – from the time when hon. Frank Tumwebaze stood, I was here. Actually, when I went out to make a telephone call, I was following on the screen -[MR NANDALA-MAFABI: “There is no screen there.”] I had -(Laughter)- I always thought that he was able to see all the time. I am only discovering that there are moments when he does not see properly. I was here and on the screen, I was following everything that was happening. That is why I was proposing – merely, it is a reasonable proposition, Mr Chairman, that we stand over this; we will go and discuss it and come back and take a clear position. That is point number one. 

Point number two, last week, I stood as Leader of Government Business and asked this honourable House to give us time on the question of PAC - on the question of the conclusion of the PAC Report. There was one recommendation remaining on which we were not ready because we had not interacted as you said -(Interjections)-  with the specific -(Interruption) 

MR SABIITI: Mr Chairman, we are seriously debating the relevance of a new committee in this Parliament, which committee many Members think is a good idea. Others are saying it may not be a good idea, let the other committees handle. The Rt Hon. Prime Minister stands up to discuss the issue, he derails and starts talking about another report which we are yet to complete. Is it really in order for the Rt Hon. Prime Minister to mix up issues when he is presenting his idea? (Interjections) Is it in order? I even understand it is on the Order Paper on the business to follow.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN Honourable members, the issue that the Rt Hon. Prime Minister rose on was to seek a stand over of the matter we are discussing to give them time to consult. He then raised another reason why he thinks this matter should be stood over. He was stating the second reason why he thought this matter should be stood over and he raised a matter of fact. Was he in order to raise those issues?

On the first issue, he was seeking to defer the debate on this particular issue; he was in order because that is the matter we were discussing substantially. 

On finishing that, he sought to advance another point which is outside the realm of what we were discussing and our Rules of Procedure require us to be relevant to the debate. To that extent, Rt Hon. Prime Minister, you stepped outside our procedure. (Laughter) 

MR AMAMA MBABAZI:  Mr Chairman, I rise to move that the committee – 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN Is it a motion?

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: I am moving a motion under rule 46(1)(c) that the debate on the Rules of Procedure, for the reasons I gave, stands adjourned so that we do the necessary consultations and come back when ready. I will move a motion after that. I beg to move. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN Honourable members, under rule 46, they say the following motions may be moved without notice, and that was (c), “any motion for adjournment of debate”. What we are carrying out is at committee stage, so no secondment is required at this stage. The motion was justified. I put the question for the motion that debate on this particular matter be adjourned.

Honourable members, the rules of voting are very clear; you vote once and clearly. I will put the question again and it is not about how loud you shout as an individual. I need to hear the consensus. I put the question for the motion for adjournment of debate on this particular matter.

(Question put and agreed to.)
 
MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME
6.08
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON RULES, DISCPLINE AND PRIVILEGES (Mr Fox Odoi-Oywelowo): Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the House do resume and the committee of the whole House report thereto. I beg to move. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN Honourable members, the motion is that the House do resume and the committee of the whole House reports thereto.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Deputy Speaker presiding)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

6.08
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON RULES, DISCPLINE AND PRIVILEGES (Mr Fox Odoi-Oywelowo): Mr Speaker, I beg to report that the committee of the whole House has considered the proposed amendments to the Rules, particularly rules 125 to 122, and passed them with amendments. I beg to report. 

6.09
MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON RULES, DISCPLINE AND PRIVILEGES (Mr Fox Odoi-Oywelowo): I beg to move that the report from the committee of the whole House be adopted. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion is that the report of the committee of the whole House be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to)

(Report adopted.)

CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC ACCOUNTS ON GOVERNMENT COMPENSATION TO HABA GROUP OF COMPANIES LIMITED AND RHINO INVESTMENTS LIMITED IN THE FINANCIAL 2009/2010

(Debate continued.)

6.10
THE CHAIRPERSON, PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (Mr Kassiano Wadri): Mr Speaker and colleagues, a few minutes back you just saw some drama on the Floor of the House. That just shows how impatient the Rt Hon. Prime Minister is when it comes to matters of that nature. Having said that - (Interjection) – If there is any plausible explanation, move it.

Mr Speaker, the last time we met as a whole House, which was on Tuesday last week, the Government did ask for time to consult and interact with the Governor Bank of Uganda on the recommendations that the Public Accounts Committee had made about the role he played in the compensation claims that were settled at the figure of Shs 142.6 billion. I did concede on the Floor and granted that Government be given three days within which to carry out its consultations.  

I am reliably informed that a lot of consultation has taken place both as the NRM-O caucus – (Laughter) - Yes, the NRM-O caucus - and even other meetings handled with the chief executive. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the honourable member still speaking the English language?

MR WADRI: Yes, I am. By the way, Mr Speaker, it is public information that at my O’Levels I got a distinction 1 in English and that record can be checked. So, when I talk of the NRM-O caucus, I mean it. How did you hear it? [HON. MEMBERS: “Carcass.”] No, it could not have been a dead animal. (Laughter) It is only dead animals that have carcasses. 

It is my prayer and hope that with nearly two weeks of consultations, I expect Government is now ready to come up with its report, more so through the Parliamentary Cabinet select committee chaired by Dr Chrispus Kiyonga, the Minister for Defence. If they are ready, we as members of the Public Accounts Committee and the entire House are ready to receive their report so that we can engage one another thereafter. I beg to move.

6.15
THE PRIME MINISTER (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the chairman of PAC for his magnanimity, which he exhibited last time and in his statement today.

Indeed, as hon. Kassiano Wadri says, because the Executive had received the PAC report and prepared itself on certain aspects of it and for the reasons we gave had not done so on others, I stood here and asked the House to give us more time. We are grateful the House did give us that more time. 

I am also happy to report to this House that indeed the Executive has utilized this time to carry out all the consultations it required in respect of the two officials we reported. Our committee of Cabinet had not been able to interact with them at the time when we debated this matter. These were Mr James Sseggane, the former Town Clerk of Kampala City Council, and Mr Emmanuel Tumusiime Mutebile, the Governor of Bank of Uganda.

Mr Speaker, it is my pleasure to inform this House that we are ready now. We established a Cabinet committee, which was chaired by Dr Chrispus Kiyonga, and I seek your permission to allow him, on behalf of Cabinet and the Government side, to present our report. Thank you.

6.16
THE MINISTER OF DEFENCE (Dr Chrispus Kiyonga): Mr Speaker, I thank you. Honourable colleagues, the Members of Parliament, you will recall, as the Rt hon. Prime Minister has said, that – (Interruptions)

MR SEMUJJU: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I also thank hon. Kiyonga. The guidance I am seeking from the Chair is this: last time when we had a communication of this magnitude, announcing the resignation of ministers, that communication was made by Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali, the Deputy Leader of Government Business in the House. Today, the chair of that committee, which found it important to load the said Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali with such work that time, now wants to deliver it. So, the guidance I am seeking is whether such a communication should not be delivered by the Leader of Government Business in the House himself.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Ssemujju, you heard the Rt Hon. Prime Minister ask the Chair to allow hon. Dr Chrispus Kiyonga to present the report. Since that request was made through the Chair, I can confirm that it is the Chair that allowed the Dr Chrispus Kiyonga to present that report. You are ruled out of order, honourable member.

DR KIYONGA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I hope that all colleagues have now got copies of the statement to which I am going to speak.

Mr Speaker, as the Rt Hon. Prime Minster has explained, we were not able to come earlier because after the last statement was made, many of us, members of the committee, travelled abroad on duty. That is the major reason we could not present the report on time. We would like to thank you for understanding our situation and giving us the opportunity now to do so today.

When we made the first statement, I supported the Leader of Government Business and made certain undertakings. I now would like to start by referring to what I said on 16 February 2012.

I remember I said that we now want to give equal opportunity to the Governor of the Central Bank. I also assured this House that if we find that the Governor was at fault, the recommendations would not be any different from what we gave about our comrades, meaning the former ministers. I also asked the House to be assured that no stone would be left unturned. 

We said that people named by PAC and those not named would be handled. I gave the example of people who had drafted some of the letters for the signature of H.E the President. At this early stage of the statement, I am glad to inform the House that H.E the President has already taken action on the four officers in his office for the negative role they played in this situation. (Applause)

I went on to say that Government had learnt lessons and that we needed to rectify some weaknesses. We also said that we are going to bring a law to be followed in respect of making compensations from Government. I recall also saying that the Office of the Government Valuer had been marginalized and needed to be strengthened. 

I would like to indicate at the onset that we have learnt even more lessons following our second search. These will require actions on the part of the Executive and Parliament.

Before I get into the additional findings, let me make a summary of what we considered as errors on the part of our colleagues who resigned so that they are put in the context of totality in our reporting.

On the part of the former Attorney-General, hon. Khiddu Makubuya, he had single-handedly escalated the evaluation beyond what the technical committee had done. He initially raised this figure from Shs 55 billion to Shs 96 billion and finally to Shs 142 billion. I am just summarizing because when you look at the PAC report on page 31, you precisely find that information. This final figure subsequently formed the basis for actions by the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and consequentially the Governor of the Bank of Uganda.

On the part of the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, she did not cause appropriation for the money as assessed. She also did not take serious technical advice that had been given to her. I will elaborate on this point. Again, we are not raising a new point. If you read the PAC report, you will find a section referring to officers who even refused to take certain actions because their advice to the honourable minister was different. So, this is not a new creation but it is squarely elaborated in the report. 

When we went back, we saw many more people who had something to do with the PAC report. In particular, we met the Governor a number of times, as I will elaborate later on. We also met the former Town Clerk, Mr Sseggane, who had been reported on in the PAC report. We also interviewed other people, the former Chief Government Valuer and the current Chief Government Valuer. We also called in the Deputy Secretary to the Treasury, the Secretary to the Treasury and also the former Solicitor-General who is now Justice of the High Court. All these people helped us quite enormously. 

On page 2, those are our main additional findings. When it came to Mr James Sseggane, the former Town Clerk, the following were our findings: Kampala City Council had, in May 2002, contracted management of city markets to private companies. In 2005, after the expiry of those contracts, the former Town Clerk, Mr Sseggane, had made an attempt to advertise the contracts for the markets. However, the President had in a letter dated 20 February 2006 put a ban on award of new tenders, imposing taxes and disposing of property in the city council. In another letter on 31 July 2006, the President, after due inquiry, had later lifted this ban. 

On the 23 December 2005, the then Minister of Local Government wrote to all local government councils dissolving and directing that they vacate their seats or offices in view of the expiry of their term of office. As a result of this directive, there was no council to approve the contracts of the city markets. Faced with a vacuum, Mr Sseggane took an administrative decision on 4 May 2006. Here, there is a bit of difference; when you look at the PAC record, they indicate that this action was taken on 9 December 2005. We may have to harmonise that difference. He took the decision directing the incumbent contract holders of the markets to continue with the management of the markets until such a time when the council was in place to approve the new contracts. In our view, his action saved financial loss to the council. 

In addition, the letter from His Excellency the President of 20 February 2006, and the one of the then Minister of Local Government, we think can be used to exonerate him from any wrongdoing. This is because he acted in good faith and on those directives and the decision to have the contracts for the markets extended to earn the council money. Those were our main findings on Mr Sseggane. 

We also want honourable members to see the main sequencing of events that took place in respect to Mr Sseggane. Firstly, the management contracts of Nakasero and St Balikuddembe had expired in 2005. Secondly, the President had written a letter on 20 February 2006 halting any new contracts. Thirdly, later on the President did lift this ban on 31 July 2006. Following those events, Mr Sseggane took administrative action, as I have indicated. Subsequently, Mr Sseggane retired in September 2006. Termination of the management contracts were then latter carried out by Mrs Kijjambu who had succeeded Mr Sseggane. We thought we should give this sequencing so that the actions by Mr Sseggane are put in the correct perspective. 

When it came to the Governor of the Central Bank, as I said before, we met him twice and for long hours because we had many questions to ask. We found that it is true, as the PAC report says, that the Governor of the Bank had committed the Bank to pay obligations on behalf of Government. He consistently, in his communication, stated that the Government had, through the minister responsible for finance, made a commitment to pay Haba Group through the Central Bank. This is available to us through the PAC report. 

In this regard, some people have been making a difference between letters of comfort and guarantee. We choose to use the word “commitment” because whatever the Governor did resulted into the bank having to make payment. 

In our summary, we find that PAC had four main issues with the Governor: Firstly, that the Governor did not pay due attention to conditions precedent before making the payment. This is clearly stated in the report. 

Our findings on this point are that the conditions precedent to making the payment were never communicated to the Governor. Indeed, the only letter from the Solicitor-General, which was copied to the Governor, did not stipulate these conditions nor did the letters from the honourable Minister of Finance to the Governor. So, we are not in agreement with the PAC report that the Governor disregarded these conditions precedent to the payment.

The second point made by the PAC report is that the Governor acted in haste in communicating to the Bank. Honourable members, we would like to share with you a summary of how we saw events moving. The first letters of what we call firm commitment to the banks were written as we outline here in this statement. The letter to the United Bank of Africa was written on 29 September 2010. The second letter of firm commitment to Orient Bank was written on 28 October 2010. The third letter, which went to Tropical Bank, was on 25 November 2010. The letter to the Bank of Baroda was written on 3 December 2010. 

It helps if one looks at these dates, actions and letters side by side with the dates when the honourable minister wrote to the Governor, and below paragraph 3.1.4 I have indicated the dates when the honourable minister was communicating to the Governor. In our interpretation, the letters that the Governor was writing were in line with the letters that he had received from the honourable minister. 

The third point raised by the committee is that the Governor did not exercise his independence as stipulated in the Constitution. This aspect is handled as we go on with the report under lessons learnt, so I will come back to it.

The fourth point the committee observed was that the Governor did not crosscheck communication from the Ministry of Finance. Other people have called this due diligence. We totally agree with PAC in this respect that the Governor did not crosscheck the communication he received from the minister responsible for finance. However, in our view, the Governor acted on trust, the trust he had in the political leader, the Minister of Finance. That is our opinion, honourable members. It should be judged against the background that we have given.

At this point, I invite members to look at the dates when the letters went from the office of the honourable Minister of Finance to the Governor of the Central Bank. I will just make one small correction here. Letter No.4 of 14 June 2010 was not to the Governor but to the Haba Group of Companies, otherwise the rest of the letters are the ones which emanated from the minister to the governor.

In the letter of June 2010, the honourable minister indicated that the commitment was Shs 46 billion, as you can see, and that part of this money was in the budget of FY 2010/2011. However, in a letter also to the Haba Group of Companies, which she wrote on 14 June 2010, the figures this time were in dollars rather than Uganda shillings, and she indicated that the balance of the money, which was not in the budget then, would be paid in the two subsequent years. When you make a calculation, this would mean the money that would therefore settle this obligation would be in financial years 2010/2011 and 2011/2012.

In a letter of 24th September, the honourable minister refers to a payment schedule that had been agreed between the Bank of Uganda and the Ministry of Finance. Again I think the Public Accounts Committee does also make reference to that point.

Further, in the letter of 22nd March, the honourable minister refers to financial arrangements to be made to pay. Unlike before when she was saying the money is in the budget, now she writes on 22nd March saying, “Proceed and make arrangements to settle the obligations of the Haba Group of Companies and arrangements will be made to settle the obligation through the Central Bank.”

For the information of members, we reproduce this table on page 5, which indicates the dates when actual payments were made to these various banks. We indicate a bank, a date when the payment is made and we indicate the amount in US dollars and also the amount in Uganda shillings. We obtained this information from the Governor himself. In total, by the time we interviewed the Governor over Shs 14 billion had been paid from the Central Bank.

The committee did also point out that the Governor appeared to act without the authority of his board. I am sure many people have read that point. We asked for the minutes of the board and the Governor gave us two sets of minutes. One set was of the audit committee of the board and then another set was of the board itself –(Interjection)- I am presenting a statement; I think we will come to that. The chairman of the board, as we all know, is the Governor; that is not hidden. That is by law. So, I hope one is not insinuating that-

In the minutes of the audit and governance committee of the Board of Bank of Uganda held on 12 September 2011, the committee observed that the Governor issued the letters of comfort in good faith based on the representation made by the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development in her several letters to the Governor. Also, that the Governor had delegated authority from the board to make decisions - I am just quoting minutes of this committee - and report to the board at an appropriate time. This committee’s position was endorsed by the board at its meeting of 13 September 2011. As I said above, on the issue of the independence of the Central Bank, we would come to this when we reach some key lessons learnt from these findings.

In paragraph four, I would like to again take you through some of the information you already know. The committee noted that the Bank of Uganda, in the performance of its functions under Clause 1 of Article 162, shall not be subject to the direction or control of any person or authority. This emphasises the independence of the Bank of Uganda particularly in handling monetary policy. However, we also call the attention of you, honourable members, to the Bank of Uganda Act. In section 4 sub-section (2) (d), Bank of Uganda is also the banker to the government. Under section 32 sub-section (2), it says that it shall render services to the government as may be determined by the Minister of Finance.

I would like members to see that those two points may not necessarily be moving in the same direction. Our view as the committee therefore is that the Bank of Uganda Act should be harmonised with the Constitution particularly to avoid any temptation of extending the Treasury into the Central Bank. This is because on the one hand, the bank is given autonomy and is independent but through the Act, it is stated that the Minister of Finance can request for financial services and the Governor is under obligation to respond positively.

After that analysis, this is the way forward as we see it: 

1. 	Our view is that the Governor Bank of Uganda should not be held personally liable for any wrongdoing, his trust having been let down by the then Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development who did not honour her request to provide the funds in the budget to pay the Bank of Uganda.

2. 	We recommend that Mr Sseggane James, former Town Clerk of Kampala City Council, should not be personally held liable for any wrongdoing. This is because he acted in good faith and on the directives of the President, and the directives of the then Minister of Local Government to dissolve all councils, and he was faced with a vacuum and took an administrative decision to save the Council a possible revenue loss.

3. 	I would like to inform colleagues that the directive of His Excellency the President to the Attorney-General to recover the excess money from the Haba Group of Companies stands. The necessary preparations to recover the money are ongoing.

4. 	We also recommend that investigations continue to discover and prosecute or take other action against any suspect in this scam. As I said before, the President has already taken action on those involved in this matter under this office. I thank you, Mr Speaker and distinguished Members of Parliament. (Applause)

6.45
THE CHAIRPERSON, PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (Mr Wadri Kassiano Ezati): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. First of all, I want to thank my very good long time friend, hon. Dr Chrispus Kiyonga. I always refer to him with high regard as the only UPM Member of Parliament because he was the only one in 1980 who won the favour of the people of Kasese and was the only person elected to come to this Parliament under the UPM ticket.

I submitted this report – (Interjection) - If you want to know where I was, I was the organising secretary for the Democratic Party in Makerere University that time, since you wanted to know where I was that time. As he campaigned, I was a very active student leader, so I know very well where I was at that time.

I submitted the Public Accounts Committee report to this House on 9th February and today is 6th March; so, this report has been around for nearly one month. Immediately I submitted this report, it is on record, and we can check this on our Hansard, the Executive came up and said yes, the Public Accounts Committee has submitted a watertight report. That time, we received praises and this was communicated on the Floor of the House and it is on record. I am now surprised that within the last one month, for a report which was praised and adopted, right now attempts have been made to make it look as if we did not do a conclusive job, contrary to what is on record.

I am surprised that new matters are being introduced. Mr Speaker, you are in a better position as a lawyer to know that when a matter is at an appeal stage, no new evidence is adduced but you proceed with the evidence that is on record and look at technicalities. 

We have got the proceedings that we had with these witnesses on an electronic recording system that can be transcribed. Time and again, my committee did ask the Governor Bank of Uganda as to whether the board of that bank, to which he is the chairman, was informed or whether there was any meeting. There was nothing. Where have these minutes come from? (Applause) Honestly, let us be frank with ourselves. Where have these minutes come from? Minutes, which were not there, and this we can attest to through the electronic system of recording, but now I am told that when you met there were records. Really, proceeding on what I said, at this stage that I consider an appeal stage is it necessary to introduce new evidence in the way of a report, which report was not there? (Applause) I think let us be frank with ourselves.

We gave you all the evidence that was available and as I said once again, all that we have in our possession is electronically recorded. You can even hear the witnesses live on the electronic system.  So really, I am surprised that Dr Kiyonga- I wish he was here because I do not want to talk in his absence but the whole thing is very absurd.

Two, let us not quote things in phases. Article 162(2) provided for the independence, as it were, of the Governor Bank of Uganda. Even if you selectively came up and said it only relates to monetary and fiscal policies, the more reason for you to know that injecting a surmountable amount of money of Shs 142 billion into the economy was going to destabilise the financial and fiscal equilibrium of this economy. (Applause) So really, what are we talking about?

We all went to school and we all studied economics. Let us not be taken as if we are students of commerce in ‘O’ Level. (Laughter) No; we are not! So, please I think with due respect, hon. Dr Kiyonga and his committee has not done a thorough job and they need to revisit this. You can try to cook up ideas and figures but where we have reached, it is very difficult for you to convince anyone.

We do accept that the Bank of Uganda is a banker of those commercial banks and the country. I want to give you a scenario. We are all men and women who have got families. You can have your bank account in any bank but at the end of the day, there are signatories to that bank account. My wife cannot walk to my bank and say, “I am Mrs Wadri and therefore I must access this account.” The first question will be, “Are you a signatory?” You are Wadri’s wife we know, you have a wedding certificate, yes we know, but are you a signatory to this account?

The point I am making, therefore, is that it is true Bank of Uganda is a bank to Uganda Government but there are signatories to this account. Here is a situation where the Governor Bank of Uganda is in a very privileged position in the sense that he was former Secretary to Treasury and Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. He knows very well that by virtue of being a PS and Secretary to Treasury, you are a signatory to government accounts alongside the Governor Bank of Uganda; the minister is not.

For any money to be withdrawn from the account of Government of Uganda there has to be an audit warrant raised. You do not just walk to the bank and say, I am here, I am the governor and I am withdrawing money. It has never happened. Where these things followed? That is the reason I want to draw the attention of my honourable colleagues to one of these documents that I appended to my report, a letter written by the Minister for Finance to the Governor Bank of Uganda. Allow me to read it verbatim. 

This letter is dated 24 February 2011 and the reference is MEP/83/2007/02, addressed to the Governor Bank of Uganda: 

“Dear Sir, 
Subject: Compensation to Haba Group of Companies. Refer to my earlier letter ref. MEP/83/2007/2002 dated December 30, 2010 and to the other correspondences of the subject echoing H.E the President’s directives. 

Haba Group has written to state that they were duly assisted with a small portion of their claim by various financial institutions and that the payment is now due. In accordance with their correspondence, this is to request you to sort out repayment with the said financial institutions. 

Yours faithfully, 
Syda N.M Bbumba. 
MP, Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development.” 

It is copied to the Permanent Secretary and Secretary Treasury and to chairman Haba Group of Companies. 

On the same letter, the Minister of Finance, knowing very well that she is not a signatory, wrote to the Permanent Secretary/Secretary to the Treasury and to the chairman. It goes as follows: “The Governor Bank of Uganda requests you to sign the letter. Please do the needful.” At this stage, the Governor knew that the Minister of Finance was not even a signatory or a party to the account of Government with that bank. On knowing this, the Permanent Secretary refused to sign, and this is on record. (Applause) The Governor went ahead and opened wide the doors for Shs 142.6 billion to go away. 

Mr Speaker, I am happy that hon. Kiyonga is here; I wish you were around to hear some of the strong statements I am expressing about some of these things. I have a very high regard for you and do not want you to soil your image and hands. The reason you were the only MP elected at that time was because of your clean record and I do not want you to soil it. I say this with a lot of pain in my heart and because I feel very strongly for you. Do not attempt to wash what is already dirty.

Mr Speaker, I have not seen in any African culture where two dead bodies are buried in one coffin. (Laughter) Each one will be buried in his or her own coffin. So, let everyone carry their own cross, like Jesus did when He was crucified. Do not attempt to die for other people; let them die for themselves. 

The Governor of Bank of Uganda is a very knowledgeable person. Unlike other Governors who preceded him, as I had earlier said, he had an opportunity to be the Secretary to the Treasury. To be duped by the Minister of Finance – We know very well that every time the Budget is read, the Governor of Bank of Uganda is one of our esteemed guests. He gets copies of approved budgets. Now to say, “I was just told that they are going to appropriate this money” - We do not work in anticipation when it comes to issues of money; you either have the money or not and therefore you do not fork out what is not there. 

Mr Speaker, I find it very difficult to exonerate the Bank of Uganda Governor, and my conscience governs me. It will continue haunting me the rest of my life if all this evidence my committee adduced is just rubbished. No amount of sweet-talking can reverse this document. I, therefore, once again re-echo the stand of the committee and of the House as it adopted the report, which I presented here last time, that the Governor of the Bank of Uganda is adjudged culpable and should take personal responsibility for what went wrong. (Applause) I rest my case.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think we should finish this matter, if possible. We should restrict ourselves in this debate to three minutes each. So make your best point first before you are caught up by time; we shall not have time extensions.

6.58
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Serere): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like hon. Kiyonga and the Executive to clarify on two issues from this statement. 

You are quoting a number of letters and minutes; why have you decided to selectively attach them to this report? When hon. Wadri was presenting his report here, he attached all the necessary documents; why haven’t you done that? 

The other one is that the Auditor-General with his group of technocrats, including Ernst & Young, among others, did the audit investigations and found these people liable. The committee of this House investigated and found these people culpable. Now, for you as the Executive to come here and say what all those professionals did was not good enough is an insult to the Auditor-General’s office and to this House. What competence does your team have in financial matters? Which school did you go to where these others did not go? I need to be helped and the whole country as well. I believe the two teams did their part well. As the chairperson – (Hon. Nandala-Mafabi rose_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, we agreed to spend three minutes each. Let us be orderly.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, I am just giving him this book because he needs it. It is the Annual Report of 2010/11 for Bank of Uganda and it is signed by the Auditor-General and KPMG. On page 118 – which hon. Okupa needs to know – it is clearly stated that the Governor did this without consulting the board. So, I want to lay it on the Table to confirm that hon. Kiyonga is a total liar.

MR OKUPA: Thank you, hon. Nandala-Mafabi. I am pained by your statement in paragraph 5.1, which says that the Governor should not be held personally liable for any wrongdoing, his trust having been let down by the then minister – (Interruption) 

DR KIYONGA: I will just make two brief points of clarification. Hon. Okupa has said we should have attached the documents we have referred to to the report. I think that is a legitimate demand. We just depended on the fact that the PAC report has these attachments, but I can lay them on the Table for the record. 

The other point is that I have the minutes of the Central Bank committee here and also those of the Board of Directors, which I will also lay on the Table. 

MR OKUPA: I am wondering why these minutes were not given to the Auditor-General and to PAC. When you were out, hon. Wadri stated that they have documentary recording and evidence where the witness was saying there were no minutes. I do not know whether we are going to ask for that video to be replayed in the House. I do not know whether we can allow this type of new evidence to be adduced and presented in the House now because that is imputing bad motive on the committee that they lied yet they have a recording where all these witnesses were saying this is what the Governor said when he appeared in the committee. So, I would be happy if that can also be allowed. 

Finally, on a sentimental note, I do not know how we shall be able to explain to the people out there. We had two people from one region and now two from the other region. So, how are we going to explain to the public out there that this was okay? (Laughter) I need to be helped because it is going to bring the sentiments of tribalism and sectarianism. I need help. I am only asking for clarification to be given to me.

DR BITEKYEREZO: Mr Speaker, I am one of those people who do not believe in sectarianism and you know I have been reading on the same page as you, hon. Okupa. I do not think that people who have actually been doing this are doing it just because they come from one region but I think these are individuals in specific contexts. Tomorrow you will be there and when these things are brought - Is he in order surely to bring tribal and regional sentiments here to cause chaos? You are now causing us problems. Is he in order, surely, in Parliament here?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Okupa, would you like to explain what you said?

MR OKUPA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I asked how I can be helped to explain to the people out there these two scenarios- 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What? 

MR OKUPA: Hon. Syda Bbumba and hon. Khiddu Makubuya are both from the central region and then this other Kainamura and the Governor are from the western region. When I get back to the constituency, I will be asked how this comes about. Is it that it is these guys from the central region who have this affinity and the others do not? (Interjections) So, I just need to be helped on how I can be able to explain to the public out there. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Well, I am supposed to rule on a point of order but I think the matters that were raised were factual matters in the opinion of the honourable member. I cannot rule on it. 

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Mr Speaker, really I think it is not necessary as it is not proper to raise- (Interjections) - I am rising on a point of order- (Interjection)

MR ODONGA OTTO: I rise on Procedure, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can we have some order, please! Honourable members, can we resume and see how to proceed. I will have the hon. Bihande making his contributions. Three minutes each.

7.08
MR YOKASI BWAMBALE-BIHANDE (FDC, Bukonjo County East, Kasese): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to thank my colleague with whom we share the county of Bukonzo for this orderly presentation. However, in several instances, when I read through his statement, he was duped and deceived on certain aspects.

The chairman of PAC has done justice to the issue of Mr Tumusiime and now I want to do some justice on the issue of Mr Sseggane. I was chairman of a local government for two terms and I understand the systems of local governments very well. Local governments have local government tender boards which award contracts, not local government councils. So the absence of a local government council does not mean the absence of a local government tender board. When Mr Sseggane says he renewed contracts because councils had been suspended, he is deliberately telling a lie or he acted outside the law. (Applause)

Two, the budgets of local governments are passed between July and September like those ones of the central government. It is at that level of debating the budget that the council participates in not awarding but in listing market contracts and other contracts that will be awarded in the financial year. Now, the President lifted the ban on 31st July. Between July and December, there is a period of six months and it is during that period, between July and September, that budgets of local governments are passed. This means that if council had wanted these contracts renewed, it would have been mentioned in the budget for that financial year before the councils were suspended. So, Mr Sseggane acted contrary to the law by usurping the powers of the tender board to renew contracts. (Applause) I do not see where he acted in good faith.

Three, Mr Speaker, when we interviewed him in PAC and we asked him whether the tender board was in place at that time when he renewed the contract, he said yes- (Member timed out_)

7.11
MR GODFREY KIWANDA (NRM, Mityana County North, Mityana): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. It is a very big shame that my President and my Government can be conned by its own officials. It is also very unfortunate that such big sums of money can be lost when the people in my constituency are suffering without even a road unit to repair the feeder roads. It is also very hurting that the two ministers implicated in this scum come from my region and more so from Luweero Triangle, a triangle which is still so backward in terms of economic emancipation. It is also so bad that as the economy is coming out of the shambles, some people are there ready to partake the biggest share of that kind. 

Mr Speaker, I recommend in the highest terms possible that this money should be recovered. I am also very happy that the two ministers indicated in this scum took political responsibility and resigned. I am very happy about that. I support that investigations should take place and justice should be done. I also recommend strongly that the Governor Bank of Uganda should take technical responsibility - (Applause) - as the two ministers took the political responsibility. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

7.13
MRS ROSEMARY NANSUBUGA SENINDE (NRM, Woman Representative, Wakiso): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the honourable minister for this statement. Yes, he has given a statement basing on what was decided by the committee from the Executive. However, as a member of PAC, I would like to make this point very clear, that we made recommendations as PAC and the recommendations were considered by the House. In addition to what my chairman has actually pointed out, it is very clear Mr Mutebile actually has to take political and technical responsibility like my colleague has pointed out. 

When you look at Article 162(2), like the chairman has pointed out, Mutebile breached the Constitution and yet he is supposed to protect the Constitution. He breached that provision, and therefore, he has to be responsible. If anything, when I hear people quoting the Bank of Uganda Act, I wonder because we do not even need to quote that Act when the Constitution is supreme. 

Therefore, I want to make my point very clear and I want to be on record that I do not support the issue of exonerating Mutebile. (Applause) Mutebile has to go like the other people went because they all made equal mistakes. Actually, how do we judge that the other mistakes made by the ministers were grave and those of Mutebile were trivial. Mr Mutebile has to take responsibility and he has to go. 

What I want to say is this; we took a decision as Parliament and we know very well that according to the Constitution, the President has the mandate to either disappoint or appoint. For that matter, we took a decision as a Parliament; therefore, it was the responsibility of the President to play his part.  

I do not even think it was necessary for the minister to bring this kind of report anyway. (Applause) I do not see the necessity of this report having come on the Floor of Parliament. It was not necessary. The President would have either sacked him or not, and probably we would not care much because we took a decision as Parliament and the rest is left to Government to implement - (Member timed out)

7.17
MR EPHRAIM BIRAARO (NRM, Buhweju County, Buhweju): I thank you, Mr Speaker. Some of us get pains when we see the direction of the debate being sentimental mainly based on sections of people. Last week on Wednesday, we already had this document. I recall that very week, hon. Abdu Katuntu sponsored a motion which was meant to exonerate Kainamura and Lwabi and the motion carried the day. I do not understand, and I have not even bothered to do research to find out what tribe hon. Katuntu is or what tribe Kainamura and Lwabi are.

At the same time, I have not read any document of the facts upon which this section or this paragraph 7 was deleted. At least it shows me that the PAC report was liable to any changes based on facts and discoveries and assignments of members. Now, when the Leader of Government Business, through Dr Crispus Kiyonga, brings a report of Government’s view for members to discuss to see if they can say - I have pains, we have lost money and we have lost much more than even we are seeing here, but if we are going to defend, we cannot destroy all things at the same time. 

Camara Laye in The African Child wrote, “Except the harsh treatment is not perhaps the best way to inculcate good behaviour”. We cannot kill everybody for the sake of killing because we want to balance a decision and we think we are constructing our country. I am of the view that members should be sober, debate this report and see the merits of the recommendations and the demerits without really generating into sectarianism in the debate. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

7.19
MR PHILLIP WAFULU OGUTTU (FDC, Bukooli County Central, Bugiri): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I stand here a very sad person. Why is it that we Africans have so low levels of integrity? Why do we set ourselves so low standards, especially public officers? Why do we do that? Is this country cursed? We have lost money. This scandal of Haba is reminding us of the wounds of CHOGM. We lost over Shs 500 billion, it has never been recovered. Now we have lost or we are losing Shs 170 billion from the President’s updates and we are going to exonerate people. 

In Shs 170 billion, we could have two modern secondary schools in every district, state-of-the-art schools. We would have built over 170 kilometres of tarmac roads. That money is lost and nobody is even - because the way we are behaving, we really want to exonerate all of them and again that money will have gone down the drain, but be careful. 

Already, the shilling is falling because of Mutebile. A governor should have integrity. A governor of a bank must have total integrity; people must trust him, markets must trust him, businesses must trust him. Once he is going to remain there because of political support, we are done. He must be there because people trust him. Now people in Bukooli Central feel the Governor is also a thief. He may not be, but the perception is very important in matters of corruption. Once the public believes you are a thief, you are done and you must work very hard to recover that. 

Mutebile has no method of work; he has to recover his name. The only thing we are going to do for him is to ask him to resign. This country’s economy will be saved. If you keep him - the shilling yesterday came from Shs 2300 to Shs 2600 and I do not know what it is today because I have not monitored. I am a business person – (Interjection) - It is Shs 2700, that is the information. It is going to reach Shs 3000 because of a person who has now no integrity.

The problem is that before they gave him money, Mr Basajjabalaba owed Uganda people US$ 11.5 million. Why wasn’t that money recovered? The President had said, “Recover the money which the man owes the country before you pay him.” Why didn’t Mutebile recover that money from Basajjabalaba? (Applause) We cannot say the man does not have any problems for which he should step aside or resign; he has!

So, members of this august House, we should be legislating for our country not for our party, not for our stomachs. (Applause) I beg you, ladies and gentlemen of this august House, that we should legislate for Uganda, for our country. Mr Mutebile has done great work for this country. He has done great. I have seen him in the economy since 1980. He was the chief planner - (Member timed out_) 

7.24
MS MARIAM NALUBEGA (Independent, Woman Representative, Butambala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the minister for the report. I need clarification. 

You talked about Mr Sseggane in (b), and on the President’s letter halting renewal you quoted two years, 2002 and 2006. Which is which? What did you mean here? You also quoted that the governor - (Mr Ruhindi rose_) - I have to allow you, Attorney-General; sorry, I have two minutes. You will have time to respond. Sorry, I am not being rude.

You quoted Section 32(2) of the Bank of Uganda Act. I want to ask you to lay on the Table the instruction that the minister gave to the governor in respect of this Section 32(2). Section 32(2) reads, “The bank shall render services to the Government as may be determined by the Minister.” I want that instruction where the minister required the bank to act in accordance with what the accusations are. 

Members, we are not children. I want to appeal to your conscience. My best friend in this world is my conscience. All of us here know the facts. Even the honourable minister, Kiyonga, knows. You know them well the facts in this matter. The trust Mr Mutebile is basing on, that he acted in good faith, so is hon. Syda Bbumba and so is hon. Khiddu Makubuya. Why are they taking responsibility? We are not going to allow situations where one person is guilty and the whole nation is guilty. Everybody must carry his own cross. I will not sit in this Parliament – I will remain alone if it means that, but I will not endorse your position. The governor should take responsibility. 

I have ever heard him say on radio - and indeed, God is working through hon. Kiyonga - (Laughter) - that only God can remove him from that position. That is what I am seeing today. God is working through the front bench, through some members, through other authorities. But whether God removes him or not, that sounding God, the one we believe in, will remove him at an appropriate time. Let us swallow the shame; let us be conscious of this nation; let us do what our children and grandchildren will expect from us. What is power without respect? (Member timed out)

7.27
MR MUHAMMAD NSEREKO (NRM, Central Division, Kampala): Mr Speaker, I would like to thank you for this opportunity. Whereas the honourable Chrispus Kiyonga quoted Article 162(2) of the Constitution and demanded harmonisation, I think as has been explained by other speakers, this Constitution has already clearly, under Article 2, stated that if any law is inconsistent with the Constitution, then the Constitution remains supreme. (Applause)

It is true we are debating the fate of the governor, something we should not be doing at this moment. It was after a series of events, and the best questions to ask in this matter are very clear. Number one, what amount was he told to pay in order to follow all those stories? Number two, is it a normal trend that the Governor of Bank of Uganda, who is a supervisor of these banks, writes letters of comfort at such a terrific speed without referring to the budget to salvage people from an economic downturn as it was seen in that matter? If in any case someone is trying to trace good faith, where can you trace it from Mutebile? This is a trend of events, or is it a chain? 

In this case, this is causing financial loss. The Governor did not even go back to the Minister of Finance to say, “The money you are asking about or the money you are asking from me is not appropriated and therefore, I cannot pay.” How can we sit in this august House and say we are exonerating the Governor of the Bank of Uganda from shouldering liability personally? Which liability do you want him to shoulder - vicarious liability? He should personally be held liable for the omissions he did or else he misbehaved or he did not conduct himself in a manner usual to a governor of a central bank.

In this case, I would also like to say that I think the Governor of Bank of Uganda, Mr Emmanuel Mutebile, should take personal responsibility and resign from his position. The PAC report recommended that all people who were in that chain of transaction, and he was at the tail end - He is the person who issued these letters of comfort. He is the professional on whose advice people would have relied. He did not tender that advice to them, and therefore, it means he consented to the transaction and he should be held personally liable for these omissions. I beg to submit.

7.30
MR DEOGRATIUS KIYINGI (DP, Bukomansimbi County, Bukomansimbi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. We are at pains when the minister, hon. Chrispus Kiyonga, presented his paper defending the Governor Bank of Uganda. When you look at Article 161 (5) of the Constitution, it states, “The governor, the deputy governor or any other member of the board may be removed from office by the President only for...” and the reasons given include when he misbehaves or when he has misconducted himself and is incompetent.

Mr Speaker, looking at what you have been listening to, it is very clear that the Governor Bank of Uganda has been disgraced, he has been incompetent and therefore, we need to ask the President, who is the appointing authority, to fire the Governor Bank of Uganda. I beg to move.

7.32
MS FLORENCE NAMAYANJA (DP, Bukoto County East, Masaka): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I stand to support entirely the report of the Public Accounts Committee as adopted by this House and to request the members to disregard the submission by hon. Crispus Kiyonga.

The Public Accounts Committee went a long way into investigating and digging deep into the crux of this matter and recommendations were made. We have just got information from the chairperson Public Accounts Committee on some of the references being made by hon. Kiyonga and we are tempted to think that some of them are forged. There are new issues emerging which were not mentioned initially; they are not even attached to his submission. So we are becoming suspicious that probably these are just concocted materials. 

I therefore beg to move that this House adopts the PAC report and entirely disregards what has been submitted by hon. Kiyonga. I beg to move.

7.34
MS HARRIET NTABAZI (NRM, Woman Representative, Bundibugyo): Thank you, Mr Speaker, and I thank honourable members. It is unfortunate that such a loss is happening in this country when we are looking for money for other things. It is a challenge that we are continuously deliberating on a report of which we have already pronounced ourselves. 

Mr Speaker, in the Constitution we are given different roles to play. Once Parliament brings out a matter and sends it to the Executive, the ball remains in the hands of the Executive to act. The challenge started from the Attorney-General, to the Minister and now to the Governor. The minister and the Attorney-General whom we gave power have played their part. When you read Article 161(5), which my colleague read, the power to remove the Governor from office lies in the hands of the President, and the President may or may not remove the Governor. So we are here complaining and discussing but the powers lie in the hands of the President. 

I also want to rubbish this claim of tribalism. If I may read the names of the people who have been roasted on this Floor, you will not find a single Muganda among them. There was Nasasira, Jim Muhwezi, Kutesa, Mukula, Kabakumba Masiko – are these all Baganda? Why do we tribalise national issues instead of talking about serious matters? When we talk in Parliament here, we go on the Hansard and we are monitored by the whole country. So when you bring in these claims of tribalism, we shall not allow them. We should talk as responsible Members of Parliament and speak with knowledge. People sent us here to speak for the whole country and not for particular tribes.

Mr Speaker, my issue is very clear; we may talk but the powers under Article 161(5) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda lie with the President. Thank you. 

7.38
MR STEPHEN KAGWERA (NRM, Burahya County, Kabarole): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me the chance. I stand here a sad man. As my sister has just put it, it is very bad for the Parliament to degenerate to the level of tribalising issues; it is very unfortunate. 

However, as hon. Wadri has put it, every individual must carry his or her own cross. In this case, I have tried to read both the report from the committee and the report from Cabinet headed by Dr Kiyonga and I am fully convinced that Mr Mutebile has issues to answer (Applause).  We cannot be a mouth that eats itself. Our committee of Parliament wrote a report signed by both members from the Opposition and NRM. My own party, NRM, has championed the fight against corruption. So we cannot come here and say Mutebile is cleared when the issues are clear in the report. 

The Public Accounts Committee and the Cabinet committee are both in agreement. The Cabinet Committee says, for example, “The Governor Bank of Uganda did not exercise his independence as stipulated in the Constitution.” Who stopped him from exercising his role as mandated by the Constitution? Number two, it says, “The Governor did not crosscheck communications from the Ministry of Finance.” What else do we need? The report admits that there was an error. If he did not crosscheck, it is not our problem; he should have crosschecked and come up clearly as a technical person.

Mr Speaker, given the two reports that are in agreement, it is very prudent that this Parliament continues to pronounce itself and advise the President – our good and beloved President who has been fighting against all these evils in the country - not to be entangled in this thing and let Mutebile go. Thank you very much.

7.40
MR KISOS CHEMASWET (NRM, Kween County, Kween): Thank you, Mr Speaker. It is like we are discussing the Bible. There were two women, one of them killed her child and the other had a live child. Now, both of them started arguing that the surviving child belonged to them. The one who slept on her child claimed that the live one is hers. So, should we really punish individuals because others are criminals? Should we believe that when we are going to steal, you will trick others in order for them to facilitate you get more. I do believe that an old man like Mutebile is not a criminal. That is what I believe. A nation without elderly people is not a nation, and I do believe that Mutebile is an elderly person who should be respected by all Ugandans and Members of Parliament. 

Other members and ministers where here saying that they have political responsibility. They confessed and said that it is true, they are liable. The ministers said it! It is only that the Rules of Procedure do not allow Mutebile here but it is true that through the media he said he did not commit an offence, he did not steal. He has not committed any offence at all. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. 

7.44
MR BERNARD ATIKU (FDC, Ayivu County, Arua): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to begin by disregarding the statement from the Cabinet sub-committee and dissociating myself completely from it, and I will waste no time to make reference to it. This august House actually made a mistake in granting the three days for the Cabinet sub-committee to interface with Governor Mutebile and colleagues. I am saying this because it has not helped the situation. Instead, they have helped us to unearth the dirt in Government. 

First and foremost, my sister here said that actually there is proof that the Cabinet sub-committee has involved itself in forgery. If PAC – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, I did not hear the honourable member say there is proof. Would you like to rephrase your statement? That is not what hon. Namayanja said.  

MR ATIKU: Let me not refer to her. Let me say it myself. The Cabinet sub-committee, through hon. Kiyonga, has told us that they are in possession of minutes of the board. We want them to be laid on the Table. We request them to be laid on the Table and that will help counter the PAC report where they say they requested the Governor to bring the minutes and he could not. So, can he lay them on the Table so that they can be examined further to prove whether there was a meeting –(Interjections)– Maybe you will be given time. Let me finish my two minutes. You should have done that when presenting – (Interruption)
 
MR WADRI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. As I made my submission, I did observe that we are at the stage of a court of appeal as it were, and in that – (Mr Mbabazi rose_) – Yes, as it were. Please, Prime Minister, I went to school. I am speaking English. As it were, or should I say it in Latin so that you understand it better? 

The point I am making – (Interjection) - If you cannot understand, I will tell you in Rukiga so that you understand it. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Kassiano, the rules of the Court of Appeal, the rules of the Supreme Court and the rules of all appellate courts in this country allow fresh evidence to be admitted on application. 

MR WADRI: Mr Speaker, you have guided very well, and that is the reason why on a matter of procedure I am seeking your guidance as to whether at this particular moment, it will be in order for Dr Kiyonga to introduce minutes, which minutes were denied to us when Dr Emmanuel Tumusiime Mutebile appeared before the committee. He has not even sought leave, as it were. Procedurally, is it correct for him to introduce those minutes?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Kassiano, to the best of my recollection, those minutes were being asked for by the members; even the honourable member holding the Floor still insists that they should be laid. So, the honourable minister did not ask for this; people are requesting for them to be laid on the Table. Let us have some order. Let the member finish his submission.  

MR ATIKU: Mr Speaker, I think to cut the story short, in case he feels it is vital to provide this House with the minutes, that will be at his discretion. However, I felt it was very important for us to have had access to that information since he has presented a statement on the Floor of Parliament so that we can look at it. 
Last but not least –(Interruption)

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Hon. Bernard Atiku and hon. Namayanja Florence made an allegation very clearly that the Cabinet committee – by the way, they are speaking for the Executive; they are not speaking for the committee – that the Executive has uttered falsehoods. They have said that they have manufactured minutes. Is it in order, Mr Speaker, with that challenge, when the minister rises to lay on the Table copies of the minutes so that they are available for scrutiny, for honourable members to make an allegation on one hand and then when the minister stands up to disprove what they are saying, they attempt to stop him? 

I think our rules say nobody in this House should impute ill motives or bad motives on the part of anyone. So, for a Member of Parliament to say that there is a forgery, that a chairman of the committee has forged, is a very serious allegation. So, I would like to request that they substantiate or withdraw that statement, and that when the time comes, hon. Kiyonga presents these documents to this House. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, severity demands that we listen to more especially those we disagree with. It is only when you do that that you earn yourself a right of good reply. 

I was disappointed to hear the conduct of members when hon. Chemaswet was making his contribution. It was disrespectful and in your heart you must be feeling particularly sad about what you did. If you are not, then some titles could be considered withdrawable from you because the conduct that was exhibited was completely improper. I hoped that someone was going to raise it as a matter of privilege for this House. The conduct of members was not, in my opinion, what is expected of members. 

I listened to hon. Namayanja very carefully. She said that the refusal for the minister to bring the statement earlier makes her suspect – those are the words she used. That is why I raised the objection when hon. Atiku was trying to say that she had said that they had forged. That is not what she said. When hon. Atiku rose up to substantiate, instead he asked the hon. Kiyonga to just lay the document on the Table. That is what I have been following. 

So, the point is that we should have that document laid on the Table. Why don’t we allow the minister to lay that document on the Table? This will help to ascertain whether there was any forgery. 

The House conduct is all about courtesy in regard to what every member does here. Please let us exercise a lot of respect for each other. Otherwise, it might not be good in terms of conducting business in this House. As Chair, I would like to express my deep regrets in regard to the conduct of some of our members. 

MR TUMWEBAZE: Mr Speaker, I am seeking guidance. I had wanted to seek clarification from the chairman of PAC but he is off the Floor. Maybe through you I will seek it. The chairman of PAC took fault seriously with the statement that the Governor had given minutes to the Cabinet sub-committee and that those minutes were not given to PAC. 

I think PAC had its own interests and they knew what they wanted. I also want to believe that even the Cabinet sub-committee also knew what they wanted, which was different from what PAC was looking for. We want to know, since there are electronic recordings for the proceedings of PAC, whether Mutebile is on record having either failed or refused or totally denied the existence of the minutes. 

The second matter for us to know is whether his consultations with the board ever surfaced in the proceedings as an important matter for consideration. I am saying this because you are trying to cast doubt on the minutes available. So, we need to know whether PAC dealt with that matter or not. If it did not, then we shouldn’t unnecessarily create suspicion on the report of the Cabinet sub-committee.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think we are now getting out of the box. What we need to do is to get back on course. What we need to know is whether there was any meeting or not. If there was one, definitely there must be minutes to it. But also, can it be that there was no meeting at all? Is that possible? I think those are matters that the minister will respond to later. 

Before that, let me recap this again; honourable members, we have just received a very strong statement from the Bench on the way we have conducted business in this House. I urge all of you to have that in mind. I am making reference to the recent Constitutional Court ruling. I have read the wording of that judgement and I can tell you that the judges were not very kind – they used very strong words. We should not go back to the same route and receive the same kind of words from the Bench. 

Let us try to channel this thing in a more – really, it does not matter even if you lose your voice here, the issue is to present your points clearly so that we understand and we take decisions accordingly. This privilege is already in our hands. You do not have to shout at anybody, you do not have to lose your temper and you do not need to insult anybody. You just need to articulate your issues to help us take a decision. 

You know that when we take a decision, we all own it. That is what this discussion is all about. I could have just said that we vote on this issue, but because we want to have an informed debate on this matter, I had to give all this latitude for members to make those contributions. Please let us respect each others’ opinions and views. I will let the honourable member complete his contribution, but if you use very strong words I will stop you in the middle of your sentence.

MR ATIKU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I raised this issue because it was very crucial during the investigations and especially now as we are about to take a decision. Before Bank of Uganda dished out colossal amounts of money that were given to Haba Group, a board was supposed to sit. Of course as you said, when a board sits or when there is a meeting between or among three people or between two people, there must be minutes. (Interruption)

MR AKORA: Thank you, Mr Speaker, and thank you, honourable colleague, for giving way. I wish to give information to the House with regard to the appearance of the Governor of Bank of Uganda before the Public Accounts Committee. 

I am a member of the Public Accounts Committee and vice-chair. I chaired the meeting with the Governor on 1 December 2011. We asked the Governor specifically two questions that come to my mind that relate to this particular matter of approval of the board. When he quoted the law indicating that he could make guarantees to commercial banks under the Bank of Uganda Act, we asked him, “Did you involve your board?” The Governor replied that he did not but he would subsequently inform the board at a later date. At that point the Governor did not indicate that he had informed the board. I do not know when those minutes are dated. He did not indicate to the committee that he had informed the board or that he thought it was important at the time to refer the matter of the letters of comfort to the board before he took that decision. 

We also asked the Governor what would happen in the event that the money he had paid out to commercial banks in lieu of the letters of comfort he had written to them is not recovered from Government. This is because the PS had indicated that the government had not approved that expenditure. The claim had been referred to the Attorney-General to verify it and he had asked the minister to take up the matter with the President in terms of verifying the quantum of the claim. 

We asked the Governor that in the event that this money is not recovered as he had been promised by the minister, what is going to happen. He did say, and he dismissed it in a casual way, that they have a provision in their accounts under “other debtors” and he would charge this as a loss and clear it in the annual report, which he has done, and that that would be the end of the matter. 

I wish to remind members that there is an annual report of the Bank of Uganda for the financial year ended 30 June 2011. It shows a huge provision of over Shs 150 billion as a provision against unrecoverable debt of advances made to Haba Group. That money is reported and as far as the Governor is concerned, he has done his work.

The committee considered all this evidence and found that the Governor was reckless in handling this matter. He was cavalier in attitude. We –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are you still giving information to the member? (Laughter)

MR AKORA: Yes, Mr Speaker. The Governor is in a very privileged position, privileged by the Constitution that guarantees his independence. He is privileged by the fact that he is protected by the Constitution and that he is privy to information regarding budgets and government’s financial management systems.  

The Governor wrote several letters of comfort to commercial banks that had blatant inaccuracies, which we have cited in our report. There are two that have been referred to by the sub-committee. One is that there were no conditions contingent upon Government making the payment to Haba Group. 

There were conditions that were contingent that had been specified by the Attorney-General. Even though we found the Attorney-General had been negligent in his work, he was quite clear that there were conditions that had to be met by the Haba Group before money could be released. The Governor did not take the trouble to find out if there were conditions but stated positively in his letter that there were no conditions precedent on government releasing that money to the Haba Group. That was inaccurate. 

The Governor similarly wrote another letter, which was inaccurate, indicating that there was money in the budget for the financial year 2010/2011 to pay the Haba Group. That money was a provision that had been made for the Haba Group to refund money to government. That was also inaccurate. So, it shows that the Governor, who was in a very privileged position, was acting in bad faith because he was making assumptions for which he had no basis. That is the information I want to give the House. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, and that concludes the member’s contribution. Can I have hon. Nyakikongoro.

8.05
MS ROSEMARY NYAKIKONGORO (Independent, Woman Representative, Sheema): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have been listening attentively. Sometimes we make laws that tie us, and the people who get into the implementation process end up getting confused. When you look at what the Constitution says and what the Bank of Uganda Act says, it puts the Governor in a position in which he actually uses the Bank of Uganda Act as his tool to do his work.

The way I understand it, if I am the Governor Bank of Uganda, I am keeping the money of the Government of Uganda. In other words, I am a banker. Therefore, if the Minister of Finance writes to me on several occasions saying “give me this money, I want to use it and I am going to refund the money basing on this vote”, as the Governor Bank of Uganda, what do I do?

Secondly, the Governor Bank of Uganda having been advised by the Attorney-General and the Solicitor-General that they have gone through a, b, c, d and he should actually pay this person, as a –(Interjections)- Let me speak my mind because this is what I believe as Nyakikongoro. 

If I am the Governor Bank of Uganda and you have written to me, the minister has written to me, and irrespective of the Secretary to the Treasury having written to the minister, the minister went ahead and said, “Please pay this amount of money”, what role as the Governor Bank of Uganda should I have played? I am first of all being pressured by the minister to pay and the Attorney-General, who is the legal advisor, says it is clear. However much we believe that the Governor had erred by abiding by what was asked of him, he does not have much to answer because of the errors he committed. 

As a Member of Parliament, I am usually quoting my rules - (Member timed out.)  

8.08
MR TOM ALERO (NRM, West Moyo County, Moyo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have three observations and each observation will take only one minute. One, money has been lost. We have lost colossal sums of money, which would have alleviated poverty if put in service delivery like on our roads. 

My dear colleagues, just about four days ago, hon. Katoto, hon. Katuramu and I were encircled, subdued and humiliated on our knees at the Sudan border. Committees have been going for on-the-spot checks on these borders so that they can be re-demarcated, but they have always got reports that there is no money in Ministry of Finance for the last five years. When we went, nine of us were about to lose our lives because of this business of saying, “there is no money.”

Two, there were very many people involved in the loss of these huge sums of money. Now, how do they share the blame for the loss of this money because some ministers have already resigned and others are still at large?  So, what share of blame are they going to carry? 

Three, we are all aware that our dear Tumusiime Mutebile, the Governor of Bank of Uganda, is about to retire. There is hypertension, heart attack, blood pressure and so on. Maybe before he gets all these attacks, we kindly and humbly request him to retire now - (Applause) - so that our grandfather can retire honourably and do other things. 

Otherwise, we thank you very much for having prayed for us after surviving from the hands of ragtag soldiers from Sudan. May the Minister of Foreign Affairs please come to the rescue of the people of Madi otherwise we cannot farm, we cannot dig; we are in poverty. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  

8.13
MS GRACE KWIYUCWINY (NRM, Woman Representative, Zombo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. First, I would have loved to understand the difference between the minutes of the board and the minutes of audit and governance committee of the board. While the minister is ready to lay all these minutes on the Table, I hope that he will clarify the difference between these two so that we have an informed position. 

Secondly, I do not support mistakes but I would first like to thank the Executive. I am learning ever since I joined Parliament that whatever resolution that we come up with, it goes to the Executive and they look at it and give their version and bring it back to us so that we know what they have agreed upon. In that sense, I would like to appreciate what the Executive has done by bringing this information to us so as to understand their views.  

In relation to that, I would like to observe that while the PAC report was very clear as well, I think that there is a meeting point between the PAC report and the report from the Executive. I know that as we discuss now, we are pulling ropes; we seem not to agree but there are common grounds on which we can build. 

In this report from the Minister of Defence, hon. Kiyonga, in point 5.3 and 5.4 he recommends - let me first read 5.3: “The directive of H.E. the President to the Attorney-General to recover the excess money paid to Haba Group of Companies still stands.” I think this is what we are all looking for. We are not really saying that it was bad to compensate Basajjabalaba; we are asking for the basis of the excess funds that he got. That is what is making us suffer. So, I would like to support this view that even the President would like to see this money recovered. 

Point 5.4 says: “Investigations are continuing to discover and prosecute or take other actions against any suspects in this scam.” Here, I would like to tie this to what PAC recommended. It also recommended that investigations should continue. My understanding is that while we do a good job here, it is not the end of it. Even when the Executive takes it up, it is not the end of it. We still have to give it to another arm of Government to do a decent investigation. (Member timed out)

8.15
MR YONA MUSINGUZI (NRM, Ntungamo Municipality, Ntungamo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Members, today as we begin to discuss the Governor Bank of Uganda, the exchange rate has shot from Shs 2,300 to Shs 2,600 per dollar. There is a problem. 

I would like to be corrected by the Speaker if I am wrong to ask under which rule of the Rules of Procedure this Kiyonga committee was set up. No wonder, it has spent only two weeks investigating a matter that took the PAC members more than four months. It is no surprise that they lied that the board of directors, under Article 161 of the Constitution where the powers of the Governor Bank of Uganda are vested, recommended the Governor to issue letters of comfort. 

At what stage did these recommendations of the board come into play? The auditor’s report did not mention the minutes, and I think that he had the capacity to go into the Bank of Uganda and look for those minutes. (Applause) Not only did he stop there, the same Governor, who has given the committee that spent only two weeks investigating him minutes, came to PAC which investigated him - and we can play the recordings on –(Interjections)-  and he did not tell us about the minutes and yet he was asked. So, at what stage are these minutes coming in now? There must be a problem. 

Members, tribalism is diversionary to this issue. I am a Mukiga, I am a Munyankole, but you cannot lie to me about this. Whoever is saying that is trying to divert the minds of the members today. It has been ministers and we have all been longing to get these technocrats whom we know have been stealing from this country. This is the time; let us get him now. (Applause) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I am going to give additional time and then we begin moving towards the closure of this debate. Can we agree to give two minutes to each contributor so that we can have more members from the back bench? Okay.

8.19
MS BETTY AMONGI (UPC, Oyam County South, Oyam): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am looking at the consistency with which over the last one decade, the name Basajjabalaba has been prominent in Central Bank issues when Mutebile is at the helm of the Central Bank.

I remember a time when the issue of billions of shillings by Central Bank was given to help Basajjabalaba’s hides and skins industry - it was a big national scandal and at that time - Mutebile was the Central Bank Governor. There was the time of saving Kampala International University and again at the centre of it were Basajjabalaba and the Central Bank where Mutebile was at the helm. There are several other incidences, like the UBC land. 

Everything around this country revolves around Basajjabalaba and the extent to which Bank of Uganda has stepped in for one man in this country. Actually, if we are to accumulate the amount of money that Central Bank has spent on Basajjabalaba over the last two decades in this country or one decade only and Mutebile was to put it to transform this country - (Member timed out_)

8.22
MR LATIF SSEBAGALA (DP, Kawempe Division North, Kampala): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The issue we are discussing is very important and pertinent. Right from the word go, I do not know how we are going to move as Parliament. We know that we have parliamentary committees, which make reports and they are presented here and discussed and then we make some recommendations. Now it is a new culture that the Cabinet is coming in to put in place sub-committees. I believe that this kind of arrangement is going to weaken this institution because whenever we come out with reports, they are going to be trashed by the Cabinet sub-committee. The image of this institution is going to be damaged -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Ssebagala, I do not think this is entirely correct. The report was made to this House. The request was made to this House for this sub-committee to do something. It was made to this House and it was allowed by the Speaker then that it should happen with the consent - I am sure you heard the opening statement from the chairman of the committee. So please let us not go into those ones because we are the ones who allowed them to do it.

MR SSEBAGGALA: Mr Speaker, if it is the case that sub-committees will be put in place whenever a report is presented, then that is a bad scenario. 

When you look at the issue of Governor Mutebile, we have heard people saying that the moment he resigns, the economy is going to collapse. It is very unfortunate if our economy depends on only one person.

I will agree with many colleagues who have said that we should not bring tribes in this kind of situation. If we are fighting corruption, it is corruption. Wherever you come from - we do not mind whether you come from the west or North - if it is corruption, it is corruption. Let us speak up. 

A case in point is this one. I was chairman of the Buganda caucus when these ministers resigned. Maybe we would have sat as Buganda caucus to say, “Please, how can we save our people?” But we said no; if they have committed any crime - Syda Bbumba is my sister-in-law and Khiddu Makubuya is my clans mate, but I said, “Be responsible for what you did”. (Applause) So if we are talking about patriotism, we must really be seen to walk the talk. 

Mr Speaker, I believe that Governor Mutebile has a case to answer. If someone comes up to say that he was acting on directives from the minister, if we pinned the ministers for having worked on directives from the President, then what about directives from the minister? We pinned the ministers because they were working on the directives of the President and now the minister, hon. Kiyonga, is saying that the Governor was working under pressure from the ministers, yet he is protected by the Constitution -(Member timed out.)

8.25
DR ARIDRU AJEDRA (NRM, Arua Municipality, Arua): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I think as Members of Parliament we need to step back in time. I was not here when this matter was being debated in this House and when the recommendations were being adopted and expunged from our records. I have been reliably informed that this Parliament deleted and expunged the records regarding the recommendations with respect to the acting Solicitor-General and the current one.

In whatever we do, there is always the messenger and the message. This is my personal analysis and when I give my analysis, I will have given thorough thought about it. The Governor Bank of Uganda delivered the message. He is the person who delivered that message and that message originated from other parties – (Interjections) - I said this is my opinion. I am giving my analysis; you may have yours. We, as Parliament, said that those records should be deleted or expunged. In other words, the people who were ably responsible have been set aside, and that is the acting Solicitor-General at that time and at this particular time.

I do not think it was the Governor who woke up one morning and said, “I am going to pay these people”. The instruction must have come from somebody else, and we need to go after the person who issued that instruction. I am seated in my office and as the person responsible I say, “Eng. Dr Aridru, can you pay so and so much amount of money”. I have the liberty to say yes or no. Now, if I am instructed, whether by the political office or by the persons that be -(Member timed out_)

8.28
GEN. ELLY TUMWINE (UPDF Representative): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rarely contribute to motions except where I feel it is very important. By the attendance today in Parliament, you can tell that this issue is sensitive to our people – their feelings and concerns. 

I was concerned that perhaps the response from Government would be very far from the PAC report. However, the conclusion of this report has clearly stated that there was loss of money and money needs to be recovered, and some people have been sent away from jobs and investigations should continue.

In our revolutionary struggle, we say shame is a revolutionary sentiment. (Applause) Shame should be felt when there is loss and feeling sorry when there is a mistake. There are two ways of committing a crime; you can commit a crime by omission or commission. Whoever it is, when we discuss individuals, I feel it is even wrong. As long as there was a problem, we should all feel concerned. (Applause) We should have one focus against corruption, and we should maintain the momentum so that whoever is found wanting in one way or another should go and be investigated. (Applause) 

I am glad that the report is talking of investigations; let all those who were involved be investigated by all the relevant agencies of the state and only be exonerated by court rather than – (Member timed out.)

8.31
MS JENNIFER MUJUNGU (Independent, Woman Representative, Ntoroko): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to comment on this pertinent issue of the Governor Bank of Uganda. 

I want to bring to the attention of this House that there are only three grounds in the Constitution on which the Governor of Bank of Uganda can be removed from office. These can be found in Article 161(5) (a), (b) and (c). They are, the inability to perform, misbehaviour or misconduct and incompetence. 

Honourable members, if PAC in its findings found that the Governor was either incompetent, misbehaved or was unable, then the recommendation should be that the Governor should be removed. However, the question is: who should remove the Governor? The Constitution stipulates that it is the President. Therefore, as PAC we cannot investigate, prosecute and pass judgement. This issue should be left to the President so that he can take the necessary actions. 

It is like court; when Police does the investigation and the case is in court, whereas there could be evidence on record, Police cannot compel court to pass judgement just because there is overwhelming evidence because the judge is independent. Usually, the judge gives the ratio decidendi - the reason for the decision – (Member timed out.)

8.34
MR JAMES KYEWALABYE (NRM, Kiboga County East, Kiboga): Thank you, Mr Speaker. On the issue of the Governor Bank of Uganda, I remember hon. Wafula Oguttu had begun telling us about the Governor; I will now complete what he did not say. 

The Governor is a person who has served this country diligently over a period of time. He has steered the economy through difficult times, working with other people. At no time has he been found wanting. In this particular situation, he finds himself in a difficult situation which is not of his own making. However, we have a situation whereby Parliament has ever exonerated some people who may have been involved but we did not have clear evidence that they were the ones responsible. Given the Governor’s track record, I am compelled to say that he should also be given the benefit of doubt just as we did for Kainamura and Lwabi. This is a Governor who has worked for a long time and nobody has shown that he has ever done something wrong. (Interruption)

MR YONA MUSINGUZI: Mr Speaker, I know that one right does not justify one wrong. We appreciate the Governor’s work but it is time to answer for our deeds. Is the honourable member in order – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Musinguzi, you are ruled out of order.

MR KYEWALABYE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. As leaders of this country, we should look at things in a wider perspective. I know that we want to fight corruption and I support that. However, in this case, the Governor has not broken any law in this country. I think the recommendation that he should take personal responsibility should be expunged from the record. The recommendation that he should be dismissed should also be expunged from the record. (Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I had said that we now need to bring this to a close. I have consulted with both the Leader of the Opposition and the Leader of Government Business. I am requesting that we have responses from their front benches before we conclude this debate. I think we will regulate the time; the issues are fairly clear and we should not take a lot of time on this. I think three minutes will be sufficient for each. I do not know whether the chairman wants to respond to these issues again. Okay. 

8.39
MR MATHIAS MPUUGA (Independent, Masaka Municipality, Masaka): I thank you, Mr Speaker, and I would like to thank colleagues for their submissions on this subject, very critical indeed to the history of this Parliament and perhaps it could set a precedent for generations to come. 

Mr Speaker, I have heard members variously refer to Article 162 of the Constitution. I would like to specifically refer to Article 162(2), which indeed reaffirms the importance of the Governor of the Bank of Uganda, to the effect that at no one time must he be influenced by any individual or any institution. 

When you look at Article 161(5), which describes the mode of removal of the Governor or the deputy, clearly he can only be removed by the President on confirming that his body or his mind is not sound enough to execute the duties of the Governor, and also on incompetence or misconduct. I am not in a position to tell the mind of the Governor now as a ground for removal by the President. However, I can affirm to the fact that on misconduct and incompetence, by allowing himself to be pushed around by politicians he clearly failed in his constitutional obligation, and I find him culpable for this huge loss.

Secondly, we might have to learn from history. Hon. Wafula eloquently enumerated what it takes to be Governor of the Central Bank - the degree of confidence by various sectors of society including the business community and politicians. Clearly, the business community has spoken that they have no confidence in the Governor of the Central Bank. It is on that ground that so many people are closing businesses either by the actions or inactions of people in control of the country’s central bank. This is very clear. So many people have lost jobs because of the people in the Central Bank, and I believe this august House can finally do this country justice - (Member timed out.)

8.42
MR MEDARD SSEGGONA (DP, Busiro County East, Wakiso): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I think our work has been simplified, and I want to thank hon. Kiyonga for giving us a largely truthful finding on their part. I have a lot of trust in his team. The finding of this Cabinet sub-committee confirms the findings of PAC, that Governor Mutebile made mistakes and that his mistakes by commission or omission amounted to crimes and administrative failures. By not doing what he is supposed to do and by doing what he was not supposed to do, and by failing to follow the procedure he was supposed to follow, we ended up losing money. 

The grounds, in my very humble understanding, required for the removal of the Governor under the Constitution, which has been variously cited by my honourable colleagues, have been satisfied and the remedy is simple. If somebody makes those mistakes, we are not here to issue prerogatives of mercy; we are here to ensure that systems are followed. 

Where is the good faith in hiding minutes of the board, if they ever existed, and in not working with the board, which is a requirement of the law? Without wasting time, reading sections from 1, 2, 4, 32, 10 you find that for an act to be deemed as an act of the Bank of Uganda, it must be an act of the board. How on earth could the Governor simply inform the board after doing what he did? 

In summary, one writer said that the art of being a good guest is knowing when to leave. I appreciate and express gratitude to the Governor for the work he has been able to do and I ask him to take responsibility for the failures on his part. By the way, the Governor carries bigger responsibility than the politicians because the Governor is chosen based on competence and his technical knowledge, and especially having been Secretary to the Treasury and knowing how instructions move before you remove Government money.

Mr Speaker, I do not intend to speak more, but by anticipating that we shall approve the budget and therefore be able to replace the money, that was an insult even to this institution of Parliament - (Member timed out.)

8.46
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS/DEPUTY ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Fred Ruhindi): Mr Speaker, I am sure everyone appreciates that I am between a rock and a hard place to speak about a matter that originated from an office I worked in. However, I want to simply limit my exposition to an area where I am confident I can make a contribution on this debate. 

I appreciate the views expressed by hon. Nyakikongoro about the challenge that the Governor could or may have faced in the way he conducted himself in this particular transaction. You know, there was a problem at first. I know the chairperson of the committee of Cabinet laboured to put letters of comfort and letters of guarantee together as commitments by the Governor. However, in our interview with the Governor, it appears he issued letters of comfort knowing that they did not carry the commitment guarantees ordinarily carry. 

I looked in Black’s Law Dictionary for the definition of a letter of comfort. Certainly, a letter of comfort falls short of a guarantee. I want to - (Interruption)

MR WAFULA OGUTTU: Thank you very much, hon. Attorney-General. We were just informed here some time back by the chairman of the committee that the Secretary to the Treasury, who is given constitutional powers approving the removal of our money from the Bank of Uganda, refused to sign. Therefore, if he refused to sign, it means our banker decided to spend money without our permission. Mr Speaker, is it in order for the honourable Attorney-General therefore, to continue on this line?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, to the best of my recollection, those statements were not made by hon. Kiyonga; they were made by hon. Kassiano Wadri. The chairman of PAC did not sit in the sub-committee of Cabinet because what hon. Ruhindi is talking about is what happened in the sub-committee of Cabinet and hon. Kassiano Wadri was not there. So, you put me in a difficult situation to rule on facts I was not privy to. I cannot rule on it.

MR RUHINDI: Thank you so much, Mr Speaker, for that wise ruling. 

In summary, what I wanted to say is, there is the Shakespearean saying that “A rose by any other name would smell as sweet”. It could be termed a letter of comfort on the surface while the substance actually indicates a guarantee. Even looking at the letter of comfort, it does not actually come out with that kind of substance that would elevate it to a guarantee in the first place. 

However, when the days lapsed for the Ministry of Finance to make good, nothing was forthcoming. The integrity of Bank of Uganda was at stake. Bank of Uganda being a regulator, the Governor had no choice but to make good from the bank’s own resources - that should actually be clearly understood - from the bank’s own resources - (Member timed out.)

8.51
MR SAMUEL ODONGA OTTO (FDC, Aruu County, Pader): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. When I heard Gen. Elly Tumwine speaking and those who participated in the revolution that makes all of us sit here comfortably today, I almost thought he had said it all. These are people who were actually maimed to bring the revolution in place, so no one can speak a little louder than some of them because they have seen it all from the first day the 27 of them walked to the bushes to date. So, what he said should not be taken lightly. 

Having said that, I think the doctrine of common intention is still clear in our minds. It can be construed alongside what we call group packed. So, now that we have isolated a few members of the group, it is only prudent that all the members of the pack face the wrath of the actions they did. 

The purpose of criminal law is to punish those who commit offences and to deter others from doing such things. So, I will really appeal to this Parliament, irrespective of political affiliation which we are actually doing very well today, that let Mutebile also bite the bitter pill. When he was executing those deals, we were nowhere to be involved so they are not just going to rush to us and say, “We were cleared by Parliament”. In their own conscience, they probably even drink up to morning because they know they did a wrong thing. So, it is not about standing and saying, “You have been exonerated”.

The minister’s statement is just almost like a cut and paste of the committee report. The only difference is that my good friend, Dr Crispus Kiyonga, had included lessons learnt. Lessons must be lessons. Mutebile has not yet learnt anything, so we cannot start talking of lessons learnt when he is still at large. Let him learn his lessons so that all other future governors will say - (Applause) – “I do not want what happened to Mutebile to happen to me”, and that is the role this Parliament must play. 

If we exonerate him, then the future governors will also learn that you can make mistakes and you will be politically exonerated. I am really very happy Dr Crispus Kiyonga with that choice of words. You really made my day. (Laughter)

This morning, as I was finishing my workout at Sheraton, the first person I met was saying, “Why are you Parliament exonerating the Governor?” He said that they have a staff in BOU who even left Tunisia to come back to Uganda with the hope that he would even be a governor. So, if it is - (Member timed out_)

8.55
THE MINISTER FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Mr Adolf Mwesige): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to begin by clarifying the point raised by the Member for Ntungamo Municipality who questioned the locus standi of the Cabinet sub-committee. I would like to say that under Article 99 of the Constitution, the President of Uganda is seized with Executive authority to appoint any committee in Cabinet to assist him in assessing a matter of this nature. 

As our committee reported, the Governor acted on two points - on the basis of trust and the basis of the law. The Attorney-General’s Office, under Article 119, is a very important constitutional office. Indeed, courts of law, including the Supreme Court in the case of Bank Arada vs. Bank of Uganda, directed the Bank of Uganda itself to always follow the opinion of the Attorney-General. I would not really be surprised; not just Bank of Uganda but any Government department, when confronted with a decision, a legal opinion of the Attorney-General, is under obligation to implement that opinion. This opinion was communicated to the Governor Bank of Uganda through a letter written by the Solicitor-General, written to the PS Ministry of Finance and copied to the Governor Bank of Uganda. 

The chairman of the committee told us that apart from the strong opinion of the Attorney-General, the Governor Bank of Uganda was confronted with seven categorical letters from the Minister of Finance. The Minister of Finance is the policy coordinator and policy supervisor of the Bank of Uganda. People have talked about the independence of the Bank of Uganda in Article 161, sub-article (2). Yes, that Article is very clear but there is also Article 162 (3) which says that this Parliament will make laws which will govern the functioning and operations of the Bank of Uganda. 

Section 32 (2) also clearly says that when the Minister of Finance demands for services from the Governor Bank of Uganda, the Governor Bank of Uganda has no choice but to provide those services. I have heard members pronouncing this section as unconstitutional. I am afraid we do not have that power to pronounce a clause of the law unconstitutional. You can express your opinion but for the time being, that is part of the laws of Uganda, and that is why - (Interjections) - I do not take the information. That is why -(Member timed out.)

8.58
MR GEOfFREY EKANYA (FDC, Tororo County, Tororo): Thank you, Mr Speaker, and I want to thank hon. Kiyonga. I remember one time hon. Adolf Mwesige was the Deputy Attorney-General and hon. Khiddu Makubuya was the Attorney-General. The Electoral Commission sought advice whether to nominate Dr Kiiza Besigye or not. Our hon. Adolf Mwesige said that he can be nominated but the Attorney-General said, “No”. I leave that for you to decide. That is the hon. Adolf Mwesige now speaking.

Honourable colleagues, I want us to go back. I hate speaking about people’s names but I am compelled. Suppose the Governor Bank of Uganda and the entire board had shared or released Shs 2 trillion, would that be good? Would we exonerate them because the decision says “the board and the Governor”? Assuming that happened, that they got Shs 2 trillion and gave it out to some people? 

There is a procedure in the report of how the Minister of Finance, Secretary to the Treasury and the Accountant-General manage the Consolidated Fund. There is a memorandum of understanding and that procedure was followed when it came to the issue of the aircraft, the jets and that procedure was followed when Haba Group of Companies sought the Government of Uganda to get them a guarantee. 

I want to refer to ourselves, honourable colleagues. I am happy, Mr Speaker, that you have a programme of taking Parliament to the people. The people of this country are going to read this Hansard for posterity. The power of Government to borrow or to lend - “Government shall not borrow, guarantee, or raise a loan on behalf of itself or any other public institution, authority or person except as authorised by or under the Act of Parliament.” 

It goes down and defines that, “For the purposes of this article, the expression ‘loan’ includes any money lent or given to or by the Government on condition of return or repayment and any other form of borrowing or lending in respect to which- 
(a)monies from the Consolidated Fund or any other public fund may be used for payment or repayment; or 
(b)monies from any fund by whatever name called, established for purposes of payment or repayment whether in whole or in part...”

Colleagues, the Governor Bank of Uganda usurped the power of Parliament and released money without our approval. I want to read Article 164(2). It says, “Any person holding a political or public office who directs or concurs in the use of public funds contrary to existing instructions shall be accountable for any loss arising from that use and shall be required to make good the loss even if he or she has ceased to hold that office.” (Member timed out.) 

9.02
THE MINISTER FOR DEFENCE (Dr Chrispus Kiyonga): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Since the time is very limited, I would like to take this opportunity to lay on the Table the minutes of the audit committee and minutes of the board that I referred to. I would like also to lay on the Table the series of letters that the honourable Minister of Finance wrote to the Governor.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, since you are laying those documents, I will allow you to lay them. I will give you additional time to deal with your submission. Please lay the papers first, properly. Give us the date of the minutes then you lay them properly. I will give you additional time.

DR KIYONGA: I referred to the dates in the statement I made. The board meeting is dated 13 September 2011.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You can lay it. 

DR KIYONGA: The committee meetings are also dated 12 September 2011. (Interjections) I think for the letters, I have already given the dates.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Give the dates now as you are laying them.

DR KIYONGA: Okay, letter number one is dated 7 June 2010 –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: From whom to whom, honourable minister?

DR KIYONGA: From the Minister of Finance then, hon. Syda Bbumba, to the Governor Bank of Uganda. (Interjections)  “Compensation to Haba Group of Companies.” 

The second letter as I explained, of 14th June, was written to the chief executive Haba Group of Companies. The subject is, “Compensation to Haba Group of Companies” authored by hon. Syda Bbumba. 

The third letter is dated 24th September to the Governor Bank of Uganda. The subject is, “Compensation for Haba Group Uganda Limited,” written by hon. Syda Bbumba.

The next letter is dated 30 September 2010 addressed to the Governor Bank of Uganda and is coming from hon. Syda Bbumba. The subject is, “Compensation claims to Haba Group of Companies.” 

The next letter is dated 3 December 2010 addressed to the Governor Bank of Uganda. The subject is, “Compensation claim to Haba Group of Companies”, and it is coming from hon. Syda Bbumba. 

The next letter is dated 24 February 2010, addressed to the Governor Bank of Uganda and the subject is, “Compensation to Haba Group of Companies.” It is from hon. Syda Bbumba, the minister responsible for finance. 

The last letter that I referred to is dated 22 March 2011 addressed to the Governor Bank of Uganda and the subject is “Compensation to Haba Group of Companies”. It is from hon. Syda Bbumba. 

I also have a series of letters which were written to commercial banks by the Governor, which I also made reference to. The first letter was written on 11 June 2010 to the managing director, Orient Bank from the Governor, Mr Tumusiime Mutebile. 

The second letter is also to the managing director, Orient Bank. The subject is, “Proposed Facility of US$ 10 million to Haba Group Limited”. It is from the Governor of the Bank of Uganda.

The next letter is addressed to the managing director, Orient Bank. The subject is, “Facility for Haba Group to pay Uganda Broadcasting Corporation.” It is also from the Governor Bank of Uganda. 

The next letter is dated 12 August 2010 to the managing director, United Bank of Africa and is from the Governor Bank of Uganda. 

The next letter is also to the managing director United Bank of Africa. The subject is, “USD 10 million facility to Haba Group”. It is from the Governor Bank of Uganda.

The next letter is to the managing director of United Bank of Africa. The subject is, “US$ 10 million Facility to HABA Group of Companies Limited”. It is from the Governor Bank of Uganda.

The next letter is also to the managing director United Bank for Africa. The subject is, “US$ 10 million Facility to HABA Group”. It is from the Governor Bank of Uganda. 

The next letter is to the managing director of United Bank of Africa. The subject is “US$ 20 million Facility to HABA Group Limited”. It is from the Governor, Central Bank.

The next letter is to the managing director of Tropical Bank, “Credit Facility, US$ 10 million to Haba Group Uganda Limited”. It is from the Governor Bank of Uganda. 

The next letter is dated 3rd December to the managing director, Bank of Baroda. The subject is, “Credit Facility of US$ 1 million to Haba Group Uganda Limited”. It is from the Governor Bank of Uganda.

Those are the letters and the documents that I made reference to.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, you have three minutes now.

DR KIYONGA: Thank you. I think my colleague, hon. Kassiano, made a very strong statement that PAC worked so hard, which I agreed with and which I maintained. He was asking whether this evidence collected over that period should be rubbished. Nothing could be far from the truth. In the first statement that government issued, we agreed with the PAC report that our colleagues had erred and the colleagues had accordingly taken political responsibility. So nobody is saying that the PAC report should be rubbished. 

The PAC report called for recovery of the money that had been lost. In the statement that we have made now and even earlier, we have said that the President has directed the Attorney-General to start the process of recovery of this money. So nobody is rubbishing this report. We are only indicating that our own analysis in regard to the two officers is different and that our recommendation is that they should not take personal responsibility.

In regard to Mr Sseggane, my brother hon. Bihande made some clarification about council and tender boards not being there. However, when you go to page 8 of the PAC report, the committee states thus: “The committee observed that the action by Mr Sseggane to extend contracts without council approval was a huge administrative error.” So we referred to the council because PAC itself made this observation. We were just informing the House that council was not in session because the council had been dissolved by the then Minister of Local Government. 

Finally, Mr Speaker, the resolve of the NRM to fight corruption is not in doubt. In fact, I would like Parliament to appreciate that using this PAC report we have made substantial progress. It is unknown in our history of fighting corruption that Cabinet itself makes a recommendation asking their own colleagues to take political responsibility and they indeed do take it. So the NRM will remain committed to fighting corruption and nobody should be in doubt.

9.12
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Nathan Nandala-Mafabi): Mr Speaker, I want to thank the committee, and I want to thank all the Members of Parliament who have contributed to this subject. It looks like we are determined to deal with the wrong things when they come. 

The Governor of Bank of Uganda is a former Secretary to the Treasury and he knows how government operates. So, how could he break the rules which he put in place? I want everybody here to understand that nobody should tell you that if somebody dies, the office will die with him. In fact, one time the Governor Bank of Uganda was sick for one and a half years and the bank still operated. So nobody should lie to us that if he goes, something terrible will happen. 

Having said that, I want to thank hon. Adolf Mwesige for what he said, that the Attorney-General’s words are always final. I recall the time when Dr Kiiza was in prison, he differed with the Attorney-General. He said that Kiiza Besigye could be nominated even while in prison. Even for the case he read of the bank in Spain, Basajjabalaba had not taken the Governor Bank of Uganda to court. So there was no reason for the Governor to honour anything from the Attorney-General. Under Article 160(2), which you read very well, it says that the Governor Bank of Uganda is independent. 

The letters of comfort showed that he had the authority to give out the money and that money was charged on Bank of Uganda accounts. That is very dangerous and it has shown how our money was lost. 

I want to quote the accounts of Bank of Uganda on page 151, and I want to read it: “As indicated in the table above, the bank total capital expenditure excluding translation reserves has a net deficit of Shs 115.659 billion. The bank is following up with Government on how best to make adequate the core capital reserves of the bank.” They are coming to you to ask for more money to capitalize the bank and from this, you have not deducted the Shs 153.3 billion which Basajjabalaba has taken. That is the more reason we should get angry that our money is being lost. 

I want to agree with the Minister of Defence - by the way, he was my minister in finance - that there was a meeting on 13th September and this meeting was to approve accounts and not to write off the debts. I will show you the accounts – (Interjections) – Please give me a chance; I am going to help you so that you understand because I am a professional. The meeting was on 13th September and the board members who were there were Mutebile, the chairman; the deputy, Kassami, and Balunywa, Mukiibi and Tumubweine. They sat on that day to approve accounts. It is dated 13th September. That day, by the time they were sitting to sign to approve the accounts, money had already been paid. So, you should have said that the board never approved the expenditure and that is why on page 118, there is an impairment loss of Shs 163.135 billion. That is a clear indicator that we lost money and if we lost money, we should get angrier at those who lost our money. 

I want to quote the President’s letter, a copy of which I have given you, and you note the date. It was dated 8 January 2011. He was writing on the compensation for the Haba Group. The last paragraph is very interesting: “I therefore advise you to assist the company to accept this funding without suffering interest. However, this should only be done after offsetting whatever is due and owing to Government.” He never offset it. He knew the Shs 23 billion is the one in court with Basajjabalaba, that he had transferred the titles. He never offset this. That means he is clean. Why didn’t he deduct even what the President had told him in good faith? He knew his cut, that he had been paid - (Member timed out.)

9.18
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Let me begin with a question of the law. I think my colleagues have responded to it very adequately but I want to ask a question. If the Bank of Uganda Act is unconstitutional and this is Parliament saying so, should the same Parliament which is responsible for making laws hold Tumusiime responsible for that unconstitutionality? 

I know the law, as all of you know it. I know both the Constitution because I made it and the Bank of Uganda Act because I enacted it. I know both very well. I want to tell you without fear of any contradiction that the Bank of Uganda Act was enacted under the constitutional provisions of Article 162(3). Therefore, it is constitutional. It is really not for any of us here to declare that an existing Act of Parliament is unconstitutional and that he or she who acts by that law should be held responsible. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, the Bank of Uganda Act commenced on 14 May 1993. So, is the Prime Minister in order to say that this was done in conformity with the 1995 Constitution?

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Well, Mr Speaker, it is my great pleasure to inform my young brother on what he says. If you read Article 274 of the Constitution, it will give you a very clear answer and you will withdraw what you said. (Interjections)- Mr Speaker, do you know the meaning of the name Odonga Otto? It means that death is the only thing I am waiting for now. (Laughter)

MR SSEGGONA: Thank you, Mr Speaker, and I thank the Prime Minister for giving way. Article 274 of the Constitution that the Prime Minister is talking about provides that if there is any pre-existing law with the Constitution, it must be read with such modifications and adaptations and qualifications to bring it in conformity. The issue at hand, which was before the House, is whether the Act was enacted in accordance with the Constitution. The Prime Minister came and reported this and further to strengthen his point, he opted to start intimidating members with death. Is he in order on those two respects? (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Death comes to any living person at any age; it can never by proclamation of the Rt hon. Prime Minister. Please proceed.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: My second point is – (Interjections) - Colleagues, I know that hon. Ibrahim Semujju is someone obviously who is ignorant. That is an established fact, which I know by myself. (Interruption)

MR SEMUJJU: Mr Speaker, I rise on a point of order. I have respect for the hon. John Patrick Amama Mbabazi; if for not anything, at least for his age. 

The name Semujju Ibrahim Nganda is not a subject of debate neither is it on the list of those who participated in this fraud or even in earlier ones like those about Temangalo and CHOGM, not even in the oil frauds. Is the hon. John Patrick Amama Mbabazi, who remains a suspect on trial, in order to smear my otherwise good name – (Laughter) – in his failed attempt to even make a single point?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Ibrahim Semujju, do you know what point he said you are ignorant of?

MR SEMUJJU: Mr Speaker, I have been listening to him and I have said he made no point. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What I am saying is, do you know what issue he said you are ignorant?

MR SEMUJJU: But he had not raised any issue.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You know, he said that it is an established fact that you are ignorant of something. Do you know what he thinks you are ignorant of? Well, if you do not know, then you –

MR SEMUJJU: Mr Speaker, immediately after he said Odonga Otto means death, he went on to say that Semujju is ignorant and that that is an established fact.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, but do you know the issue he says you are ignorant of?

MR SEMUJJU: Mr Speaker, I am very sorry really, but I think that question should be directed to hon. John Patrick Amama Mbabazi.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You see, the reason I am in a fix is because he said that you are ignorant and that between you and him, that is a confirmed fact. You know that not all of us are knowledgeable on everything. He might know of something that you are ignorant of. That is why I am asking you about it. 
Anyway, in the circumstances, I am unable to rule on that point of order because you have not proved to me that you are not ignorant of what he said you are ignorant of. Rt hon. Prime Minister, please wind up.

THE PRIME MINISTER: Thank you, Mr Speaker for –(Interruptions)

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Speaker, is it in order for the Prime Minister to threaten to kill me? (Laughter) I have sat there for one minute wondering why of all people he chose to misinterpret my name, that what is remaining for me is only death. Is he order to make such serious statements in respect of a young man with a bright future like I? (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think the Rt Hon. Prime Minister should have sought advice from people who are conversant with that language. The statement that he made would be similar to a phrase, “Odongtoo” but Odonga Otto would not fall into that category. In the circumstances, I would forgive him on the basis of his limited understanding of the language. (Laughter)

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Mr Speaker, allow me make a few more points – (Interjections) – You cannot count the time when I was forced off the Floor against me. 

When we talk about the loss and so on, Mr Speaker, as you know Government believes, as we said in the statement, that actually there was overpayment made. Certainly, there is no doubt that Haba Group of Companies, because Government cancelled the contract they had, were entitled to some compensation. Our problem, however, is that the money paid to them was excessive. 

We have said that we are going to follow on this matter to the last in order to determine how much money was paid in excess. I would like to inform the House that Government will do everything possible to recover that money.

Now, let me ask this question: Why do people say – including my dear brother, the Leader of the Opposition - that payment was done unlawfully without audit warrants and instructions from the Secretary to the Treasury? This was because, and it is clear from the reports that hon. Nandala-Mafabi was reading and even in the PAC report, the payment was not made from the Consolidated Fund. 

If that payment had been made from the Consolidated Fund, there would have been need for an audit warrant and instructions from the Secretary to the Treasury. This money was paid from sundry accounts of the bank itself; that is money within the bank – (Interjections) – This is a fact. Therefore, it was not necessary to first secure an audit warrant and the authority of the Secretary to the Treasury because they do not have authority over that.

Third, the Attorney-General made the decision about this amount of money – (Member timed out) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Members, you can appreciate that the Rt. Hon. Prime Minister was interrupted several times. Please wind up in two minutes. 

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Mr Speaker, the Attorney-General is the authority on this matter of compensation. It is not disputed that the Attorney-General is the one who gave the opinion that the Shs 142 billion should be paid to Haba Group of Companies; it is not the Governor. Actually, it is not even the Minister of Finance. As you heard from all the authorities, including the Attorney-General, once the Attorney-General gives an opinion, everybody is bound by it. How can you hold Tumusime Mutebile - [Hon Member: “Why Bbumba?”] - That is not my question now, but I would answer it. How can you hold Tumusime Mutebile at fault for implementing the decisions of someone else? Obviously, it would be wrong.

The critical issue is: was the board involved? Mr Speaker, it is obvious from the dates that we have heard that actually the board was involved after decisions had been made by the Governor. How did this happen? The Governor is the chairman of the board and he was acting with delegated authority. Eventually when the board met, they endorsed it. This is what is in the minutes that the minister has presented here. The Board of Bank of Uganda endorsed those decisions. They are here in the papers that were given. 

Therefore, the Government position is very clear. As the minister put it, the President has directed that all the monies must be recovered, and we are determined to recover them. Investigations are going on and anyone who acted either criminally or in breach of the law, this will be established by investigation. I would like to ask you, colleagues in Parliament, do not another time take action that will be faulted. Let us leave it to those whose responsibility it is to investigate to establish facts and act accordingly. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Rt Hon. Prime Minister. Mr Chairman, I think the issues are fairly clear for you. I will give you five minutes. 

THE CHAIRMAN, PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (Mr Kassiano Wadri): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I trust you are a very humane person even when you are in the Chair, and that you will give me equally the same amount of time that you gave to the Rt hon. Prime Minister because I have to respond to the issues that they have raised. 

Mr Speaker, I first of all would like to register my appreciation and gratitude to the entire institution of Parliament for having given justice to the report of the Public Accounts Committee. The entire country is waiting and watching us. We as a country are said to be having strong commitment to fighting corruption. Now is the time for us to walk the talk, and I appeal to us, honourable members, that let each one of us be counted as people who strongly stand to fight corruption. (Applause)

As it is the practice in Commonwealth parliaments, the allegiance of a Member of Parliament is rated along the following hierarchy: Your commitment first and foremost is to the country. So in whatever you do, look at Uganda first before any other thing. The second person to whom your allegiance goes in that order is the electorate that sent you here. The third person is you and your family and your conscience that should guide you. The last person is the political party through which you came to the Parliament of Uganda. That is the order in which I appeal to you to have your allegiance.

Mr Speaker - (Interjection) – Do not be worried about the concerns of John Patrick Amama Mbabazi, the Rt. Hon. Prime Minister, he just wants to derail me. I have the following to say. Hon. Kiyonga laid a number of documents on the Table. Out of these, the only documents that I consider new are the purported minutes of the Board of Bank of Uganda. All those letters, which you are talking about having been written by the Minister of Finance to Governor Bank of Uganda - the letters of comfort to the various commercial banks - are duly attached and considered in my report and are already captured in the Hansard of this institution of Parliament. 

The Rt hon. Prime Minister has made two serious errors that I need to correct. Letters of comfort, indeed as they were issued by the Governor Bank of Uganda, are letters of guarantee. It is not the first time that letters of guarantee have been given and more particularly even to the same beneficiary. A letter of guarantee needs to be supported ordinarily by collateral security. That is the reason why in the first attempt, Mr Hassan Basajjabalaba had to surrender land titles in order to save his university. In this particular case, there is no collateral security whatsoever in the letters of comfort, which attracted US$ 46 million. (Interjection) There is nothing! I have to tell you this. This in essence actually showed a sign of carelessness on the part of the Governor Bank of Uganda. He was reckless in exposing our resources to danger. 

Secondly, the Rt. hon. Prime Minister again attempted to mislead, and indeed he was misleading, this House that afterall these are sundry payments. Sundry payments are cash which you can use for breakfast in your office. Those are sundry payments, but you cannot consider Shs 142.6 billion as sundry. You cannot consider it as something, which you can just pick at leisure and say, “Hon. John, are you there; can you have this?” (Laughter) No, you do not do that. 

Not only that, this figure which he considers as sundry – first of all there was no money appropriated which would offset the Shs 142.6 billion – has now caused a loss because there was no collateral security and secondly there was no money. (Member timed out_) 

MR WADRI: I told you the Rt. hon. Speaker is very considerate. Thank you. That therefore means we have lost that money.

Lastly, I want to thank His Excellency the President. The President was more careful than the Governor whom we have appointed to be at the gates of the stores where we keep our money. Allow me, Mr Speaker, to read this letter and lay it on the Table. This is the letter, Reference PO/10, dated 8 January 2011 addressed to the Governor Bank of Uganda. The subject matter is, “Compensation for Haba Group of Companies”: 

“Reference is made to the above subject matter and my previous directives on the same. Haba Group has petitioned me with regard to compensation for the various investments and interest in various properties acquired by Government. A copy of the petition is attached. 

I am made to understand that the amounts owing to Haba Group of Companies have now been evaluated and quantified by the relevant Government ministries. However, this compensation is to be made over the next two financial years, which Haba claims will have negative financial implications due to the exorbitant interest raised that will be charged if the company is to borrow money basing on Government’s undertaking to pay.  

I, therefore, advice you to assist the company to access this funding without suffering interest. However, this should only be done after offsetting whatever is due and owing to Government.”

Here we had US$ 11.5 million; we had another Shs 3.5 billion, which was never recovered even after the directive. Signed by His Excellency, Yoweri Kaguta Museveni, President, and copied to the Minister of Finance and also Managing Director, Haba Group of Companies. I beg to lay this document once again on table to show that actually there was incompetence exhibited   on the part of the Governor, Bank of Uganda. (Applause)

 Lastly, therefore, colleagues, I appeal to you to very overwhelmingly support the recommendations of my committee under recommendation No.4, which hon. Speaker you will allow me read verbatim:  “The committee recommends that: (1) The Governor, Bank of Uganda should be held personally responsible for the loss the government incurred; (2) Governor Bank of Uganda should be relieved of his duties; and (3) The Governor Bank of Uganda should be further investigated by the IGG and the CID for abuse of office and appropriate action be taken against him.” (Applause)

The second recommendation I implore you to support, honourable members is recommendation No.6, which reads as follows: “The committee recommends that the then Town Clerk, Mr Sseggane, who entered into an extended value of contracts without following the laid down procedures, should be held liable for abuse of office and causing financial loss.” (Applause) I rest my case, Rt Hon. Speaker, and I appeal to you, colleagues, to accept and endorse this recommendation without any changes. I beg to move. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the two issues are matters that were deferred previously on the request from the government, to allow some interactions with the persons mentioned in the report to be heard in order for a decision to be taken by the House. Today, we have had the benefit of that report from the Cabinet sub-committee, and we have had a very lengthy debate on this subject. What is left for us is to take some decisions on these last two items that remain outstanding. 

The guidance I would like to give is that the issue and procedure, and ways of removing the Governor of the Bank of Uganda are well contained in the Constitution and we should respect it. If at the back of our minds we have other things that sound like we have the authority to do it here, we would be acting in error and in total disregard of the clearly spelt out constitutional provisions. We will, therefore, take the recommendations as they have been presented. Let the appropriate authorities in whose hands these matters lie, take the appropriate decisions.  That is the guidance I thought I should give before we take the decision. (Applause)
So, nobody should leave this House thinking, we as Parliament have fired the Governor Bank of Uganda, nor should we go out there saying we have fired a former town clerk or somebody like that. We have no such powers. So, honourable members, I will put the question that recommendation No.4 of the Public Accounts Committee and the terms read by the chairman of the committee –

MR MBABAZI: Mr Speaker, I am seeking guidance on this. The recommendation as it was read by my good friend, hon. Kassiano Wadri, is: One, the Governor should be held personally responsible for the loss; two, that he should be relieved of his duties; and three, that he should be investigated for abuse of office. 

Now, you have said correctly that under the Constitution, some of the things being suggested are not within the powers of Parliament.  It is up to some other authority. So, what would it mean if, for instance, we were to pass a resolution that: “Parliament has passed a resolution to relieve the Governor of his position as Governor,” because clearly we would be acting unconstitutionally. So, can we amend it? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Rt Hon. Prime Minister, this is part of the committee report. What we are adopting are recommendations by the committee; it is not in terms of any resolutions that this Parliament is directing anybody to do. It is making recommendations if that decision should be approved. It is not a resolution; it is a recommendation in those terms. If you say, “No,” you will have said no and if you say, “Yes,” you will have said yes, as Parliament recommending.  (Applause) So, I put the question, honourable members. 

MRS SSENINDE: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise on a point of procedure and I would like to request that the fact that the issue we are going to vote on is crucial, I suggest that as a matter of procedure, we vote by show of hands. (Applause) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Honourable members, is there any objection to that? 

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Speaker, I rise on a Point of Order. As we were deliberating here, one of our colleagues was seen in the canteen by Dr Epetait drinking heavily, and the same MP has come back in the House, that is, hon. Chemaswet; he is drank; he is raising both hands; he is conducting himself in a deplorable manner. Is it in order for honourable members to come on the floor of this House under the influence of an intoxicating beverage when we are making such an important decision? Mr Speaker, is it in order and may we call upon the Sergeant-at-Arms to carry out an alcohol test? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Honourable members, the Speaker does not possess the equipment for testing alcohol levels in persons. I am unable to rule on it. I do not have the competence of testing whether he is in a certain state or not.

Honourable members, these issues are fairly simple. Do you really want to do it by show of hands or we do voice voting? The proposal is that we vote by show of hands. Should I put the question to that method of voting? We need to first take a decision on the method we are going to use for voting. The motion is that we should vote by show of hands. I will put the question to that.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Honourable members, as we take the vote I would like all of us to be seated. I am going to call the vote row by row so that there is no mix-up. Please, there should be no movement when the vote is being conducted.

I now put the question that those in favour of the motion to adopt recommendation No.4 in the terms proposed by the committee put up their hands. Recommendation No. 4 states that the Governor Bank of Uganda should be held personally responsible for the loss that the government incurred. We vote one by one?

Two, that the Governor Bank of Uganda should be relieved of his duties and the third one is that the Governor Bank of Uganda should be further investigated by the IGG and the CID for abuse of office and appropriate action be taken. That is the question I am proposing. Those in favour please put up your hands. I will start with this row. Honourables, please could you sit down? I will start with the first row.

(Members voted by a show of hands.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, those in favour of resolution number four, to be adopted by the committee, are 38,; those against are 79; those abstaining are 5. The total number of votes cast is 122. 

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Thank you very much Mr Speaker. (Interjections) I am holding the Floor myself.  (Interjections) I am on procedure myself. Let those who know speak. Mr Speaker, I know you asked for those for, those against, and abstentions; but I know people who are here who did not vote. Now, the procedure I am raising is this, when you are counting the numbers of people in Parliament for purposes of quorum, do you count those physically present?

HON. MEMBERS: Yes.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI:  Because if you are to do so, then you should take a count -(Interjections)

HON. MEMBERS: But ex-officios do not vote. (Interjections)  


(Interruption in the recording.)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, I want to thank the Members. We did not vote. I want to thank hon. Sseninde who brought up the issue that we should vote by a show of hands and indeed we did. What has happened? We have got the votes, and the votes have been counted, and we should declare the results. We have declared the results, there are always even spoilt votes, and if they are spoilt, they are spoilt. (Interjections) Please listen to me. 

We have discovered that as we voted, we did not have a quorum.  (Interjections) Mr Speaker, we do not need to raise the issue of the quorum; the law is simple, we had agreed, if we had got the quorum, there would be no problem.  (Interjections) If you want to go by that, then we should now change the procedure of voting; either we go by secret ballot and we designate time, that from 8.00 a.m. to 5.00 p.m. we are going to vote, or else, for now, as we stand, the motion has been lost and, Mr Speaker, we cannot change our own rules. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the rules are fairly clear on the subject. You call a vote of this nature and you take decisions, the kind we have taken, the motion is lost. That is the situation. We cannot come back tomorrow and do it again. Why? Because there is a decision. I recall from the Seventh Parliament when we ended up in this kind of situation and a vote was called and finally, a vote was taken and the - the motion for approval is the one that has been lost so that – (Interjections)- yes that is the motion that is lost. So, that motion is lost and the procedure for reviewing it is - that is why I was insisting that we need to prefect our rules before we transact business. The rules we are trying to use are still in very raw stages. 

There was that one which was giving us authority to be able to review decisions of this nature. So, this decision is taken and that is it. The recommendation stands rejected accordingly – (Applause)- by loss of the vote; the motion is lost on this particular recommendation. 

Honourable members, I have a short announcement to make. This announcement is from the Speaker, Rt Hon. Rebecca Kadaga, and it is to the effect that there will be the launch of the Parliament Gender Budgeting Programme starting tomorrow, 7 March 2012. It will be launched by the Speaker, starting at 8.30 in the morning at the Imperial Royale. All Members are urged to come and participate in this launch.

Honourable members -

MS AKOL: Mr Speaker, this House had stood over two recommendations, recommendation No.4 on the Governor and then 6 on Mr Sseggane, the former Town Clerk. I note that we have not taken a decision on recommendation 6. So, I am seeking guidance on this matter from you, Mr Speaker.


MR SSEKANDI: Mr Speaker and honourable members, I am personally amazed that in this business, the Town Clerk of Kampala City Council could be involved when the main conclusion was that Mr Basajjabalaba was entitled to compensation, but the compensation was in excess. Therefore, it means that Mr Basajjabalaba was entitled because of a valid contract that had been concluded. Having recognised that there was a valid contract in respect of which Mr Basajjabalaba was entitled to compensation, you cannot go to the person with whom they concluded the contract and say he should be blamed. For what?

MS AKOL: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am still seeking guidance from you. I thank the Vice President for the guidance he has given on Mr Sseggane. But he still stands here as one of the recommendations in this report and it is one of those recommendations that were stood over. It was recommendation 4 and recommendation 6. We have taken a decision on recommendation 4; how do we proceed with recommendation 6? It is one of those which were stood over? Is the House going to be silent on that one? How do we proceed?

I would like to propose - I was seeking guidance, but I would propose that you put it to question and we conclude it as well. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the status has since changed from the time we took the vote. We have had many more Members of Parliament leaving the chamber. If they lost the other decision on account of lack of quorum, how would we be able to take another decision immediately on the basis of that? We will get another date, probably tomorrow, and bring this matter back and then we take a vote on it. 

Honourable members, on the announcement for tomorrow, please, be in attendance and thank you very much for the passion and determination you have exhibited on this matter. This should be the spirit. With this spirit, we will go a long way this year in transacting business for the people of Uganda. (Applause)

House is adjourned until tomorrow at 2 O’clock. 

(The House rose at 10.20 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 7 March 2006 at 2.00 p.m.)

