Wednesday, 7 March 2012

Parliament met at 2.19 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala. 

PRAYERS 

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.) 

The House was called to order. 

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, good afternoon. Thank you for keeping time. I will use my prerogative under Rule 22 of our Rules of Procedure to amend the Order Paper to insert a new item - statement of personal explanation from hon. John Ken-Lukyamuzi - immediately after the Bills first reading and before the presentation of papers. 

He approached the Office of the Speaker yesterday, so he should have been on the Order Paper today but for some reason he has not placed on. So, I use my prerogative to allow him make that statement at the appropriate time when that matter is called after the Bills first reading. Thank you.

2.21
MRS BETTY NAMBOOZE BAKIREKE (DP, Mukono Municipality, Mukono): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance. For two years now -(Interruption)

MR SSEMUJJU NGANDA: Mr Speaker, thank you very much. You have given opportunity to hon. Nambooze to raise a matter of national importance but the front bench are conspicuously absent. I do not know whether she is raising the matter to us or to you, Sir.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I can see the honourable minister on the front bench. Honourable member, proceed.

MRS BAKIREKE: I am very happy to see the Leader of Government Business, the acting one. (Laughter) For two years now, my constituency has been hit by a wave of a new crime in the country, that is, people are being murdered using iron bars. In the Eighth Parliament, this matter was raised and a statement was given by the Minister of Internal Affairs then. However, there is a new wave of this crime now. 

On average, we are losing one person per week under the same circumstances. Only this weekend, three people including a pastor were hit and killed by these iron bar wielding men - I hope they are not women - and we have about three other people who were also hit and maimed. They are now in Mulago Hospital. 

The people of Mukono feel that there is a possibility that the security personnel are deliberately breaching the security they are required to provide and are behind the perpetuation of this crime for the following reasons: Ordinarily, attackers like these would not target the poor and school children. However, when you take a record of what has been taking place, you will find that most of the victims are either the poor women who get up early in the morning to go into farms or to do some odd jobs in the market or school children. 

Secondly, most of the victims have been found with their possessions on them including cash. One of the incidences was when one of the sheikhs who had got up to worship at the mosque was killed and on his body Shs 2 million was recovered. You would not expect a thief who had attacked somebody for money to have left that amount of money behind. 

All the victims, according to records in Mulago Hospital, are now hit at one position of the body. This points to organised crime by gangs and people who are trained in torture and can tell which particular part of the body when hit is fatal. 

Most of the people arrested by the police as suspects and paraded before the media are marijuana smokers or card players or young men and women arrested from video clubs. All of them are released thereafter by the police after extorting money from them. 

As a reaction to this crime, people in Mukono no longer move early in the morning. The Police have also made it a directive that we should not wake up and move out of our houses early in the morning. They have their patrols, which are conducted very early in the morning because this is the time these attackers operate. They arrest and beat up any person who is found moving very early in the morning, between 5.00 a.m. and 7.00 a.m. 

As a reaction to this, schools in Mukono have now opted to become boarding schools. The day scholars have been phased out from some schools, including the biggest school in the area, Bishop’s Senior Secondary School. The headmaster said that he cannot allow children to move very early in the morning because they would be attacked and yet they have to go for morning preps. The school has now phased out the day scholars just because of this.

We tried, through my office, to have a record of the deaths and those who were maimed but we were defeated. We lost count when we reached 123 people. When this matter was raised here in the Eighth Parliament, the RDCs in Mukono went out campaigning against me, the whistleblower who had raised this matter before this honourable House. I do not know why they are not as bothered as I am about this crime.

Finally, we have never had a heavy deployment of security personnel in the history of Mukono as we have right now. So, my people are saying, what is all this about; we have so many policemen patrolling our town, we have so many GISOs, DISOs, PISOs, name them but people are being killed day in, day out. There is no visible effort on the ground that security is fighting this vice. Our suspicion is, is it a deliberate act of security personnel who want to justify an operation in this constituency since this crime began soon after I had been elected in a bye-election, or have the terrorists who are targeting our country changed their method of work and are killing our people in these criminal activities they are carrying out, especially in my constituency?

Mr Speaker, I am standing here before you and before this august House on behalf of the people of Mukono. They want to be assured by the government that it is still committed to protecting the people of this country and their property. Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, is there some response you can make on this issue raised by the honourable member? 

2.28
THE MINISTER OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Mr Adolf Mwesige): Mr Speaker, I would like to thank the honourable member for Mukono for raising these concerns. I will inform my colleague, the Minister of Internal Affairs. I will give him a brief and I am sure he is going to make a very comprehensive statement on the matter. 

However, what I would like to make clear from the onset is that it cannot be the policy or even the habit of this Government that its forces can deliberately be involved in acts of violence against our people. I would like to correct that statement. Hon. Nambooze mentioned that she wonders whether it is a deliberate effort by the security forces who have been deployed in Mukono to injure and kill the people of Mukono. I would like to correct that impression. That cannot be the policy of this Government. It will never be. It is not the practice of our forces to injure the people of Uganda. However, if there are criminals who are involved in these acts, they will definitely be investigated and brought to book. 

The Minister of Internal Affairs will make an elaborate response to these concerns. They are legitimate concerns; they are serious concerns which must definitely be addressed. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister. Honourable member, is that sufficient? – (Interjections) - The minister is not here. No, we cannot make that commitment on behalf of the minister who is not here. He is going to brief the minister and then at an appropriate time, we will make that request. 

MRS BAKIREKE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Wouldn’t it be procedurally right if you please gave Government a deadline when they should bring that report here? This involves death of people in big numbers. Would it squeeze you, Mr Speaker, if you requested Government to produce this report on a specific date?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, it is usually good to raise these matters with the ministers before you come here so that the ministers are alerted and can make comprehensive statements. In the circumstances, the honourable minister has offered to contact his colleague and he cannot make a date commitment on the issue because he is not the substantive minister. I think we should be fair to the honourable member who has made the undertaking to brief his colleagues so that they can come up with a comprehensive statement. Let us take it like that for now.

2.31
MR MAJEGERE WAIRA (NRM, Bunya County East, Mayuge): I thank you, Mr Speaker. Last week I buried my voter called Kulaba. Mr Kulaba was fishing in the lake with his son and another boat, which had about five people who were alleged to be from the fisheries ministry, came and struggled with these people. The son dived into the water and had to swim to the land. As they struggled with Mr Kulaba, he drowned in the lake. In that process, instead of these people struggling to rescue Mr Kulaba, they struggled to rescue the nets as evidence of bad fishing. 

The point here is that the ministry responsible for fisheries is using excessive force. Much as we support bad fishing, the ministry responsible for fisheries should use reasonable force when they are carrying out their operations.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Did you say you support bad fishing?

MR MAJAGERE: We are not in support of bad fishing.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, proceed.

MR MAJEGERE: Thank you for the correction. We are not in support of bad fishing but the ministry in charge of fisheries should use reasonable force. We are losing people because the ministry in charge of fisheries is using excessive force in fighting bad fishing. So, I request that the ministry uses reasonable force. 

Two, the ministry of fisheries should come up with an official sympathy statement to the family and even think of compensating the family. This man left 20 children; you know us Basoga. He left 20 children and five grandchildren. 

Thirdly, the ministry of fisheries should come up with specific people putting on a specific uniform. What is happening is that even criminals are using that chance because the ministry does not have a specific uniform. So, these criminals just go into the lake and terrorise people and get money from them. The ministry of fisheries should come up with a specific uniform for those people who are doing operations. 

The other issue is that the ministry of fisheries should be coordinating its operations with the security at the district level. We realised that the DPC was not aware of the operations on the lake. This team had three fisheries officers, one GISO and one Police officer but the DPC in Mayuge was not aware. I request that the Minister of State for Fisheries comes up with a statement detailing all that.

I thank you, Mr Speaker. 

2.35
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR AGRICULTURE (Mr Zerubabel Nyiira): Mr Speaker, the issue that has been brought on the Floor is definitely marked. However, I want to bring to the attention of the members of the House that what is going on in the Department of Fisheries is enforcement of the Act which was passed by this House. For that matter, what is going on is not out of action. At the same time, the reasonable force that the honourable member is indicating is exactly what is being done. 

Apart from this law enforcement, I would want to indicate that the framework and guidelines that are supposed to be able to guide the operation that he is indicating are just about in offing. For that matter, I would want to assure the honourable member that everything is being done, and everything possible will be done, to ensure that whatever is being done is done under the law. Thank you very much. 

MR MAJEGERE: I thank you, Mr Speaker. There is one thing which I have not heard. This man died because of the ministry of fisheries using excessive force. You have heard that when this man drowned, instead of saving him these people struggled to rescue the nets so that they take them as evidence. For that negligence, I would demand that the government comes up – He has not even given a sympathy statement to the family.         

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, it is always smarter to use other means within the rules of this House. If, for example, you had asked for a formal parliamentary question, you would have got a more comprehensive answer in the House. This is a long-standing matter; it is not a matter that happened yesterday. So, you should have asked a formal question, raised it to the minister who would have come here with a statement that we can hold them to. So, the responses you are getting cannot be researched responses, and some of the statements you are making may not be to their knowledge. 

If something is running for a long time, it is better that you raise a Parliamentary question so that you can have formal responses within the Rules of Procedure. You cannot have a comprehensive answer now.

MR MAJEGERE: Mr Speaker, can we give the minister time to come up with a statement especially on the compensation of the family and other measures I have mentioned?

MR NYIIRA: Mr Speaker, the matter will be considered. However, as I indicated earlier, there is nothing that has been done out of the law. Perhaps to assure him, if what he is bringing up is anything that is out of the law, we shall be able to investigate as a ministry and come up with a response. 

2.39
MR HOOD KATURAMU (NRM, PWD Representative, Western): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity to raise a matter of national concern. I would like to make a statement on a field visit that was made by Members of Parliament on the Committee of Foreign Affairs who were detained for some time in Moyo District by South Sudanese soldiers. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, you are not making a statement; you are raising a matter of urgent importance. 

MR KATURAMU: Mr Speaker, the Committee of Foreign Affairs conducted a fact-finding field visit to assess the situation on the ground as a result of the reported border disputes and cross-border conflicts in some border districts of Northern Uganda such as Moyo, Koboko and Yumbe. The purpose of this visit was to verify the gravity of the violent clashes as reported, and to see how people in Moyo, Yumbe and Koboko have been affected, and see what action has been taken so far and what further action the Committee of Foreign Affairs could recommend. 

When the committee embarked on the field visit on the morning of Wednesday 29 February 2012, it was meant to cover these districts: Moyo, Koboko and Yumbe. Unfortunately, the events I am about to describe in this report caused the committee to stop in Moyo –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, what did you see that requires the urgent attention of this House?

MR KATURAMU: Mr Speaker, what we saw is in tandem with what the minister, Dr Mallinga, reported yesterday on the refugee situation in Uganda. The border of Uganda and Southern Sudan is so porous. There have been incursions within Uganda, and there have been abductions of Ugandans in Moyo and destruction of property within Uganda. We feel there is need for urgent intervention by government to ensure that our border with Southern Sudan is clearly demarcated – (Members rose_) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I often do not allow information when a member is raising a matter of urgent importance. He finishes and then you contribute. Fifteen minutes is the rule. Please conclude.

MR KATURAMU: Mr Speaker, I would like my colleagues in this House to know that while we were in Moyo, we were not in Southern Sudan but we were in Uganda, in a sub county of Uganda. The area where we were detained by armed men of South Sudanese Army was a refugee camp area given to our brothers from Southern Sudan when they were fighting for their independence from the Khartoum Government. 

At an appropriate time, we shall present to this House a substantive report with photographs because some of the posters clearly indicate that these are refugee camps which we visited. Those refugee camps, which still remain, are now being claimed as part of Southern Sudan.

Mr Speaker, this is a very serious matter because violation of the territorial integrity of Uganda is not a simple matter; it is a matter that should be handled expeditiously by both the Government of Uganda and that of Southern Sudan. Refugees in any country must abide by international regulations as stipulated by the United Nations High Commission for Refugees. In the place where we met this ordeal, it is not so. 

When we interviewed some of the people in Moyo, some of these Southern Sudanese people were studying in Ugandan schools and they would cross from Southern Sudan to Uganda and they were coming to collect results for A ‘Level. Uganda is now pursuing Universal Secondary Education and that means that people of Southern Sudan can come into Uganda and study being sponsored by the Government of Uganda. This is an unfortunate situation which I think the Government of Uganda should take seriously.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, I think the matter is raised.

MR KATURAMU: Let me conclude, Mr Speaker. The Government of Southern Sudan applied to join the East African Community in Bujumbura and Uganda was one of the countries that supported Southern Sudan to join the East African Community. There is no way we can have a harmonious East African Community fraternity when we do not have clear borders. It is against this background that members of the Committee of Foreign Affairs went to ascertain whether this new applicant, Southern Sudan, has its borders clearly demarcated so that we can enter the East African Community avoiding the problems that led to the breakup of the defunct East African Community in 1976. 

Mr Speaker, I beg to submit and I lay this statement on the Table. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You promised us a comprehensive report on the subject. I am sure you do not have a comprehensive statement because you have risen on a matter of urgent public importance. I will allow the honourable member for Adjumani, the member from Koboko and hon. Baka and responses from the government, if there are any, and then we will close this. That will take you three minutes to raise. 

2.48
MS JESCA ABABIKU (Independent, Woman Representative, Adjumani): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I wish to thank my colleagues for having raised this issue. This issue is also affecting the people of Adjumani, specifically the sub county of Arinyapi, which borders Southern Sudan. He listed all the insecurities that it has caused us. People have lost their property and their animals have been raided by the Sudanese. Therefore, although we believe that there is a great business opportunity in Southern Sudan, there is already insecurity caused by lack of pronouncement on our border issue. 

Government has taken steps; the President himself took the initiative to handle this issue, but it has never been concluded. Therefore, I pray that His Excellency the President and the relevant ministries take it upon themselves to conclude this matter and then –(Interruption)

MR TODWONG: Thank you, Mr Speaker. On 29 March 2009, His Excellency President Salva Kiir and His Excellency President Yoweri Museveni met at the border in Moyo District over the same issue. By that time I was the Presidential Advisor for Northern Uganda, and I remember the communiqué they issued was to the effect that the foreign affairs ministry should work out modalities of sorting out these border disputes between Uganda and Southern Sudan, and there were commissioners who came from the other side. I thought maybe we would benefit if the Ministry of Foreign Affairs can update the august House about the route they have taken on this issue. That is the information I wanted to give. Thank you. 

MS ABABIKU: Thank you for that information. I had always hinted on it. When the people of Arinyapi were affected, the President promised to compensate those people who lost their animals when the Sudanese came and raided our animals but it is still pending. So, I also pray that when the minister comes, she or he will pronounce himself or herself on this issue, specifically the promise made by the President. 

Lastly, I pray that as the ministry organises itself to put this thing to a conclusion, the security along the borders be enhanced because the free movement of people is at hold especially in the evening. My people of Arinyapi cannot move. I thank you. 

2.51
MR AHMED AWONG (NRM, Koboko County, Koboko): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank you for giving me this opportunity to say a few things about our relationship with the Southern Sudanese. As you know, the people of Koboko, Yumbe, Moyo and Adjumani, all in West Nile, share a common border with Southern Sudan. As you may also recall, we have been living together with these Southern Sudanese since 1954 when they started their internal conflicts. The fact that we have lived with these people for all this time has not yet yielded any positive relationship with these Southern Sudanese. Often times, the Southern Sudanese have done things which you cannot believe can be done by neighbours. 

Apart from living with these people, there are many things that we actually share with these people. For our case in Koboko, one-third of our population, the Kakwa tribe, are in Sudan and another third is in Congo and another in Uganda. That means that we are actually the same people. However, this does not work there. These Southern Sudanese have continued to disturb our people and to loot our property regardless of this relationship. 

Mr Speaker, you have heard from many people from Uganda about how Ugandans are mistreated in Southern Sudan, especially in Yei. In Yei, people are suffering, property is looted, and it is even worse in Juba and yet Government very seriously supports these people. When these people are here in Uganda, and more so in Arua Park here, from the way they behave you can think that they are in Sudan. Whenever a Ugandan has a problem with the Southern Sudanese, the Government will favour the Southern Sudanese and this makes them even more bigheaded. I want to appeal to Government and more so to our people in Government to ensure that these Southern Sudanese are –(Interruption)

MR OKUMU: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I was reluctant to raise this point of order but I think it is important for the record of Parliament. The honourable member read the names of districts in West Nile and has repeatedly claimed that Adjumani is in West Nile. Are we running away from the realities on the ground? To the best of my knowledge, Adjumani has never and it will never be part of West Nile. Adjumani is in East Nile. Is he therefore in order, plus many others including the honourable Member of Parliament for East Moyo, to continue lying to this country and deceiving this House that they are part of West Nile yet they are actually not, geographically? You will never divert the Nile. They are part of East Nile. Is he in order, Mr Speaker?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, there is a region I understand that is called the Rwenzori region and it has nothing to do with the mountains, as I understand. I remember the Third Deputy Prime Minister one time said that Moyo is the only district of the West Nile on the eastern side of the Nile. That is a regional description of the situation there; it is not because it falls on the east or the west of the Nile but that is the description generally. So, the order is not properly placed. Hon. Awong, please finish. (Laughter)

MR AWONG: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for that wise ruling. We are concerned about these disturbances because we think that without peace and security, there is nothing we can do as the people of West Nile. 

Recently, there were problems about Migingo Island. Migingo Island is about an acre and you saw the kind of heat that was generated between Uganda and Kenya. This area that we are talking about today is a whole constituency; actually, it is a 20-kilometre area from the border that these Southern Sudanese are claiming. If you are very serious about Migingo, what about this 20-kilometre area from the border that we are talking about? I want Government to be very serious about this and let us ensure that there is peace and security at our common borders. We want to live in harmony with the Southern Sudanese though they must respect our people. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

2.57
MR STEPHEN MUGABI BAKA (NRM, Bukooli County North, Bugiri): Thank you, Mr Speaker. When I heard, through the media, that our Members of Parliament had been arrested and harassed by Southern Sudanese authorities in Uganda, I got very uncomfortable. It is true we have had a statement from the chairman of the committee, but I have not heard anything about what our Government has done so far to express her displeasure to the Government of Southern Sudan. Harassing MPs on our own land is an issue that should have been taken up already by our Government. 

In the circumstances, I would like to seek clarification from the leader of the delegation on whether the Minister of Foreign Affairs has taken any action, for example, by raising an objection at diplomatic levels. Although this is an issue that took place in our country, they unknowingly thought they were doing it in Southern Sudan territory. However, even if they were in Southern Sudan, is it the way to treat MPs? We have been to many countries and have been treated in a manner that is befitting of MPs. For whatever reasons, this issue should have been taken up by Government and that is why I need a clarification from either the head of the delegation or Government.

Mr Speaker, as we move towards regional integration and getting new members like Southern Sudan to join the bloc, Government must be very clear and serious on issues concerning our borders. Government is enjoined by our Constitution to protect our borders. When we get into regional integration, it does not mean we forget about our borders. The member has just raised the issue of Migingo Island, which is hardly an acre - I had the opportunity to visit it – but you saw the amount of pressure it raised in the Kenyan Parliament on whether Uganda was grabbing their land or not. Actually, I still do not know whether that issue was resolved.

The issue to do with that sub county is not coming up for the first time. It has been around for some time. I recall hon. Fungaroo raising it on the Floor of Parliament sometime back. I am surprised that this issue is still going on. I beg Government to concern itself with issues to do with our borders as we move towards regional integration. If they do not, it will create more confusion as we move towards a regional bloc and could stand out as an obstacle.

Finally, let me say something about the issue of compensations. This matter was also raised by hon. Fungaroo sometime back but I have noticed that these are issues that keep coming up with Government reassuring us about getting a solution, which they never do. Parliament has been pronouncing itself on some of these issues and the ministers have been giving assurances but nothing has ever been realised. We need a very clear statement from Government on how far they have gone in compensating people in that Moyo area. I thank you.

3.01
THE MINISTER FOR SECURITY (Mr Muruli Mukasa): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The concerns raised by the honourable members are quite legitimate. However, I would like to say that Government has made a move to engage the authorities of the Republic of South Sudan to ensure the following: One, that there is peace and security along the border and two, to make sure the border, at the earliest time possible, is surveyed so that it is made clear to avert future disputes.

There have been several meetings between delegations, ministerial and otherwise, from this country to their counterparts in Southern Sudan for some talks aimed at ensuring existence of harmony to sort out some of these sticky issues. All I can say now is that it is true a process is already in place with talks being conducted. However, let us also not forget the high-level talks between President Yoweri Museveni of Uganda and H. E Salva Kiir of the Republic of South Sudan to ensure such border conflicts are solved once and for all. I thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What about the issue of the MPs who were detained?

MR MURULI MUKASA: Mr Speaker, I am not in a position to comment on the compensations.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, I am talking about the Members of this Parliament who were held by the authorities of South Sudan. It seems you are not well briefed about that subject.

MR MURULI MUKASA: Mr Speaker, I will follow that up with the concerned minister. I got wind of it through the press but I promise to follow it up with the Minister of Foreign Affairs.

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE NATIONAL COUNCIL FOR DISABILITY (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2010

3.04
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ELDERLY AND DISABILITY AFFAIRS (Mr Sulaiman Madada): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The National Council for Disability (Amendment) Bill, 2010” be read for the first time.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The Bill stands committed to the appropriate committee.

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE NATIONAL COUNCIL FOR OLDER PERSONS BILL, 2010

3.04
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ELDERLY AND DISABILITY AFFAIRS (Mr Sulaiman Madada): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The National Council for Older Persons Bill, 2010” be read for the first time.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The Bill stands committed to the appropriate committee. As the rule says, the committee should take it up because we have only 45 days within which this Bill should come back to us. We are following it closely. Chairperson of the committee, please take note.

PERSONAL STATEMENT

3.05
MR JOHN KEN-LUKYAMUZI (CP, Rubaga Division South, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. From the very beginning, I would like to thank you for according me this opportunity to make a personal statement. This is very good for me because apart from being a Member of Parliament for Rubaga South in Kampala, I am also the President General of the Conservative Party. More so, and by coincidence, I am the only sitting President of a political party occupying a seat in Uganda’s Parliament. (Applause) That being so –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are you also a shadow minister?

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: Yes. I am also the shadow Minister of Water and Environment. (Laughter) In light of that, I would like to thank you for according me the opportunity to present this personal statement.

On 18 February this year, four NEC members from my political party, the Conservative Party, broke into the party offices located at Namirembe, Bakuli, after destroying all the door locks in the company of the police. The leader of that group was at one time our party secretary-general, who was suspended from office by the NEC in accordance with our party constitution. The Uganda Police authorities know more about this.

The four-man group, led by that suspended secretary-general, connived with police and in an intended coup d’état broke into the building which houses the headquarters of the Conservative Party. We believe that important documents could have been stolen from the office by people aided by the Police or by the Police itself. We are still investigating. 

Mr Speaker, the said group of rebels, in open defiance of the CP constitution, forced their way into the CP offices with the assistance of those people, during broad daylight, and to the amazement of so many people they opened the offices forcefully. I wish to report that my leadership does not know how safe the CP offices are now and we are worried because our confidential files could have been penetrated. 

We have reported the matter to Old Kampala Police Station with the purpose of opening a criminal case against the suspects including the police personnel who were employed that day. A case is now filed with the police vide CRB/SD/29/01/2012. 

In accordance with the Penal Code, under Section 297, breaking into a house without a court order is tantamount to a criminal offence. So, those concerned should know that any time they are going to answer. 

Mr Speaker, the involvement of security operatives in the invasion of the CP offices is tantamount to a criminal offence. If we relate it to what happened in the USA during the Watergate scandal, where former President Nixon was obliged to step down as President, what I am talking about carries a great deal to be understood. The meeting held at the CP offices was unlawful, and I have successfully foiled the coup d’état as President General in command of the Conservative Party. 

We are now preparing ourselves for the delegates’ conference to elect our leaders in the course of this year given the availability of logistical requirements. The Conservative Party is not the only party whose delegates’ conference is late. The Electoral Commission should stop intimidating us. Our lateness does not empower the Electoral Commission to impose wrongdoers on the party. Under Article 42 of the Constitution, political parties can challenge any misrule administered by a public body like the Electoral Commission. So, they too stand warned. 

As I end, I wish to inform the House that my life as John Ken-Lukyamuzi the man is in danger and Parliament should protect me. I was perplexed when on the day we held the NEC meeting at Seeta, both my mobile phones were blocked for 24 hours to stop me from communicating with my members and the general public. That is why I believe the Police may have something to do with those concerns because as we speak now, Police has the power to intercept communication of any individual.
 
MR ONEK: I want to draw hon. Ken-Lukyamuzi to order. In his first statement, he accuses police for conniving with his former secretary general to break in. He then contradicts himself and says he went and reported the case to the same police. He is continuing to insinuate that Government is interested in his small party, the Conservative Party. Is he really in order to keep confusing the House in that manner? Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the rules that govern personal statements are very clear and hon. Ken-Lukyamuzi knows this. A personal statement should not attract or dwell or touch on any matter that will raise controversy. The line you are taking, honourable member, is beginning to impeach provisions of the Rules of Procedure, where you are raising controversial matters that would attract debate. A personal statement must be plain, explaining circumstances that do not lead you to raise controversial matters. 

The issue you have raised certainly is controversial. So, unless you withdraw some of those allegations and continue in accordance with the rules, I will rule you out of order and I will order for the expurgation of your statement.  

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: Much obliged, Mr Speaker. In conclusion, and in appreciation of your advice, I would like to state as follows. As an individual, in the names of John Ken-Lukyamuzi the man, I am also entitled to the protection of my constitutional rights both as a politician and as an individual. Don’t I have the right to live in this country? Why should my phones be blocked? Is that not an issue constitutionally that warrants stating some concern? Why should police be used as aiders to subject torture on me?

Under Article 24 of the Constitution, and I refer to it verbatim, the state has a duty to protect me from any torture. I was tortured, as I have reported; why should that raise anyone’s eyebrows when I talk about torture? It was torture and real torture. 

I hope the Inspector General of Police will bring the police personnel who aided those people to book. All the allegations intended to taint my name as an individual are fiction. I have already directed my lawyers to seek redress over those allegations in a court of law. 

Mr Speaker, thank you for according me the opportunity to say something. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, hon. John Ken-Lukyamuzi. Under the rules, that statement does not attract debate. 

PRESENTATION OF PAPERS

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Where is hon. Monica Amoding? Is there any member standing in her place? In the absence of the honourable member, please proceed to the next item.

REVIEW OF THE PROPOSED AMENDMENTS OF THE RULES OF PROCEDURE

3.15
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON RULES, PRIVILEGES AND DISCIPLINE (Mr Fox Odoi-Oywelowo): Mr Speaker, I beg to move a motion without notice under Rule 46(1)(g) that the House do resolve itself into a Committee of the Whole House to enable it consider the proposed amendments to the Rules of Procedure of Parliament. I beg to move. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion is that the House dissolves itself into a Committee of the Whole House to look at the amendments proposed to the Rules of Procedure. I put the question. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, there was a proposed clause 116, which was stood over. The chairperson of the committee is ready to handle that. Can we start with that straight away? 

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Mr Chairman, in respect to rule 116 on page 166, the committee proposes to delete rule 116 and insert the following:

1. 	The sub-title will be: “Functions of select committees on Bills”. “(1) The select committee set up under rule 115 shall not discuss the principles of the Bill but only its details. 

2. 	The committee may propose and accept proposed amendments in the Bill as it considers fit if the amendments including new clauses and new schedules are relevant to the subject matter of the Bill. 

3. The committee chairperson may accept proposals for the correction of obvious misprints and punctuation errors and may instruct the clerk to make necessary amendments to the Bill without any formal amendments being moved by a member of the House”. 

The justification is that reading the current rule 116, it is not clear as to which committee is being referred to. To cure this ambiguity, the committee has proposed an amendment to provide for a specific rule providing for the functions of a select committee when considering a Bill.

We also propose that immediately after rule 116, we insert the current rule 119 to read as follows and renumber the rules accordingly-  

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Can we deal with Rule 116 as proposed first before we go to the next one?
  
MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Much obliged, Mr Chairman.  

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, you remember the debate that took place over this matter? I think the issues are relatively clarified now. I will now put the question to the amendment proposed to rule 116 by the chairperson of the committee to the harmonised position presented. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Rule 116, as amended, agreed to.

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: We propose that immediately after rule 116, we insert the current rule 119. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Are you proposing amendments to the existing rule 119 or relocating it? 

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO:  Mr Chairman, we are relocating it. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  So that the sequence is proper? 

DR EPETAIT: The renumbering is okay but rule 119(1), the last phrase, reads as follows: “It shall go through the Bill as provided in Rule 118.” Let me read the whole sub-rule - 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  That will be consequential.
  
DR EPETAIT: That last phrase, “It shall go through the Bill as provided in Rule 118”, should be deleted because we cannot subject a select committee on a Bill to use the same procedure as the Committee of the Whole House uses. I beg to propose. 

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO:  Conceded, Mr Chairman. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I put the question to the amendment as proposed by hon. Dr Epetait to delete the phrase “as provided under rule 118”? 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Rule 119, as amended, agreed to.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: That means rule 119 relocates immediately to fall under rule 116.

Rule 118

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Mr Chairman, we propose that immediately after rule 117, we insert the following: The sub-title will be, 
“Functions of the committee of the Whole House on Bills”: 

“(1) The Committee of the Whole House under rule 115 shall not discuss the principles of the Bill but only its details. 

(2) 	The committee may propose and accept proposed amendments in the Bill as it considers fit in the amendments including new clauses and new schedules are relevant to the subject matter of the Bill. 

(3) The committee chairperson may accept proposals for the correction of obvious misprints and punctuation errors and may instruct the clerk to make necessary amendments to the Bill without any formal amendment being moved by a member of the House”. 

The justification is that since we have provided for the functions of a select committee when considering a Bill, it is prudent that we should provide for the functions of the Committee of the Whole House when considering a Bill.
 
THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable chairman, is that the proposal on the report or on the sheet?
 
MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: It is the one on the sheet that was distributed yesterday. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: On functions of the Committee of the Whole House on Bills? 

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO:  Yes, Mr Chairman.
 
THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, there is a proposed amendment as raised by the chair, and the purpose is to make that distinction between the select committee on Bills and the Committee of the whole House dealing with Bills so that the procedure is clearer. Are we together so that I put the question? 

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO:  Mr Chairman, we did not make any amendment to the subsequent rules. 

DR EPETAIT: Mr Chairman, I can see that the chairperson of the committee is now taking us to amendments on rule 134 but by closure of debate yesterday, the Rt hon. Prime Minister prayed for a stay on rule 132 where we had a long debate on the creation of another standing committee on value for money accountabilities/audit. Unfortunately, no timeframe was given as to when Government will come back to brief us on their position. 

We need to dispose of the rules. It has been a long standing matter and we need to be clear as to how fast we shall deal with this matter so that we can get the rules out of our way. It is good that the Prime Minister has come in. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Thank you, honourable member. On all deferred matters, I take the cue from the chairperson of the committee. He is the person processing the rules and whatever is ready, he should be able to advise the Chair. That means that he is not ready and we should not go on to investigate what is still pending. So, on the clauses that were stood over, the chairman says he is ready with some particular ones. Let us check what he is ready with. 

Rule 11

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO:  Mr Chairman, the sub-title is: “Election of Members to the East African Legislative Assembly”. We propose that we delete rule 11 and insert the following: 

“(1) The nine Members of the East African Legislative Assembly representing Uganda shall be elected by Parliament not from among Members of Parliament, representing, as much as it is feasible, the various political parties represented in the House, shades of opinion, gender and special interest groups in Uganda; 

(2) 	The election of the Members to the East African Legislative Assembly shall be held in accordance with the rules set out in Appendix D to these rules; 

(3) 	Members of the Assembly shall report to Parliament on the activities of the Assembly in accordance with Appendix C”.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, this is a re-draft of rule 11. A committee had been set up to look at this again and come back to us. I think the chairperson was heading that particular committee that was designated. Is that the position of the committee so that we proceed as proposed by the chairperson of the rules committee? That is all. The appendix is different and comes later.

DR EPETAIT: Mr Chairman, I am aware that the Protocol of the East African Community under Article 51 talks about the term that a member may serve in the Assembly. Isn’t it prudent for us to provide in our rules something that now comes in consonance with the Protocol to provide for the terms that a member may serve?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable member, I do not think that is entirely true. That is a matter of contention. It is a substantial matter before the East African Court of Justice so we cannot say it is a determined matter of the Treaty. Even the Treaty is now being interpreted by the East African Court of Justice on that subject. So, I do not think we should import uncertainties in our rules by bringing that in. Let them handle that and we will be guided by it. Whatever the court rules there will guide us in what we do here.

What we have here is a proposed amendment on rule 11, and the terms proposed are that we delete the existing rule 11 and substitute it with what has been proposed by the chair after the consultations that came from the committee that this matter was referred to.

MS NYAKIKONGORO: Thank you, Mr Chairman. On sub rule (1), much as the sub rule says that there are various political parties represented in the House, shades of opinion, gender and other special interest groups, we are aware that we are basing ourselves and deriving all this from our Constitution. We draw on our constitutional mandate as far as affirmative action is concerned. When we talk about gender and leave it as a blanket statement, we might even fail to capture the representation of women in EALA.

Mr Chairman, you will realise that we had a challenge even when we were looking at women chairing different committees of Parliament. There was a snag. We believe that if we do not bring it out at this time, what if parties or different shades of opinion do not bring out the issue of women? Given the fact that the issue of affirmative action has been deeply entrenched in our Constitution and at local government level and in terms of politics one-third is mandated, I believe that we should bring it on board so that we continue respecting what the Constitution affirms. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Mr Chairman, is this particular aspect specifically covered in the appendix?

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Yes, it is covered under the schedule in Appendix B.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: The details of what will happen are in the appendix. These are the general principles of what will guide the elections but the actual rules for the elections are in the appendix. I am sure it is covered there. If it is not, then we will come back to that.

MR BAKA MUGABI: Mr Chairman, I was just wondering whether we are now free to go to the appendix or we will come to it later.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: We will come to the appendix later. That is how they proceed with these matters. You do not start discussing schedules to an Act of Parliament within the discussion on the Bill itself.

MR KAKOOZA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I seek clarification. When you say that the former rule 11 as it was talks about the numerical strength representation and the re-drafting here does not talk about it, where is it catered for? As you know, this is a multi-party setting and it talks of numerical strength but here in the re-drafting, it does not talk about it and as you know, parties designate members within -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Mr Chairman, that is a matter for you to respond to.

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: I have listened with very keen interest to the submissions of hon. Kakooza. The mandate of the committee was to make proposals to the House to amend the rules to first conform to the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, secondly to the Treaty establishing the East African Community and thirdly, to the several judicial pronouncements on this subject. Our recommendations meet that standard.

MR KAKOOZA: Mr Chairman, rule 11 says, “Members of the East African Legislative Assembly representing Uganda shall be elected in accordance with the rules set out in Appendix B, and such representation shall reflect the proportional party membership based on the numerical strength of the parties in the House and take into consideration gender...” In the re-drafting, it is not there. 

When you look at rule 160 of our Rules of Procedure, sub rule (2), it reflects the same, and that means there is consistency. Rule 160 is on membership and composition within the committees we are going to have. Why do we have a divergence? Even the membership or composition of the committees we have in Parliament - So, I thought that we could have the same consistency with the numerical strength in the representation in EALA.

MR AYENA: Mr Chairman, I would like to take this opportunity to inform the honourable member that the proposed amendment is informed by the dictates of the ruling in the popular Oulanyah case. That case considered seriously the provisions of the Treaty; so, in drafting this amendment, the members of the committee were cognisant of the evil that the amendment was meant to cure. 

One of the evils that the amendment was supposed to cure is the emphasis on proportional representation. And once you get the main rules wrong, you are definitely going to get it wrong when you come to Appendix B. That is why the drafters of this provision were careful not to repeat the evil that it was instructed to avoid. And the best way to do it was to craft it in the way it is stated in the treaty, so that we don’t face another contradiction. I think we shall come to the matter of the details when we come to Appendix B. That is the information I thought would be useful to my brother on the opposite side. Thank you.

MS OLIVIA KABAALE: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I seek clarification from the committee chairperson regarding the rule we are referring to, because if we understand what numerical strength is, you cannot come down again and say, “Among Members of Parliament representing as much as it is feasible the various political parties represented in the House and shades of opinion...” For people who understand English well, it means you have moved from the numerical strength – various parties in this House cannot have the same numerical strength. Please explain it to me. Thank you.

MR GODFREY KIWANDA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. On the same issue, when you talk about different shades of opinion, here in Parliament, we have over 40 Independent Members and each of them has a different political shade of opinion. Does it mean that we have over 50 political shades of opinion in the House? We have seven different parties plus 40 Independents, which comes to 47. I need some clarification here.

MR RUHINDI: Mr Chairman, I have interacted with the committee chairperson over this and consulted a few colleagues within the House. But you will have to appreciate that we got this draft yesterday. I have had senior officials on my side who have sought to further internalise this document and I believe that considering the trend of the debate on the Floor, we need to just do that. I propose that we stand over this provision so that we internalise it further with a view to harmonising our positions, and come back better prepared than we are.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Will that be done today so that we can proceed by the end of the day?

MR RUHINDI: Yes, Mr Chairman, we shall actually consult as we continue with the debate and by the close of the debate, we shall get back on the Floor.

MRS WINIFRED KIIZA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. The matter of the Rules of Procedure of this House is a very critical matter to this Parliament. It is very critical to the extent that even by the time the Speaker went to court in Arusha, she was of the view that by the time she goes to court – she was pleading with the House that we should have actually gone through these rules and passed them.

Mr Chairman, the Government side kept saying they were still consulting, right from time we started discussing this document. There was even a select committee that was proposed by this House to go and look at the issue at hand. The Attorney-General was a member of this committee; the committee chairperson was a member; and I was a member too. I do not know how long the Executive will keep consulting on this matter. I would suggest that – 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable member, you heard me asking the Attorney-General whether their consultation would happen now and the matter comes back to the Floor today and he promised so. I am holding him to that and after a while we will come back to Rule 11. Is that okay? By God’s grace, I want us to finish with the rules today.

Rule 132

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Mr Chairman, the Prime Minister was supposed to report on the process of their consultation. He made this commitment yesterday.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Thank you, Mr Chairman. We did consult on our part and we did consult with the mover of the motion – I am sorry he is not here now. [HON. EKANYA: “He is around.”] I said that he is not here; not being here and not being around are two different things. I am sorry he is not here, but I can confidently report that we agreed that he abandons his amendment. I am happy to deliver that message on his behalf.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I seek your guidance. Yesterday when hon. Tumwebaze moved a motion for the creation of a new standing committee called “Value-for-Money Accountability Committee” it attracted a quasi-debate in this House. My understanding is that the entire suggestion was owned by the entire House because interjections came from both sides of the House – it ceased to be a person-to-holder thing of hon. Frank Tumwebaze. 

So, in the circumstances, the guidance I am seeking is this: Would it not be prudent for this House to dispose of that issue in a manner it feels is appropriate, other than being told that hon. Tumwebaze has abandoned the motion? And coincidentally, he is also not in the House; I hope he has not been told not to be around. This kind of operation in future – of person-to-holder mover of suggestions – would make the operations of this House practically difficult. I seek your guidance.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, I recall that this matter attracted debate and there was even an amendment proposed by hon. Amuriat to have it enlarged to include gender audits and environment audit. Those matters were moved, but because of the request that was made by the government side, this matter was deferred for further consultation. So, there were some suggestions that were made that we needed to resolve. Even when hon. Frank Tumwebaze could have lost interest in the matter, there were already amendments that had been proposed. So, I do not know how to proceed with this now. Hon. Amuriat is not here and neither is hon. Tumwebaze. 

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Chairman, I have got instructions from the Opposition Chief Whip that since hon. Amuriat is not in the House, I am competent enough to persuade this House that we carry on and make the appropriate decision. 

For Members who may need to be reminded of what happened yesterday, there was a suggestion that we have an accountability committee called Value-for-Money Audit Committee. It would be a committee that would act alongside the Public Accounts Committee to help the Public Accounts Committee perform its role in Parliament. The members of the Public Accounts Committee yesterday stated that out of 38 reports from the Auditor-General, they have managed to dispose of only one, and at that rate, by the time this Parliament ends, we may have just handled three or four reports.

I would really appeal to Members of this House that it costs nothing to have a new committee of Parliament, which would be composed by Members from both sides of the House, to carry out due diligence and to ensure that every coin that we pass in this Parliament is actually followed to the dot. I am really appealing to Members that the idea of the creation of this new committee, irrespective of what the Prime Minister stated, should be accepted by the House. Actually, those who would be reluctant to accept the creation of new committees are those who get big deals in Government. They do not want to be followed up. Those who handle Government contracts do not want to be followed up to the dot. It is like asking the monkeys whether trees should be cut. It is very unlikely that they will say, “Yes, please cut the trees.”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, in the public gallery this afternoon we have local council leaders from Ntenjeru South represented by hon. Nsanja Patrick. Please join me in welcoming them. I think they are the group that are already walking out. (Applause)

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Mr Chairman, if the hon. Odonga-Otto - not the other one - is moving the same amendment, I would have no problem, but on our side, we have considered it and we find that there is no merit in that argument because the Auditor-General, under the Constitution Article 163(3)(b) is enjoined to conduct financial and value-for-money audits in respect of any project involving public funds. This means that whenever the Auditor-General does an audit on projects involving public funds there must be financial and value-for-money audits. We found it difficult to know how the two would be separated so that you have two different committees handling the two different aspects. Because the whole essence of auditing is to make sure that the money was used properly and that indeed there was value for the money that was spent. Therefore, we really find no merit except those who want to create additional committees -(Interruption)

MR EKANYA: Thank you, Mr Chairman and I want to thank the Prime Minister. I am one of the people who believe in lean institutions and lean governance. I want to seek clarification from the Prime Minister whether he has taken time to interact with the institution of the Auditor-General since its establishment and to look at the reports. 

This is because the trend in the world now - I have been the Chairperson of the Local Governments Accounts Committee and I have travelled to different countries in the world using taxpayers’ money - and I want to find out whether your staff briefed you on it - audit is moving from finical audit to value-for-money or systems audit. And if that is the case, I do not know whether you are also aware that through your office, the donors and the Parliament of Uganda, realising that accountability committees of this Parliament had a backlog of 10 years and that this Parliament had not exhausted these reports, Government decided to come up with money under a project called FINMAP to exhaust that backlog. 

But up to now - because as you do this, backlog comes up as you create more institutions and more districts. This committee cannot exhaust these reports and if Parliament does not conclude these reports, the institution of the Auditor-General is weakened because the civil servants in the field say, “Even if the Auditor-General writes smart reports, nobody will discuss it,” and that has affected the integrity of the Auditor-General in the field to the extent that civil servants were ignoring. 

Government decided to ask the Auditor-General to start conducting system audits, which we also call value-for-money audits. It would even help us in legislation. For example, in other countries, for each telecom company to have a mast, it costs taxpayer’s money and in Uganda we have six. Then the Auditor-General is always requested to conduct audits before new companies are licensed and they are told that in order to cut costs, because of the report, they have to use single masts so that they share.  

On utilities like telecoms and cables, there are reports in other countries that require water, power and electricity to use single pipes. That is what we call value-for-money systems that are used in other countries. So it is not all about money that people steal, and that some people are going to be arrested. It is going to help us look at value-for-money in whatever we do, to see whether the systems deliver results. Whether having one X-ray is helpful or whether having each MP with a driver is helpful or you waive off - (Interjections)- I am seeking clarification from the Prime Minister - certain requirements - Government moved - (Interjections)– please, I will grant you opportunity with his permission. 

Governments in the past used to make sure that no civil servant would be allowed to drive, but Government realised that that increased the cost. You find that Government moved to give some civil servants permission to drive Government vehicles in order to cut costs. So, you are looking at value-for-money. This civil servant can have his laptop and he can also be a driver of his own car to cut costs. So, you are looking at value-for-money in whatever we do. It is not about the money that is stolen. Financial audits continued, but the people who are handling the money have become so smart. You can get clean vouchers; you can get everything clean, but if you do not do value-formoney – 

So, as I speak now, the Public Accounts Committee still has a backlog of five years. The Auditor-General, requested by Government, has conducted value-for-money audit reports and they are lying there. 

So, I want to request the Rt Hon. Prime Minister, if you find that this is hard, maybe we need to come up with another means that Parliament or the Speaker and the Leader of Government Business can create a committee to handle some work so that the institution of Parliament is not blamed for backlog. Thank you.

MR KAKOOZA: Thank you hon. Prime Minister.  You see, the genesis of the Auditor-General Act, which we passed here on the Floor of Parliament - we agreed and said we need to expand the structures of the Auditor-General’s Office so that the money which we pass in Parliament here is audited and an opinion is made. 

The reports which are brought in Parliament are the basis on which you can know that there was misuse of money. If another committee of Parliament which wants to form an opinion and which can cause prosecution for the loss of money - value-for-money audit is not only for money spent, but there are repercussions once money is spent or misused; there is an opinion made.

The oversight function of the committees of Parliament is to go and check what the opinion of the Auditor-General is. If the Auditor-General has made all the reports to Parliament, it is incumbent upon the committees like the Local Government Accounts Committee and Public Accounts Committee to come and say, “This is where we are, we recommend to relevant institutions, go and prosecute these guys” because they have already made a technical assessment of it and they have audited. The projects have been accounted for, the money which is lost is already mentioned in those reports, so there is no need to duplicate again and go and do the same work, which is already done. This was the basis of our argument.

MR SABIITI: Mr Chairman, I think let us distinguish between the functions of the Auditor-General and that of Parliament. True, as the Prime Minister has said, the audit work is done by the Auditor-General, but after he has done that work, it comes to Parliament. As you know, currently, we are in a crusade of fighting corruption and where most of this money goes is in projects which require value-for-money. You recall in the past, we used to have a committee called PAC, but because of the volume of work, Public Accounts Committee was divided into three committees. 

Nown the Government and Auditor-General have embarked on value-for-money, which requires a separate committee, which should critically look at the aspects brought by the Auditor-General. These three accounting committees cannot fully work on these reports, hence, the need for this committee, which should specifically look at what the Auditor-General will have come out with. I, therefore, request honourable members that this committee will be very important and it will be helpful to this Parliament to further look at corruption that has been going on. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Okay Chairman, Budget Committee. Please, we need to wind up with this. We debated this issue for a long time yesterday.

MR TIM LWANGA: Thank you, Chairperson. I really think - I want to agree, first of all, with hon. Sabiiti that we are confusing the role of Parliament and that of the Auditor-General. As far as I know, whenever the Auditor-General does an audit, he also does value-for-money. He carries out an audit in its entirety. He looks at whether you followed the rules of the game when spending money.

He looks at the risks of what we are doing and he looks at whether whatever we did was worth the money that we spent and he makes his report. Our problem here is that our Public Accounts Committee is spending so much time probably doing what it should not be doing. The focusing is scattered, and that is a method of work that we use.
I think what we need to do is to, first of all, streamline the workings of the Public Accounts Committee and because of the backlog, appoint probably a special committee for about six months to help, composed of people who are experienced in auditing, and help them clear the backlog and then they get on the way.

MR BIRAARO: Mr Chairman, while you are talking about forming another committee and at the same time talking of cutting costs, we are creating a serious contradiction. Formulation of a committee is an overhead to Parliament and the taxpayer. I would like to inform the Members and the movers that I have a modest proposal.

We have got big committees of 30 Members each - accountability committees and others. In many areas, when you want to be effective and efficient, you can form groups within the same committee. For example, when it is PAC sitting, it has got UBC and it has got NSSF. A group can handle that one and come to the plenary of the committee. That is one method.

Method No.2. We can enhance the ability of these committees by employing slightly more technocrats; engineers, accountants and analysts, so that the committee can be more technical in approaching these issues and at the same cost we are able to deliver more work in a shorter time through the same committee. Thank you, Mr Chairman.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Mr Chairman, you can see that there is no confusion at all. If it is a question of backlog, we can find administrative ways of handling it, but to form a committee because there was a backlog - I actually would like to look at the work of all the committees and, therefore, know how many more committees we need to form in order to finish the backlog.

It does not really add up very well. Once you have the report of the Auditor-General, that report inevitably has components of the value-for-money audit. This is the point we are making. It will still be coming from that office anyway and you are saying you have two different committees. We did not see how you could actually possibly separate them. 
But administratively, as is being suggested - you know I think I can say this. The Parliamentary Commission actually provides for the PAC on the basis of the workload they have in terms of funding and so forth. This is an administrative procedural decision we take. They are given much more money to facilitate them to work. So, we can do something similar rather than establish another standing committee because it is not necessary and of course, it will be even more costly. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, we need to roll up this thing. We have had this debate for two days.

MR AYENA: It seems we all agreed on the principle, but I am rather surprised that much as we all agreed on that principle, our conclusions are different. I would like to draw the attention of the Rt. Hon. Prime Minister to Article 163 (4), (5) and (6). If it were true that because the Auditor General has already conducted a financial and value-for-money audit and, therefore, there would be no reason to establish a committee of Parliament to do value-for-money audit in Parliament; it might as well be true that since after all, the Auditor General under (a) “audits and reports on the public accounts of Uganda,” there would be no reason for having a Public Accounts Committee. But why are we saying that the workload of Parliament in respect to committees should be such that it is possible to be efficient and on the spot? 

Sub-section(4) of Article 163 says, “The Auditor  General shall submit to Parliament annually a report of the accounts audited by him or her under clause 3 of this article for the financial year immediately preceding.” (5) says, “Parliament shall, within six months after the submission of the report referred to in clause (4) of this article, debate and consider the report and take appropriate action.” In fact, Parliament is constrained to act within six months. We are already saying we have a backlog of five years. I am yet to be advised on the magical arrangement we are now going to put in place to make sure that after we have done this special arrangement; we shall not be faced with the same problem next time. 

I think we should look at this with a more open mind in the sense that the reason why we want to create more committees is for Parliament to be more efficient and act within the time limits prescribed by the Constitution. I did not want to engage my colleagues on the other side that there is a lot of reason in proposing a new committee.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Thank you, honourable member. 

MRS KIIZA WINIFRED: Thank you, Mr Chairman. The Members who brought this suggestion of saying we have a committee created by this House to deal with the financial audit, the gender audit, the environmental audit - I am told the honourable Frank Tumwebaze has withdrawn his position if what the Prime Minister has said is what it is. A Member, the hon. Amuriat, made amendments to the motion. Now that the owner of the motion has withdrawn it, I find it hard for us to continue discussing the amendment when there is no more motion. Though at pain, I wish to withdraw the amendments of my Member. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, the only subsisting amendment to Rule 132 is the creation of the Committee on Human Rights. I put the question that, that amendment be part of our rules.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Rule 132, as amended, agreed to.)

Rule 132, as amended

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I put the question that Rule 132 as amended forms part of our Rules of Procedure. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Rule 132, as amended, agreed to.)

Rule 134

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Mr Chairman, we propose to amend Rule 134 as follows. “Representation on standing committees”: Redraft Rule 134, “Composition of standing committees -

    1. Each standing committee shall consist of not less than 15 and not more than 30 Members who have deposited with the clerk a written notice indicating the standing committee in which they wish to serve.

    2. Every Member shall belong to only one standing committee.

    3. The membership of standing committees under sub-rule(1) shall be subject to the approval of the House.

    4. Each standing committee shall elect from their number a chairperson and a DEPUTY CHAIRMAN.

    5. Without prejudice to sub-rule(4), standing committees on Public Accounts Committee, Local Government Accounts Committee, Government Assurances Committee and Commissions, Statutory Authorities and State Enterprises Committee shall be shared and deputised by the Opposition party or parties or organisation.”

The justification for this proposed amendment is that we want TO make elections for the leadership of the House committees democratic. We think it is a function of the committees to elect their own leadership. 

Secondly, it was the position of the committee that the Members should decide on their own accord which committees they want to belong to, notify the clerk in consultation with the Speakerto determine who serves on which committee with the approval of the House. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, the proposal from the committee is clear. Can I have some short responses on this issue? 

MR TINKASIIMIRE: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Very, very quickly. 

MR TINKASIIMIRE: I am finding a problem with the proposed amendment on this sub-rule (4) that each standing committee shall elect from their number a chairperson and a DEPUTY CHAIRMAN.

If this happened, if this proposal was in my caucus, I would support it. But for this to stand in our Rules of Procedure governing this House, a multiparty House, I will find a very big problem with it. 

I am here on the ticket of NRM and I represent the interests of my party to capture and sustain power. I find it very difficult that I can belong to the same party which has power and I want to give it out on a silver plate. I beg that the proposal be deleted and maybe, various party caucuses can consider it. I beg to move.

MS KABAKUMBA MASIKO: Thank you very much, Chairperson. I also rise to oppose the amendment. As hon. Tinkasiimire has said, we are operating under a multiparty dispensation. What is being suggested here was when we were under the Movement System. I was in this House; we would express our interests to the Clerk and the Clerk would designate us under the Movement System. But we have since moved from the Movement System to Multiparty dispensation. Mr Chairman, I would like to persuade the chair of the committee to withdraw the position and we revert to the old rules.

My second issue is about the composition – the number from not less than 15 and not more than 30 - I think we would be safer if we put a particular number to the committee. We have been talking about the challenge of quorum; the bigger the committee the bigger the challenge of having Members to attend these committees. So, I would rather suggest that we have 20 or 25, but not up to 30. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, let me ask the chairperson to make a short statement on this.

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Mr Chair, the committee had lengthy debates over this proposal and I must state that this proposal came from the Members who subscribe to political parties represented in this House -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Mr Chairman, what are the statements that you wanted to make?

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Mr Chair, this is the preamble to my statements. Having listened to the sentiments of the Members in this House, on behalf of the committee, I would like to withdraw this amendment. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Amendment withdrawn; Rule 135. Honourable members permit me at this moment to announce that in the public gallery we have constituents from Bukabuli sub-county in Bunya, East Mayuge District. They are represented by hon. Waira Magegere. They have come to witness our proceedings; they are not this side. (Applause)

Permit me also at this time to announce, in the VIP gallery, we have dignitaries; the programme steering committee, which is the governing body of the African Parliamentary Strengthening Programme, which is supporting Parliament in terms of capacity building for budget oversight. They have been holding their meetings in Sheraton Hotel Kampala. This programme which is managed by the Parliamentary Center Canada, and is funded by CIDA, supports Parliament of Uganda, Tanzania, Zambia, Benin, Senegal, Kenya and Ghana.

In our midst this afternoon, in the distinguished gallery, we have the following dignitaries who have been attending the said meetings: Hon. Alfred Agbesi, Parliament of Ghana; Hon. Gilbert Gabana, National Assembly of Benin; Hon. Gregory Laourou, National Assembly of Benin; Hon. Seydou Diouf, National Assembly of Senegal; Hon. Elias Mbau, National Assembly of Kenya; Hon. Marthar Umbulla, Parliament of Tanzania; and Hon. Highvie Hamududu, National Assembly of Zambia. 

The honorable members are accompanied by the respective Parliamentary staff who are in the gallery: Mr Erick Ordeman, Canadian International Development Agency, and Dr Rasheed Draman, Director of Africa Programs Parliamentary Center. Please join me in welcoming them to witness our procedures this afternoon. You are welcome. (Applause)

Rule 135

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Mr Chairman, Rule 135 –(Interjections) - amendment to Rule 135 –

MS AMONGI: I am inserting a new rule, Mr Chairperson. I appeared before the committee and discussed an amendment to cure a lacuna which was in the Rules, and agreed with the chairperson, and a number of other Members that I move this amendment to insert a new rule immediately after Rule 134 to read as follows:

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Mr Chairman, would you like to confirm that statement?

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Mr Chairman, the correct position is that the honourable member strongly feels that there should be an amendment which the committee feels she should present herself and defend.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: But what was the position of the committee on this?

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: She appeared before the committee and the committee declined to recommend to the House the said amendment; subject to her right to raise them on the Floor of the House.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, the honourable member has the right, protected by the Constitution and our Rules, to raise any matter before this House. Hon. Betty Amongi, present your issue.

MS AMONGI: Thank you, Chairperson. I want to introduce a new rule which will read as follows: “Save for the Leader of the Opposition, Opposition Chief Whip and the Shadow Cabinet, which shall be reserved for the party with the greatest numerical strengths, all other leadership positions, reserved for the Opposition shall be shared by all Opposition parties taking into consideration their numerical strength. 

I bring this because the current rule which we are operating under leaves the discretion to the Opposition with the highest strength to determine what the share of the other Opposition Members should be. And it does not take into consideration their numerical strength. 

Yet everywhere, this rule talks of proportionality and numerical strength. It is only fair that we give each party in this House a right to make decisions on what position they want to take on this side. I say this because at the moment, we have FDC with the highest numerical strength. But in sharing positions reserved here, it is at their discretion. If they do not give you, even if you have the numbers, you are still at the mercy of that Opposition party. But I also have a right with my numbers; just like NRM has a right with their numbers and FDC has a right with their numbers. In that same way, DP should have a right with their number and UPC have a right with their number.

And sometimes, we are forced to support certain positions because if you do not support it, you fear that you will not be given a position as chairperson somewhere or you will not be put on the shadow cabinet or made a deputy. So, I want my own right; whether I have only one position, my number of ten is equivalent to that position I want, so that if I want to take a decision, I take it on my right. That is the reason why I brought this amendment. Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, the issue is passionately introduced. I will not allow any honourable member who has been speaking when the Speaker was speaking, to contribute on this matter. I will ask two contributions from this side and two from this side. 

MR BAKKA MUGABI: Thank you, Mr Chairman. The National Resistance Movement came to this Parliament with an overwhelming majority – 264 members. If we did not have equity in our rules, all these positions of Parliament of chairperson and DEPUTY CHAIRMAN would have been taken by the NRM, but because of that, we have specifically put in our rules that some positions, especially those on accountability committees, must be chaired and deputised by the Opposition. The Opposition, which has the FDC, UPC, DP, JEEMA and CP must also agree to share the little that we have agreed to cede to them. I think it would be unfair for only one party, which has 34 members as opposed to 25 members of all the other Opposition parties combined. I, therefore, stand, Mr Chairman, to support the insertion of the new rule as proposed by hon. Betty Amongi such that the positions that fall to the Opposition side are shared proportionally between the parties in the Opposition. I beg to move, Mr Chairman. 

MR MUSASIZI: Thank you, Mr Chairman. It is not always correct that we ignore the minorities’ interests and wishes and in this Parliament, I believe we all acknowledge and appreciate the principle of sharing. On this matter, I wish to support a proposal brought by our colleague, hon. Betty Amongi, that positions within the side of the Opposition also be equitably shared because honourable members, we are all here to represent the interests of Ugandans and the good of this institution. It wouldn’t sound fair if you found that certain Members are being suffocated because they don’t have numbers. Honourable members, I would invite –(Interruption)

MR SSEBAGALA: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman and colleague. The information I wanted to give to my colleague is that since he believes in the principle of sharing, why can’t we also extend the same gesture to the ruling party to give us some posts so that we share some sessional committees as the Opposition in order to get more? Yes, the principle of sharing is good. So, let us get more sessional committees from that side so that we share. 

MR MUSASIZI: Thank you, for giving me the information, but I would like to inform hon. Ssebagala through you, Mr Chairman, that even giving you 25 percent, considering your numerical strength, is good enough from our side. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable member, you have limited time on this. Please wind up. 

MR MUSASIZI: In conclusion, I invite my colleagues to overwhelmingly support hon. Betty Amongi’s proposal such that even when she sounds to be suffocated because of the numbers, we want to provide for her such that she can also find some good life within this Parliament. 

MR EKANYA: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I want to say that in principle, for us in the Opposition, we practice clean politics and governance. The concern of hon. Betty Amongi has been taken care of by the Opposition. We realised that there is a constitutional lacuna because Article 82(a) talks about a Leader of the Opposition and his roles and functions. Then if you move to the Administration of Parliament Act, it defines “Leader of the Opposition” as the Member of Parliament who is the Leader in Parliament, of a party in opposition to Government and having the greatest numerical strength. So, having this lacuna, you cannot now introduce a new provision to take care of the gap because the Constitution defines what the Leader of the Opposition is and the Leader of the Opposition comes from a party with the second numerical strength and in this House there are two sides. It does not mention that the Opposition means 10 parties from the Opposition. 

So, being aware of these gaps, what the Opposition did, Mr Chairman, we sat with all the other parties and said we believe in equity. As we speak, hon. Namayanja from DP is the Vice Chairperson of the Local Government Accounts Committee. Hon. Maxwell Akora from UPC, where hon. Betty Amongi is, and he was recommended by hon. Betty Amongi, is the Vice Chairperson of PAC. We have so many members –(Interruption)

MR SABIITI: Mr Chairman, as my colleague has stated, this is a constitutional matter. We have two sides - the government side and the Opposition. Within the government side there are various shades. There is gender and regions, and in the loops, we should also include how the government side should allocate the places in the same way as the Opposition and, therefore, if you want we, in the Opposition, to put rules governing how we manage our shares here, we should also put rules on how the government side, given the shades within your government side, should also allocate your positions and, therefore, I would like to advise, Mr Chairman, that this can be –

THE CHAIRMAN: Honourable member, are you giving information?

MR SABIITI: Yes, I am indeed still giving information that we have two sides, the Opposition and Government. If you want to dictate how the Opposition should manage their affairs, we should equally go to the other side and provide how they  can allocate positions on their side.

MR EKANYA: Mr Chairman and honourable colleagues, we have more than 20 sessional committees. In the wisdom of governance under the multiparty system worldwide, that is reserved for a Government in power. We have not even complained that the sessional committees should be shared by the Independents who have no side, because there is no provision for that. But we also know that that is the practice of the Commonwealth parliaments and the Inter-Parliamentary Union. There are some of the standing committees like that on HIV/AIDS, Equal Opportunities and so forth, which are still being shared by the Government side only and there are no complaints about all that. We only have four accountability oversight committees that are managed by the Opposition. But supposing you have 10 political parties, are you going to create 10 other committees to be shared? 
Therefore, I really want to request that if we want to introduce and accept the proposal by my sister, hon. Betty Amongi, let us amend the Constitution and the Administration of Parliament Act before we bring in the Rules of Procedure. I am saying this because these rules cannot amend the Constitution and the Administration of Parliament Act. I beg to submit.

MR AYENA: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I rise to support the proposed amendment for the following reasons: One is that the proportion is aligned to the provision of the Constitution, which talks about marginalised and affirmative action –(Interjections)– yes, you can add that.

But the reason we make this proportion is because there is fear that there are endangered species –(Laughter)– and so, we fear to suffer double jeopardy as an awkward minority – we are already an endangered species.

So, for those who are in the minority within the Opposition there are those who are further endangered –(Laughter)– and, therefore, we must find a way –(Interjections)– I have a very short time. As I was saying, we should put in place some of these rules to protect ourselves against bad table manners. (Laughter) You know, in a polygamous home, you can only share commonly when there are good table manners. Where you have bad table manners and there are three or more wives in a home, a wise husband will always come with meat in different proportions for distribution to the three houses for the children from each of those mothers to share what is due to them.

Mr Chairman, I think this type of rule could not come at any better time than now when we have already seen how the practice of bad table manners has been exhibited by the Opposition. Thank you very much. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, I had allowed for two interventions from both sides and I am now done. It would be proper for us to close this matter now. Guidance from hon. Epetait.

DR EPETAIT: Mr Chairman, a wrong impression is being created here that there are bad table manners on the Opposition side. I would like to make the record straight. First of all, we recognised that it would be unfair for one Member to hold a position for the entire term of Parliament. For that reason, which did not only come as an issue on the Opposition, but also on the Government side, we decided to have mid-term reviews of our leadership in the various positions. And as if that was not enough, at the creation of these leadership positions, the official Opposition political party communicated to all the Opposition parties with representation in Parliament. For example, CP and JEEMA have only one Member each in the House –(Interruptions)

AMONGI: Mr Chairman, the Member is making allegations that they consulted. But as a Whip of UPC, I know that when Parliament started, FDC Members went to Najjanankumbi to distribute positions reserved for the entire Opposition. I was not consulted to propose any names. It was only after sometime that hon. Geoffrey Ekanya came to me asking for five names. When I did that, someone else came in and said that they had decided to give us only two slots for a shadow minister and one for vice chairperson. That other Member said that if hon. Geoffrey had proposed for five names, they didn’t know that.

In lieu of that my party president was asked to propose two names. When he did that he was made to understand that –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: What is your point of order, honourable member?

MS AMONGIN: My point of order is, is it in order for him to make such allegations that they consulted and that they continue to consult other parties when indeed these consultations have never been brought to my attention as a UPC Whip?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Those are factual matters not within the knowledge of the Chair. So, I am unable to rule on them.

DR EPETAIT: Thank you, Chair for that wise ruling. But I also would like to thank the Member for further giving evidence of the consultations.

Hon. Maxwell Akora, it wasn’t FDC that came up with the name; we got that name from UPC. Our Shadow Minister for ICT, hon. Benson Obua – it was the UPC that submitted that name.

But as I said earlier, JEEMA has only one Member in the House. CP also has one Member. If you are to talk about being an endangered minority in the Opposition, I think it would have been CP and JEEMA to cry louder than UPC because they are more endangered numerically than the UPC.

So, in principle, for us on the Opposition side, we agreed to the principle of sharing responsibilities, and indeed, even after the mid-term review of our leadership positions, some people may   become chairpersons of committees while some chairpersons may end up being ordinary backbenchers without any responsibilities depending on their performance. Yes, I am a Shadow Minister of Agriculture now, but after the mid-term review, depending on my performance, I could be deployed anywhere. But I could also get nothing, but still remain in the House. What is wrong – what I don’t comprehend is this argument of saying “bad table manners” when we are actually sharing very well. 

MS KIIZA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I wish to appreciate the sentiments of my Member, hon. Betty Amongi. I wish to pray that we stand over this matter and we go and consult. I wish to request. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable Member, there is a request from the Opposition Chief Whip to the effect that this matter needs consultation from that side of the House. 

MR TINKASIIMIRE: Thank you for giving me this opportunity, Mr Chairman. The guidance I want to seek is, whereas I appreciate the predicament in which my sister, hon. Betty Amongi, is in, when you look at our Rules of Procedure, they mainly recognise two sides of the House: the Government side and the Opposition side. Anybody who feels uncomfortable in either side of the House is free to cross. And for us in the NRM Party, we welcome everybody who crosses from the other side to our side because it increases our numerical strength. I want to assure UPC Members that if today all of you cross, we will give you seats on our side. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable Member, you rose on a point of guidance and you seem to be giving that guidance; but in the process of giving that guidance, you are actually going against the provision of the Constitution. Crossing the Floor is not permitted by the Constitution. So, it might not be a good thing to give as guidance in these circumstances. 

MR AKENA: Thank you Chair. The guidance I am seeking is that clearly, everybody is stating that there are two sides to this House; the Government side and those who are not part of Government form the Opposition. That being the case, anybody who is not part of Government is the Opposition, be you Independent –(Interjection)- that is the guidance I am seeking. If you are not part of Government, you are in the Opposition. If that being the case, the party which is of the greatest numerical strength in the Opposition is actually in effect a minority. Overall, if we combine all of us who sit on this side, my colleagues in FDC do not form the majority. We are all Opposition, but you do not form the majority.

Earlier last week, the Leader of the Opposition was raising a situation whereby there can be a case or a point in time when the party in Government can be a minority in this House. 

On the basis of that, the guidance I am seeking is that, if we accept the principle of two sides to this House, and the Opposition forms the rest, how do we handle the question of the largest party numerically in the Opposition being also a minority in the whole Opposition, which is not part of Government. 

MR YAGUMA: Mr Chairman, in a situation before this House, where we have some parties endangered because of the numbers, the guidance I am seeking is whether the majority cannot take care of their interests. It appears from the debate that the Opposition has failed to take care of the interests of the minority. Can I be guided whether the majority in this House cannot take care of their interests? (Laughter) 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, the precedent we have set here is that where matters require further consultation, we give an opportunity for that to happen. A request has been substantially made to the Chair and to the House.  Can we stand over this?

MR AYENA-ODONG: I crave your indulgence and guidance, Mr Chairman. The Government side is a homogeneous lot and, therefore, when they seek consultation, they are consulting within and amongst people of the same mindset. But in the Opposition, there are different shades of opinion and, therefore, when a party comes with a proposition and is stuck to that, what benefit will it be for you to allow for consultation between people who have a completely different opinion about the matter. Because as far as –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable member, the consultation will produce two results, it will say, we have agreed or we have disagreed and then we proceed from there. Let’s not spend a lot of time on something that we are not going to be able to make a decision on.

MS BETTY AMONGI: Mr Chairman, I want to state that when I brought this particular amendment, - I have already heard some Members on this side taking me to have done wrong. To talk about this side being the Opposition, the fact that I said, save for the Leader of the Opposition, the Opposition Chief Whip and Shadow Cabinet being reserved for the party with the numerical strength, it was because I had read the Constitution; I had read the Parliamentary Act and recognised that there is a leading Opposition on this side. 

When I submitted on this matter, I said that I had read 62 different Commonwealth practices, and this amendment would not upset any Commonwealth practice because in all Commonwealth parliaments, the leading Opposition produces the Leader of the Opposition and produces a Shadow cabinet, but the rest of the Opposition is on the basis of proportionality, which is already in this rule. This rule already talks about proportionality. Why would someone not want proportionality and numerical strength? 

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Chairman, you have guided that the Opposition Chief Whip made a request that we stand over the matter other than washing dirty linen in public the way it is happening.  Isn’t it procedurally right that at this point we first abandon this, basing on your guidance, and we come back to these issues next time because she is getting onto the merits of the debate, which I would like to respond to right away? So, isn’t it procedurally right as you guided earlier that we first stand over this thing and she can present that argument eloquently another day and get overwhelming support of whichever side exists in this House. But for today, I would advise her not to. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Honourable members, this matter is stood over. 

Rule 135

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: The head note is membership of standing committees. We propose to redraft rule 135 as follows: “Subject to this rule, each standing committee apart from the Business Committee, Budget Committee and Appointments Committee shall comprise of not less than 15 and not more than 30 members selected in accordance with the rules.” 

MR SABIITI: With your guidance, Mr Chairman, on rule 134(5) we seem not to have looked at 5 the way it had been framed since 4 was deleted. I would like to make the following amendment.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No, we have already pronounced ourselves on that. 

MR SABIITI: But if you take away 4, what happens to 5? Is it automatic? We didn’t.  

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  What happened to rule 134 is that we reverted to the old rules; we abandoned this amendment. 

MR SABIITI: Yeah, I wanted to make a small amendment in that rule because you remember we created the Committee on Human Rights and I felt it should have been part of this rule. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Those will be subsequential issues that are handled by drafting to harmonise the creation of that and then it will affect the sections appropriately, unless you are creating a completely new thing. 

MR SABIITI: The issue is that since we have created a new committee, and under rule 5, clearly, five committees which are accountability committees are specified and I feel the Human Rights Committee should be part of the accountability committees as per the Commonwealth practices. So, I was proposing that we add the Committee on Human Rights.

MR TASHOBYA: Thank you so much, Mr Chairman. I would like to inform hon. Sabiiti that actually, the position he has given that human rights committees in all Commonwealth countries are chaired by the Opposition is not correct. I have personally visited a number of Commonwealth parliaments, including that one of India and the Human Rights Committee is definitely not chaired by the Opposition. So, to really base our decision on the information given by hon. Sabiiti is definitely not correct. 

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Mr Chair, the new committee on Human Rights that we proposed takes out part of the mandate of the Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Committee, which by any stretch of imagination cannot be called an accountability committee. So, I don’t see the relevance of the proposed amendment. 

MR MUGABI: Mr Chairman, one of the issues we have been handling in that committee is dealing with the budget and policy issues of the Human Rights Commission, and making recommendations to this House, which cannot be handled like an accountability committee. So, it will be treated more like a sectoral committee because it will receive budgets from the Human Rights Commission, consider them and their policy issues, so as to report to the House. I am going to move an amendment along that line because when I looked at the functions, they were not catered for.    

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: But you should remember that it is now a standing committee.  

MR MUGABI: It should be considered as a sectoral committee. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Honourable members, I will put a question to the proposal by hon. Sabiiti, who proposes that an amendment be made to rule 134(7) because he is looking at the amendment that was abandoned by the committee. So, what he is proposing is actually in the existing rules; sub-rule (7). Are we together? I am now going to put the question to the amendment proposed by hon. Jack Sabiiti to the effect that rule 134 be amended in sub-rule (7) to include the Committee on Human Rights. 

(Question put and negatived.)

Rule 135

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: We propose to redraft rule 135 as follows: “Subject to these rules, each standing committee apart from the Business Committee, Budget Committee and Appointments Committee shall comprise of not less than 15 and not more than 30 members selected in accordance with these rules.” This is to cater for the growing number of Members of Parliament. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Didn’t we take a decision on something similar to this? 

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: This is a standing committee. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Okay, honourable members, I put the question. 

MR EKANYA: I would like to seek clarification from the chairperson because there is a provision in rule 134(3), which we have passed: “Unless otherwise provided for in the rules, and as far as reasonably practical, the overall membership of committees shall reflect proportional membership in the House taking into consideration the numerical strength of parties and the interests of Independents.”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: This is representation. 

MR EKANYA: Yes, Mr Chairperson. I agree, but I want to seek his clarification because the party whips and numbers in Parliament keep on varying. I think it is better we leave it so that you don’t tie it. Parliament can have as many Members as 400 or 200 or 500. Let us just look at the number and then balance, which your office, Mr Chairperson, has been doing with the parties, instead of tying ourselves to 15 or 20. 

MR RUHINDI: Mr Chairman, if I may use hon. Ekanya’s reasoning, then the proposed amendment is better because you are saying it should be flexible. The current one is more rigid because it specifically mentions, “Shall comprise 20...” But what they are proposing is better and more flexible; not less than and not more than.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: The rationale is, if you have a committee of more than 30 people, it is not a committee anymore; it is not practical. Even 30 is already too big.

MS KIIZA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I think they are working under the spirit in which we are operating currently, because you will realise that the current rule talks about a minimum of 20, but when Parliament increased and there was need for every Member of Parliament to be a member of a committee, then we found it very hard as Whips, and actually the entire administration of Parliament through the Speaker’s Office. To maintain the Members at 20 would imply that some other Members would not be on committees, which was going to disenfranchise Members of their rights to do their work in committees.

Personally, I would support the amendment that we keep it between 15 and the number so that when we are coming up with the new committees, maybe we can now get the other Members from 30 to 15. I think the amendment is okay.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, I put the question to the amendment as proposed by the chair of the committee to re-draft rule 135 to the terms proposed and impose the numbering raised there. I put the question that rule 135 as amended do stand part of our rules.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Rule 135, as amended, agreed to.)

Rule 136

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: The proposed amendment is withdrawn.

Rule 137

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO : Mr Chairman, we propose to re-draft rule 137 as follows, “The Appointments Committee shall comprise not less than 15 and not more than 20 Members designated by party Whips on the basis of proportional party membership in the House taking into consideration the numerical strength of the parties and the interest of Independent Members”. The justification is to provide for a lower limit and an upper limit. The rules, as they stand now, make it mandatory to have 20 members.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I think it is the same spirit with the one we have just passed. I put the question to the proposed amendment on rule 137.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Rule 137, as amended, agreed to.)

Rule 139

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Mr Chairman, we propose to delete sub-rule 2. The justification is for transparency. It is proper to have committee meetings open to the public like the other committees. This will avoid speculation.

MR EKANYA: Thank you very much. Mr Chairman, when the debate on this matter started, I stated categorically that we did some legal research and we established that this committee was infringing on the Constitution of Uganda because the Constitution states that Parliament shall create committees for its functions. It does not say that when Parliament creates committees for its functions, other committees will be closed and others open.

So, it is very clear that all committees of Parliament are equal and they are committees of this House. One time, I wanted to attend the Appointments Committee and I was told that I could not attend. As a Member of Parliament, one of my cardinal roles is representation. I have a role to attend all other committees, but when it comes to the Appointments Committee, colleagues, you cannot even attend; you are denied. If even a Member of Parliament can be denied access then the right to representation is being infringed upon and –(Interruption)

MR MUJUNI: Thank you very much, my colleague, for giving way. Honourable members, it is on record that in parliamentary democracy even access to information is key. In the event that Members of Parliament and the members of the Appointments Committee have a delegated responsibility from the main House, I do not see what the Appointments Committee is always hiding that the whole House and that the public should not know about. Even when there is rejection of a nominee, the public should not know the reason behind that to raise reasons for suspicion because the Parliament has reasons that could not be made public.

I think it is only prudent that we open up the Appointments Committee to the public. If you know your academic qualifications are - I hear some people are saying if you know that your academic qualifications are not there, then you would rather not even present yourself before the Appointments Committee because this committee is doing its work on behalf of the main House. I thank you.

MR EKANYA: The people who go through this Appointments Committee seek to serve the public and if you are seeking to render service to the public, you should accept scrutiny of the public from day one. Therefore, I just want to seek the indulgence of this House that we need to sort this out so that we do not have some people taking Parliament to court that we have violated the Constitution by creating other committees to be more special than others. I beg to submit.

MR OKOT OGONG: Mr Chairman, I want to invite my honourable member on the Floor, hon. Geoffrey Ekanya, to read our Constitution, Article 90; “Committees of Parliament -
1.	Parliament shall appoint committees necessary for efficient discharge of its functions.

2.	Parliament shall, by its Rules of Procedure, prescribe the power, composition and functions of committees.”

So, we are not violating any rules of the Constitution.

I want to inform our Members also that we have public interviews at Public Service. I do not know whether Public Service interviews are done in the open, but they are always done by members of the board of the committee. Any appointment in the country is not open to every Tom, Dick and Harry.

I am informing you that this is a Parliament. The sanctity of Parliament – we are making laws for the efficient discharge of our powers; so, for us to allow committees to be run by the public and its sentiments, I think, will actually not be performing or discharging our functions properly.

I would like to appeal to my Member that as Parliament, we are a very important institution -(Interruption)

MR ODONGA OTTO: Thank you so much for giving way. We had a lot of debate in the Eighth Parliament before we allowed live coverage of parliamentary sittings. We were so worried that if we opened up to the media, this Parliament would turn into a theatre, but somehow we are still going on even when all these proceedings are live. 

So, the information I am asking from you is, you are MP for Dokolo. How does it feel when as a whole Member of Parliament, you cannot even be allowed to enter the Appointments Committee and listen to what is taking place? Forget about the media. MPs are blocked from going into that committee. How do you want to respond to that principle?

MR OKOT OGONG: I would also like to inform my brother, hon. Otto, that we have many committees of Parliament and we cannot all be in those committees. We delegate the functions of our powers to those committees and they can decide on our behalf. Even when we decided in this Parliament that the session is open, I was the Minister for Parliamentary Affairs then and we actually put it here how the proceedings of Parliament will be covered. It is clear here in our Rules of Procedure. And when you are covering the proceedings, you have to observe the dignity of the House. And the restrictions are even clear; how you film a Member of Parliament. This is for the efficient running of our Parliament. So, I want to inform you that I am aware that even the Appointments Committee – we should allow members that we have selected to perform on our behalf.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, I will now limit this to the two frontbenches. 

MR MPUUGA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I have the privilege of being a member of this particular committee. My sense is that the proposed amendment is informed by what eventually happens in there and what the public perceives to have happened there. For the sake of transparency, the public ought to know what goes in there. If PAC and the rest of the parliamentary committees are open, why should the Appointments Committee not be? In fact, this committee faces a lot of blame because the public wants to know. When Members go in there and face challenges, they actually go to their constituents and tell them the reason they were not given the nod is because there are people who hate them because of either their height, size or all kinds of subjective arguments. In fact, for the sake of preserving the sanctity of this House and for promoting accountability, this committee ought to be open. I have not seen Kenya on fire – because they do it openly. These are public officers we are vetting. People should be helped to know who these people are who are going to serve them. That way, we shall be able to promote transparency. I would like to –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, I had given hon. Mpuuga the opportunity to give some closing statements on this issue.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Chairman, the information I am giving is that our Speaker has been attacked. Without mentioning names, when one Member was appearing before the Appointments Committee, the Speaker even disqualified herself from handling the matter. But what came out in the media – that it is because of A, B, C, D that is why this person did not pass through the Appointments Committee. As of now, I even do not know what happened to my colleague because the information in the committee is confidential. He was trying to explain to me the other day –(Interjections)- I do not want to mention names. So, we must make it fair for people who have failed to become ministers so that the public knows why they failed. This is because they may spend the rest of their life explaining to people. That is the information I wanted to give.

MR MPUUGA: We were all there when the Prime Minister was openly being vetted and we received all kinds of comments thereof, including the Speaker. The sky did not fall down because these were openly vetted. There is nothing unique about those individuals that are being vetted by that committee. I happened to participate in vetting the current IGP and I would rather that Members are not subjected to the kind of blackmail that I saw during that vetting. Let us do it openly and life will continue.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, from the perspective of the people who sometimes have the fortunate or unfortunate task of chairing the Appointments Committee, it becomes extremely difficult when the proceedings are conducted in the way they have always been conducted. (Applause) It becomes a matter between the person chairing the meeting and the history and relationships and things that predate that meeting that will be raised. In order that the persons who chair this committee are protected, it could be beneficial if these matters are not left to them -(Interjections)- honourable members, that is purely from the presiding officers’ challenges view. (Laughter) Honourable members, as it is said, I am not permitted to debate, but I am just raising concerns based on what I have shared with my senior colleagues. The challenges we face in keeping this information and processing it within three days, sending it to the President, without even bringing it to Parliament – you know this information is confidential – we have difficulties with it.

MR RUHINDI: Mr Chairman, it takes excessive guts for one to stand up to speak after your good guidance. (Laughter) But I have two things to say: First, I am happy that hon. Okot Ogong made a very good reference because I have been hearing – there is another leg to this debate that the matter now comes to the House. I am happy that he started from Article 90 of the Constitution which gives Members of Parliament to prescribe powers, duties and functions of the committees. Now, Mr Chairman, the challenge you face is because you measure up to that job – that is why we gave it to you. And let me tell you that the Speaker and her deputy are the fountain of honour of this House. When you are up there, we know that the House is there and we have a lot of confidence in you.

I want to give you an example – it is good you have mentioned about Members of Parliament who may go to this committee to be vetted. That is a different committee compared to a person who is from Kanungu and may not have been to Kampala before –(Laughter)– The person comes to the committee for the first time for vetting – he or she has not been a public figure. He or she may or may not get that job, but you have already exposed them to the public. At the end of the day, if he or she fails to get the job, he or she would have lost out completely. He or she did not nominate himself or herself. Anyway -[HON. DOMBO: “Information.”]- Did I say I wanted it? 

MR DOMBO: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I have had an opportunity to serve in this Parliament a little bit longer and when the first rules for the Appointments Committee were made, I was there. At that time, we made a regulation, which was a little bit selfish, and we knew our own inherent weaknesses, and at that time, we feared that if I am going to be appointed and this becomes a challenge, it cannot be known to the public. 

The information I want to give is that during the induction training of this Parliament, the Deputy Speaker did raise a question about this specific issue, and to us we have had the privilege of being addressed by somebody who has had the opportunity to sit in that chair. By the way, there is nothing which has happened in the Appointments Committee, which has not been public. It has eventually ended up in the public. The only problem is that they have said a little bit more than what has happened there because it is closed. So, the only way we can put the fountain of honour of this institution in the position that he deserves, is by allowing the public to see him or her the way he or she is -(Applause)- so that this issue is debated. And by the way, Parliament reserves the powers to amend those regulations. If tomorrow we find that actually this proposition is not enhancing what we forethought, then we shall amend it at that time. But let us allow the other alternative also to be tried so that we see what exactly happens. This will be a very good arrangement. 

MR RUHINDI: Mr Chairman, I wish to rest my case and continue to listen to the contributions with a view to being convinced beyond where I am. Thank you.  

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, I want to thank the Members who have seen it necessary that we should make this committee public. I remember the Vice President was talked about in the open and hon. Amama Mbabazi was talked about in the open and you won. We have had a problem that if you are a member of the Appointments Committee, while you are in there somebody says, “I cannot come in, but have this document.” You see SMSs coming in and the information is so vital, but whenever you suggest reading an SMS somebody might think it is because you are the Leader of the Opposition and you are against somebody.

What we are talking about is the right example. Someone might lose and yet the Opposition might have supported him or her, but when he comes out you find people saying the Opposition was against him or her. Mr Chairman, while there, I saw CVs I have never seen on earth. (Laughter) A man comes with a CV that he is a qualified Accountant and an Astronaut and that he has finished a degree and he has a PhD; only to cross- check and find that he does not even have a diploma. Now, if this thing was in the public, the public could have said, “Does Nandala have the Masters he is talking about?” No. It would have stopped. Mr Chairman, I tell you this will solve a Parliament problem. When you discover that you are not able to hold the fire and that your record is very bad you will not appear. You will say, “I am not coming.” And the integrity of the people in the public will increase because he knows that “the day I will be appointed, I will be exposed to the public.” So, -(Interruption)

MR TINKASIIMIRE: Thank you very much, honourable colleague, for giving way. Mr Chairman, we must appreciate that this is the 21st Century. This is the Ninth Parliament and subsequent parliaments will not be the Ninth Parliament. We have within our Constitution a provision, Article 41, on the right to access to information. It clearly puts an obligation on every Ugandan to be transparent in his or her dealings. I find it very difficult to say you are transparent and you are giving everybody information when your meetings are closed. Yes, we can agree that members of the committee should vote and those other members can attend and see what is going on, but we should be able to observe what is going on -[HON. SSEBAGGALA: “Information.”] I will take it.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No, the honourable member has risen on a point of information. Honourable member you are senior in this House. No.

MR SSEBAGGALA: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. It is very important that the Appointments Committee is transparent. Up to now, I do not know why my elder brother was rejected. If it was open I would have known and I would have informed him. (Laughter)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, what hon. Ssebaggala has said is very important because in that meeting, there was white smoke and black smoke. None of you heard about it. So, I can tell you that there are some members of the Frontbench whom we know are using papers which are not -(Interjections)- yes, and we are telling them - do you know why the directory is not here? We are waiting for the directory. The day the directory will be here you will see what we shall do with them because we are very certain - even one time during the -(Interruption)

MR ASUMAN KIYINGI: Mr Chairman, the Leader of the Opposition is making a very serious allegation against the Frontbench. He is saying that there is information that some of us who are sitting here are fraudsters. Is he in order to maintain that position without naming or substantiating?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Hon. Nandala-Mafabi, would you like to substantiate?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, I am going to substantiate. You know you are dealing with a man from the mountains. During -(Interjections)- relax. During the time of hon. Ssekandi as our Speaker, I was the acting Leader of the Opposition and I appointed hon. Odonga Otto to represent me. When he brought the issue of a petition of papers against hon. Nakadama, the Speaker chased him without listening to him. Hon. Odonga Otto is here. Didn’t I send you? Come and tell them? (Laughter) 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, I will put the question -

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Mr Chairman, when hon. Tinkasiimire reads any part of the Articles of the Constitution, he should read them fully because Article 41 that he refers to reads as follows:

“Every citizen has a right of access to information in the possession of the state or any other organ or agent of the state except where the release of the information is likely to prejudice the security or sovereignty of the state or interfere with the rights to the privacy of any other person.”

The difference between our Constitution and, for instance, the American Constitution is that the American Constitution actually does not have the provision as we do of right to privacy. It does not. So, they conduct public hearings and by the way, there if you demand that the hearing be in private that could also be considered. So, the idea here was that not everyone who is appointed to a public office is public. Like I am public so if you want to bring me upside down, am there. Even hon. Odonga Otto is now public, but you see because the appointments - you know when you subject yourself, for instance, to election and things like that, then you have voluntarily offered yourself, but appointments by the President are not limited to only those who are exposed publicly. He may wish to appoint people who are private and really would not want to - yes it is public office. 

Appointments Committee; what do they handle? Ministers, ambassadors, Judges, constitutional commissioners - people like that. We debated in the Sixth Parliament; we had a very heated debate on it. That time we said if we can entrust -(Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, I remember when I was here, a Member asked me to give information and I had a long list which I wanted to give on some of these guys. Now the clarification I am seeking, did I stop talking or what or you want me to stop there? Otherwise, I have data on many of these guys.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No, when you used your own prerogative to invite hon. Odonga Otto to the microphone, you lost your right to speak.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: So, that was the idea that not all appointments by the President which are subjected to approval by Parliament are of people whose privacy should not necessarily be thrown to the public. That was the whole idea. 

So, then we said, in the case where the Parliament through the Appointments Committee which is exercising its delegated authority by the arrangement we have - this Appointments Committee because it is authorised to act on behalf of the whole Parliament, is the whole of Parliament actually. So, once they meet and they take decisions and the President feels that those decisions should be appealed against, then we said in that case because Parliament will have had reasons to reject these people, let them be subjected to public scrutiny, then of course it comes to the open in the plenary. 

So, that is the formula that we used and whereas I must tell you that I have a lot of sympathy for the argument that things should be public, I also see a case for the possibility of people who do not want to expose themselves or their privacy to the public after being appointed by the President to positions that require approval by Parliament. Otherwise, we are going to limit -(Interruption)

MR EKANYA: Mr Chairman, thank you and I want to thank the Prime Minister. Mr Prime Minister, you are a learned person and one of the constitutional obligations and oath, I and you and all of us took is to defend this Constitution; and as a Member of Parliament one of our cardinal roles here is representation. Don’t you think it is really unconstitutional that a Member of Parliament can be barred from accessing only one committee? I can access all committees of Parliament, but when it comes to accessing Appointments - forget about the public. I, as Ekanya Geoffrey, a Member of Parliament from Tororo County, I am here, I took oath to come and represent my people and I have a right to access all committees; but when it comes to the Appointments Committee, I am told by a seargeant that I cannot access. Doesn’t that mean I have been recalled by the provision of that rule because I cease being a Member of Parliament in that aspect? So, as a learned person, don’t you think my right has been infringed on and the people of Tororo County?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, this matter has taken long we are not making any headway. 

MR MUSINGUZI: Thank you. Members, the appointments board, if we zero it to a service commission – really, these are members and they are not interviewed on the same day. They are interviewed on different days. If appointee A has been interviewed today and tomorrow they are going to interview me but I have heard the interviews of A, who has been interviewed today, really won’t I cheat the exams?

MR TINKASIMIIRE: Mr Chairman, I am rising on a point of order to my honourable colleague from Ntungamo, who is misleading this House by stating that equating the appointments board interview, where individuals - 100 and so - apply for a similar job; and where the committee of Parliament – one individual is being interviewed for a single job. I have not seen anywhere where they are appointing a minister -(Interjections)- or the two ministers are competing for the same job. Is he, therefore, in order to confuse this House that there will be cheating? Is he in order?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, we have taken a long time and do not seem to be making any headway on the subject. I am asking that this matter be stood over; consult and get back to us when you are ready to proceed with the matter.

Rule 141

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Mr Chairman, Rule 141 is in respect to the same subject. I request it also be stood over. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Rule 141 is related to the same subject. It is stood over.

Rule 144

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Rule 144 is also stood over. It relates to the same subject. 

Rule 146 

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Same subject

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Same subject? It is stood over.

Rule 148

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: We propose to re-draft rule 148 in the following terms. “148(1) The Public Accounts Committee shall consist of 30 members on the basis of proportional party membership in the House and the number of Independents.” 

Mr Chairman, I will withdraw this one. The draftsmanship is clumsy, I must admit.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Next? (Mr Nandala-Mafabi rose_)

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Rule 152, “Functions of the Committee on National Economy.” Rule 152(2)(b); insert the word, “draft” immediately after the word -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Which rule? 

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Rule 152(2)(b)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: What have you done with 150? Paragraph 62

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: We have dropped it.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: It is dropped. Next? 

Rule 152

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: We propose the functions of the Committee on National Economy. Rule 152(2)(b); insert the word, “draft” immediately before the word “loan”. The justification is that the committee scrutinises draft loan agreements before presentation to the House for approval. 

MR EKANYA: I am seeking clarification from the chairman, who was the head of the Legal Department in the President’s Office. Normally, all these agreements – currently, I am the chairperson of the Parliamentary Forum and World Bank caucus in this Parliament. Therefore, I am informed. All World Bank, IDA, African Development Bank agreements are signed by the time they come to this House. I do not know under what circumstances the chairperson, hon. Odoi-Oywelowo, is saying they are drafts. In fact, Government does not bring drafts unless you are introducing a new stage, which you have discussed with the World Bank and ADB that you should have drafts. We have agreed that we shall have a forum outside to discuss and agree with Government.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Mr Chairman, please withdraw this particular amendment. 

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: I am advised to withdraw this one. 

Rule 153

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Functions of the Committee on Government Assurances. Delete paragraph (a) and replace it with the following, “(a) Scrutinise the assurances, promises and undertakings given by any minister, Prime Minister, President, Vice President.” We shall have to, in order of precedence, re-draft this; but the principle is, “...in the House from time to time and report on the extent to which the assurances, promises and undertakings have been implemented.” 

The justification is that other agents of Government do not have audience in the plenary and most assurances are made in the House. Secondly, it has proved difficult for the committee to extract assurances made by other agents of Government in the committees.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No, move all of it, honourable chairman.

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: (ii) Delete paragraph (b) and replace it with the following, “(b) Monitor the fulfilment of Government assurances and report its findings to Parliament.” The justification is that this gives the committee a broader mandate of monitoring the fulfilment of Government assurances and the committee shall be able to present its report before Parliament

(iii) Delete (d) and replace it with the following, (b)(i) “Where the timeframe is not given by the minister, the committee shall determine the category within which it falls and accordingly determine the timeframe within which it ought to be implemented. The categories shall include:

(a)	Emergency assurances
(b)	Short-term assurances 
(c)	Mid-term assurances or 
(d)	Long-term assurances”

The justification is to provide the timeframe within which assurances should be implemented by Government.

(iv) Insert a new paragraph as follows, “The Chairperson of the Committee on Government Assurances shall at the conclusion of every session make a statement on the status of the implementation of the assurances upon which the Leader of Government Business shall respond during the first meeting of the next session.” The justification is, by allowing the chairperson of the committee to make a statement on the state of the implementation of the assurances, Parliament will be holding the government accountable.

(v) Insert a new paragraph in the following terms, “The Speaker shall allot time for Members to raise specific Government undertakings and assurances made in their constituencies.” The justification is to enhance the oversight function of Parliament and enable the constituents from the areas where such assurances and undertakings have been made to have an avenue where the assurances can be followed up to their logical conclusion. 

We propose to insert a new sub-rule in the following terms, “Withdrawal of assurances” - “Any withdrawal of an assurance or undertaking shall be made to the committee which shall in turn report to the House.” There is need to provide ministers the option of withdrawing an assurance where circumstances rise which might make the fulfilment impracticable.

(vi) Insert a new sub-rule as follows, “For the purpose of this rule, an assurance shall mean any undertaking or promise made by a minister, Prime Minister, VicePresident, President on the Floor of the House and may take any of the expressions stated in Appendix H.”

The justification is to clearly define and restrict what constitutes a government assurance. Not any statement made outside Parliament with a connotation of an assurance should be presumed to be an assurance.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, that is where there are movements for proposed amendments to Rule 153, the terms proposed by the chair of the committee. The justifications are indicated. I open it for short interactions. Procedure?

MR MULINDWA: Mr Chairman, when you look around in the House –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable member, please, resume your seat. Proceed, hon. Otto -(Laughter) Honourable members, the proposals from the Chair of the committee are to the following effect – any comments to the proposals or I put the question? 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, the amendment I want to raise is in respect to the assurances made outside Parliament. It is common for our ministers to go in the public and say, “We are going to do A, B, C and D”. But the moment you restrict it to assurances made in the House, some of our ministers might make wild assurances under the influence of alcohol and put us in problems.

So, this category which the chairperson has read should apply to both inside the House and outside to avoid having people make assurance, which they cannot implement.  

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: My understanding of assurances is those matters that are raised and captured in the House and I think that is the kind of assurance that a committee of this House would be entitled to pursue.

MR ODONGA OTTO: What the LOP is saying is already catered for under what the Chairman of the Rules Committee moved. Under Item B, the Speaker shall allot time for Members to raise specific Government undertakings and assurances made in their constituencies. 

The import of this is when the minister goes upcountry and makes some statements; the Speaker will give time on a designated day where Members can question the ministers and the committee will capture it as assurance. We cannot track the ministers all around the world: in Brussels and informal functions; in weddings, in bars – it becomes very difficult. 

So, what the chair of the Rules Committee moved is what we advised them to do basing on the challenges we are facing in the Government Assurances Committee. 

MR SSEBAGGALA: Mr Chairman, before the chairman comes in, since some of these ministers at times make unrealistic promises, in my considered opinion, we should put a clause that these assurances must have parliamentary approval, because some assurances might be unrealistic. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Well, we have a proposal that it can be withdrawn – I think the withdrawal is humiliating enough. 

So, I put the question that Rule 153 be amended in the terms proposed by the chair of the committee.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Rule 153, as amended, agreed to.)

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Chairman, I followed the Rules of Procedure and notified your office accordingly. Recently, courtesy of our Office, we met MPs from Kenya and that is why this amendment is emerging at this point. 

We want the name of the committee to be changed to become Government Assurances and Implementation Committee. The mandate is:

1. 	To follow up and report to Parliament, the progress of loans approved by Parliament and the extent of their implementation.

2. 	To follow and report on motions, resolutions and committee reports passed by Parliament; the extent of their implementation and execution.

3.	For avoidance of doubt in two above, the Committee of Government Assurances shall not get into the merits of such loans, motions, resolutions or committee reports, but rather the extent and time of their implementation. 

The justifications of these amendments are as follows:

1.	We do not want our role to be just extracting assurances and stop at that. We want to be able to follow the extent of implementation of all commitments made before this House – whether it be loans or anything else. Many times, we pass committee reports and no one follows up to know what is happening. So, we thought that his honourable House would be honoured to accept these recommendations.

2.	In the Rules Committee, there are some people who wanted a separate implementation committee. In Kenya, it is called the Implementation Committee. So, we are now expanding the role of Government Assurances Committee to be able to follow up on all resolutions passed by this House - even committee reports - so that we can report back on whether there is progress on them without getting into the merits. 

MR BYABAGAMBI: Mr Chairman, I do not know whether the Chairman of the Government Assurances Committee is not usurping the powers of the sectoral committee. When you talk about monitoring and implementation of programmes – 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No, it is monitoring the implementation of the assurances. Once an assurance has been made and captured, they monitor the extent to which it is implemented. 

MR BYABAGAMBI: He said he wants the name to be changed from Assurances Committee to Committee on Assurances and Implementation –(Interjections)– maybe you add on “Implementation of Assurances”; then I withdraw my query.

MR MUKULA: Mr Chairman, I would like to associate myself with the amendment moved by hon. Odonga Otto. Colleagues, those of us who have been in Parliament for a bit of time, since 1996, Sixth Parliament, the problem has been the implementation of assurances; that has been a big problem in Government to the extent that sometimes they follow up or the bureaucratic contradictions impede the progress of a certain project or loan brought before this Floor. 

I wish, therefore, to say that the amendment which has been suggested by hon. Odonga Otto is an addition to the assurance in that to me it helps the committee follow up. That is all it does; it helps the committee follow up the implementation. I, therefore, would urge honourable members to support that amendment because it helps all of us in Government to achieve the objective of getting Government objectives done. 

MR TASHOBYA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I also support the proposed change of name to Government Assurance and Implementation, but I differ from the subsequent paragraphs. The mandate is to follow and report to Parliament the progress of loans approved by Parliament and the extent of the implementation; and two, to follow and report on motions, resolutions and committee reports passed by Parliament, the extent of the implementation executions. 

Mr Chairman, my understanding of the mandate of the committee is to have the assurances and Government promises implemented. That is what I understand as the cardinal responsibility of the committee. To that extent, I support it, but when it goes to approving loans, motions and resolutions and committee reports, I think that is outside the mandate of the committee. Once Parliament resolutions and motions are passed, then the relevant committees - and my brother hon. Odonga Otto knows because in different stages of interacting with ministries at given stages, that is actually what committees do; to find out that Parliament at such a time made this recommendation. How did you implement –(Interruption)

MR ODONGA OTTO: The information I am giving is that in our drafting we said, “For avoidance of doubt, the Committee on Government Assurances shall not get into the merits of the motions of the loans of the parliamentary resolutions. It will only follow the time and extent of their implementation.” In 2002, we passed a resolution that the government would build a technical school in every sub-county. Of course, education would fall under the Committee on Social Services, but as of now, there is no single technical school that has been built as it was promised. So, we are looking at a situation where you need a specialized committee. We even pass parliamentary committee reports here and we recommend that minister A does this and the moment Parliament passes a committee report, we somehow tend to relax on following up on whether the minister is doing a specific thing in that area. So, the information I am giving is that we are not in any way usurping the powers of the specific committees, but we are restricting ourselves to the time and the extent of their execution and not the manner of their execution. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable Chairperson of the Government Assurances Committee, if you look at paragraph (a) of what we have just approved for the committee on rules, “…to scrutinise the assurances, promises and undertakings given by the minister in the House from time to time and report on the extent to which those assurances, promises and undertakings have been implemented.” I think that captures the spirit of the implementation aspect of these Government assurances, and then the issue should be specific. Would you consider changing this for the committee to be called the “implementation of Government assurances committee”? 

MR ODONGA OTTO: As they say, the one putting on the shoes knows where it pains. Mr Chairman, if we are to remain with the current proposal, which we have approved, then we must define assurances. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  It is also defined. It is in 66 in which we insert a new sub-rule. “For purposes of this rule, an assurance shall mean any undertaking or promise made on the Floor of the House and may take any of the expressions stated in appendix H.” 

MR ODONGA OTTO: Yes, this has been passed now. What I am saying is, if you say, “For the purpose of this rule, assurance shall mean any undertaking or promise made by the minister…” where do we put specifically resolutions which this amendment is trying to bring? 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Let the Chairperson, Government Assurances make his submission. 

MR ODONGA OTTO: You see, what we are trying to do in the committee – for example, next week we are launching the first book of assurances made by ministers, ministry by ministry. They number up to over 1,000 on the Floor of this House and we will go ahead to track down those assurances. For example, yesterday we were in your office, hon. Byabagambi, when you promised you would give out graders in every district by February. We came to your office and you received us well. The challenge we have is that we are not going to restrict ourselves only to that. We find situations where, for example, the Speaker of Parliament, hon. Rebecca Kadaga, last week when we were passing resolutions, would notify me that chairman, Government Assurance Committee, take note. She mentioned it twice on the Floor of the House. So, we want a situation where motions, resolutions and even comprehensive committee reports - because there are certain committees that recommend something and nothing is done. We don’t remove the powers of those committees to call the minister to find out whether the recommendation is being followed. We have bundles of committee reports which we have looked at as a committee that nothing is being done about and no one seems to be following up. 

So, we were thinking, Mr Chairman, that the definition of assurance then, if we are to abandon these amendments I am moving, should then be broadened, and I will really appeal to Members, to include motions, resolutions and loans. For loans, we are not jumping into the roles of the Committee on National Economy. We have loans which have been approved; the committee has advised Parliament to approve the loans. We approve it – 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable Chairman, are you still on the matter of assurance? I think that crosses over because that is not an assurance. A loan is not an assurance but a decision of this House. 

MR ODONGA OTTO: I understand. So, if that is the case, then we would have to revert back to the earlier argument in the rules committee that we need an implementation committee in this House because we have thousands of resolutions, thousands of motions and thousands of committee reports which no one is following. It is like we are talking to ourselves. As of now, we have that challenge. So, as Members raised that we need an implementation committee in Parliament, probably I would then be advised that we need to add another committee in Parliament called the implementation committee, specifically to follow motions, resolutions - to follow the extent of implementation of committee reports. 

MR TASHOBYA: Mr Speaker, I want to entirely agree with you that once we agree that the role of the committee is to secure implementation of assurances from Government, I think that is already a very big task because what is resolved by Parliament, what happens in ministries, is implementation of recommendations and policies. That is really the work of sectoral committees. I think what has been happening is that maybe the committee did not have sufficient support to do their work, but if you did your work, I am sure there is a lot for you to do and follow up, but for the rest of the implementation, that should be sectoral committees, which actually start from the budget up to the implementation. I thank you so much. 

MR KIWANDA: Mr Chairman, allow me to seek clarification from hon. Stephen Tashobya. In my life as a parliamentarian, I have never seen a sessional committee come back here – for example, if the government comes out to say that they are going to replace all asbestos sheets in all schools and hospitals with iron sheets roofs -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No, but that is an assurance; it is what is captured here.

MR KIWANDA: Yes, but why we should name it an implementation committee also is because it has to follow up on the implementation of that assurance. Even if you are withdrawing, it is an implementation. As of now, there is no sessional committee that follows up on the ministers and the ministries to withdraw and to make sure that they fulfil this. That is one of the justifications. 

If we have a committee in charge of implementing these very assurances, it is going to give this committee powers. You know very well that from the Seventh to Eighth Parliament, this committee has been somehow dormant. That is why some members have been shying away from serving on it. So giving mandate -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Hon. Kiwanda, please do not take us back. All those issues have been raised by hon. Odonga Otto and agreed upon. The question now is about including resolutions of Parliament, motions, loans and committee recommendations to the list of assurances. That is the matter on the Floor. The other one of following up the implementation of the assurances made in this House has been agreed to.

MR KIWANDA: But, Mr Chairman, we also get assurances from reports. When we talk about reports, resolutions, recommendations, that is where we get the assurances. Assurances come out of these resolutions and - They will not come and say, “Today we are making an assurance on this one” - 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No, an assurance is a commitment made by the government; it is an undertaking made by the government. It is not what Parliament has asked Government to do. So, once Government has made a commitment of undertaking, this is captured by this committee. Its duty now will be to peruse the implementation of that undertaking. I thought that is where we are.

Now, on the issue of loans, motions and recommendations from reports of the various committees, I think those should fall back to the respective sectoral committees handling those details. It is about respective committees doing a follow-up on the implementation of their recommendations by Government. If committees have not been doing that, they have simply not been doing it. They should just do their work. 

MR SSEBAGGALA: Mr Chairman, the Government Assurances Committee is there to ensure that what is promised by Government is implemented. That committee is supposed to do that follow-up on our behalf as Parliament, just like other sessional committees follow up on other commitments in respect of their activities and recommendations.

I am of the view that we do not overburden the Government Assurances Committee. The responsibilities they have now are more than enough. Let us leave those other responsibilities like those in regard to loans to the Committee on National Economy because they are supposed to report to Parliament on the progress.

What should be done by the Government Assurances Committee is to ensure that whatever has been promised by Government is implemented. It should be their responsibility to come and report updates on the implementation of Government assurances to Parliament.

MR SEBUNYA: Mr Chairman, I think we are done with the functions of the Government Assurances Committee. What we should be doing is to agree on the wording of its name. In that regard, I do not know why members want to add a mandate to a name. Maybe the problem is that most committees do not follow up on their resolutions and recommendations after being passed by Parliament. After Parliament approval, the respective committee will just forget about it. That is why the Committee on Government Assurances is finding a gap. They would be right, but that will make us create a line of so many functions, which might deter them from doing their work effectively. 

I would like to propose that the committee’s name reads as follows: “Government Assurances and Implementation Committee” or the other way round as read the first time, “Implementation of Government Assurances Committee.” I think that would be enough. We should not add new words to its name.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Before we take leave of this matter, hon. Fox Odoi, as chairman of the committee on rules, when you look at what you have listed as Appendix H on pages 60 and 61, you will realise that it reads in part as follows: 

“The following are examples of expressions that constitute Government assurances: 
•	the matter is under consideration; 
•	I shall look into it; 
•	Inquiries are being made; 
•	I shall inform the honourable members; 
•	I shall write to the department concerned…” 

What I am saying is: is it necessary that it should be like this?

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Chairman, these suggestions are not just coming from nowhere. We visited the parliaments of India, Ghana, Zambia and the United Kingdom. Specifically in Zambia, where the Committee on Government Assurances seems to be working best in Africa, they have these expressions to amount to the assurances in their Rules of Procedure. Why do they do that? It is because we have situations where ministers come to the Floor of the House with members asking questions, but they try to dodge in giving appropriate responses yet the essence of asking such questions is to get appropriate responses.

Also like now, we have support staff sponsored by donors extracting assurances from ministers. We thought it wise to have expressions that amount to assurances so that tomorrow a minister who talks here does not come to the committee and say, “that was not an assurance”.  

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Hon. Odonga Otto, let me just illustrate to you my point. I can put all these points in one sentence as follows: “The matter is under consideration and I shall look into it properly as inquiries are also being conducted and I shall inform the honourable members.” I have said it all. Those are four of those expressions; would that be one assurance or four assurances?

MR ODONGA OTTO: They would be four assurances because we just number them. What we have seen in practice in this Parliament is that ministers who talk for about 20 minutes make about seven assurances. The moment that publication is out, they would be very careful with their words. Hon. Byabagambi here knows; we have visited him twice and he is even surprised that someone is trailing him. 

Mr Chairman, maybe for the other earlier argument of loans, motions, resolutions and committee reports, what hon. Ssebunya said answers it all. Parliament should do something to enable other committees follow up issues up to their logical conclusion. The reason we are coming in is because we see that there are very many commitments which are not followed. We will work within the definitions first but these expressions that amount to assurances, which we cut and paste from the Zambian Parliament, we would plead with members to leave so that we can get hold of these ministers. We really want to make the business of making empty promises a very risky business on the Floor of the House. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: We had already approved that one with our Appendix H anyway. I was just recasting our thoughts on it. The issue of the name is now what I need to –

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Chairman, if we have dropped these suggestions, it now becomes redundant to call it, “government assurance and implementation committee.” Why we are bringing the issue of implementation is because we were positioning ourselves to follow up loans, motions, resolutions.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Not just the implementation of assurances?

MR ODONGA OTTO: Maybe we would now call it the “implementation of government assurances committee.” That is better drafting. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Is that okay now?

MR MUKULA: Mr Chairman, it is really English. To me, I would persuade the chairman of the Committee on Government Assurances to accept the position of committee on assurances and implementation. That, to me, should carry the day. Duplicating issues will in a way countervail a number of other things. I would rather persuade hon. Odonga Otto to leave it and we pass it as “the committee on assurances and implementation.” 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: In the definitions, of course, in the functions you know exactly what the implementation means. It is clear. You will not be getting something which is not in the powers of the functions of the committee. 

MR BYABAGAMBI: Mr Chairman, supposing we do it the other way round - “the implementation committee of government assurances.” How do you see that? 

MR RUHINDI: Mr Chairman, I think you were guiding very well because you were trying to say, if I understood you well, what is in a name because everything is in the substance, in the body of the rule. In fact, the broader the name is the better. 

So, the government assurances committee, the way it is, is sufficient – (Interjection) – No, we do not even need to put there “implementation”. The Chairman guided us. In No. 1 itself, it shows you the stages that are required for you to go through when you are doing your job. So, there is absolutely no need to change the name. What is in a name? A rose by whatever name called smells as sweet. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, I think we should close this matter. Are we now saying it is, “the government assurances and implementation committee”? The role specifically says that the implementation relates to government assurances as in the functions of the committee. 

I will put the question that the name of the committee be changed from the Committee on Government Assurances to the Government assurance and implementation committee. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Rule 153, as amended, agreed to.

Rule 154

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Mr Chairman, we drop the proposed amendments. It serves no useful purpose.

Rule 157 

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Rule 157 is on the functions of the Committee on Human Immunodeficiency Virus/Acquired Immunodeficiency Syndrome, HIV/AIDS and other related matters. 

We propose that in the head note, we delete the words, “and related matters”. The justification is that this committee handles a specific portfolio, a specific mandate, and the expression “and related matters” is ambiguous. 

MR RUHINDI: I differ because – 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Hon. Attorney-General, can we have the whole thing so that we handle them comprehensively. I see other proposed amendments to this particular rule. Let us handle all so that we dispose of it once. 

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Mr Chairman, in (ii) we propose to replace rule 157 with the following: 
“The Committee on HIV/AIDS shall -

(a) 	coordinate HIV/AIDS activities of Parliament and provide a link between Parliament with the Uganda AIDS Commission in combating the epidemic in Uganda;
 
(b) 	scrutinise the HIV/AIDS policies, monitor and evaluate strategies and activities of Government, local government and other bodies aimed at HIV/AIDS prevention, care, treatment and psycho-social support of infected and affected persons;

(c) examine and make recommendations on relevant Bills and other matters related to HIV/AIDS; and

(d) in co-operation with the Uganda AIDS Commission and the Ministry responsible for Health, initiate relevant Bills and motions required for combating the epidemic in Uganda.”

(2) 	The committee shall report to Parliament at least twice a year.” 

The justification is to give the committee a broader mandate in the management of HIV/AIDS in relation to prevention, care, treatment and psycho-social support of infected and affected persons. 

Mr Chairman, before I take leave of this matter, I will not contest the existence of “and related matters”. It is an inconsequential matter that I do not intend to waste the committee’s time on.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, I now put the question to the proposed amendment of the functions of the committee. 
 
MR NANDALA-MAFABI: The existing rule has all these functions. So there is nothing we are trying to – (Interjection) - Yes, you look at (a), (b), (c), (d), (2), (3) they are all the same. So why do we – 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Mr Chairman, what new matter have you raised in this particular function apart from the “and related matters”, which has been withdrawn by yourself?
 
MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: We basically added three dimensions: first, prevention; two, care; and three, treatment and psycho-social support, which are not available in the current rules.
  
THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Those are the additions? 

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Yes, those are the additions.

MR RUHINDI: I would like the chairperson of the committee to guide us because in the current Rules of Procedure there is (2) which says, “The committee shall in the performance of its functions network with other parliaments on the problem of HIV/AIDS and related matters.” Do you still have it or you have dropped it?
 
MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: We dropped it. 

MR RUHINDI: Why? 

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: We dropped (2). The argument of the committee was that this is a method of work but not a specific function of a committee. All parliamentary committees do benchmarking visits and it is not indicated anywhere as part of their functions.
 
THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: It is actually saying, “in the performance of its functions”. So, what you do in the performance of your functions can never be your function.

Honourable members, the proposed amendments are in the terms proposed by the chairperson. I put the question that rule 157, as amended, stands part of the rules.  

(Question put and agreed to.)

Rule 157, as amended, agreed to.

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Mr Chairman, we propose to insert a new rule as follows: “Functions of the Committee on Human Rights. (1) The Committee on Human Rights shall have the following functions: 

(a)	 to examine Bills for compatibility with human rights standards;

(b) 	to track and report on human rights concerns in every business handled by Parliament;

(c) to monitor Government compliance with national and international human rights instruments and follow up on Government periodic reports to international human rights monitoring bodies;

(d) to enhance Parliament’s interaction with other human rights monitoring bodies;

(e) 	examine the recommendations in the Uganda Human Rights Commission reports and ensure that Government is held accountable in this regard; 

(f) 	to inquire into any matter relating to human rights in Uganda; and

(g) carry on such other functions relating to human rights as may be assigned to it by Parliament under this Act or any other law in force.”  

The justification is to provide for the functions of the Committee on Human Rights that this House graciously approves the creation of.
 
THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Are you saying under (g) this Act or rule?
 
MR ODOI-OYWELOWO:  Under this rule or any other law in force.
 
MR RUHINDI: Mr Chairman, just a clarification in (a), which says, “To examine Bills for compatibility with human rights standards.” As much as this is a good principle, I am wondering how it will be implemented. On every Bill shall we be receiving two reports, from this committee and from the committee in charge of the Bill?  What shall happen?

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: The learned Attorney-General has a very valid point. At the level of implementation, this may create a lot of complications. 

However, the background to this was that there were proposals made to the committee that every Bill submitted to this House must have, as part of their accompanying documents, a certificate for human rights compliance. As a middle ground, the committee then proposed that this should be one of the functions of the Committee on Human Rights. With the benefit of insight, this will be practically impossible to implement and I think I should withdraw it.
 
THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: You with draw (a)? 

MS NABILAH NAGGAYI: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I would like to seek clarification from the chairperson as to why an amendment was debated in the committee and can be hurriedly withdrawn. Behind the scenes, we are looking at Bills that may come on the Floor of the House but do not have the component behind to see whether the Bill will be implemented and will impede on our human rights. 

We know that there are Bills that may be brought by Government that may not necessarily take into consideration human and other rights of Ugandans; for example, when we look at gender and look at engendering Bills. I think that is the spirit within which this was brought. You see that there has been a process of engendering whatever each Government department is going to do. This is one way of putting human rights at the forefront of the Bills or the laws that are going to become active in the country.
 
MR RUHINDI: Mr Chairman, do help because I buy the principle; I think what we should do is to redraft it and say that the committee should guide the relevant committees on Bills for compatibility with human rights standards. This way, we shall find ways and means of interacting with the relevant committees when they are handling Bills for compatibility because it is going to be problematic. You cannot come here with a report and then the relevant committee also comes with a report. In fact, you should evolve methods of ensuring that you evolve some basic standards, which other committees can look at and follow. In other words, you guide the relevant committees and other institutions of Parliament to ensure that Bills are compatible with human rights standards.  

MR TASHOBYA: Mr Chairman, I think the earlier observation of the learned Attorney-General is more persuasive than the position he is taking now. I think it would be practically impossible, as the Attorney-General rightly pointed out, to implement that function. What maybe you can say is “to work with other committees” because when you are considering Bills in committees, you address yourself to human rights, the Constitution. 

Now that we have this important committee, we should say that it will work with the relevant committees in examining the Bills to ensure compliance with what is being put down. To make it a specific mandate of the committee would be quite difficult to achieve. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, seven committees could be sitting at the same time and they are all examining Bills. Should they stop until the members of the Committee on Human Rights show up in their meetings? You see, the issue with (a) is its implementation. To examine Bills for compatibility with human rights standards would mean that the Bill first comes to them also so that they then give the go-ahead that it is compatible and then the other committee starts. Look at the implementation of this particular mandate.

MS KABAKUMBA: I agree with you that it may be very difficult to implement this. Unfortunately, we have finished the functions of sessional committees but we could have put it under the general functions of sessional committees so that when each committee is examining a Bill, it looks at the compatibility of that Bill with human rights standards so that it is general.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: So, we can bring it after because there are general functions of these committees. We can put this and say an issue of gender and all these issues to be captured as people look at the Bills in a comprehensive-

MR LUGOLOOBI: Mr Chairman, would it then not be necessary to have a particular committee that sets these standards or customizes whatever international standards could be available for the various committees to follow? I thought that it was necessary to set a certain standard, which could be followed by all other committees. Otherwise, it will be difficult for some of these committees. They may not even understand what these human rights standards actually involve. So, I thought that a committee that has the expertise should take up the responsibility of drafting guidelines or the standards as would be required to be followed by the various committees.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: That would be this committee, wouldn’t it?

MR SSEGGONA: I was conferring with the chairperson. Mr Chairman, I am a member of the same committee and I wanted to concur with hon. Kabakumba but only modify the position a little. As I was conferring with him, what came to my mind was actually compliance, so that we do not have to open where we have left already. Compliance with human rights standards is a constitutional matter, so it is given that with or without specific mandate in the rules, any committee that is observing a Bill or any instrument must ensure that it complies with constitutional standards.

MR RUHINDI: That settled, like you did draw attention to sub rule (2), (d) is not a function. Is that a function, Mr Chairman? It is not.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: “To enhance Parliament’s interaction with other human rights monitoring bodies”; is that a function? It is a method of work. So we take that out. So (a) and (d) are taken out.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, we should also include the reporting mechanism - how often they should report. I would propose that this committee, as we have stated with the HIV/AIDS committee, should report to Parliament at least twice a year. What I am trying to propose is that yes, they can report many times but at least mandatorily, they should have a period of reporting twice.

MR TASHOBYA: Mr Chairman, the principle is fine but I think it should be annual because the Human Rights Commission reports are submitted annually. I think the report they are submitting would have the biggest component as their recommendations and findings from the recommendations of the Human Rights Commission report. So I propose it should be annual.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Chairman of the legal committee, in my experience when I chaired the legal committee, we had reports that were running into 15 years that had never been examined. So, if you create a mandatory reporting period of twice, they might be able to deal with the backlog and also take on new issues because they are saying “at least”.

MR TASHOBYA: Mr Chairman, I just wanted to correct the record that things have changed since that time. The Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs cleared the backlog up to 2009 and a report was submitted to this House and adopted.

MR EKANYA: Mr Chairman, I have something very big and important. Thank you for your guidance. I want to introduce a new function, “In promotion of human rights, the committee will ensure that the culture of the people of this country is protected.”
 
THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, even in the cultures, we have a legal definition of permitted cultures, those cultures that are not repugnant.

MR SSEGGONA: Mr Chairman, I agree except to the extent that amongst human rights are cultural rights. I am entirely in agreement with the Bahati Bill except that we do not legislate emotively. I am only saying that cultural rights must not be distinguished or isolated from other rights. To me, the words “human rights” would suffice protection of rights.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Chairman, hon. Ekanya is just being diplomatic. The mischief he is curing- You have been checking your emails; I am overwhelmed with mail from all over the world in the name of human rights. So, we do not want this committee to be a single destination to be used by those gay activists hoping that it is a human rights issue. 

What hon. Ekanya is doing is that he is putting a caveat. We do not want people to trap the whole world in the name of human rights. Those who are dealing with them should know very clearly that this group of people are not allowed by the rules to promote other kinds of activities in the name of human rights.

MR RUHINDI: To me, that is a very good proposal but I am wondering how we should put it. Maybe we could be helped by some other colleagues because we are talking about a substantive provision of the law and I am looking at Article 32 of the Constitution. You can draw some lessons from there. These are Rules of Procedure.

First of all, homosexuality is prohibited in Uganda one, by our Constitution and two, by the Penal Code.  According to the Penal Code under Section 145, if you get involved in an unnatural sexual conduct, the punishment is life imprisonment if you are convicted. 

One time I went to Bangui and was presenting a report on human rights for this country but I was shocked because when I sat in the audience, I did not know that these people get mobilised. So they started attacking Uganda, and I saw everybody looking at me and jeering. Then when I stood up to speak, I said, “In Uganda, sex is between man and woman.” Of course, I had to look for the earliest exit from Bangui. (Laughter) 

So how do we draw from Article 31(2) (a) and Article 32? When we put it the way you wanted, it sounds very broad – you are not taking into consideration these exceptions. So I want you to help me because you are the ones proposing. I am just giving you the substantive laws so that you can draw from them to make a better proposal.

MS NAGGAYI: I wish to seek some clarification from the Attorney-General over the issue of FGM in relation to the amendment that hon. Ekanya is proposing, because FGM is against some cultures in this country. So if we bring the word “culture” into rights, some cultures clash with others, even within the country itself. So how do we bring it into conformity?

MR SSEGGONA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I do not disagree with my colleagues who have spoken on this subject. However, I wish to draw the attention of the Deputy Attorney-General to again give a deeper analysis to Article 32 and also look at the mischief that my brother Odonga Otto is trying to cure by making his proposal. 

The short title to Article 32 is a bit dangerous if we are not careful - “Affirmative action in favour of marginalised groups”. If you listen and follow these people’s debate, they say they are a marginalised group. Now, when you give more in terms of enhancing the word “marginalised”, they are going to jump onto it, especially when you read Article 32(2). They are talking about enhancing the rights of these marginalised groups. The moment you over codify and opt to be exhaustive at times in legislative drafting, you get into problems. This is an evil we must fight but also fight consciously and cautiously. Since the whites came, they introduced the culture of constitutionalism and the element of the written constitution. If you are not careful, the moment you pass any law, they will jump onto it. 

Of course, it brings in the element of conflict of laws. There is an apparent contradiction between Articles 31 and 32. In my view, the more important provision is Article 31 because it is more substantive. Now, Article 32 comes in and brings in some problems because whereas those of us who are the anti-gay activists will be pushing for Article 31, the gay activists are pushing for Article 32. I think that is where we need to be very careful in doing more and more legislation.

MR EKANYA: I did not say what some members have said but I just want to propose and modify by saying, “In exercise of their functions, the Committee of Human Rights shall ensure that all constitutional provisions are adhered to.”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Isn’t that automatic?

MR EKANYA: Mr Chairman, I want to remind colleagues that when we were doing the amendment of the Constitution, to which you were the chairperson, there was a provision that Members of Parliament are entitled to salary, allowances and any other payments but I insisted to add the word “pension”. Until it was passed, it was a problem for MPs to get pension. So it is very important that we include my amendment so that other people do not use them to divert.  We do not want to specify only Article 31. We want to say, “In exercise of their functions, the Committee of Human Rights shall adhere to the constitutional provisions and all other laws of Uganda.” 

Mr Chairman, one of the functions talks about international human rights’ standards and treaties. Some of those treaties have not been domesticated and they cannot be enforced until that is done and a given number of countries have ratified them. You may find that a treaty on a given human rights standard was signed at the UN but only five countries have accepted it. So, it will divert us. So, let us stick to the above amendment I have proposed. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, this particular rule has attracted a lot of debate. The new proposal made by hon. Ekanya is on the Floor and I am going to put the question on it - the drafting as he has proposed it. 

MR OBOTH: Mr Chairman, this spirit of the proposal by hon. Ekanya is entirely good. The only challenge is, how do we draft it as guided by the Attorney-General? There is general fear; probably the chairman knows that when this proposal was being brought up on the streets, people were saying that this is the committee where the lobby agencies are going to come and use Article 32 to portray themselves as a disadvantaged group being oppressed but with constitutional rights. So, I think before you put to question the proposal by hon. Ekanya, we should think about how best it can be captured, marrying it with Article 31 which would cover the fears that hon. Ekanya, a man of family that I know, would like to cure. So, I think we would benefit from further guidance on how to make the modification. 

MR TASHOBYA: Thank you so much, Mr Chairman. I do appreciate the spirit in which hon. Ekanya is bringing the proposal but the guidance I am trying to seek is that all committees in doing their work are supposed to ensure that the Bills and the laws that they pass are constitutional. This is not a specific responsibility of any committee. That is what we are supposed to do - to conform to the Constitution. To me, that is a given. 

So, what specific problem are we trying to cure because really that is what we are supposed to do? 

We are supposed to ensure that laws that committees and Parliament pass are constitutional. The spirit may be good but I do not see why we should specifically put it in the rules as if to imply that some of the committees, in passing and considering Bills, have a way out outside the Constitution.

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you very much. I think the issue being raised is clear. What we only need now is the language. The way hon. Ekanya has put it is too general and it will presuppose that other committees can avoid being compliant with the Constitution. I want to suggest a draft - “The committee in discharging its function should ensure that positive aspects of our culture such as heterosexuality are protected” - so that we are very clear. The committee should ensure that positive aspects of our culture such as heterosexuality are protected. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, maybe we are looking at that thing and we are allowing something else to crop in under(c). Something is sneaking in under (c) - international human rights instruments. What about those ones which are not enforced in Uganda? Although the general rule of interpretation is that all laws made internationally are binding, there are those that we are not signatory to and there are those that we have not ratified. When we leave it like this, it means that we will follow all international human rights instruments. We might need to qualify it and say the ones enforced in Uganda to which Uganda is party.  So that we-

MR EKANYA: Then the other proposed amendment even becomes redundant. My concern was about those instruments that some countries have ratified and have domesticated but for us we have not. So, (c) and (d) – 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Sub rule (c) should be modified?

MR EKANYA: Yes.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: We have already deleted (d). 

MR EKANYA: So (c) should be modified and then I will drop my proposal. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Yes because (c) takes care of that concern.

MS NAGGAYI: Mr Chairman, I think in our quest to cure a certain problem we should not bog down the human rights committee. I think we are being overzealous on the issue of homosexuality. We are looking at the human rights committee and we are already judging it that it may now be the one to promote it. We may try to create a roadblock for one issue, which we are very passionate about like homosexuality, and create a roadblock for other issues of human rights that we may want actually to enforce in our country.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No, hon. Naggayi. On this proposal to use the instruments that are in force, it is those international instruments that Uganda has studied and has agreed to be party to. We are not blocking anything. If Uganda should accede to some other international instruments, that fall within this category. 

MS NAGGAYI: Well, there are some issues, especially from the women and gender perspective, which Uganda has refused or has not yet signed and we are urging and campaigning all the time for Government to sign. So, what are we pegging now before -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Before they have signed it, it does not apply. That is why you are urging them to sign it. Once they sign it, it falls within the rules. 

MS NAGGAYI: I would want to hear that amendment and see how it will block one item and allow others to come in.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: It is not blocking anything. It is just saying we will use the national and international human rights instruments that are enforced in this country. We are talking of those ones which are enforced in this country, the ones that Uganda has ratified. That is why you have the national laws and international laws to which Uganda is party.

MS NAGGAYI: We are blocking the committee to look - I am looking at the women campaign, especially where they may come to this committee as a women’s group. We know very well that we are still-

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Hon. Naggayi, I have understood your point. Have you read the clause we are dealing with? It says, “to monitor Government compliance.” You cannot monitor compliance to something that you are not signatory to. We are monitoring the compliance of Government to what it has acceded to and what is binding on it. If it is not binding to the Government of Uganda, how do you monitor its compliance to something which it is not party to?

MS NAGGAYI: Yes, hon. Ekanya, I have my legitimate concerns too. As a woman, I know that there will be groups of people who come to interact with the committee - (Interjections) – Yes! People will come to interact with the committee on certain issues, for example on some instruments that we are still urging Government to sign; won’t these groups come to the committee to interact with them?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Have you looked at (g)? It says, “to carry on such other functions related to human rights as may be assigned to it by the Parliament under this rule or the laws enforced.” There is what we call the incidental clause to take care of all those situations. 

Honourable members, I will put the question to the new rule on the functions of the Committee on Human Rights. I put the question that the new rule as amended stands part of the rules. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, I want to inquire. I want to know if we agreed on the period where we say they report to the House at least twice.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Yes, we agreed on the period. 

MR LUGOLOOBI: Mr Chairman, I have an amendment.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: To this one?

MR LUGOLOOBI: No, it is a new amendment where I am proposing inserting a new rule in the Rules of Procedure.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: What rule?
 
MR LUGOLOOBI: I am proposing inserting of a new rule-

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: After this one?

MR LUGOLOOBI: Not necessarily. The rules committee could decide where to place it appropriately.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No. That is too general. Honourable members, there is a proposal on paragraph 70 to insert a new rule on the functions of the subsidiary legislation. That one falls by the wayside because it was not approved. So we go to rule 159 on sectoral committees.

Rule 159

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Mr Chairman, this was disposed of. The House approved the change of names to sectoral committees, so this is basically an inconsequential amendment.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: That one is inconsequential. Yes, the name has been changed from sessional to sectoral committees.

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: The second one is substantive. In paragraph (c) of sub rule (2), delete (ii) and insert a new committee on health covering health and substitute for “Social services” the word “education and sports”.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I put the question that the consequential matters be approved.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: In paragraph (i) on Presidential Affairs, add (vii) and (viii) as follows:
“(vii) Directorate of Ethics and Integrity; and 
(viii) Uganda AIDS Commission.” 

The justification is that these are new votes under the Committee on Presidential Affairs which need to be included.
 
THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Handle the next paragraph also so that we deal with them.

MS KABAKUMBA: Kampala City Council Authority is under Presidential Affairs; maybe it could be added as (ix).

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: So, (ix), KCCA. 

Replace paragraph (l) on finance as follows: “Finance, Planning and Economic Development covering – 
(i) 	Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and its agencies;
(ii) 	Office of the Auditor-General.” 

The justification is that the Ministry of Finance has several agencies under it, like the Bureau of Statistics, Bank of Uganda, National Council of Science and Technology, the Treasury Department, Uganda Investment Authority, the Population Secretariat among others and they should be monitored by this particular committee.

Secondly, the Office of the Auditor-General is a separate vote from that of the Ministry of Finance and it is an independent institution.

In paragraph (j), delete (i) and insert a new paragraph (n) immediately after paragraph (m)-

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Where is it? We are on rule 159.

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Sorry, Mr Chairman; I promised to report to the House yesterday on the creation of the Committee on East African Affairs. So this is the report.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: We first deal with this. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, I think we are about to reach there. On the Office of the Auditor-General, as you are aware, the Office of the Auditor-General is an office of Parliament and what has been happening is that the Office of the Auditor-General has been going to the finance committee. I do not think it is the right place to go to. It should either go to Public Accounts Committee or Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs. Generally they deal with Public Accounts Committee -of course, those are accountability committees. For purposes of independence in Parliament, we could take it to Legal and Parliamentary Affairs.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: When the Auditor-General brings reports, which committee brings its policy issues?

MR OKUPA: Mr Chairman, the Leader of the Opposition here was thinking of either PAC or legal but I think it would go to legal because the Auditor-General’s Office is now an office of Parliament. Since it is the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs which handles parliamentary issues, I think it should go to the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: The Public Accounts Committee is a standing committee; it is not a sectoral committee. We are talking about which sector it falls in. It is not a standing committee issue right now. It is the issue of their policy issues.

MR EKANYA: Mr Chairman, I wanted to request that this matter be given time for consultation because I cannot go against the position of the Leader of the Opposition. 

There was a position, which was issued by hon. Rebecca Kadaga in consultation with the Leader of the Opposition, which I need to remind him of in a meeting which was attended by the Auditor-General regarding this matter. So, I wanted to request that this issue be stood over because I cannot disagree with the Leader of the Opposition here and then you -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: You see, hon. Ekanya, do you still insist that this office of the Auditor-General should go under a standing committee for policy issues.

MR EKANYA: No, Sir. It is which sessional committee it should go to. There was a meeting between the Auditor-General, the Speaker and the Leader of the Opposition and it was agreed.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: It was agreed that what?

MR EKANYA: I need to consult my leader, Sir.

MR OKUPA: I thought we had this thing very clear. We are talking about the policy issues and the issues of that nature. As I stated earlier on, when we made the Act establishing the office of the Auditor-General, we also changed it and put it under Parliament. We all know very well that the office of the Auditor-General is now an office of Parliament. Since it is the committee of legal that handles Parliament, I think that is the right place for the office of the Auditor-General to fall for these budgetary policy issues. 

If it is issues of accountability, this is where PAC handles. But for these purposes, I think that the legal committee is the right sectoral committee to handle. I think my LOP is agreeing with the position.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, I have remembered. The meeting he is talking about was a meeting which was set up to look at the office of the Auditor-General and the members were the chairman PAC, chairman COSASE, chairman Local Government Accounts Committee and chairman finance committee at that time in the past Parliament. 

The office of the Auditor-General is an office of Parliament and the committee that appropriates money for Parliament is the legal committee. In fact, the budget of the office of the Auditor-General should be under the budget of Parliament and then we table them. Finance will handle other things not-

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: So, Mr Chairperson, the proposal is that you delete the office of the Auditor-General from this particular amendment you are proposing. Do you concede?

MR FOX-OYWELOWO: I concede, and we move it to Legal and Parliamentary Affairs which is under (f). So we introduce (viii), office of the Auditor-General. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Under the legal and parliamentary committee? 

MR FOX-OYWELOWO: Under legal and parliamentary -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, I put the question that rule 159, as amended, do stand part of our rules.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Rule 159, as amended, agreed to.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

7.29
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON RULES, PRIVILEGES AND DISCIPLINE (Mr Fox Odoi-Oywelowo): Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Deputy Speaker presiding_)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

7.29
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON RULES, PRIVILEGES AND DISCIPLINE (Mr Fox Odoi-Oywelowo): Mr Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the proposed amendments to the Rules of Procedure and handled rules 116 to 118 and rules 134 to 159 and passed them with amendments.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

7.30
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON RULES, PRIVILEGES AND DISCIPLINE (Mr Fox Odoi-Oywelowo): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question to the motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)


MR EKANYA: Mr Speaker, I am seeking your guidance so that the next business be the select and ad hoc committees. I am seeking your guidance and your permission to introduce an amendment to the rules to create a special committee similar to ad hoc and select committees that will be constituted solely by the discretion of the Speaker. 

Under the current arrangement, select committees are constituted in consultation with the whips and ad hoc committees with the Business Committee. The hand of the Speaker is tied up to find independent members whom she or he has confidence in, like us who have been here, to do work and to get results-(Laughter) - so that the country can see. I am seeking your guidance and I am putting notice that when the appropriate time comes, please allow me to do so.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, you need to consult with the chairman of the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline. You have no direct access to the Speaker. In matters of these amendments, the Speaker has no capacity to examine the proposals. You need to discuss this with the chairman of the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline and possibly the membership so that it is comprehensively handled with its implications and everything else and then it will be properly brought.

Honourable members, we have not broken our record of yesterday. 
It is a very appropriate time for us to take a break in view of the events that will be happening tomorrow. Tomorrow we have the International Women’s Day and honourable members, you will be celebrating, recognising this day in different places. It might be a good time for us to take a break. 

May I now wish you all happy celebrations for tomorrow. Wherever you will be, remember the causes for which this particular day was set for and let us see how to implement them in our day-to-day proceedings in policy matters and everything that comes with it.

This House stands adjourned to Tuesday next week, 2.00 p.m.  Thank you very much for sitting this late.  

(The House rose at 7.33 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 13 March 2012 at 2.00 p.m.) 
