
Tuesday, 2nd March, 1993.

The Council met at 2.30 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS.

(The Vice-Chairman, Al-Haji Moses Kigongo, in the Chair).

(The Council was called to order).

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Members, it is with deep regret that I wish to inform you of the death of hon. Alip Mikele, Council Member for Moroto County, Lira District.  Hon. Alip passed away yesterday at 5.00 p.m. in Lira Hospital where the body is still lying.  The Council will greatly miss him as you all recall that he has been a good debater.  Let us stand up all and observe one minute’s silence in his memory.  May his soul rest in eternal peace.

 BILLS
SECOND READING

THE CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY BILL, 1992

(Debate continued from 25th February, 1993).

MRS. F. NKURUKENDA (Women Representative, Masindi):  Mr. Chairman, I rise to support the Bill.  As the debate goes on, you find that your points are raise but I only have one observation to make.  While I agree that people should stay on because of the experience and what not, I would like to stress the importance of people’s wishes.  I do not think it is wise to cling on, if the people’s wish is that they want to give us a fresh mandate and this is where I would like to suggest that if possible, we go back and seek fresh mandate so that we make our Constitution acceptable to all without any complaints or ill feelings.  One thing I wanted to talk about is this, the Chairman of the Assembly.  Now, with this Chairman, I would like to support the fact that he should be nominated and appointed by the President because I feel, if you have been elected to the Constituent Assembly, you come as a delegate.  You are a delegate of your people and if you are given the responsibility of a chairman or a chairperson, I am hoping it is possible it can be a lady - then you are supposed to be impartial and I feel you may not be in position to actually articulate your people’s feelings without fear or favour.  

So, I feel the President should nominate a chairman of course with the help or advice from maybe NEC, Cabinet and the NRC.  One other point I would like to stress, like many have said before me, is the point about women representation.  While we thank the NRM Government for having facilitated our coming here in these numbers, I would like here again to suggest to the Ladies who are here and those who are able, to go and stand for the Constituent Assembly but at the same time, there is a fear that many may not come through because of the traditional beliefs especially men; look at us here, how men are here in this House as compared to the women.  People tend to assume that this is a man’s world and that women should stay at home and cook and look after the babies.  Actually not thinking about the fact that the women’s contribution to the development of not only Uganda but the world in general cannot be over emphasised.  So, you actually need these ladies just like in the home.  A home without a lady cannot really - you cannot call it a home.  So, if we work together side by side, I am sure we can really reach great things.  

So, I would support the suggestion that from every district, we get a lady delegate, which I want to go and be a delegate for Masindi.  In fact, I would like to get somebody else, somebody fresh to come and represent Masindi District in the Constituent Assembly and maybe stand in some other county in Masindi and test the people’s feelings and maybe, if there is a change towards the female world.  So, Mr. Chairman, with those few remarks, I beg to support.  Thank you.

MRS. NKWASIBWE (Women Representative, Kabale):  Thank you, Mr. Chairman, to call my name so that I air my views about the Bill in question.  Mr. Chairman, at first, I had misgivings as to whether I should support the Bill or not, but in the name of democracy, I think I will support the Bill whole heatedly because I believe in sharing power and I believe there are many more Ugandans both men and women who are capable of debating the Constitution and promulgating it so that Uganda can move ahead.  But, I get puzzled, although the Minister explained very well the coming up of this Bill, it seems the adoption report is so much as variance with the Constituent Assembly Bill.  The Commission recommended so much, and so much is left out, and I do not think it is fair in some parts especially where representation is concerned.  For example, I believe that the RC.V as was recommended in the adoption report, should have been provided for in the Bill.  I also believe that political party representation was tampered with and differs from the arrangement recommended and very good reasons were given for the inclusion of RC.V and also the representation of political parties.  For example, in the adoption report, it says that Uganda Patriotic Movement Party is no longer in existence but I think socially outside, I think there is enough association with UPM members to show that actually, it is there in existence. (Applause)  Why should the report say that there is no UPM and there in the Bill they say UPM should give two representatives?

MR. OBWANGOR:  Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, I would like to inform the hon. Friend on the Floor that if UPC and UPM exist, why did they refuse definitely to give evidence to the Commission?

MRS. NKWASIBWE:  Mr. Chairman, I do not accept that bit of information because the population of Uganda includes people; they did not discriminate who associates with who and what to give views and all the views which were given in the making of the new Constitution include people of various beliefs and different political affiliations.  

I feel a bit worried although I support and has to happen that Ugandans are going to suffer election anxiety for two years, this year and next year because all along after the collection of views for the new Constitution, Ugandans were looking forward to the elections next year 1994, but it is a pity that we have to go to the polls this year and then next year again but as I said, I also believe in democracy and sharing of powers and duties and responsibilities.  Therefore, the elections should take place and we elect a new Constituent Assembly and I believe that this Council was not left out although I think the number given was too small.  I would propose that it could be raised to 20.  I also support the idea that each district should shield a woman representative and I wish to conclude by calling upon Ugandans women; there are very many able-bodied women, very well educated, intelligent and hard working like the men in Uganda.  So, I call upon them to go and challenge the seats on every constituency.  With those few words, I support the Bill. 

THE DEPUTY MINISTER FOR LABOUR AND SOCIAL WELFARE (Mrs. B. Okwir):  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  I am sorry I am a bit disorganised by this afternoon’s information but I would like to say collectively we are all sorry about what has happened to hon. Mikele Alip.  We pray to God to rest his soul in eternal peace.  I briefly say something little on the Construction after making an observation.  I wish to make an observation that since 16th February this year when we resumed, the Members had been quite pleasant and vigilant.  At one moment, the pleasantness was becoming too much and I had fears.  It was almost becoming a kind of excitement.  I would like to tell my Colleagues that sometimes too much of something is not good in that you find in this House, during the period, moments when temperatures, blood pressures and tempers were fluctuating and thank God, we have doctors in the House here who could have handled uncontrollable situations but we did not have the case where Member’s temper or blood pressure or temperatures short or high that it could not be controlled.  I would like to congratulate Members for stabilising now and we look forward t a successful end.  

I would like to support the Bill.  I do not see anything wrong with having another team who will be handling the Constitution.  If the same people who elected us now want another group to discuss the Constitution, I do not see anything wrong with it.  In any case, at one time, the people had fears that the Constitution had already been made.  Now if we have to solve that problem and they preferred another team discussing the Constitution, I would support them and I would encourage as many Members as possible to go in for yet another election in preparation for yet another one in 1994.  The problem maybe some of the Members here and I also do fear is that we have to use methods of democracy.  Yes, Uganda just like any other third world, its democracy, I see that it is not matured enough and that it tends to be personalised and in that way, democracy itself is undermined.  So, that is the only fear otherwise the Members here I am sure quite a number of them.  They are quite popular enough, should they go back to the people they will be re-elected.  So, I do not see why we should not all go back and be re-elected.

The point on composition of the Constituent Assembly.  I think it is important that since our society is balance, it is important for some members of our society to be nominated until such a time in future that we all feel that the society is so balanced that everybody can be elected fairly, then there will be then no reason why some members of our society should be nominated.  I am talking like this because people like women, youth and others who are disadvantaged they should be nominated.  I do support the idea that they should be -the number nominated should, actually, be as many as possible, the number which has been given here of eight, I do not want arithmetic was used to reach this figure either, knowing very well that women are the majority - I do not know whether it was simple arithmetic or alternative or modern maths used -(Interruption)

MR. OBWANGOR:  Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, I would like to tell my hon. Friend holding the Floor of the august House that there cannot be freedom if we fear ourselves, I repeat, there cannot be freedom if we fear ourselves.  The only Member intimated that because we fear ourselves, therefore, we should ask nominations.  Then we do not love Uganda, if we love Uganda, and we are a key of the broad-based government, I see no grounds at all, Mr. Chairman, we should not fear one another, it should be a competition.

MRS. OKWIR:  Mr. Chairman, that is the advice from or wisdom from an elder, but I do not support that one.  I thank him for the advice, but it is true that today we are what we are, the society is in balance, so somebody somewhere has to start in the way of balancing it, and that is what NRM Government is doing.  So, let us give it a chance to continue nominating till things normalise.  I do not see anything wrong with it.  Before I was interrupted by the hon. elder, I was saying that the figure given for the women is reading either, and I was saying what arithmetic was used to get this figure eight, knowing very well that the women are over 50 per cent of the total population of the country.  I would support the idea of having women nominated, or at least, the general figure - if it were possible I would have women 50 per cent of 180, that will be about 90 -(Interjection)- okay, taking quite a number of factors into consideration and being flexible then I would support the idea of having one woman representative per district, and that would be 40 then plus the eight and then it would be 48.  

The other section, youths, the soldiers, the workers, the historicals and a few others, yes, I do support that these groups should be nominated in any case there is no way - we are not going to have young people takes care of what we are discussing now, if we want continuity, and there is no way we are going to live out soldiers as you all know that in the past we have had problems where soldiers take over Governments and then kind of confuse some parts in the Constitution, it is important that they are there so that together we see how to protect this new Constitution.  I have two other points to raise.  Somewhere there is a mention made of qualification, the Bill is quiet on the qualifications for candidates, and I would like to propose that the same qualification that was used for NRC Members should be the same ones made for the members that would come to Constituent Assembly, and on age, allow me to say something.  When a mention was made on the youth, the Bill stated clearly the age range for the youth 18 to 35, which was very good.  But, the age range for adults there was no mention made about it, and I think this is an oversight.  I think the Minister - there was an oversight here and through you the Minister should look at it again, where we all assume that the adult age starts from 35, what is the maximum age for the adults?  I am particularly concerned about this because earlier on a Member had said that young people have lost experience so they should take over certain responsibility.  But, I have also seen that adults of a certain age they have too much experience that they confuse issues.  I am aware that in Uganda today there are few Ugandans who are over 100 years old with very good experiences and I am happy to say that my grandfather is 102 years old with very good experience but you cannot expect him to propose one of those good experiences for new situations.  So, it is important for us to put the maximum age for those who are coming to participate in the Constituent Assembly so that they are say, 150 and so on.  Because - so, I would like to propose that something near 70 could be tolerated -(Interruption)

AN HON. MEMBER:  Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, I would like to inform the hon. Deputy Minister on the floor that most of the aged people amongst Ugandans, for most of them it is difficult to tell when they were born, because the idea of registering births is only a very new idea, and it will not be easy to tell who is 75 or who is 78 years old because of lack of adequate data on births.  

MRS. OKWIR:  I thank the Member for informing me, Mr. chairman, but I still think that 70 years old would be tolerated - about somebody of 70 years of age could be -(Interruption)

MR. OBWANGOR:  Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, I would like to inform the Minister holding the Floor and I am glad that the learned Attorney General and Minister for Justice, and the Deputy Minister of Justice, they are here, that under RC Statute 9 of 1987 every Ugandan under the age of 18 -(Interruption)

MEMBERS:  Under or over?

MR. OBWANGOR:  No, no, every Ugandan at the age of 18 - RCs, therefore, he is in position to understand life in a nation, and I am glad that this lady to think that people under the age of 70 will be tolerated, that is the yardstick of politics. (Laughter)   

THE CHAIRMAN:  Try to wind up hon. please

MRS. OKWIR:  Thank you very much hon. Obwangor for your wisdom, I do appreciate your sentiments, I am with you.  Mr. Chairman, lastly on the appointment of Chairman of the Constituent Assembly, I do support the proposal that the President should appoint the Chairman after consultation with the Cabinet.  I do not see anything wrong with the President participating in the election of the Chairman of the Constituent Assembly.  Surely, this is a project that has come through his initiative and I do not see anything wrong with the President participating in the election of the Chairman so that he is sure of what will come at the end of it.  Mr. Chairman, with that, I do support the Bill.  Thank you very much.   

MRS. MASAABA WAFAANA (Women Representative, Mbale):  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  First of all, I have some resolutions that were passed DRC, Mbale that I would like to present here.  But before I do that, permit me to support the Bill and to make a few observations.

While I support the Bill, I would like the Minister for Constitutional Affairs to tell me the meaning of constituencies, because everybody was asking me in my village what is the meaning of Constituent Assembly.  The other question I received was that do we have the provision for the making of the Constituent Assembly under the Constitution we are following?  When I contacted some religious people they felt that they would be comfortable as observers rather than as participants.  On the preamble some people felt that it is very difficult to have a real democratic system because where there is democracy even in America, you will find that there is not really very perfect democracy.  Usually you find the President still holding all the gadgets of communication of transport etc, but they are in for this Government bringing out a truly representative Constituent Assembly to be established under our rules.  The people of Mbale District are fully behind the Government, they also feel that although they elected some of us to come here, but to go the masses there should be a Constituency Assembly.  On that specific point, when I left this place I took the Constituent Assembly Bill and gave it to the Chairman of the district who made photocopies and circulated to the members of DRC and the same was with Municipal Council.  Unfortunately, when they met I was not well, so I missed the meeting.  However, I got their resolution and they are as follows; permit me to present them.  That on addition to section 4(c) the intending candidate shall also be required to have paid graduated tax for the preceding two years consecutively in the area he intends to stand.  Because there are usually many defaulters, many who evade taxes and they want to enjoy the services in the country or in the district.  Number 2, that the following sections be amended as below; 

-	One, section 6(e) the prison sentence be reduced from 10 years to 5 years.
-	Two, Section 9, Clause 2, the Chairman of the Constituent Assembly should be elected by a two thirds majority of the delegates who are directly elected, but should not be 	appointed by the President as provided in the Bill, because the Chairman might start overlooking some other delegates.

-	Three, Section 15(1) that for purposes of transaction 	business other than adjournment the quorum be reduced to 50 per cent instead of 140 as provided, because usually you will find that sometimes even in NRC we do not realise a quorum in time.

-	Four, Section 24, that the courts shall be presided over by three High Court Judges instead of one as provided, and that where aggrieved is dissatisfied with the ruling he or she should be allowed to appeal to a higher court.

Section 26, that the delegates allowances should be much higher than those payable to NRC Members because of the special task they will have to perform.  Mr. Chairman, No. 6, the special groups should not be represented as provided in the First Schedule, instead all delegates should be elected directly except for the armed forces which shall include NRA, Police and Prisons who must also be subjected to direct elections by their fellow members of the forces.  However, special forces or favours, but many men’s attitude in Uganda have not changed to realise the importance the role a woman plays in society, that we shall venture and go it a long way, it a woman goes on the same ticket like Mrs. Victoria Ssekitoleko we shall know that we are really forging ahead.  Under No. 7, Rule 2, that the population of 80,000 inhabitants to qualify for an electrical area, should be reduced to 50 persons and also areas with vast populations like Karamoja and Gulu and mountainous ones like Bugisu and Kabale, because of their difficult terrain, although small in area, but with large population should be subdivided into more electoral areas, say of them on county boundaries in such areas could not depict through representation as some of the counties were created for political convenience.  Eight, Rule 6, that the District Executive Secretaries be appointed returning officers, and Rule 9(b) that candidates be where candidates get more than an eighth of the total votes this money should be refunded within a period of one week after the elections.  Mr. Chairman, those were the resolutions from Mbale District.

While I support this Bill, I have a problem about who is supposed to be supreme in legislating the law, is it we or is it the Constituent Assembly? Because, when I was being trained as a lawyer, they said that the august House, that is the National Assembly was the supreme legislative body, although I heard the hon. Minister saying that the Constitution is the supreme.  Now, this is where I need clarification also as a lawyer.  I do agree that when extended out life our purpose was for debating the Bill, but I do agree with the report that when you see the composition of the House according to the masses they would rather have out.  So, I think I will go with the masses to say that although we are supreme, we have done what we can, we have supported NRM Government as those who came in and we hope that those who will discuss the Constituent Assembly will know the thinking of NRM and peace -(Interruption)

AN. HON. MEMBER:  Point of order.  Is it in order, Mr. Chairman, for the hon. Member from Mbale to say that Members have extended their lives when she quite well know that we have suddenly lost some of our Members, is she in order?

THE CHAIRMAN:  Not in order.

MRS. MASAABA WAFAANA:  Mr. Chairman, I think I was here when we were debating the extension and I participated.  The people of Mbale District are looking forward to a peaceful change, they are only worried about this transition period.     Because of people who are crafty and are trying to manipulate others who are already lining up to see that - even those who are here should be replaced.  The people who think that this is time to capture over, all they are interested in is to see that people are elected, we discussed the Constitution peacefully without bias, without discrimination and so on and so forth.  However, they asked me that, is decentralisation covered in the new proposals because they see it being implemented and here is no law backing it, maybe the Minister of Local Government will have to give me an answer to this one so that I go back and tell them because I started decentralisation in the City Council but we had no formal Bill may be this is where we have to go -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Wind up please.

MRS. MASAABA WAFAANA:  Mr. Chairman, while I wind up I support the Bill and say that people be allowed to choose their people freely without discrimination, without bias because we are all Ugandans and we must participate in the discussing of our Constitution without fear or favour. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  

MR. MUGWANYA ZIMULA (Mawokota County, Mpigi):  Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for giving me the chance also to contribute on the very critical issue of the nation.  This is the Bill that all Ugandan, since 1967, have been waiting for, and I stand here to support it by little bit of amendment.  First of all I would like to salute the hon. Minister for the good background which he has given us and also to salute hon. Kanyeihamba who has brighten us our mind as Members. (Applause)  Secondly, before I contribute anything, I have come here not to give a speech or to do it but to represent a message from my people.  I represent two people, the first is my people from Mawokota as you know them very well, secondly as from the Bataka of Buganda, thirdly to pass the law of Uganda that is why I am here.  I have been listening very carefully to all the Members about this Bill, I would like to advise hon. Members that we cannot ignore the sample of the future produced by the Constitutional Assembly, we have been complaining about the figures that it is not 18 per cent, but these figures were obtained from our people that is what we should know whom we represent here.  

Secondly, when we were extending our stay, we agreed that NRM should go with NRC.  But if some of the Members they decide to say we can dissolve the council, it is not correct, when a Man is married to a wife he should not dissolve that.  We should not go out, when you have not solved with your ‘mukoo’ if the NRA.  That so far I am supporting the Government, NRC should stay in power even if we elected the new Constituent Assembly.  Hon. Kategaya talked about democracy, it is an expensive thing all Members know, even the developed countries democracy is an expensive thing.  So when we are arguing about the number, I would tell my colleague the hon. Member of Finance, do not add the number if you want to produce the real democracy we should allow everybody to participate in this, all the women and others.  We may not mind about the money the little peace in the North, we have spent a lot of money to bring that peace hon. Members should know and when we are debating this, do not think about money, what we want is to create a good democracy which His Excellency or NRA fought for.

Secondly, about the appointment of the chairman, hon. Members let us be realistic to leave this Bill as it is, to allow His Excellency to elect the Chairman.  the man has been genuine, for this time, his the one who brought this peace and I do not think, if we say, we do not want him to elect the Members, it will be in proper way.  I would also advise saying, let us give him four names from this council because we are the supreme organ of the nation, he can elect and give him the advisors on the four Members we are not going to have the Cabinet to advise him on these four names.  We should select people who will advise him, let us send the names about four people and then we select people we say okay, Ssemogerere can go, Kanyeihamba can go, Butagira can go -(Laughter)- and advise him.  The real persons who will not be biased -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Order please.

MR. MUGWANYA ZIMULA:  Mr. Chairman, if we finish that, I think we will produce a very good Constitution.  The Bataka say, they do not mind about the costing, they said you can reduce the number up to 50,000 people can be represented by one.  Because this thing is an international thing for everybody and we have to make it once and for all not just to make it for this time, now it is about 30 years we have been fighting for this, we have been waiting for this, they brought me to be here for only one thing, the Constitution not the other thing.  So, what we should do, we should reduce the number up to 50,000 a Constituency. I think with those few remarks, Mr. Chairman, I support the Bill.

MR. LUBEGA (Rubaga Division, Kampala): Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  In the first place I would like to join my Colleagues who have stressed the importance of this Bill.  This is a very important Bill and if this House makes out of this Bill un acceptable good law we shall have gone to an important step towards making a durable acceptable Constitution.  Since we are restricted to time, let me go straight to the provisions of the Bill, in the first place, I would like to support the proposition that a new body to discuss, enact and promulgate a Constitution be appointed that is the Constituent Assembly.  I am supporting this proposal in the Bill because not only have the many people countrywide demanded so and certainly in the Kampala Districts all the forums we have addressed have supported that a new Constituent Assembly be elected.  Even before that, I do remember when my constituency Rubaga Division was forwarding proposals to the Constitutional Commission, we did point out as early as July, 1991, and I would like to quote: ‘that the Government should institute a Constituent Assembly consisting people’s representatives directly elected’.  This memorandum was forwarded to the Constitutional Commission on 31st July, 1991, and I would like to throw my weights on this proposal not only because it is a proposal from Rubaga Division but I am also saying that there is a demand as I have said before from many people and certainly from Kampala District that a new Constituent Assembly should be elected.  In Buganda, there is a proverb that states that, ‘nanyini kabya tayasa’, meaning that the owner of the pot does not break it.  For even if he has to break it, the essence of this saying is that do not blame anybody.  Now, if we go back and participate in elections whereby every person who is illegible to vote that is 18 years and we have universal suffrage we shall not be heard tomorrow from those so many people of Uganda - adults at that level to say that that was a bad document and I think this is very, very important for credibility and transparency and what have you, let the people do this exercise through electing their own representatives directly.  When we came up with this proposal, we were aware of the existence of the two laws - section 14 or Article 14 of Legal Notice No. 1 of 1986 as amended and also an Act which provides for Constituent Assembly, an Act of 1967, we were aware that these were replaced but we are also aware that laws are amended by this very House and if we could find there is justification in amending a law, this House is charged with the duty of amending that law and in case this will not be the first time we are revisiting the Legal Notice No.1.  We did so at the term of extension, whether it was desirable or not - that is it, but we did really revisit this law and we have done so on a number of other occasions.  So, it is not inconsistent with the functions and objectives of this House to amend laws.  We, therefore, in my opinion we should support the provision of Clauses 33 of this Bill whereby it is proposed that the two Constituent Assembly Laws be repealed in fact and that is my stand.  There has also been a talk about the existence of two Houses simultaneously running.  I have had time and opportunity to look at the pending Bills for this year, and I find that if we did programme ourselves between now and September, we shall also have debated and passed the Budget.  So, for purposes of programme, we can talk of the Constituent Assembly coming into existence - this is just my observation - somewhere in October and at that time the House can be recessed.  It is not unusual for this House to be on recess for four months; it has happened before it can happen again and during the four months, even if many Members from this House.

MR. OBWANGOR:  Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, I would like to inform my hon. Friend holding the floor of the House, when we in the Uganda Constitution Commission raised the proposals setting up the Constituent Assembly and even making the substance of the new Uganda Constitution, we made it so sure because of what we passed in this House as with time the Legalistic process for making the new Constitution.  We did not make it as to be against the Government progress and programme for Constitutional development.  So, even in that when you mention, in my own defence, my friend it states that Clause 33 because we intend we amend the Legal Notice No.1 of 1986, an Act 12 of 1987 did not interfere with our thinking which we pushed today in the Ministry of Constitutional Affairs.  So, therefore, there is no at all obstruction except that Government is still doing its work.

MR. LUBEGA:  Thank you very much for the information and on being that time is about I have got only about two or three minutes to go -(Interruption)

MR. MAYENGO:  Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, I would like to inform the hon. Member on the Floor that if he took a look at Clause 30 of the Bill he will realise that there is implication that the NRC will have to be around as this all exercise goes on.

MR. LUBEGA:  Mr. Chairman, I was going to extend my discussion and propose that, when and wherever it is necessary to call the NRC they could come in to continue normal legislations even during the debate of the Constituent Assembly.  Now I want to go to reactions as given to me by Rubaga Division besides what I have already stated.  As far as the number of residence or people in the area, the people feel and I do feel that because of the disparities in population from county to county that in order to counter that somehow the number of approximately 60,000 should be used - when I say approximately I am using an alphabetical approximation whereby the intended number is what we are aiming at when we say approximately 60,000 we mean that anywhere between 55,001 and beyond 50 would create this approximation.  

So, that is the proposal from the constituency and I also support it as far as the election of the Chairman or rather the appointment of the Chairman, Rubaga RC III have no objection in letting the President appoint the Chairman but, I have listened to many others besides RC III, other have got mixed feelings because of transparency and I have also listened to Members here debating and I am very much persuaded that if we have to come up with a very transparent uncongested Constitution probably we can propose as other people in Rubaga Division did propose that you appoint or elect the High Court or Supreme Court Judge and this is my proposal, High Court or Supreme Court Judge, we do not necessarily need to elect or to appoint a person from among the elected Members, we can even go outside that because my Colleague was arguing that after all when you have been elected you are a delegate and to sacrifice you into being elected a Chairman probably you would compromise yourself, people can elect from outside but we propose a High Court Judge.  Now, on the issue of the Electoral Commission, I am of the view we did not discuss that - because of the importance of this position, the Electoral Commission we should appoint a team rather than getting one man to do the job, it can work very well and I intend to make the proposals as far as that is concerned.  For the rest the NRA went through without any problem, the NRA representation, the women found some problems because people of Rubaga really pitied, they said now, these 8 representatives will prejudice the chances of other women being elected.  Because if this provision is carried people will say, now the women have their own fare, so they may tend to be compromised, in that good faith they expect mixed fears otherwise they passed the 8 but also added that if elections have to be carried out, they should be carried out on regional basis.  For the Youth that was okay, for the President, they proposed that the number should be reduced from 15 to between five and ten, the RC III Council proposed ten and they said, this is so because probably it would be necessary for the Cabinet and President to appoint certain people to sit in the Parliament, for instance pilot this discussion they could be people from Government side or may be they also considered prisons and police and so on and so forth, and the originals here the historicals they said, probably this number may cater for these categories.  Now, political parties that passed without any question they said it is very, very important indeed. (Laughter) 

 They talked about the campaign; they said that it is not desirable for people we are going to make a fundamental basic law of the country to be taken into paddocks for purposes of explaining themselves.  A number supported that id an intending candidate wants to stand, one can - may call upon the police to be around, can organise his programme inform the authorities and in case people are fearing that there will be insecurity problems.  I realised that you want me to sit down, those are some of my issues, others I would like to propose to them particularly, those regarding the rules that will govern the Assembly.  I am not satisfied and I am consulted with other Members on the committee of Rules we are not satisfied the way the provision for rules governing the Assembly is provided here, because we would rather think that the Assembly itself can involve its own Rules and the Minister can only form a basis.  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  

MR. KAWANGA (Masaka Municipality, Masaka):  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  This is a historical period in the development of this country, the fact that we are sitting here to contribute to this process of Constitution making is historic itself.  Now, I think everybody who has had the opportunity of being here should feel he has made a good contribution, good enough even if he is not asked to come back as a Member of the Constituent Assembly.  My view, is that the key phrase in this Bill is part of the preamble and it says, in whereas, it is deemed expedient and in concert with a policy of involving the will of the people, in the entire process of the national Constitution making that a truly representative Constituent Assembly established to scrutinise the debate finally re-draft and enact the Constitution prepared and submit to the Minister in accordance to Section 6 of Uganda Constitution Commission.  That issue is that we should get the will of the people when we are making this Constitution and it is for this reason that I support the view that the Constituent Assembly should be directly elected.  The people who come here to debate this Constitution should come with a specific mandate to make that Constitution.  the reason for this are, we know the people have demanded it at least the people in my area insist that the people who should debate this Constitution should come from themselves from their elected representatives.  The other one reason is that, it is better that the people who make this Constitution are directly elected, for those of you who are familiar with law we talk about the best evidence rule.  If you have got direct evidence, you do not look for indirect evidence to prove the point.  So, if you can get a directly representative, why do you look for an indirectly elected one to the same job?  And in any case, I think it is a correct thing to do.  There has been argument that perhaps the people did not say so - whether the people said or they did, I think it is necessary for us to say it for them even if they did not say it themselves.  It is the correct thing that they elect somebody to come and represent them. So, the Constitution from now onwards can be said to have come from the people themselves.  I have looked at the proposal of the Joint Assembly whereby the Members of the NRC are joined together the members who elected directly to join together and we make one body as a Constituent Assembly.  I looked at it with a lot of sympathy but I think I am not going to support view, one reason perhaps for the Biblical reason that you do not put new wine in old bottles but that apart would have a messy situation where you get directly elected representatives, grabbing shoulders with indirectly representatives, all of them in one Assembly.  When it comes to reporting back in the Constituency, you wonder who should do the reporting.  What if they do not agree? (Interjection) It is possible.  Not only that you would get a situation where you have one constituency with one indirectly elected representative and four others who have been directly elected because you have got others and the messy situation is that would develop during the Constitution make, in process could cause us more problems than what we anticipate now.  

So, for that reason, I think we should preserve our honour stay here, call upon other people, give them the job, they do it and give them an okay after they have completed it.  And for those proud Members of this House who feel if they go back and they do not get elected, they would feel bad.  I would want them to borrow a leaf from hon. Barigye.  He went, he stood in another election, he did not get elected and he is sitting back in this House. (Laughter)  I wish to remind those proud Members that this is a whole crown Prince who went for an election in his former Kingdom, so if he can go and come back and go on, why not you?

I have some concern about Section 4 or Clause 4 of the Bill and this is the one which - especially 4(a) which says that, not more than 180 delegates elected from the electoral areas - you know, it gives the number as 180.  I propose that we should not fix a number of the directly elected delegates because as the debate has proceeded we have noticed that there is a desire that counties remain the unity but some counties have got very small populations.  Just as I would have said that Municipalities should become the unity.  Some Municipalities have got only 20,000 residents.  Now if those can have that, it is necessary that the bigger counties also reduce the numbers to figures which are near, somewhere near the figures that we are proposing for the small counties and the Municipalities.  Of course, it cannot be very long but I propose that the future should be 50,000 people rather than 80,000 which is being proposed in this one and the reason for this is simple.  When we are talking about representation in the Constituent Assembly Bill, we are talking about representing people not geographical areas or mere the flora and fauna of those areas.  Now if it has to be people, if a Municipality can get representation for 20,000 people, why not Bukoto, why not Igara or any other county?  I want to feel that if I speak here as a representative of people surely I speak for about the same number of people as my other Colleague who is speaking for his own people and he is then that we can talk about democracy and this - if this has to happen, we should leave to the Electoral Commissioner to get out that even number.  I realise that, that will be a larger Assembly but I think it is necessary that we have it that large but to be sure that we get the consent of all Ugandans when we are making that election.  So, I suggest that Electoral Commission should not be shadowed with a number and this means that also Rule No. 2 under the Rules should be looked so that we do not fix the number at that one.  

I am worried and the people I represent are worried about Clause 22 of this Bill.  It appears to have escaped every hon. Member in this House but one of the most powerful individual under this Bill, is the Commissioner.  The Commissioner has about 10 functions.  He designates the Constituent Assembly electoral areas.  He organises and supervises the elections.  He exercises general direction and supervision of the administration and management of elections.  He appoints by name of office registration and returning officers.  He issues election officers instruction for running the election.  He carries out the day-to-day administration and so on.  But as if that was not enough, after he has done all that then he comes to the Constituent Assembly and he also starts it.  I feel this is a little too much.  I propose that we split the two functions.  That the Commissioner should be left to the function of conducting elections that is easy enough because immediately - even immediately after the election will have the job of completing the whole election exercise.  So that he would not have time to come again to be a member - I mean to look after the new Constituent Assembly that shall have been formed.  I propose that some other person becomes the Clerk as if it were, of the Constituent Assembly and for that reason, I propose that election purposes we should have one person as the Commissioner.  I propose that we should have an Electoral Commission.  This will be useful in two ways because he organises that election well enough, the data and arrangement he have made then shall be put to use next year when we are making elections for the next elections.  But if on the other hand the fellow messes up the lection of the Electoral Commission, he will find it very difficult to service the Constituent Assembly.  So, for that reason, I think we should have a second look, I hope the Minister will have a second look at the functions of this gentleman or lady.

Now, for the purposes of Section 9, the Chairman of this Assembly, a lot of views have been expressed.  I have a feeling also that if you get more than 200 people elected afresh and you bring them to this House, the first week and you ask them to choose one of them as their Chairman, it can be a very difficult exercise.  In fact it can become futile.  So, perhaps it is necessary to find a mechanism of zeroing down on a category of people from among they can elect somebody.  Then it becomes easier for whoever is appointing to know that there is a category.  We have talked about judges, that is always obvious choice but we could widen it to people who have got a distinguished career in this country, who are known for their probity and impartiality.  But certainly, to do that a body of this kind would find it very difficult.  So it is so for that reason I think that perhaps we can leave it to the President on the advise of Cabinet to choose from a category and I think this House can specify that category.  In my areas they proposed judges who are always obvious ones but I think that is something that we can extend.

The people I represent had some fears about restricted campaign.  that the campaign should be conducted the way it is proposed in this Bill.  The reason is simple that although in the past we have told people not to campaign, in real fact they have campaigned.  They have campaigned in very funny ways and at the end of the day, everybody knows that they have campaigned.  So, why pretend that people will not campaign and only design methods of ensuring that peace and security is preserved during that period.  There was only one funny other Clause, I forget which it was, which talks about the qualifications of people who should come to this House and it talks about people who belong to professional bodies but who for disciplinary reasons have been suspended for the performance of the fact those functions.  My people wondered about priests who get defrocked by their Bishops.  Would those also be dismissed, they belong to a profession and also judges, you never know.  So, we thought this clause is not really necessary.  If the profession has dismissed somebody but his people want to elect him, let him be elected.

And finally, there has crept into the Debate a reference to holding a referendum before the Constituent Assembly.  My view on that issue of holding a referendum now is a Constituent Assembly issue.  We should leave it the Constituent Assembly.  We should not assume the functions of the Constituent Assembly.  With those remarks, Mr. Chairman, I support the Bill.  

MR. BUTAGIRA (Rwampara County, Mbarara):  I thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I would like to say form the out set that my contribution will centre only on the composition of the Constituent Assembly.  Who should be there?  I am sure we all agree that there should be a Constituent Assembly.  This is agreed to discuss and promulgate a new Constitution.  The issue is, who should be there?  Now it is important to understand this principle otherwise, if you miss it we are derailed.  But permit me, before I give my views on this matter to comment on one or two matters that touch on this business for the House which were somehow raised in some quarters.  When this debate started, I was not present, but I finally came I tried to catch up by reading what was going on including reading papers and my attention was drawn to the New Vision of 19th February 1993 on page two.  There they are reporting in summary views of who contributed in this House of the Members and my Friend the Rt. hon. First Deputy Prime Minister talked and referred to me in the debate although he had not has the benefit of hearing me speak here.  He said this and I quote: ‘It seems the people of Uganda have forgotten nothing and learnt nothing.  I heard Butagira is saying we should repeat the mistake of 1966.  I do not see why people want to be more Catholic than the Pope”.  I am greatly perturbed and justifiably.  I do not know first of all what is meant by being more Catholic that the Pope, but if it means that I am becoming more of the NRM than NRM themselves and it if that is an offence, then I have no apology to make.  But seriously, I think we have joined this House, we have contributed, we have done our best and our proposals are in the best interest of this country.  I think it is not good test.  Two, read hidden agenda or smell a rat out of innocent that is brought before this House for the good of the country.  I think this type of thinking is not good for our country.  As they say so here, that what I am about to say is conceived by my proposal, I am going to talk about and with genuine and good intentions.  I do not want to dwell much into this aspect, suffice to rest the matter there.  

I would like also to refer to a trend which I think the Chairman of the Constitutional Commission should refrain from pursuing.  The report of the Chairman of the Constitutional Commission is very important and should be seen to be impartial but I have read in the papers that he is engaged in public discussion, trying to defend positions and in fact was saying – was going further to say this NRC should not in his view deliberate on the Constitution.  Now, okay, that is his view.  But this is the man who was chairing the Constitution Commission and we do not want -(Interruption)

MR. OBWANGOR:  Point of information.  I would like to inform my hon. Friend Butagira holding the Floor of the House, that the opinions of hon. Justice Odoch when he speaks to the press, it is the idea and a position of the Uganda Constitutional Commission that is his own matter.

THE CHAIRMAN:  Order, please.

MR. BUTAGIRA:  Mr. Chairman, thank you for the information although it is not helpful.  If the hon. Odoch should at best keep quiet, if his report is attacked, there is a Minister responsible for these matters who should answer. 

Just briefly, another point concerns an interview which was given by hon. Minister of State for Constitutional Affairs - hon. Njuba and reported in Weekly Topic February 1993 page 25.  He was being asked questions on the Constituent Assembly Bill but if I were him knowing very well that he was coming to this House to introduce this Bill and give his views, I would have kept quiet.  Because what he said might boomerang on him here.  Mr. Njuba was asked and I quote what he said -(Interjection)- hon. Njuba, sorry, and his question was, Mr. Njuba next week the House is going to sit and discuss this Constituent Assembly Bill, do you have any strong views you would like to have reflected before this House - before the House discusses the Bill and in his answer he says, -and this matter I want to bring to his attention and the attention of the House, ‘apart from some Members in NRC whom may have some selfish interests, I know the overwhelming Members of NRC and the majority of them are prepared to support it’.  I am asking, who are these Members with some selfish interests and, what are these selfish interests?  We do not know.  This is a serious assertion, an assertion that doubts the integrity and capability of this House to deliberate, an assertion that attribute bad motives on some Members of NRC that they have got their self interests when they talk on this view or if they happen to oppose his proposal.  This is a dangerous way of going about debating important issues of a nation.  

Having said that, let me talk without selfish interests. (Laughter)  As I said I support the Bill as far as it establishes a Constituent Assembly.  But what is a Constituent Assembly? To be analytical is very important because once you analyse the problem, once you analyse the issue, you can have a clear thinking.  Some Members have stood and even outside, they say, people want a new body elected.  Now my question is, who are the people?  Who are these people?  Because if you do not answer that then you maybe, derailed.  Now to answer that question some people have used the report of Uganda Constitutional Commission - interim report.  Now if you read this report, you will get an idea that the so-called people really give conflicting views and they are not speaking with one voice that they should be a new body.  So to use that argument and use this one is very faulty reasoning.  Now, let me refer you to a particular provision here in this adoption report.  If you look at page 18 of this report where they are discussing the NRC option to discuss the Constitution here, paragraph 35 reads; ‘There is limited discussion of NRC option in most memorandum’.  It was not an option mentioned in the guiding questions’.  If I may pose here, this very issue whether the NRC should debate Constitution or not was not within the terms of reference of the Constitutional Commission.  I go on to say, many memorandum especially, those from lower level RCs tended to an critically assume that the Draft Constitution would be formerly debated by NRC.  Hon. Members, these fellows the lower RCs, are in fact even nearer to the people and they are not saying - for them, in fact, they say Oh! let NRC debate.  So to use the argument the people without analysing it you can really be derailed.

Now I want to refer to another paragraph on this issue.  On page 23, of the report paragraph 48.  It reads, ‘The majority of the submissions to the Commission which have explicitly addressed the issue of the adoption process support the Constituent Assembly option’.  Now it says, those who explicitly addressed themselves to the issue.  What does it mean?  It might have been minority who expressed themselves on this issue and out of that minority, the majority chose NRC option.  Do you get me hon. Members?  So, in summary, it is wrong to use this report and say the people have said this. First, because they have not said so.  Secondly, it was not among the points of reference of the Constitutional Commission.  Mr. Chairman, I will proceed this man can wait - (Interruption)

MR. OBWANGOR:  Point of order.  Mr. Chairman, I would like to inform my hon. Friend -(Interruption and Laughter)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Order, please.  Is it a point of order or information?

MR. OBWANGOR:  Information, Mr. Chairman.

THE CHAIRMAN:  Order, please.  Take your seat please.  Order, please, proceed please.

MR. BUTAGIRA:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I would like to say, one thing is clear, even from this report.  There are people who would like a new body apart from the present NRC elected to debate a Constitution, but there also people even whose views are reported in this report who would like the present NRC to be part of the Constitutional making process.  So, I took opinion oppose, I consulted people in my Constituency; I had a register of whoever spoke, I wrote his name down and what he contributed.  Now, people of Rwampara, in that, those who came, and they were representatives form each of the sub-counties.  What were their views?  They were saying that the present NRC should constitute itself in a Constituent Assembly and debate the Constitution.  Four out of a hundred people said, we want a new body.  I told them, I said, thank you for your view, I am your representative, but I am not a delegate, when I go to Kampala, I will listen to other peoples’ views and in the interest of the nation as a whole, I will take a decision.  I will risk.  I will take a decision that may not be yours, which may not like but I said, I would do it, if that were necessary.  Now, if I come here and totally ignore their views and say to hell, your views that this NRC should participate is not what people want, then, I begin to wonder who are the people?  

Now, if you look at my proposed Amendment, which I briefly refer to it since it is not a Committee Stage, in that, I am trying to marry two important proposals.  There are people where, who have spoken very strongly in favour of elected body - a new body and there are people who have said, the present NRC should be - take part in that constitution making process.  Now, I am saying, those two wives are strong and they cannot be ignored.  After all, the more people you can get to bless the Constitution, the better for its acceptability and durability. (Applause)  

So, what do I propose?  Marry the two.  Why not?  Why do those people not come - who want to be directly elected, come here?  Who is preventing them?  Let them come and let these people - because there are some people who want them also.  Mr. Chairman, I made that remark.  That was a light remark but it undermines the importance of this exercise of why two, two or why not four?  So, rather than engage in a debate on the criteria on how you come to the two, for each of the parties, do away with it, let the people who want to come under party - you can go and stand directly as I said, and come here.  So, it is beautiful, you avoid conflict and you accommodate whoever wants in the present NRC where women are half of 30, now you want eight, you know, you will suffer, if you -(Inaudible and Laughter)  So, in conclusion, I strongly believe that a combination of the present NRC plus people directly elected, will enhance and enrich the Constitution making exercise, will make the Constitution durable and will make the Constitution legitimate.  I beg to support.    

MR. BIDANDI SSALI (Nakawa Division, Kampala):  Mr. Chairman, I thank you for giving me this opportunity so that I contribute.  I am going to put on three coats under which I am going to contribute.  The first coat is, as a representative of the Nakawa Division.  I held meetings in my Constituency and like my colleague hon. Ssemogerere, had interaction with them.  Like in his case, there were different views expressed by different people on the issue of the Constituent Assembly.  The only difference between my people and his people, is that ours came up with a consensus, in their case, they failed to reach a consensus, that is why the hon. Member did not come with any recommendation from his area.  This is his submission here please. I am not insinuating anything.  In a nutshell, the people of Nakawa through their Constituent Council, which is equivalent to the Saza Council in the rural Constituencies, agreed that a new Constituent Assembly should be set up to consider the Draft Constitution.  And I would like to inform the hon. Member, my dear friend that was one of the basis - one of the grounds that I also came in to say this was what the people were saying.  

Members of Nakawa also agreed that there was need for special representation without giving the details which other members have also given in their respective cases, they agreed that the NRA, the Women, the NRC, in this case the NRC, NOTU, Political Parties, Youths, should be represented in their own right.  They also proposed that in addition to the Police and the Prisons, should be represented.  The Federation of Uganda Employers should also be represented.  They also said that traditional institutions that were a subject somewhere in the 1962 Constitution should also be represented but that this would be optional in the part of those who would be interested.  

On the question of the Chairman of the Constituent Assembly, there was a split vote and the majority said, the Assembly should elect the Chairman.  Those were the main - major recommendations of the people of Nakawa through their Council. I now put on another coat as a Cabinet Minister.  As one Member has said, this House gave Government a responsibility through a Statute that was passed in 1988.  We were asked; we were directed to constitute a Constitutional Commission.  We were authorised to receive the report after it has finished its work and we were authorised to present - to consider the report and present proposals in form of a Bill to this House, and this is exactly what we did.  The interim report was produced to Government, somewhere towards the end of last year around November and exactly two months, we came to the House with the proposals as directed.  Therefore, as we debate this particular Bill, we should be very clear that these are proposals by the Government and not decisions brought here for information.  I have attended every day of this Bill and have an impression that some Members seem to think that Government has already decided, has directed, is implementing, but please, let Members feel free and know that they have every right to amend any part of the proposals. (Applause)

In paragraph 22 of the report which Government received, okay page 10, paragraph 22, it reads if you allow me, ‘Overall there is concern that there should be fair play and openness in the establishment and operation of the body of procedures used to debate and adopt the new Constitution.  Fears of the possibility of manipulation of the process will only be laid to rest; if the adoption process chosen by government, convinces the people that manipulation by any social force will not be allowed.  The concerns of one’s social force must not be allowed to influence the process at the expense of other forces and of the people of Uganda as a whole’.  Paragraph 24(b), the last paragraph of that (b), also says, ‘the principle of effective safeguard has consequences for the adoption process.  The people have made it clear that it is only with their full participation in the public debate at the adoption of the new Constitution that it will be safeguarded for.  For only them, will they know, love, respect, uphold and when necessary, defend what is adopted.

And finally, paragraph 27 in general.  It is essential for the future of the nation that all social forces including the Government, the Army, political parties and all other institutions and pressure groups respect these principles throughout the entire adoption process.  Any methods of adoption of the new Constitution which are not consistent with them, should be avoided in particular, care is needed to avoid the possibility of domination by sectarian and opportunist interests which are likely to lead to unprincipled compromise - the transitory benefit of particular groups or localities at the expense of the national interests and the desire of the people for a peaceful future.  On the basis of the amongst others, we as Government came up to say, please let us recommend a new Constituent Assembly as opposed to present NRC.  But I hasten to add that it is not because of any other ground, other than what the report which you asked us to receive, deliberate on, and recommend, is what itself it gave.  So, that is why we are saying, a new body, but not by any other negative insinuations.  

In Cabinet, just like here, when we debate issues, I hope, Mr. Prime Minister I am not giving away the secrets of Cabinet, but when we discuss issues, especially, a report like this one, we start off exactly where this House starts off.  Everybody gives his views divergently.  Somebody opposes vehemently the other, but in the final analysis, we come to a consensus.  Incidentally when I was a novice in Cabinet, I disagreed at one time and demanded my objection to be recorded.  My senior Colleague told me that all in Cabinet, there is no such a practice.  You either abide by the consensus or you resign.  So, from then on, since I have not resigned -(Laughter)- I have abided by the consensus.  But unfortunately, I do not remember on an occasion later on when the situation was so strong that I had really the need to record my objection, otherwise I would have definitely resigned.  Why I am referring to this matter?  I am referring to it because of the ethics of democracy.  I think it is unethical for me as a Cabinet, who is bound by the ethics of democracy for which I aspire to come here and say, well, I agree with the principles behind the Bill and then proceed to oppose those elements of the Bill.  I have no problem, one can hold his views, but I think if I am one of those people aspiring to be one of the protectors of democracy in future, it is important that I show my commitment, and ability in practice.  This one, I mention because I think it should be on record of the House and in our proceedings that for a member of Cabinet to say - supporting the principles and in the end, he says, the thrust of the Bill.  I think it is an indication that we lack decisiveness, some of us, in leadership so that our people could be guided.  Because that alone, if I came with that sort of position and the Prime Minister came up with that sort of position, then, I am wondering what sort of leadership we would be giving this House and the nation.  That is the coat as a Cabinet Minister.  Now, I am coming to my personal coat as Bidandi, it is going to be short.  This is the fourth time in my life, I am witnessing a Constitution making process in this country.  The first one was 62.  I was a student, but I was an interested student.  Second one was in 66, then in 67 and now in 1993. (Interjection)- I will answer that where I was.  The process in 1962 we had an underlying fault, which later on was reflected in the very Constitution and the basis of which was, the reason why it never worked.  Who participated or which were the interests?  The interests were the DP, the UPC, the Colonial Government and the traditional institutions.  ‘Kyabazinga’ was also there, that is why I am talking of the traditional institutions.  Now, in their own right, they were sincere, they had not ulterior motive, they could not know or appreciate what would come later.  But the point I am making is that each of this group went to make sure that it entrenched its own interest in the Constitution.  That is why there was even an attempt of alliance which I have already held as an unholy alliance and that is why, some of the people who were there, walked out and on the background of all that, a Constitution was hammered out, and you all know what happened.  Interests, sectarian interests, being entrenched in the Constitution never lasted.  In 1966, the same principle, the same thing.  One wants his interests to be entrenched and hence, the senior who was part of the Government knew where it came from.  Then in 1967 the same problem of an attempt to entrench interests in the Constitution, this time, the UPC and the Army.  And indeed, the interests were entrenched!  what is interesting, if I can enlarge it a bit, is that prior to the discussion of that Constitution or more exact, when the debate was going on of the Constituent Assembly, it was the Government that was saying, this Parliament should constitute itself into a Constituent Assembly.  So, when you read the other and now you see what is happening, you say, I think I lived long enough to be able to share my experience with my other Colleagues whom might have lived less.  As I said, the results of all those entrenched, sectional interests in the Constitutions of the past, have led this country to bleed to chaos.  I think that we have to be very careful.  It is our historical responsibility as a Member has said, this very NRC to think of a Constitution different from the past ones.  And we can only do that if we avoid the pitfalls of the past in the process of making those Constitutions.  

As we debate this Bill, we have interests in the country in this House.  Certainly, we have the UPC, as of old, the DP, NRM, UPM, and the CP, and we have even the unsurfaced political party interests.  There is nothing wrong with it, nothing wrong with that because there is also that one.  Now the biggest mistake that we hon. Members in this House can do, is to pursue a line while discussing this Constitution process - this Constitution making of entrenching interests, any interests associated with any of these groups I have mentioned.  I do not think this country will ever forgive us if so happens because whether we want it or not, it will meet the same fate as the other Constitutions, if we work towards entrenching our sectional, sectarian or whatever interests in the Constitution.  I am saying ‘No’, we should not do this.  We should, I think resolve ourselves into Ugandans of good will in order to entrench the permanent interests of the people in a document called a Constitution that should really prove to be permanent.  To run the risk of over emphasising this point, I am saying, we should consider ourselves as representatives of the people outside this House and also representatives of our children and their children.  It is not necessary.  It must not be that our children when they grow up, they will come and make another Constitution and then when their children come up into age, they also constitute themselves into a Constituent Assembly to discuss a Constitution.  I think it is very important that all of us change our attitude in this debate and as I say, become citizens of Uganda of goodwill.  Now this brings me to also a small point on the issue of the debate here, as an illustration.  Their people who when they received the report, they received the Bill, they read, they formed their opinion, they prepared their contribution, they came, they contributed and away they went.  Now, what is the essence of debating?  Because the essence of the debating on this very important topic is that you bring your views like hon. Butagira has done.  You bring your views like every other person who has spoken has done and in the process of everybody submitting his views, definitely you are bound to be influenced and perhaps change positions in one way or the other from your original position in order that we move ahead in unison, and harmony especially so on this Bill, but now as I say somebody formed an opinion, he prepared his speech, delivered his speech and away he went, regardless what views from other people will come; regardless of whether it is possible that the views of other people -(Applause)- might influence them in the interest of us all, in the interest of the country.  

So, it is because somebody or some people, and I am not pointing at anybody, I am just talking generally because it applies to the majority of us, by the time we finish this House, there are less than maybe a third.  So, it has been a daily thing, it is not a particular person.  So, there is very little chance of finding harmony of pulling each other by reason, by argument on the Floor of the House so that you say, ‘yes’ hon. Butagira’s Amendment is correct or hon. Butagira saying ‘No, I think I am convinced I withdraw the Amendment.  So, let us take this debate seriously different from all the other debates we have held here for the sake if our future, for the sake of the future of our nation.  

Lastly, my personal views on some of these issues, there is the issue of the Chairman of the Constituent Assembly.  If I discuss this matter of the Chairman subjectively, I will have a different submission, but from the point of view, the background I have given in my own view, humble, I am saying that it is in the interest of the process that we are party to have the President on the advice of Cabinet appoint a Chairman.  My own view is this, okay, one Member has already said it, people are new, fresh and you cannot tell me that within just a month you are able to elect a Chairman, I think we formed the NEC after six?

MR. NTIMBA:  Point of information.  I would like to inform the hon. Minister on the Floor that, the NRC election of 1989 took place on the 25th of February and NEC was elected around 17th, 18th May of the same year.  

MR. BIDANDI SSALI:  Thank you very much.  That means that was roughly about three months.  There, four months, but today in this House we are saying that the NEC Members were elected before Members knew who was who and that is why Members who were known by virtue of their being Ministers were elected to the NEC.  I happened to have been one of them but I do not know whether -(Laughter)- that was the reason; but on a serious note, the same situation is going to happen in the Constituent Assembly and if we all bank the hopes of this country to the Constituent Assembly and then we say that they also elect, then we have a problem.  Without any insinuation and without any negative influence, supposing the House, the Constituent Assembly elected Mr. Lukyamuzi or Madame Cecilia or diehard UPM like myself maybe - now somebody would say, what is wrong with it?  Okay, there is nothing wrong with it because that is the verdict of the vote, of democracy but the next morning the DP will say, we walk out, the UPM will walk out saying no way, we are not serious.  If not the UPC will walk out to say, forget it.  And then if such actions happened that one group however small walked out, then that will be a nail in the coffin of the purported Constitution.  So that is why I am saying that let us use the better alternative.  It may not be ideal, but in the absence of an ideal, let us use the better alternative and that is the Presidency.  Me, I am also submitting that the advantage at the moment we have in the President is that he is moving towards a statesman rather than a competitor in the leadership of this country.  I have my own reasons to say that.  Therefore, his protection of the statesmanship in Uganda, in Africa and internationally is more important to him than maintaining what he has already had. (Applause)  So, it is my belief that whatever recommendation Cabinet gives him, he will use the statesmanship yardstick rather than anything else to appoint a Chairman.  I here even lend support - if need be some Members were expressing that okay, we could even say that let Cabinet suggest two names to the President or three names to the President, then the President suggests two names, they would have passed that but there is need to protect the oneness of the Constituent Assembly, right from the very beginning.  The Presidential Nominees, I am also in for them, not because I am a member of the Cabinet because many of us are, including hon. Nkangi Mayanja here, including hon. Ssemogerere, including hon. Kaijuka and who - so different shades of opinion are represented in cabinet.  Now, I was joking with my colleague here.  I said that now you are saying that you women are more than men in Uganda, if you knew how to manoeuvre and I think you can, supposing you decided that in every Constituency every woman must vote for a woman and if it turned out that the House that comes out is women only.  By virtue of the vote, it is that House that is going to discuss the Constitution because it is verdict of the electorate, but as a government which has been charged from the very beginning, since 1986 with the process of a Constitution making process that is based on the people so that something finally comes out which is acceptable to all and binding to all - will such a House bring out what we want or for that matter, supporting all the Members of the Constituent Assembly elected directly happened to be Moslems only, by virtue of the vote or the other way round, supposing the result does not bring any single Moslem or any single Catholic?  Now, it is in the interest of the nation that whoever is in charge of government business at that material time realises that there is need to get some voices which have not been taken care of by the vote to join the Constituent Assembly, after all, the essence is, this voice also to be heard there, not that they also share but the to be heard so that those who are responsible for this exercise, the Constituent Assembly take a decision fully knowing that they have had almost every note.  That is why I support these presidential nominations and in the same line, that is why I am also supporting the interest groups.  It is my feeling that there is really nothing to be shared there.  It is only that it is a place where as much contribution from our society and interest groups can bring their voice.  That is why I feel that these interest groups should as much as possible be represented.  On the parties and multiparty politics. I think some people are misunderstanding or because of the earlier statement I made, that is, the wish to entrench their interests, that one makes them not to see reason. It is my submission, that issue of parties is just a question of time.  There is no way, and I do not think anybody is saying it that parties can be closed or in - I do not know what sort of enclosure never to reappear in this country, it is unrealistic.  It just cannot happen, it is impossible.  After all, what is the world today?  Shall we be the only country in the World where the West will say, okay, except for Uganda, you can go on for another 50 years.  No, I am one of those people who are saying that ‘parties will come and must come’; but the point of issue is, when?  We all agreed that we give a period of transition.  So far we have achieved a lot as far as some of us are concerned and as far as I am sure many of you Members are concerned.  Look around you, look at who is sitting next to you.  Go outside the town and look at the way the people who served under Amin in the army, the people who served under Amin in the Government, the people who served under Obote I in the Army, in the Government, the people who served under Lutwa, the people who served in any regime in the past, go about freely without any intimidation with their business. (Applause)  Go on freely in this House contributing on the basis of our Uganda.  Now, some of us are saying this has been one of the greatest contributions NRM and when I talk of NRM, I am not talking like some Members do take NRM, because they seem to indicate the NRM and we, you NRM and us, I am saying all of us are NRM who are sitting here by virtue -(Applause)- of the fact that you stood in your own area, in your own constituency and people stood behind you, they elected you, you came here and you have been contributing to the best of your ability to this day.  So, we are all part and parcel of the NRM and I am submitting that one of the greatest contributions this NRM has made to his country is the reconciliation, the reconciliation that has been effected up to now.  Now, to some of us or myself, who speaks and I speak very strongly that there should be another period say of five years, say of four years so that we transit into the parties without being abrupt, because we are just about to get out of the cabin on a rope.  Just about to get over and it is my submission that the moment we now, say go back to parties then the rope is napped and what is whose, we seem to have static minds, the people of Uganda about parties.  When we talk of parties we think we are talking of DP, UPC, CP, UPM.  That is what we think, I do not know why majority of people, me, I think that another contribution of the NRM to the politics of this country is the fact that right now in this House we could have as many as 30, 40 people who can speak together and form a new party. (Applause)  I have watched and I am watching.  I am seeing so many people like myself, you know it, I was a very ardent supporter of UPC, there is no question about it, right. (Laughter)  I am being called back, but in spite of that, I said in 1980 and I am saying it right now that it can no longer serve the purpose.  That is my view; you are entitled to your views.  Now, the same applies to somebody else from DP, the same applies to somebody else from CP, so we have a common ground.  Why not form a new party?  All right, this is an initiative.  So, parties, there is no problem, parties nobody is talking of banning, otherwise, if the original people who came, came with that idea then we could not have reached here.  They could have used the NRC then before expansion to ban parties, they could have said in order to join us, you have got to decry your party and so on, but all through the NRM period, hon. Members belonging to different parties have been recognised as such, and I always say that never in my political life before have I ever thought that I would sit with hon. Ssemogerere, with hon. Mayanja Nkangi to discuss national issues because at that time, no way - there was no meeting ground except perhaps on the campaigning but you cannot imagine that every week of the last six years, we have sat together across the tables in this House to discuss National issues, much less realising, until recently now this debate is coming that after all we still are this, we still are that.  

So, I am saying no quarrel about parties.  We can influence those who will be in the Constituent Assembly to entrench it, to amend the provision of the Constitution which reads for example, referendum after five years - you say, no, it should not be referendum, it should be laid down, the rules of the games should be laid down so that an introduction comes after the first three years or whatever the case maybe depending upon what will be discussed there, so that we move in transition, so that if hon. Kanyomozi goes back to his part UPC, and I go back to my UPM or I join the new party, when we meet we joke like we are joking right now in this House. (Applause)  

So, instead of calling names, instead of a word like ‘historicals’ sending vibrations in somebody’s heart as if it really means anything.  ‘Historical’, means I am a historical or what can I do about it?  After all, as one Member was saying, by now all of us have become historicals of one group or the other.  Let there be the bush Historicals, now they are the NRM Historicals, so that if we break into parties you have nothing to say when somebody calls you NRM Historical.  So let us not be perturbed by things that really are immaterial.  I am almost ending but just an observation.  Mr. Chairman, I must admit that you have been very kind because this is the first time that I am contributing to this House, so it is my maiden speech more or less. (Laughter)  I have always been giving points of order and points of information, but I have just two more points to make.  One is on the traditional institutions.  It is a very important point while we are discussing the Constitution of tomorrow.  What happened in 1962, I have mentioned.  The political parties had interests.  The traditional institutions had interests.  Now, one of the political parties joined hands with one of the traditional institutions.  In other words, they agreed that their interests were the same or would complement each other’s interest.  One group was sincere hoping that the other group was sincere about this interest.  The other group knew that it has really made the best catch and that is why it is always remembered that some of them said, oh, we have got him.  Why?  Because he had signed the undertaking of the alliance.  So you can see that the interests of this group were paramount and as soon as it was convenient to shade off the interests of the other group, then problems started.  Now those interests of that shade group never died and have played a key role in the subsequent politics of this country.  Therefore, it is important that we do not lose sight of these interests within minutes.  What I am saying is that some of these interests have gone a long way to move from where they were in 1962, to what they are now.  Therefore, some of us who were opposed genuinely and correctly to those interests should also move some distance to meet this interest in order to ensure a stable future.  Why I am saying that there is a Movement?  There is a move from what those interests were in 1962 to what they are now.  It is because one of the declarations - for example, the Bataka of Buganda have said never, never shall we allow our Ssabataka to be involved in politics.  That is a very big step forward.  And if the Ssabataka of Buganda or for that matter, the elected Kyabazinga of Busoga, has no meddling in the politics of the country and that his interests or their interests is their traditional institution, their traditional culture, their cultural oneness.  What is wrong with that?  Can that not be accommodated?  So, I am saying that some of us - incidentally I was never party to KY, so I should not be misunderstood and I also should not be misunderstood that perhaps I am making a ground for the elections coming in 1994.  Because I will not be there.  But I am saying, and I am saying very seriously that, let us change the attitudes.  It is because of contributions of some people and it is because of the provisions within the Draft Constitution that makes me say so.  Because if we go by what happened in the past, we are likely not to achieve what we want.  Let us try to understand each other.  Let us not go by the law to ban circumcision in Kapchorwa.  Let us not do that.  Let us go and ban that or discourage it by education, even if it continues for another five years, seven years, nine years, knowing that ultimately it will go, it has gone peacefully.  But the moment you cork it in the bottle, anytime there is a chance it just corks out.  So, on the issue of that, I would say that let us change attitude and then think in terms of this Constitution.    
 
Finally, concerning UPM.  One Member of the House was saying other parties have started working, UPM is sleeping.  What is wrong?  People were pointing at Bidandi Ssali.  But I am recorded to have said that as far as I am concerned, I said UPM was no more.  Because the aims and objectives of UPM were embodied in the aims and objectives of NRM totally except that they were plus.  This is not a secret.  Hon. Members know it very well.  So any step now for me as the ex-Secretary General to move towards UPM means automatically now breaking the NRM before we formally break it.  So, I cannot advocate for UPM going to the people to say we as UPM.  Secondly, remember how it came about.  Again it was the same argument if you remember that we prevailed, we begged, we knelt before hon. Members and some of who are here to say please, let us still go on with the umbrella for another period so that we cool the tempers or the animosity of having killed each other.  And the two parties got together in bribery embrace and declared we go back.  So those of us who said, we do not go back said what do we do?  We remain in UNLF.  Then people claimed that UNLF belongs to us.  I am the Chairman, I am the Political Commissioner.  And we want to organise ourselves and reconstitute leadership.  We said, no, I am the Chairman.  Then we said let us look for another name in order to continue with this umbrella politics in order to harmonise the people of Uganda.  That is how it came about.  

Now, I am saying finally, that I am one of those people who are saying that even after we have said that parties go back, I have two alternatives, either to join those who will form a new party or remain with these who will remain NRM and we constitute ourselves into a political party.  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. (Applause)

THE CHAIRMAN:  With that we come to the end of today’s Session, we adjourn until tomorrow at 2.30 p.m.  


(The Council rose at 4.45 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday 3rd March, 1993 at 2.30 p.m.) 

