

Wednesday, 3rd March, 1993

The Council met at 2.30 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Vice-Chairman, Al-Haji Moses Kigongo, in the Chair).

(The Council was called to order).

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY BILL, 1992

MR. MBURA MUHINDO (Busongora County, Kasese):  Thank you, Mr. Chairman for giving me this opportunity to contribute on this very important Bill.  But before I can do that, allow me to say something about what I have read in the papers concerning elections in Makerere, that is an issue that hon. Members cannot keep quiet about.  The abduction of students during elections just reminds of some of the things that were happening in this country before some Members in this House and outside this House went to the bush to fight this type of thuggery, now if it is coming back, and as even we talk about having elections in the nearest future coming, this is a sign to show that this garbage has not been removed from the population and that the NRM Government must continue to put clear into the system, because it means we may be heading again for a very, very bad future.  So, I am glad the Minister of Education is here, I would request that this matter be given very, very great attention and tell us what will have been done, so that we can be satisfied because we cannot continue to sacrifice for this country when people are trying to wind the clock backwards.  

I also want to say that Makerere has become a laboratory for all politicians, every time you here in Makerere, and how you are beginning to see what they go to do there.  So, if this is the way politicians in this country are really going to, this is what they are going to show to he future generation, these very tricks they were using in the past, then I am afraid we still have a long way to go.  

Now, going back to the Bill, I would like to say that for the prosperity of this country and the unity of this country, we must have good laws and at these good laws must also be followed by very good leaders.  If these two are not there, then the future and prosperity of this country cannot be assured, and it is on this note that I congratulate the NRM Government for having realised that this country must have good laws and also good leaders, and that these laws, must stem from the people and also that the leaders must also stem from people, and the NRM Government must be congratulated for fulfilling some of the promises that is has made, because the Constitution has been one of those promises among many that were made to the population and therefore, this is a sign that the NRM Government is very accountable to the population and it can fulfill whatever it says.  I also like to pay tribute to the architects of the NRM Revolution, because if it were not for these, all what we are talking about we would not be doing so, and it is, and it is on this note that sometimes I get surprised that people are able to join the peace today but forget where peace came from when you talk about somebody Historical or somebody who went to the bush, the reactions of some people are very negative and yet if it were not for these, these very people would have no voice.  So, some mistakes could have been made, but we must always give respect where it is due, we must be able to give respect where it is due.  So, I pay tribute to them, because if it was not for them, then even this Constitution we are talking about would not have been there, and needless to say, I also thank the Constitution Commission and also all the Ugandans who participated in giving their views very, very freely, I thank them.  

I also want to say that of course a Constitution must not be rigid, it must be made in such a way that it is flexible, -(Interjection)- I am saying that a Constitution must be flexible to allow for other ideas to be incorporated into it at later days, because as I say society is very, very dynamic and so it is not rigid.  Now, we are aware that the NRC and the NRM Government we derive our mandate from the population and therefore, we must by all means respect the population.  This House and the NRM Government have worked very, very hard to create democracy in this country, but I would also like to say that democracy is not a commodity that you can pick from a shop, you throw on a plate and those who want to enjoy to begin to do so, it is very, very different from that.  To create democracy it is a very, very painful experience, it is an exercise, it is a process of transformation and revolution and therefore, it must take time, it is not something that you will expect in a day, we must be patient to try and put system in place that will eventually bring democracy to this country.  It is not a commodity that you will just throw on the plate and think that everybody will enjoy.  So, the challenge is here, we are now at cross roads as many people have said, when I address my people, I have told them that we are just like a woman in the labour suit about to deliver, she may not know what to be the results after.  But, results may depend on the way she is going to be handled, and also maybe on her own personal physiology.  Now, being at crossroads, it is at this time that we can make Uganda or we can destroy Uganda.  History will charge us from what we decide concerning this very, very important Bill and the Constitution being the supreme law of the land, it cannot be just taken in a way that we have been handling other laws, and it is on this that I am also convinced that it is very necessary that this Constitution for it to be respected, to be acceptable that it must be given a wide base, and this wide base is to allow at least, a great part of our population to participate in its making.  So, I can now say that I also support the idea of having a Constituent Assembly, so that we can incorporate as many people as possible, as many views as possible.  Why do I say this?  This House cannot be doubted, it has the integrity, we have the brain to do the Constitution, but there are so many allegations that you know, have been labelled against us by those who may not be really in for the development of the country.  They label us, they say many of us are pro-NRM and therefore, we shall try to air the views of the NRM Government, they also say, we were elected by very, very few people only the RC II officials, and in fact some of the RCs now, when you look around for the people who elected you, you do not see them, if they never managed to come back.  So that indirect election has put a lot of doubt in the minds of some people and of course, as somebody said, there is also some external pressure that we cannot ignore.  

Now, in order for the Government or the NRM Government to destroy all these above, is to have the Members of this House to go back, face the electorate and I have no doubt that those who have been doing their work very well will be re-elected and will show that you are not in the pockets of anybody, but you are in the pockets of those who were electing you.  So, if that can be done, then the doubting Thomases will have been destroyed.  So, I request the Members that please, as we have always done, this has been politics of tolerance, we have tried to tolerate so many things, so as to accommodates everybody.  So there is no fear for Members to go and face the electorate so that they can get real, real mandate which will bring them here, so that they can come and debate this Constitution with confidence.  

Now, this NRC has also played a very big role in real trying to show that we can fight for democracy and we have also self deprived of ourselves in the exercise of trying to do our work.  Now, this time, we are under test, this is really litmus paper test to show how much democratic we are and so, as I said, being at crossroads we must show that we are supporters of democracy and that we hail our mandate from the people by going back to them.  I have also consulted very, very widely in my Constituency of Busongora, and these are some of the remarks that my Constituency made, that I could present to this House.  

The first issue from my constituency is that we are very, very conscious about expenditure and I think it is because of that consciousness that even when the Pope visited us, we managed to save some money, we only spent very, very wisely, they were asking me, does the Government have the funds?  That was the first question, they sound any other things that they would talk, would depend on whether the government has got the funds, then you can have the Constituent Assembly, but if Government has no funds, which they know that they may not be there, unless we can be assured by the Minister, they were saying, we elected NRC Members, they are on our behalf, and we have not withdrawn our confidence from them, and so they said for the purpose of this wide best, since we know that many of the counties are going to be subdivided according to the population, like my county has got 184,000 people and they say this should be divided into two.  Why does not the NRC Member stay in one of the division, where he belongs and then three ones they elect.  They thought that was more effective.  So, they thought that one was more effective to elect in one of the electoral areas where there is no NRC Member and where is one, then you do not elect.  As I said, these were the recommendations from my people, and they have the right recommendations to be heard here and they were also saying that they did not see any reason why two Houses cannot run concurrently.  To have a Constituent Assembly running and then the NRC, since it said that they will be sitting at the same time, because they said after all even when you are not in the Constituent Assembly or you also have other Government duties that you have been running and we have not had that you have failed, so they said we did not see why two Houses cannot run concurrently.  Then on the election of the Chairman people from my constituency said, if we are trying to build democracy in this country, we cannot give it by one hand and take it away by the other hand, if we have elected Members of the Constituent Assembly, we have full mandate, that these elected people we cannot underrate their capacity to elect a chairman among themselves, and only to say the President advised by the Cabinet and they asked me, now supposing in the Constitution, we say that the President will have to be elected, now will we not have the capacity to vote for a President of this?  Why should they doubt Members of the Constituent Assembly to elect a Chairman among themselves, if we grass root can elect a President of the whole country, so they said, they did not accept that, they recommend that the Constituent Assembly should elect a Chairman among themselves.

On the Presidential Nomination, my Constituency said, it is not always true that when you go for an election, the best people are going to be elected, it depends, it is very variable and so they said, there are certain people that might be considered, we have some minorities in the country, some tribes who are in minority and in Kasese we have them and they said supposing a Musongora stands here, he may be good but he may not pass, people are saying why?  But if you go deep down where you come from, these things are there.  So, they said, if the President is given a chance and advised accordingly, he should be able to pick certain people from minorities who could not win through a popular vote, and they said, we should advise accordingly.  If we are saying that this Constitution must be for the people and even the minorities must be considered although they cannot pass through an election.  So, this one, they supported, that the President should be given the mandate to appoint 15 people.

On the women representative, my people said, this is the very time that we now need the women.  We have been with them in the struggle, we are now preaching the critical part of the struggle, why do you leave them out when they have actually reached the critical part?  So, they said, let every district at least, elect a woman, so that these women can go to the Constituent Assembly, this is not the time when they should be left out, we must be united together so that we are able to pass through this narrow path.  My people said, it is not always true that we should subject political issues to market forces you will make a mistake, so that is why they supported that a woman representative should be elected from every district.  On the deposit of Shs. 100,000, they said, if you are going to be a representative and the way they see us moving using our own resources, you should be able to raise your head properly and so they supported that somebody should deposit Shs. 100,000 to show that he is very serious and he is not wasting their time and that when he is elected, he will manage to do the work without begging.  

Now, on the question of citizenship, my people were very skeptical, they were asking who is really a Ugandan, we were wondering because they say we have not established systems that show us who a Ugandans is, and so that one, they said although it is there in the law, it is till very floppy because up to now, you cannot identify who is a Ugandan when we do not even have national identity cards, because they have even seen the refugee camp which we have in Kasese, if you went to some of them they are now empty, the people have gone out, they have gone to the population, some are big men in certain places and yet they may not be citizens.  So, they were very skeptical about this.  Then standing behind the people, my people said this system had created a lot of differences and so they supported a secret ballot system would be more convenient to them than this system of standing behind people and creating hatred.  

THE CHAIRMAN:  Try to wind up please.

MR. MBURA MUHINDO:  I am winding up Mr. Chairman.  On the photos, they were saying sincerely, does every person from the mountains here have the ability to identify a photograph of so and so?  So, here they said that the issue of the photograph may still bring some problems because not everybody is real literate enough to identify a photograph of who and who.  

In conclusion, the credibility of the NRM Government will come at the end of this exercise, I know we have said we will be doing a lot, but our credibility will come when this Constitution is out, because that will show that really we stand for and history will be the advocate for the NRM after balancing its books, being audited by the future generations.  It is an honour for Members of this House to show the respect they have for Uganda and its people and give them exactly the democracy they want, through passing this in favour of the general Ugandan population.  So, Mr. Chairman, I support the Bill.

THE DEPUTY MINISTER FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Dr. S. Chebrot):  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman for giving me the opportunity to contribute to this very important Bill.  But before I contribute to the Bill, I would like to draw the attention to the House to report that there is yellow fever along the boarder between Uganda and Kenya, and I wish to appeal to Government and to International Committees to assist in immunizing, especially, the people living along the boarder.  Mr. Chairman, let me -(Interruption)

MR. KATUREEBE:  Point of information.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I would like to inform the hon. Colleague who is also in Government that the Ministry of Health two weeks ago dispatched a team of experts to the boarder areas to monitor the very question of yellow fever, and orders have been placed for yellow fever, and orders have been placed for yellow fever vaccines in case there is any problem, as of now there is no cause for alarm.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 

DR. CHEBROT:  I would like to thank my Colleague, the Deputy Minister for Health for intervention that he has already done to make sure that yellow fever is controlled at the boarder because if it is not controlled, yellow fever, is a very, very dangerous disease and it can spread very, very quickly, so unless immediate attention is taken to make sure that those along the boarder are immediately immunized we may be dealing with a very, very serious problem in the near future.

Let me now turn to the Bill, but first, let me thank the Second Deputy Prime Minister and Leader of Democratic Party for his very, very clear and vivid over view of the political event in Africa which he gave to this House some time last week.  In his very moving speech, the Second Deputy Prime Minister did appeal to Ugandans that they should be able to have the capacity to over come the problem that have in the past years prevailed in this country.  In the last four months, I have been holding consultations with the people of Kapchorwa and in particular Tingey, one of the observers in the meeting which I was holding, made a very interesting remark about the Second Deputy Prime Minister, he did say that the Second Deputy Prime Minister is a man who even sees a snake and he will call a meeting to decide how to kill the snake.  In my view, this emphasizes the compromising attitude of the Second Deputy Prime Minister in making sure that the problems of this country are solved through compromise and I think last week, the Second Deputy Prime Minister did very ably -(Interjection)- Mr. Chairman, protect me from the interruption of the hon. Members.  He did very ably demonstrate his ability to lead a discussion and come to an agreement because he did a demonstration to us, that compromise if nothing but the way of cutting a cake in such manner everybody feels he has got the biggest share.  Now, I am dwelling on the issue of the Second Deputy Prime Minister because it gave a very, very clear and vivid view of the political events in Uganda.  He did dwell on the issue and on the need for Ugandans to understand that the making of the Constitution is long-term issue and as Ugandans must not merely debate the Constitution with their interest at heart that they must realise they are making a Constitution for the rest of Uganda.  The people of Kapchorwa wish to register their appreciation to NRM Government for the killers that they have succeeded in making sure that they are now able to submit their own memorandum for the debate of the Constitution and also to enable them to debate various issues.  They also thank the NRM for setting up a number of political education programmes to educate the people about their rights.  This has eventually culminated in the discussion on the Constitution Assembly Bill.  This in my view, this is a big contribution on the part of the National Resistance Movement Government.  Let me turn now to specific issues in the Constituent Assembly.  A number of Members did contribute and made a number of remarks about the need to create Constituencies based on population, based on numbers.  The people of Kapchorwa feel that we should not just look at number as a necessity, representation, they feel that the basic unity of the constituency should be the county, because a county is a viable administrative unity which will be less liable to contention, it will not be able to manipulation by anybody those of you who saw the Constituencies of 1980s, I do not know how many managed to see this S-shape Constituencies by passing lakes and rivers, this is my view if counties are left as they are, will form a more effective Constituency than any other part.  Mr. Chairman, they are also a number of issues which people have to consider, while it may take my friend Sebaana Kizito 30 minutes to tour his Constituency, it can take hon. Peter from Kotido two weeks to tour not only his Constituency but even the whole sub-county.  So we should consider other things other than the issue of population.  

The other issue is that we should also consider that we should protect the ethnicity of certain groups in Ugandan, just because of their small numbers, they should not be suppressed.  I will give you an example, in the States of Hawaii, and in California although their numbers are totally different, Hawaii has only got about 3,000 people while California has millions of voters but all of them have two senators each, they have only two senators in respective of their numbers.  So, I would like to appeal to all of you to make sure that you should not only consider the issue of numbers in deciding the Constituencies.  

Mr. Chairman, the people of Kapchorwa also feel that there should be free campaign during the time of campaigns.

MR. WANENDEYA:  Point of order.  Is it in order, Mr. Chairman, for the hon. Deputy Minister for Local Government to refer to the people of Kapchorwa when there are two other representatives for the two counties in Kapchorwa District?

THE CHAIRMAN:  He is quite in order.  Proceed please.

DR. CHEBROT:  I think the hon. Member is quite aware that I am also the NEC Member for Kapchorwa.  I will not prevent any other Member from Kapchorwa from speaking.  Mr. Chairman, the issue of election process has been referred to by the hon. Member from Kasese.  During my tour recently, I met a number of people who say, although they may know me by name, they have never seen me by face.  This is really to demonstrate to you that although the people can see my photograph, they may not recognise me, although they may wish to vote for me.  So, I would like to suggest that alongside the photograph, there should also be symbols which indicate the interest of that particular candidate. (Laughter)  

My people deliberated on the issue of the election of the Chairman of the Constituent Assembly.  They said the delegate should be able to elect their own chairman and they gave a number of reasons.  They believe and I have reason to believe as well that unlike the elections of NEC, many Members of NRC who are here will be re-elected back to this House to come back and form the delegations to the Constituent Assembly.  They therefore proposed that these delegates should be able to elect their own chairman without any problem.  

On the question of Trade Unions, Youth and other groups, except for the NRA, the people of Kapchorwa suggest that these groups join us in the election process.  There is no need for them to seek special rights to be elected as members in those groups.  They gave a number of reasons, for example, the youths.  the youth age to qualify as a youth, you must be aged between 18 to 30.  So, there is a lot of gray period in the gray areas that they will play around with.  Since anybody between the age of 21 and 80 can be allowed to vote and be elected to become either President or Chairman of this Constituent Assembly, there is no reason why they should be given special rights to be elected.  So it is their view that everybody should join the political arena and be elected using their own rights as individuals but not as youths.  They also suggested that there is no need for His Excellency the President to nominate any member that there will be enough people in the NRC anyway who will support any interest that the President may have.  Number two, the army will also be represented and other groups definitely have a lot of confidence in the President.  So, there is no need for anybody to worry about anything.  

I did not wish to take long.  I will just touch on an issue that was raised by hon. Member from Lira, that is the issue of cattle raids from Karamoja and the insecurity that the Karamoja people have caused.  Last week, we lost one businessman in Kapchorwa who was shot up by Karimojong cattle rustlers.  This man was shot at around 10 O’clock at night and I was traveling 6.00 O’clock to go and see some friends.  This man was shot in cold blood.  He was actually traveling in a vehicle to come to Mbale.  So, it would seem that the Karimojong have changed their tactics now.  They are now way-laying vehicles and laying roadblocks, which was not the case before. (Laughter)  

MR. PETER AKURE: Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, I really doubt whether that statement is true.  If somebody has been killed between Mbale and Sebei, I am afraid these are not Karimojong.  If he was shot along that lie, then they are not Karimojong but they are the people of Mbale. (Laughter)

MR. CHEBROT:  Mr. Chairman, you will recall that last week -(Interruption)-

MR. LOROT:  Point of information.  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  Although I condemn the criminal act which whereby a neighbour from Kapchorwa District was shot, I would like to inform my neighbour from Kapchorwa District that it may not be necessarily for the Karimojong who could have killed that man because sometime in September last year, I happened to be a victim of a similar ambush.  This was in Bugisu in a place called Bunambutye.  I was shot at and sustained an injury.  So, I would like to inform the hon. Member that it may not be necessarily the Karimojong who could have ambushed or killed the man.

MRS. MASABA WAFAANA:  Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, Sir, Bunambutye has been an area where there has been insecurity with cattle rustling.  Mbale town has many people even the hon. MPs from Karamoja stay in Mbale and we have many people in Mbale belonging to many tribes.  So, it does not mean that when it happens in Bugisu, it is the people of Bugisu. (Laughter)

DR. CHEBROT:  Thank you very much.  I wish the hon. Members has waited a little longer for me to explain this very sad instance because last week, hon. Omara Atubo raise the issue of insecurity in the areas bordering Karamoja.  The hon. Member Mr. Nabuuri then stood up just like hon. Peter Akure and the hon. Members have stood up to defend them, the Karimojong.  Only last week, the sister of Nabuuri himself was shot dead in Karamoja.  As leaders of this country, I think we should condemn those who are involved in these acts.  Now, the shooting which took place in Kapchorwa did not take place in Mbale District.  It took place Between Kapchorwa town and Swamu and those who were involved were actually pursued and followed up to Karamoja itself, up to the border.  So, it is a clear fact that these people who came to kill this man were from Karamoja.  So, it is not true for Members to stand up when they have no correct information and say things that they are not sure of.  During that period, I also had consultations with people from Kapchorwa and I showed them the number of amendments that have been moved by hon. Butagira.  In fact, one of them said that I should ask hon. Butagira to come to Kapchorwa so that he can explain to them how he came about to suggest those compromises.  It is an idea that the people of Kapchorwa feel that the Members should take very, very seriously because it will serve to accommodate everybody both in this House and those who are outside.  They also requested me -(Interruption)

MR. BUTAGIRA:  Point of information.  May I inform the hon. Deputy Minister for Local Government that this invitation is accepted.  I will come. (Laughter)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Proceed please, but try to wind up.

DR. CHEBROT:  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman for giving me the opportunity to discuss this august House.  I would also like to thank hon. Butagira for accepting to visit Kapchorwa in the near future.  Thank you very much.

MR. TOM APILA (Nominated Member):  Mr. Chairman, I stand up to establish my gratitude to the Members of this august House.  The approach to this Bill by hon. Members who spoke earlier demonstrates the patriotism of sincere love these Members have for this country.  Members who spoke earlier, demonstrated another love for this particular Bill and these are political signals which indicate that the hon. members in this House are very serious in trying to find means of bringing and establishing a fundamental change in the history of Uganda.  I am grateful for that contribution. The way this Bill is being debated clearly shows to the people of Uganda that this House is not a rubber stamp as has been advocated.  Many people who are not in this House have rebuked this House as we are a rubber stamp.  There is an example, there are signs and there are truths that many Bills have been thrown out from this House that does not indicate that we have rubber stamped a thrown Bill.  There are people who are not in this House who even if they were in this House they would have brought moon down from the sky.  I think this is a wrong concept.  

I personally support this Bill and if the debate on this Bill continues in this way, and it is passed, then this Parliament will have done a good job that will remain in the record of the history of Uganda.  I have one question to ask.  Why should this hon. House with deep stability be excluded from debating and promulgating the Constitution of this country? (Applause)  The exclusion of this NRC to debate and promulgate the Constitution of this country is not realistic as far as I am concerned.  Some Members propose the dissolution of this House so that we go straight for general elections.  I strongly differ, and I oppose that proposal.  The establishment of this Bill alone indicates the seriousness of the Government of NRM in establishing a democratic base in Uganda for the future smooth change of Government and smooth ending of power by the previous leader of this country.  Therefore there is no need why this Parliament at this crucial time should be dissolved.  My views says, the dissolution of this House now means that resignation of NRM Government or NRM interim administration which was extended by this very Parliament.  Therefore I see no logic why a Member of this House can come and ask for the dissolution of this House.  I can see not a good consequences and I think there can be a bitter consequence which can be dangerous for the entire people of this country if this House is dissolved in this material time.  Nobody fears the dissolution of this House now; nobody in this particular House fears the dissolution of this Parliament.  Everybody is ready to walk out if this House is dissolved but I feel that since we are trying to establish a good and permanent democratic base in this country, we should be faithful to our nation and transparent in debating this Bill.  Mr. Chairman, I thank you and I support this Bill strongly.  Thank you very much.  

MR. MUTEBI MULWANIRA (Bujjumba County, Kalangala):  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  I stand to support this Bill and I have got quite a number of observations to make.  Since the time is limited, I will try to restrict myself to the Bill itself.  First of all, I will start with Article No. 4 but before I go to that Article, let me comment on the contribution of some of the Members.  In 1988 this House without some of us, passed a Bill to put in place the Constitution Commission Bill and there was a purpose for that Commission, and we must all of us accept that this Commission did a good job.  In my district, they tried their best despite the transport difficulties and they did a good job.  But if all the Members of this House were involved in the operations of the Commission, some of the deliberations, some of the contributions that I have heard from these Members should not have come from the Members who have been part and parcel of the Commission.  So, I would regrettably say that I may mistakably make contributions to this Bill giving us the sentiments that we do not seem to be part and parcel of what has been going on with the Constitutional Commission.  

Going to Article No. 4, it is talking about the establishment and composition of the Constituent Assembly.  I wish to thank hon. Members out of the so many I have been listening to, who have not negated their own existence in this House by saying that their constituencies should not have existed.  That they have resisted to stay here and when we are discussing this Bill, is the time they are telling us that they are not worth being in this House because of the numerical numbers of their constituencies.  I wish they had submitted resignations earlier on, then we would be sure but what they are talking about now is a reality.  So, the hon. Member who has just said that let us take the counties as the basic constituencies, there is reason for it because he mentioned one of the hon. Members representing an urban area, his problem is less far much less when it comes to commuting to his constituency than most of our areas.  Even if you gave me a week, I would not manage to meet my people because I have got logistics that will curtain me from meeting them, and if you come and add my constituency or my district for that matter to Masaka, you will not have asked yourself the question why in the first instance, was Kalangala District taken away from Masaka?  Why is Bundibugyo existing as a district?  Why is Ntoroko not part of Bwamba?  Why is hon. Chebrot representing the whole of Kapchorwa?  There are many reasons and I think hon. Members here if you had a chance to travel around this country like some of us have tried, you would see the essence of having these constituencies the way they have been demarcated and I think the ones who drafted the Bill had the sentiment behind why some of these constituencies are there as they are and I do not think it will be the issue to debate that now let us try to amalgamate some of these constituencies.

MR. MANZI TUMUBWEINE:  Point of information.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I wish to inform the hon. Deputy Minister for Housing that the issue is not that the small ones should die but that the big ones should be catered for.  Why I appreciate that it is true a district like Kalangala will have problems of visiting everybody, it is equally true to look at a county like Bukoto which is almost 70 miles across.  It will have the same problems and the best solution would be to combine in some scientific way the geographical stretch and population considerations.  We are not looking at the population only per see but also the geographical strength and when you marry the two, you find that you could comfortably accommodate the small ones while at the same time reducing the burden on the big ones by dividing them.  Thank you.  

MR. MUTEBI MULWANIRA:  I would like to thank the hon. Member for his contribution.  He used a very good word, geography.  Geography is a very interesting subject and I think if the Member took into aspect the norms of geographical features, they may not solve many other problems like historical, economical.  So let us not look at the stretch that somebody in Bukoto is representing that county with his population.  If that gentleman managed to stand for that county, he should have the ability to represent those people and contribute their ideas.

MR. S. NJUBA:  Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, I would like to inform my hon. Minister contributing that the Bill states categorically that the basis of a constituency shall be a county and nobody was moved out of this.  As far as I recall from the contributions, nobody has talked about amalgamating counties.  So my friend from the good islands should be rest assured he is taken care of.

MR. MUTEBI MULWANIRA:  In fact, I do not know whether some of the Members seriously looked at the interim report before they gave such castigations as to whether small constituencies would have remained.  I would like to go to the party delegates, the number that is proposed in Article 4 (2) (b).  This issue, I would not like to make my submission like some of my colleagues have done.  I am not going to say the people of Bujjumba County asked me to say this.  Unfortunately, I think Colleagues are aware that when a Bill like this one comes into your hand and you have got to go home to consult, your basic problem is to explain to your people this Bill and some of them as I found out when I was traveling in my county, hardly understand what is in the Bill.  And if you make the mistake to give them your sentiments and erroneous ones, they will give you erroneous comments.  So, I think the Members coming to us and say my people asked me to say this, what is your opinion about what they are saying and sometimes, how you explained to them to understand why this Bill has been written the way it has been written?  I would like to comment on Article 4 after taking the ideas of the people and thinking of them and giving my own opinion, summing up what they gave me.  The 42 people as far as we are concerned, the women were very much concerned about the eight women for this country.  First if all, the rural women were worried that you people in Kampala have got a few radical group of ladies talking on our behalf and if you say they are going to be eight people, you are sure it will be out of those radical ladies that will represent us and we do not know how much of our ideas they are going to represent.  So, they were suggesting that if the House allows, they can give them the eight but on top of that, they must have their women representatives from district levels.  They preferred that instead of going in for eight, you give them the 38.  The National Resistance Army.  People were concerned as much as I was that the National Resistance Army is turning for a group of the security forces and if we are going to consider security people to join us in making the Constitution, let us take all the cadres, have the police, have the prisons and have the army.  The NRC raised issues and this is an issue which some of us Members in this very House have absolutely abandoned.  You are the people who said, let us create a different body from ourselves to discuss the constitution and we are going to be watching.  As I come to one of the Articles after Article No. 4, the issue would have been a Parliamentary sub-committee if we felt that we need some expertise to go to this Bill.  Now, instead of selecting a sub-committee, you are saying, let us have a different body from us and out of asking for a different body from us, some of you are already suggesting that the baby you are producing will have no mother and father.  So, for us who suggested that let that body come and discuss, if some of you are interested to join, you are free to join.  But even when you focus on us, this august House, you definitely see that some of you may not be interested to stand for the Constituent Assembly Bill but you still represent your Constituency in the National Assembly.  Now you are charging the two issues that are completely different and giving the masses the feeling that we have no mandate.  We saw the requirement of the Bill and we said, if that is the case, here we have got historicals, we have got nominated, we have got what, if that is the argument.

MR. ELYAU:  Point of information.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  May I inform the Member holding the Floor that the statement that initiated this doubt arose when the Minister said, your people who elected you here are asking you to go and seek the mandate.  That brought a lot of confusion for nothing otherwise, there was nobody shaking.  Thank you.

MR. MUTEBI MULWANIRA:  Thank you hon. Member from Kalaki.  I do agree with you on that sentiment but I was driving a point home for us Members to come to the light of not confusing the two bodies.  For some of you who feel utterly that you must be part and parcel f the Constituent Assembly, the onus is yours.  For some of us who feel we want to see that body formulate the Constitution to the satisfaction of the masses, we are here to see their operations and their good ideas, but I do not want people to confuse - that is why if we have that deliberation within the House, those of you who will not go to stand will have condemned yourself automatically, because the idea is coming from you here that people are asking for a new mandate, but who you are saying that we want a new body in which everybody sees he has committed himself, he is not even standing behind somebody, he is casting a ballot, and casting a ballot for just seven months or four months.  In fact when this issue came up, my people in my constituency said, why are you disturbing us and when you talk about the NRC, why are you people feeling that we are not the right people?  Then you come back and we push you back.  I said Oh, if that is the case, it depends on how I look at the constituent Bill and how I look at the Constituent Assembly Bill and what it is going to do; and I said, it will be up to me to choose because if you choose me for those four months, or seven months and it is a twenty four hour job, and I am a Deputy Minister, if I see my obligations in the Ministry may not enable me to do that job, you are asking me to do in the Constituent Assembly, then I may be free to turn down the offer and say, you get somebody else than myself and let me serve you as a public person in a different capacity.  So, my not coming back to the Constituent to stand, does not mean that I have given you up but I see the roles I am supposed to play in serving this country, I may not serve you either way and do the job properly.  So, you Members who are still questioning whether the National Resistance Council should be represented, for some of us who think this body should remain and it is to remain according to the Minister’s submission, that is independent body, the other one run concurrently with this one now instead of you saying, we need some eyes in that Constituent Assembly as our representatives, as a body that proposed the existence of that body, you say, as hon. Apila was saying you are dissolving yourselves.  Then one wonders what is the level of the understanding of these guys?

AN HON. MEMBER:  Point of order.  Is it in order for the hon. Minister holding the Floor to use un Parliamentary language and call us guys?  (Laughter)

THE CHAIRMAN:  That is not in order.  Proceed please.

MR. MUTEBI MULWANIRA:  This reminds me, hon. Mr. Chairman, of somebody who said is in order for somebody to say, he has not irritated anybody when I am irritated.  Each individual is very free.  On the representation of few people of National Organisation of Trade Unions, it is my own feeling like the feeling of the many people in my place who said workers would come but these are only two guys, two fellows to come to represent these workers, and out all of us here many of the majority of us are workers, and it is the feeling that this special allocation of two fellows from the working group may not serve the purpose and I think the Members who will come to represent constituencies will clearly spear head the desires of the National Organisation of Trade Union.

On political parties; it was a big dual courage way, it was a give and take and here as my Colleague here from Kapchorwa said, we have really to thank people hon. Bidandi Ssali, hon. Paul Kawanga Ssemogerere in the way they deliberated these issues.  Of course, some people have got bitterness the moment you talk about political parties there are certain people who are anti-revolutions in the minds for reasons of their own.  But I want to blame them having been a group up from the time of independence up to now, I have seen how much revolution has come up into this country and many of our people still connect the two, political activities and political parties because they have been seeing parties of this action.  Even if the parties are not there, they say what is the resultant of this action?  It must have emanated from a political party.  So, I do not blame them for saying that, let these people who want to stand in for consecutive for democratic party, for UPM, for Uganda People’s Congress, come back to us and we elect them if he is a good man he is in DP, he is in CP, he is in UPC, we shall push him in, but do not bring two fellows and in fact one of their complaints was right, he said, supposing you have elected two representatives representing CP or UPC?  The eyes of those members in that Constituent Assembly who think belong to that party will look at those two fellows as their leaders, and if they say anything contrary to their leaders, the problem will start in that very House.  So, they said you let these people not come in as political party leaders, let them come back to the people and come as elected Members to represent in Constituent Assembly. (Applause)

National Youth Council was battled at first like the ladies.  When we talked about women, the idea was, why do we give women and the youth two votes?  The women are free to stand against men and the youths from the age of 18 to 30 are free to contest, why do you give them two votes?  And of course, from the statement you have heard they said, you mean when you look at we women you sometimes have that low attitude we may not succeed.  So, we accepted the women but then they said the youth - some of the Parliamentarians are youths, how did they come to Parliament?  They contested with old men, old women and they won.  If they have got the material, why do not they come in and somebody a youth was castigating he said, some us the youths from now up to 30 we were born with sin, we are the immortals of politics, we do not know what to talk about, why do you want to involve us at this stage?  So, I said, those of us who can manage, let us stand with you old people and we contest, if we beat you, accept it us Parliament.  So the acceptance of the youths as a special group to these people and to myself I think we have given enough audience to the youths to contest against us freely and they come on a proper card than contesting as a youth and they come here to cause more confusion. (Laughter)  Mr. Chairman, I said -(Interjection)

MRS. DHUGINA OPOTI:  Point of order.  Mr. Chairman, it is in order for the Deputy Minister to say that the youths in this House are causing confusion and as a result they may cause more confusion in the Constituent Assembly?

THE CHAIRMAN:  That is not what he meant.  Proceed please.

MR. MUTEBI MULWANIRA:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for the protection, but my Colleague from Nebbi, I was giving the exact statement of the youths, they said, we have been born in confusion and most of us are confused.  So, you should give us time to get out of confusion.  We had also the problem of the 15 delegates appointed by the President, but this one with explanation from the NRC from Bujumba, the Bujumba people understood why the President should elect or nominate some Members with advise of Cabinet.  You may realise that you have quite a lot of good materials here, not out of elections, not out of historicals, but out of somebody who has got to foresight and I think if the President with the advise of Cabinet, if you trust both, you are definitely sure that they can get us some good material to contribute people who are not even interested, they definitely know some of you, most of us who stood for election, you remember how much smear you had, people were free to talk about you, sometimes rubbish for the sake of getting you out, and it is not materialised and some of these good materials do not want to go into that type of thing.  They say, me, I am like - somebody said that he is beyond any Constituency in this country.  They say they are beyond that, but I would like to contribute but I am beyond that, I do not want to be smeared.  So, this nomination of 15 Members of the President was gross laid and overwhelmingly supported and I do concur with that idea.  

Qualifications of Membership; was a bit disturbing as an hon. Member from Kasese said, citizenship is an issue we can talk about, I have somebody in the Islands, apparently in my brother’s Constituency, whom I found very old about 90 years and his children are over 60, but since he came from a neighbouring country, he settled in the Islands and the children are diehard Islanders.  But when you look at the history of these fellows could have even stood in hon. Mayengo’s Constituency and pass through, but then they are from neighbouring country.  The fellow says I have been here for 60 years and nobody is against me being a true Ugandan and of course, they are on the RC system already.  So, the citizenship issue is an issue that deserves to be looked at by Government, but of course they encourage the issue that they should be citizens.

We have got an issue that is very contentious as hon. Gertrude Njuba said, but before I come to that one, you have got Article number 8 as I have already said that the functions of the Constituent Assembly ideally, this would have been a committee of this House, that is why I said hon. Members you should not mistake the roles of the two House, this should have been sub-committee of this House to report to us.  But since you have given them the courtesy to take on a role to enact and promulgate, it is coming an important sub-committee but, if we have been allowed we would have said, let this be a sub-committee and they report to the House for this House to debate the final results because ownership of ours.  But I am not going to go in for that, since the majority of us are saying let them be independent, we give them the go ahead.

The Presidential election or nomination of the Chairman and Vice-Chairman took us two hours to debate, but I rose up an issue like one of the hon. Members said, what happened here in this House when you elected us as NRC Members, and the revolution started in the House after a few months, and sometimes after some occasion that if things happen like this, I think I can replace that Member.  Let us elect again and when we discussed the issue with my Constituent people said, now supposing these people came and they are supposed to embark on this job, how do you expect them to know one another?  I said, really, I do not know, and we gave the instance of the Islands we said suppose these people come from 84 Islands and we ask them to choose Chairman amongst themselves, but now how could we do it, we do not know those fellows as much we meet at the lake.  But these members the proposal was, that there is no problem of the President appointing but the names should be sent to the Assembly to confirm.  Out of those members and the reasons is exactly in number 10, if you look at Article No. 10, there are so many requirements for this person that some of us may not be able to find out the truth about the particular Member whether he has got high moral character, integrity and impartiality because you have just met the fellow there, and if they ask you whether he has got of course, somebody has said that many Members from the House may stand and they come back here, okay, you may know yourselves as former Members or as NRC Members, but we have many new ones, and many of you are aware that there is a lot of politicking for these Constituency Assembly in your Constituencies and some of you are not very sure, they may refuse it or accept it but the politicking I see in the villages my dear Friends, you better make sure.  So I have got - we had to argue over this issue because of the requirements in No. 10 that Members may find it so very difficult to analyse all these factors and mind you one other issue, if you are chosen a chairman on a full time basis.  How many of us just look at the House, now the day we opened this House for this debate, everybody was here and as somebody some of you just submitted and you left you said, me, I have finished my job, I have been hear.  But you do not know how many of us will contribute to your idea to change you from your belief.  But some of these people whom we elect to the Council may not be aware of the task, the task they are going to face to pass this Constitution and some of you do not know that the Members you are going to elect are not specifically coming for the Constituent Assembly, to discuss the Constitution, they are measuring their ways against you.  So, as much as you are fighting, you should think you are creating a body to discuss the Constitution somebody you are purporting to elect to discuss and to carry out this honourable job is just there to -(Interruption)

MR. IMAGA:  Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, I would like to inform the Member holding the Floor that, this section should worry him because he does not know that in the Constituent Assembly there may be some retired high court Judges, for Permanent Secretaries, people of high ranks, government officials.  So he should not mislead the House by saying that it will be difficult to get some good qualified for this position.

MR. MUTEBI MULWANIRA:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman, I do not know hon. Members one cannot entertain the information, but I think we should have courtesy to analyse the value of the information.  Mr. Chairman, the issue that has been on the Floor is whether the Chairman should be appointed by the President, and we have had a lot of discussions about this and I am just giving the views I had and my people in Bujumba County.  As well as the Deputy Chairman being elected by the delegates from amongst themselves as soon as possible after the first meeting of the Assembly.  May be here the hon. Minister who gave this Bill will explain if he has been given in this advancement of the Bill that the Chairman will be appointed by the President in accordance with the advice of the Cabinet from outside the delegates, then the issue would not have raised so much smoke.  But even some of you Members have already contributed that if I come to stand here as a delegate from Bujumba County, and they chose me for a Chairman, I am losing a vote!  So, you would not be interested to be the Chairman and I think this is where we concurred that let the President - and this was after my own explanation to the people that you do not just talk of the President as a President, but he is a President with the Cabinet, and since the interest of this Government is to make sure that there is a proper Constitution on which we are going to run, we do not think the President with the Cabinet will make that vital mistake to give us somebody who will jeopardise the good intentions of this House, and we accept whole heartedly that the President should nominate Members and give these Members with their curriculum vitaes qualifying them to be a Chairman and sent it - and the names of delegates with the same thing should happen for the Vice-Chairman, for the Deputy Chairman.  Let me hope that other contributions will also foster the meaning of involvement of the President.  When I was giving a point of information to hon. Mateke here, he apparently did not understand my point of information.  All of us here accept it or not if anything goes wrong through our deliberation for the Constituent Assembly, and the Constitution masses this country, you are not going to escape the blame, and they are going to say, it is President Museveni and his regime, and you are his regime.  They are the ones who are responsible for this Constitution, so I do not see why people fear to involve the President whatever good that has come is taken for the President’s name, whatever bad you commit, you are making the President suffer, you are lucky those of you who were around Kampala. now that you are on CNN, the very day Clinton took over Bush, the Bush error stopped, they said Clinton’s administration.  But was Clinton alone?  Clinton is responsible for USA, President Yoweri Kaguta Museveni is responsible for Uganda as of now and whatever we are doing, he is the man responsible on top and we cannot say. let us avoid involving him, we cannot avoid involving him unless you say please stand down and all of us saying, let us make the maximum possibility to avoid the President, to me it is beyond the reason.

THE CHAIRMAN:  Try to wind up.

MR. MUTEBI MULWANIRA:  Article 14, Mr. Chairman, I do not have much to say after this Article 14(2), my people thought that the Minister put it in by error, they said, interpretation in this House, the man or the woman will be lost.  So that should just be deleted.  As I said, I just wanted to go through a few items but since quite a number of these issue have been covered by my hon. Colleagues, I do not need to go over each and every Article and we shall support those who have brought in genuine amendments.  So that when this Bill passes, the people that will come here should know that they are responsible to us, we made them come here to do an honourable job to make sure that this country does not suffer again, I told my people in my constituency that whatever mistake you will make, whether you have eaten money or not, you will have down dragged this country or you have uplifted its standards by getting reasonable people capable who know the destiny of the country and what it means.  Because this Constitution as people are talking about political parties and what have you, political parties should come and go and leave our Constitution on the desk.  So whoever comes, whoever is uplifting to beat one of us in the competition, those of you who will not go to compete, let them know that they are not coming here for chicken free job, the job they are coming here for, is going to determine whether we are going to cry for good or we are going to raise our heads high and say we are Ugandans.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  

MRS. JOYCE MPANGA (Women Representative, Mubende): Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  I stand to support the Bill.  The people I represent, Mr. Chairman, and indeed myself are grateful to NRM that when they took power, they did not accept the philosophy of the winner take or and they have included all of us and have afforded us this opportunity to discuss the Constituent Bill.  We are discussing democracy and I hope all of us who are discussing should bear that in mind that we are discussing democracy and how to put this country on a very firm foundation for the democratic governance.  It is a big challenge to all of us and we the present Members in this House are being tested by everybody - everybody is looking at us to see whether we are discussing with deep concern for ourselves and our selfish interests.  It is quite a big temptation to put self before the national interest but I appeal to Members that we should exercise extreme caution in deciding this Bill, because either it will take us on back to the rail or it will derail us and put us back to a situation we do not want to be in.  Yesterday, we experienced Parliamentarian hon. Member of Rwampara hon. Butagira, introduced his proposed compromise, and previously in this House many hon. Members have argued that NRC should turn itself into a Constituent Assembly and discuss the Constitution.  While I would like to buy that proposal or compromise for the selfish reasons, that I would proudly walk over to the Constituent Assembly as a Member without the cumbersome process of going back to the electorate wisdom dictates otherwise.  The people I represent form part of Luwero Triangle.  They gave their blood lost their property and lost their good number of years in development during the protected war that ushered in the peace and the scars of war are not yet healed because unlike the North, we have not heard a comprehensive rehabilitation plan like the ‘Northern Region Reconstruction Programme’.  Some of the representatives here come from areas that have never directly experienced or been affected by war, they have never experienced being displaced by war; they have never experienced being hated because of what they are.  They have never been forced into exile some of them, but being in the central position in the country in Uganda and near the capital, we people who live here have lived in the centre of conflicts for too long, and every time Governments are brutally and violently changed, we suffer the consequences whether we want or not.  We have experienced neglect either because we supported or did not support the incoming Government.  We are tired of living without peace and hence the people of Mubende want to make sure that we establish a firm foundation for peaceful change of Government and we want and pray that maturity in politics and Government will happen to Uganda this time. (Applause)

We must clearly demonstrate my Colleagues that we are capable of learning from history.  In 1961, we had a chance to discuss constitution this was restricted because of political awareness and desire to achieve independence quickly.  Whatever was in our way, we wanted to put it away to be counted among the independent nations.  Many issues were left unsolved in the hope that ourselves will solve them when we come back and from Britain that is because it was discussed in the Lancaster House.  In 1966 came the Pigeon Hall Constitution, at that time, I was in the Maternity Ward in Mulago Hospital waiting for my first daughter, and listened carefully to the live broadcast of the monologue speech given by then Prime Minister, the people were muzzled by the gun, there was not even a point of information, point of clarification neither did I hear anybody stamp or say hear. (Laughter)  In 1967, a House that had been directly in 1962, many of whom had crossed the Floor without checking whether the voters who voted for them had crossed with them and the House whose life had expired, turned itself into a Constituent Assembly discussed and enacted the 1967 Constitution.  This Constitution decentralised powers into the Presidency and prepared for the dictatorship that we have experienced.  The people were not consulted for this reason, many of us have since then spent our lives either resisting actively or passively resisting this constitution, people like my friend the CM for Igara is my special friend, hon. Tiberondwa, asked who told the NRM we need a new Constitution?  The answer is simple, whose way of life, whose ideas and values were thrown out without our consent did ask? (Applause)

DR. TIBERONDWA:  Mr. Chairman, Sir, I would like to inform the hon. Member on the Floor that, if the people of the area she represents in this House were asked genuinely and honestly, many of them if not the majority would prefer the 1962 Constitution.

MRS. J. MPANGA:  Mr. Chairman, I told you, he is my special friend.  They will say, they want the 1962 Constitution but not the 1966 not the 1967.  And if he is right, why do you not ask them now and then they tell you what they want!

When the Members so Parliament here want to present NRC or NRC want to turn this House, NRC present or take the option of hon. Member from Rwampara, NRC plus some other people, turn it into a Constituent Assembly, we say no.  Let us not commit the same crime again.  The people are the ultimate source of power and the power we are exercising here and enjoy in this House is exercised on their behalf.  In Luganda we say that ‘Nyini kakomo bwakusaba ossawo mukono natwala’.  Meaning that when the owner of the bracelet you wear asks you for it, you just put your hand there and let her take it.  You cannot resist because it is not yours.  the power we are exercising belong to the people and the people have told us give us our power back so that we choose, therefore we cannot resist.  The people of Mubende want a separate and a directly elected Constituent Assembly.  On Monday a good part of Mubende people clearly told the Minister for Women in Development, Youth and Culture that they want to elect the people to the Constituent Assembly directly and not only that, they did say that they want the Draft Constitution in their own language, Luganda, which they can understand and for that sake, and also want copies of Odoki Report translated into all native languages they speak, so that they can wisely choose who will correctly represent their views in the Constituent Assembly.  Members will say they have no money but these are the people and this is what they ask me to tell you.  They want the Draft Constitution in native languages they understand.  They also want the report before electing a Constituent Assembly so that they can see which person can best represent them.  They have pointed out to me and I agree with them that the present House besides being indirectly elected by electoral college, the colleges were very small and since our election there has been an election for all these electoral colleges.  The faces have changed and they say may be it is high time our faces also changed but they look at this as a special task force and they would like to make sure that they choose people who can best do that job irrespective of whether they are Members of NRC today or not.

While they agree that the county should be the basic unit for a constituency, they also point out that some areas now are over represented because some areas have got very few people and others are too small.  They agree they want as they told us in Luganda that ‘Bo bagala democracy owekimemete’, concentrated democracy not diluted and they want it fair.  I agree with them also and add that we are aware that some groups either because they were misled or because they were in exile or because at that time they were still fighting, did not give their views to the Constitutional Commission.  Therefore if we elect today they will have a chance and, in future, they will not turn around to say that we exercised politics of exclusion and never gave them a chance.  They want equal chances to be represented.

Let me turn to the Bill.  Page 3, explanation of the Bill, they say the Preamble, the word ‘Republic” is a Constitutional matter which should be decided by the Constituent Assembly.  On page 5 4(c), we have no problem with the President appointing fifteen people.  They think this will bring in people with special contribution and some of them did point out that people like the Chairman of the Public Accounts Committee would have been missed in this House if the President did not wisely appoint him or nominate him and they also hope that the President will be able to include in the fifteen people some of the historicals without whose magnanimity they would not have had a chance.  Page 8 Section 8(2) in the desire to emphasize that the Constitution should not be hastily put together and to allow ample time for Members of the Constituent Assembly to come to a consensus we consider that the initial period be extended to five months and the additional period by the Minister can be extended by Statutory Instrument, but be limited to two months only because they do not want to go on and on.  The additional expense we say is the price we should pay for making a more lasting solution to our troubles.

On page 8 to 9, Section 9(2), we accept that the Chairman, be appointed by the President for the simple reasons that the new Members do not know each other and that will avoid one pressure group using its force among the newly elected and probably the inexperienced to impose their own thinking on others and avoid starting a Constituent Assembly with charged emotions.

The election of a Deputy Chairman, they say it is okay, the Members can choose from amongst themselves.  Now, Section 14(2) language, we welcome the use of any Ugandan language if for any reason you cannot speak English properly but being able to understand what is going on in the House should be the guiding factor.  They point out that wisdom is not restricted to only English speakers.  

Page 13, the Commissioner is a very important office and wield a lot of power on him will depend on the rigging of elections, the fairness of the whole exercise and so on.  Therefore, they think the names of people considered by the President on the advice of the Cabinet should be publicised through all mass media and two weeks allowed for people to say if they have anything against her or him.  Section 21(4) (a), qualified for appointment if one - it states that you should be qualified because you are at PS rank.  We want to modify it to say, ‘qualified for appointment if one has held a high ranking administrative post for at least three years’ and drop the PS.

Now, I turn to special representation.  Whereas I agree and do encourage women t stand and compete with men for all the available seats and I here say to the men do not marginalise us and tell us you have your seats or some of you already you are telling us when you accept thirty nine, then you are not competing with us, so you are solving your own problems by telling us to go in the corner while you take the rest.  While I agree that we should stand, it is very important for people to remember that culture changes very slowly and attitudes do not change overnight.  We have started a good tradition, we are living in gender sensitisation, I think, among African countries and although our dream in future is to see that 51 per cent of this House will be women who will stand and be elected on their own merit.  We should not forget that we should feed this little baby until we reach that position.  If you give us only eight places and some people even say, let it be regional representation, how are we going to choose the eight?  Even representing a district and I have done it since 1988, I am telling you even representing a district is difficult.  It is too wide and it is very difficult to reach every corner.  So choosing only eight women, you are marginalising us still further.  So, I support that we have thirty nine women and when we do, there is, in Part Two of the Third Schedule, page 27, Section 9(3), it should be altered to make room for special representation; people to be able to stand on both because it says, ‘no one should stand in two constituencies’, and I think there is a need to devise a kind of electoral system that will suit these people. 

For Youth, we accept thirty nine, ten seat to go to NRA, they suggest the police should be represented by one person, the prisons be represented by one person, religious leaders be represented by four, NOTU be represented by four, professional workers also be represented by two.  Where are they taking the six they are distributing?  They are saying no, to the NRC ten and re-distributing those.  Section 3, No. 11, I agree elections, and I think it would be a good thing at this particular moment for the elections to be non-partisan but since multi-party people like my friend here was telling you, may be disgruntled I feel and may disown the Constitution we are going to make, we can have a referendum on parties before we go to elect the Constituent Assembly.  What I want to emphasize here is the fact that we should pay the price for achieving the lasting results.  I do not buy the idea that people are disorganised, people today know exactly what they want and they know their rights.

Section 12, we must leave room for maturity now to attain, this is campaigning, we do not like campaigning ‘mu kimugunyu’, saying there will be no campaigns or organised campaigning because we should leave room for people to mature.  And, secondly when we are campaigning in that way, you cannot easily know what your opponent has said about you and you have no means of telling the electorate that it is not right.  So, we would like to have open campaigning provided you notify the authorities and the Returning Officer that you have a meeting.  Let everything be transparent and above board and we compete on equal terms.  Page 23, part 1 of Rules, Electoral Area, we accept the county as the basic unit.  So, even the small ones like the Deputy Minister of Housing Constituency should be represented.  We say we want one person, one vote, one value and a fairest number we propose is 60,000, so if a county has more than 120,000 people, they should have an extra representation but yesterday when hon. Kawanga was suggesting 50,000, I thought I could even buy that although I think it gives us many more people than my 60,000 would.  We also support the idea that every Municipality that now has a representative in the NRC retain their seats.

THE CHAIRMAN:  Try to wind up please.

MRS. MPANGA:  I am winding up, Sir.  Kampala like the counties, should have more divisions because of population and, lastly, the people of Mubende want a re-assurance particularly if the counting is not finished on the very day, how do you securely keep the ballot boxes and be sure nobody has tampered with them?  Thank you very much.

MISS KADAGA (Women Representative, Kamuli):  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I would like to begin by drawing the attention of the Minister of State for Constitutional Affairs that I think he committed a procedural error when he presented this Bill which has led to the confusion as to whether NRC Members are entrenching themselves or we should have an independent House.  The law now in place, Legal Notice No.1, it says NRC and NRA shall form the Constituent Assembly.  So, I would have expected him either to say in this Bill he is amending Legal Notice No.1 or at least make references to it but because you are silent that is why there is this confusion

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR CONSTITUTION AFFAIRS (Mr. Sam. Njuba):  I wish to inform my very learned friend and a respected Member of this House that she should read Clause 33 of the Bill and I expect her to read it before making a contribution because we expressly provided for the amendment or repeal of Section 14(b) of the Legal Notice.

MISS KADAGA:  I am aware of that provision but I would have expected you to say this in the memorandum so that it is clear and an ambiguous otherwise everybody who has been contributing think NRC is entrenching itself.  So, I think it should have been in the memorandum.  However, I now proceed to the Bill itself and I would like to begin by talking about the obligation of the NRM Government to the people of this country.  The Government says it came to bring democracy to this country and I think that that democracy should be transparent.  So, it is not enough, in my view, for the Mover of this Motion to say that Members should go back and get a mandate.  For me, I think that for this democracy to be real and for everybody to understand it, all the people of Uganda must participate in this process.  I have identified one problem judging by the contribution in this House, the question of where we are going, what method of political organisation we are going to follow.  So, I do not think that anybody here has an exclusive mandate to decide either whether we go multi-party or we go according to the Movement.  So, I would like to propose, in fact, I would go as far as to say that this Government is duty bound to conduct a national referendum on where we are going and this referendum must be independent of the constituent Assembly.  I say this because the minimum the people of Uganda expect from this Government is a guarantee of peace, security, stability and most important and orderly transition.  That is why I say that the people should decide the mode of that transition in a national referendum.  So, I am starting further, because since 1961, Governments have been telling the people of Uganda to go for multi-party elections without asking them.  In 1980 we were told to go for multi-party elections, nobody asked what we wanted.  In 1985 we were getting set against multi-party elections.  In 1986 the NRM came, they did not ask anybody what we wanted, they said we should go according to the Movement.  I think the time has come for people of this country to decide universally what we want to do.  So, I am saying the referendum is a must, independently of the Constituent Assembly. (Applause)

Having said that, I will go to some technical portions of the Bill.  I will not dwell on clause 14 on the question of the language, a lot have been said about it.  But I would like to draw your attention to Clause 22 sub-clause (i) on the functions of the Commission.  A Member yesterday complained that the Commissioner is being given a lot of functions and it would appear that the thrust is on a personality.  This Commission should be a Secretariat.  So, we need to amend at length Clause 22 to reflect the two functions of a Secretariat.  Again on Clause 22(2), there is provision for the Commissioner to sue in case he finds difficulties in performing his functions but I would like to say that this one is unrealistic.  If a party has a right to sue, it should also be sued.  So, I think there should be a provision for people to sue the Commission or the Commissioners because the kind of work the Commission is going to do may or may not satisfy the public.  So, people should have an opportunity to challenge the activities of the Commissioner.

On the Schedule Three, Rule 5, I am not satisfied with the provision for objector proceedings.  There is no procedure at all for objector proceeding - I mean the procedure is there but there is no format.  There is no procedure for handling complaints and no procedure for handling objections from the Returning Officer to the Commissioner and since this involves registration of voters, demarcation of constituencies, these are contentious matters and clear procedures should be provided.  In Rule 5, Sub-Rule (4) provides that the Commissioner may issue directives to Returning Officers regarding the type of objections to be referred to the Commissioner or to the Parish Council.  I think we should demarcate what objection goes to a Commissioner and which one goes to a Parish Council.  It should not be left at the whim of the Commissioner today to decide that in Mpigi this one will go to the Commissioner but in Kamuli you go to the Parish Council.  I think we must be certain once we legislate.  Legislation must be certain, clear and an ambiguous.

I also propose in respect of objector proceedings again that a Returning Officer must be required by law to publish the result of objector proceedings so that the results put the matter to rest.  This has not been provided for.  So it means that when a Returning Officer feels like not publishing, he may not publish.  So, that is another area where I would expect some amendments.

Again in rule 26(1), I am not satisfied with the right to petition.  As far as I am concerned, an election petition is a universal right.  I would like the Minister to amend Rule 26(1) and to provide for an opportunity for any person who lawfully voted in that constituency, any person who had a right to vote at that election, any person claiming to have had a right to be nominated or elected and a person alleging himself or herself to have been a candidate.  I say this because matters of selection, as we say, are rights which are universal so nobody should be prevented from raising a matter if he is lawfully entitled to affect the results of an election.

On the question of representation of women, I think the minimum should be thirty eight.  I say this, because our experiences in trying to mobilise district has been very difficult so the minimum should be thirty eight but I would be happy to support Members if they say 2 per district.  The more the better. (Laughter)

On the question of the Army, I think we can no longer lock out the Army from policy making decision but I would like to go along with those who say that we should include the police and the prisons.  I have nothing to say on the representation of NRC, I think I will leave that to be settled by this House in the same way that I will leave the question of the Constitution of the Constituent Assembly to be settled by this House.  I thank you, Mr. Chairman.  

THE DEPUTY MINISTER OF HEALTH (Dr. Bert Katureebe):  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Before I get into the Bill, let me repeat by way of emphasising the information that I earlier on gave to my hon. Colleague, the Deputy Minister of Local Government.  I want to ally the fears of the country and particularly the people along the borders with Kenya that the outbreak of yellow fever in Kenya did cause considerable concern in the Ministry of Health.  A task force of experts in the field was dispatched to the border areas and for the last two weeks they have been carrying surveillance on a daily basis and as of this morning when I asked no case of yellow fever has yet been reported identified in this country.  But should need arise all logistics have been put in place and all resources mobilised the situation would be handled there is no need to panic.  

I now turn to the Bill.  Like all hon. Members I have consulted, I spent four weeks of my leave in Bunyaruguru, I have discussed with many people, I have got their views but I also believe that ultimately I am responsible for what I say in this House and because of that, I will not be tempted to hide what I say by saying my people said this and they answered that.  Part of our duties as leaders and as representatives of the people is to guide our people, sometimes their views are not based on as much information as we have and that is why they entrusted us to come here and legislate not only for our Constituencies but also for Uganda as a whole.  

I support this Bill for two reasons, one because of the principle involved, the principle that ultimately the acceptability of the Constitution is probably much more important than what is contained in the Constitution.  At the end of the day, we should not give anyone a chance to say they did not participate in this Constitution; they have objectives not to what is in the Constitution but that they were not consulted.  It is this view, when we considered it first in NEC even before the Minister for Constitutional Affairs had given us the Draft Report of the Constitutional Commission.  We did consider this question first and this was the principle that was driving us that there must be as near as possible absolute acceptance of the Constitution and it is for this principle that I support this Bill. This Bill must not be taken to be a slur on this House, it was meant to be and it is not.  This House has done commendable work as a legislature and as a watchdog on the executive arm of Government.  I do not buy the arguments by the detractors outside this House that this House has been bribed to support the NRM that is not true.  I do not agree with one Member when he suggested that maybe they were bribed by having them pick-ups, I find that very strange.  Because, members of Parliament all over the world must be assisted to serve the people they represent and to serve the country. If it was no for our meagre resources, I would even wish to see Members of Parliament now or in future be availed with research assistant, secretarial staffs and so on to enable then to come and do the job they were supposed to do.  This can never be by any strength of the imagination be deemed to be a bribery of Members of Parliament, it is a duty that the State should have and it is an obligation that should be availed to Members. This House is now being asked to do something very great, we know that technically under the present law, this House is closed with powers to sit as the Constituent Assembly and pass the Constitution, that is the law how it stands.  But we are asking that we become great, that we surrender some of our power for the principle which I have earlier on said and ask the people of Uganda to directly elect another body whose mandate is one and one only to debate and promulgate the Constitution nothing else and I believe if we do that, we will go down in history, not as a discredited House as some newspapers want to project us, but as a House that stood to its responsibility and the responsibilities of the National Resistance Movement.  

I do not agree that this House does not have a mandate; I do not agree that this House does not represent the people, we were elected in accordance with interim procedures and Rules that have been in force, we were not legitimate elected.  This was an interim arrangement, we all recognised that the NRM is an interim arrangement and we were elected in accordance with the interim Rules of Procedures that was in force, I think those who say that we were legitimate that we do not have a mandate probably do not understand that we are and still continue to be in the interim period.  What this Bill is about is putting in place a procedure to merge from the interim period to having something as a foundation for future democracy in this country.  

Having said this, let me say that this is a Bill we can still afford to debate with emotion, this is a Bill we can still afford to debate in hunger because we are at cross roads.  Those of you who were here in 1985, when Katonga was closed used to have church services almost every Sunday in Church to pray for the return of peace in Uganda and one churchman went as far as to say that it seemed God had put a way Uganda’s file and had forgotten about it and we are praying to him to look for it again. It would appear that God did not look at it again, but if we are not careful this time, he may surrender it to Lucifer who will burn it in hell and he will be able to find it.  We are at cross roads and I appeal to every political leader especially, leaders of political parties, especially Newspaper Editors and so on please, guide our people.  It has been suggested that we have a referendum now, why have these suggestions come?  I have heard some people here, say this is to prejudge the issue that this is to put the curd before the horse but was precipitated it.  You will recall and Members may recall those who listen t BBC at that time, when the Chairman of the Constitutional Commission presented their draft report and I emphasised the word draft report to the President, within 24 hours the Secretary General of the Democratic Party went on BBC to say that his party, I do not know whether he even consulted his party, that his party totally rejected these proposals and would try to put people in the Constituent Assembly to ensure that these proposals are rejected.  Now who was raising the issue there?  You have heard Press Conferences given at Uganda House, you have heard Press Conferences being given by the EP and so on.  Now the question is all of these people claim to speak on behalf of the people of Uganda and that is being the question, what do the people themselves say?  If the Constitutional Commission report we have looked at the written Report says the sampled the people and indeed yesterday hon. Butagira was asking who are the people and the leader of the Democratic Party says, he is speaking for the people and Cissy Ogwal says, she is speaking for the people, does it mean being the question that now is the time to ask the people what do they themselves say?  So, it is not prejudging the issue, they have helped to put the issue in the forefront.  I would have liked that when we put procedures in place, we follow those procedures, that is democracy.  But when we put institutions in place, we use them, once and agree to put up a Constitutional of Commission and people presented memorandum for that Constitutional Commission, it should have been cleared to everybody presenting a memorandum that is what you are presenting were your views and other people also presenting their views, and that your views did not necessarily have to be screened.  But if you now turn around and say, I am a party, I presented my views if my views are not accepted therefore, we reject the whole thing then that is breeding dictatorship in this country.  We are at a process where we need to give and take, and any political leader who does not understand this at this time will find himself on the dustbin of history.  This is what the people are saying, people are concerned not that they do not like their parties, in all the four weeks I spent in Bunyaruguru holding meetings with people I did not hear a single person who said he did not belong to one party or the other.  But, everybody say, please give us a breather-(Applause)- one man told me in a meeting he said, I want to tell you, Sir, UPC is in my blood, and another one said DP is in my blood, but please, let us first - because this man and me we never talked before, now we can talk, so give us a chance, why are you bringing these things, are you talking about bringing parties at this Point?  Give us a chance.  So, people are saying, please let us take step by step, let people discover themselves, otherwise what we have to do is to go and ask them and that is not putting the curd before the horse.  

I want to turn to this fear of a President appointing the Chairman and the President nominating the Members.  I think this fear arises over our history, it arises out of the Presidents we have had, we are scared that we may have created again a President that is going to wield so much power.  But the question is, are we saying the President should not be closed with any power at all and call that democracy?  Or are we saying that, the President may have powers but which are contained because of checks and balances that we put in place.  If you look at this Bill, it is saying the President shall appoint the Chairman, first check the Chairman shall have no vote that is a check?  Because democracy is based on checks and balances.  We can then have the rules of debate because this Assembly will not be like a drinking place; it will have Rules of procedure.  So, hon. Members the next check will be to ensure the Chairman conducts the proceedings of the Assembly in strictly accordance with the Rules of procedure.  But to say that a President should have no say even in appointing the chairman, I think this is an over re-action of our experiences but I think we should look at this thing very squarely and maturely.  Moreover the point made by my hon. Friend Dr. Chebrot here, that his people - I do not know what himself said, but he said his people were saying that they expect NRC Members many of us to go and stand and be returned and then we can elect the chairman, because we shall know the Chairman, first of all nobody has a right to assume that all of us are going to stand.  No one has a right to assume that all of us will be returned, but even if we were returned, it proves the point that those who are already here -(Interruption)

MR. MUTEBI MULWANIRA:  Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, I would like to inform the hon. Member holding the Floor through you, that quoting is a very dangerous game.  He wishes to quote, he should quote exactly what somebody said and this is contrary.  

DR. KATUREEBE:  Mr. Chairman, I am wondering whether hon. Mulwanira has turned into Dr. Chebrot.  But the point I was making is that if you have to have an election, let it be a fair election, let it be a good election, a bad election is no worse than no election, and unfair election is worse than unfair election what is a fair election?  Everybody who wants to stand must have an equal opportunity.  People must know whom they are electing, why they are electing him and for what they are electing him.  Now if you take the knowledge of my friend that those of us who would be in the NRC will now stand and can be elected as Chairman, that is the point, it means we shall have unfair advantage over other elected Members who are less known than ourselves and that -(Interruption)

DR. CHEBROT:  Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, I was very careful when I made my statement.  I did not make an absolute statement by saying that all NRC Members who are here are going to be elected back here.  I said, I believe that a substantial number of the NRC Members who are here are most likely to be re-elected back and I think that assumption is not very far from the truth, we will see many faces here to 1994.  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.

DR. KATUREEBE:  I think that does not differentiate my point.  My point is nobody should have a an undue, unfair advantage over others, that is the point I am making, and indeed this question arose here.  Some hon. Members here after we had the NEC elections did say openly even on the Floor of this House that Ministers and other people who are better known had unfair advantage over others, which was true and indeed some moves were started but they did not succeed to have NEC re-elected every year, so that everybody else would have a chance.  Now, we are talking about a one time affair, look at the time factor, we are looking at the Constituent Assembly that we are giving an assignment for four month and you are saying a man who was elected from Bunyaruguru and a man who has been elected from Moroto and another man who has been elected from Koboko can reasonably sit in the Chamber and elect one of themselves as Chairman to deliberate the Constitution.  I think we are not being serious if we carry on like this.  Likewise, there is a fear that if the President nominates Members, then the people will be I do not know whether they want to use the word surrogates of the President or whether they - that may not necessarily happen and it will not happen.  I think there must be an element of trusting our leaders, if we do not trust our leaders, then people will not trust us in turn.  I think we must assume and give benefit that a President of the country is primarily concerned for the welfare of this country basing on the present President we have and the President we want to have in future.  We have been enriched in this House I do not know whether anybody can say that hon. Mayanja Nkangi a very respectable man, has not enriched the debates of this House because he was nominated by the President.  I do not know whether anybody can say that hon. Sibo has always supported Bills and positions of Government because he was nominated by the President.  So, let us look at what we have and when I explain this to my people, we all agree and I am here to represent them.  But there is nothing wrong in principle with the President nominating the Chairman and nominating the other 15 Members of the Constituent Assembly provided there is adequate checks and balances in place.

Rather unsavory things get to be said about the historical Members of this House.  I do not know whether it was a crime or whether it is a shame that some people put their lives at steak to go and fight for a return of democracy in this country.  Today, when you read some papers, when you hear some of the political leaders talking about some of these original NRC it is as if these are social misfits, political misfits, people who are shady and so on.  They are being accused of having a hidden agenda, I do no know what is a hidden agenda, and  I do not know whether these people - what is being having hidden agenda?  When you go out to fight place your life at steak and I do not even if you will return.  What is hidden about this?  In this context, to elaborate what I am saying, I want to quote from a document that was circulated that I believe most of you - at least I found it in my pigeon hall.  This is a document entitled the Constituent Assembly Bill.  Does it project the Supremacy of the people in the Constitution making?  This was a lecture given but one John Ken Lukyamuzi who is supposed to be the Secretary General of the Conservative Party and this is what he had to say; ‘The writing of the American Constitution over 200 ago as something to teach Ugandans.  A good number of the writers of the American Constitution were Army Officers in war but lawyers in peace time, the writing of a Constitution capable of standing the test of time should not have anything to do with army men’.  I do not know whether that is not even a contradiction.  Hear and listen to this, I am not doubting the capacity of the Members of the adopt Constitution Commission but why should it comprise soldiers like Lt. Col. Serwanga Lwanga and other related to him.  How do we know whether it is not true that these men and women have been working on the direction of a hidden agenda?  This is a paper presented by a leader of a party to the students’ gate at Makerere University.  How are these helping to build democracy?  He even quoted and said that the people in the American Constitution were Army men, why should a Ugandan lawyer who for historical reasons finds himself in uniform in the bush be denied a chance to participate in the Constitution making process?  We must avoid these kind of things if we are going to move.  I now come to a question of language.  I agree entirely with hon. Mrs. Mpanga that wisdom and language are stannous that is true, but we are trying to create a body that is going to deliberate, that is going to discuss and promulgate the most important document in this country.  Are we now going to look at people who will only be assisted to give their views but are incapable of listening to the views of others, how will they debate?  Or are we thinking that for everyone who is saying he does not understand in the hall we are going to put somebody - some interpreter to keep translating for him when other people are contributing?  I think it goes more to merely saying, you will be given a translator for English when you are giving your own submission.  But the giving of your submission must involve the listening to other submissions and I think that is the point that as already been made on this Floor by Bidandi Ssali and others.  You cannot just come here and give your views and go away and then at the end of the day, you say, I debated in the making of the Constitution, you must be able to listen to what other people are saying.  So, in this connection, we must retain the basic factor that you must be able to express yourself in the official language of Government and that is English.

Finally, we are concerned about women.  I think there has been a revolution in this country the way we involved our women in the activities of the country.  Now, when you look at this proposal, we are going a step backwards I think, because if we have been having 36 women in this House now when it comes to debating the most important document of all, you say, we have only 8, I think that is taking a step backwards and I think the Minister should consider increasing this number at least, retain the present numbers.  Mr. Chairman, I have no problem with other special representative groups, I beg to support.  Thank you.    

MR. DIDI AGARD (West Moyo, Moyo):  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, for giving me this opportunity.  I would like to come straight to the point of this fellow who wants - when you bring a delicacy home should you disqualify the wife so that a new cook should be invited to come and prepare the dish?  Nevertheless, I support hon. Njuba.  I know hon. Njuba is a very naughty tactician because we used to play football together.  When he provoked Members here who rose to the level of such a mature debate, he succeeded and truly brought out the best in Members, and as hon. Kawanga informed the House yesterday, when he clarified the difference between the indirect or limited mandate as opposed to a complete or true mandate as the one we have based on a few delegates should give way for a complete one which should be based on secret ballot as is being proposed.  Since we were elected by a few, we should all go back and compete with anybody else who also wants to be stand.  This issue here, I was one of those who had earlier on brought out points of possible areas of conflict in having two rivaling Houses like the way the two Houses will be conducting their affairs. Which one will be supreme?  If Members should belong to both are attending one; where will they sit, and whether if there is some extension for the Constituent Assembly debate at the time when they may be occupying this House, whether we shall not be bogged down with the other work of making plans.  But as some of the proposals or amendments propose us go out and seek endorsement, some kind of compromise can be worked out to resolve that and since the hon. Minister has noted most of the amendments to that effect, I will not go over them but will leave that to him to choose.  I think that what is important is that Members have now realised that go back is to ask us to have what we call the baptism of fire by the electorate and this is a good challenge to all of us.  As the former speaker mentioned, this House has proved one thing, that is has discharged its work with distinction in the last five years, that is, since 1988 and if it is now time for us to get expanded by having a new House to discuss the new Constitution, you see, I would have proposed that like in the case of South Africa and elsewhere, the moment you go for the Constituent Assembly, you also transform the House into a transitional assembly.  So, I do not know why we should allow the Constituent Assembly as a Committee to be separate while we continue as the interim Parliament.  It would be better for all of us to go for the constituent Assembly so that the new assembly is both the Constituent and transitional assembly.  I will however, leave it to the Minister and his experts to introduce that.  My proposal is that, the next House should be the transitional assembly duly elected so that it tackles both the Constitution and also transform the House into the transitional Parliament until it conducts the next election.  Now if earlier on the historicals who in the bush had agreed that they would later transform into the Constituent Assembly and now they, however, wish to accept real democracy and agree that it is better for all to have elections.  I think this was a sincere but positive development on their part and it could not have been a question of any hidden agenda since they have never tasted any elections and most of us have been tested once and least, and it is us who should not be afraid to be tested again therefore.  So, anyway, on that point, I believe there is no hidden agenda by the historicals when they decided to bring this debate here.  I will now come back to one or two other points.  Mr. Chairman, I would like to believe that we stand here to be judged by history, we may even be condemned by history.  We hear of Lakwena coming back, we are selling national assets e.g. Uganda Waragi. So a song, there are so many things happening and history is going to record events like this ‘Lakwena fought Uganda and she wanted to return while Haji Kigongo was Chairman of the House’. (Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Repeat that please.

MR. AGAD DIDI:  I said that history is going to record some events like this, Lakwena who fought Uganda Government, applied to return to Uganda at a time when there was a national reconciliation when Haji Moses Kigongo was the Chairman of the Assembly.  What I want to emphasise is that whether we like it or not, we have to demonstrate reconciliation in this House as good example to all of Uganda if we live a good example and whatever we do -(Interruption)- that is the starting point I am starting from.  As for example, I remember in 1986 when I came back from exile, you know they were saying these ‘Anyanya’ now some fellow even renamed it differently by referring to ‘Munyunyusi’ even in campus a word became tomatoes -(laughter)- it was all evidence of intolerence to call the people of the worthy, but what happened was that the leadership which came in 1986 was very firm about one thing; nationalism.  So, attempts to marginalise certain sections were rejected by the leadership of the NRM and claims to Uganda were likewise rejected. What I am saying is that the first lesson we got from the NRM Government was to address the question of national reconciliation and tolerance, which explains why now the prevailing peace as has almost reached all parts of Uganda today, and when the Constitutional Commissioners went around asking questions one demand was that, can you not encourage us proceed in this kind of manner? or Government for sometime?  That question was surely asked in Moyo in my presence. 

Now, the reason why people have asked the Commissioners to include this kind of consideration is because of what they have felt and experienced since 1986.  Even when we are writing a Constitution, can Ugandans not be asked for the time being to determine whether really they cannot work together in some inclusive arrangement?  When one hon. Member says that the issue is one level ground, I want to say what is most important today is not elections, the issue is what can we do to really see that we have reconciled nationally and permanently?  Where you have got national reconciliation and national unity, the rules are automatic.  The Constitution, actually, is then clearly a covenant that defines parameters during which willing peoples agree to operate.  So, when we say that it is important to have a referendum now, the issue is whether we can agree to congregate like this.  I believe that is something that we should decide now.  It is something on which even the text of the Constitutional proposals should really contain the framework of.  The Commissioners should have on a separate report, and besides the main Constitution that I agree should be good for 100 to 200 or even 1,000 years.  The report should cover only the immediate period.  If we do not address the question of national reconciliation today, a document called a Constitution by itself will remain meaningless.  I would like to invite Members to really focus on this point.  The tendency to think that these transitory proposals are all mechanizations to perpetrate a system, could not be any further from the truth, because I believe that one, during the NRM only, we have had benefit of strong leadership which has been able to make sure that being different people has not stopped us from working together.  The NRM system has also enabled us to view things internationally, whether it is Russia or whether Yugoslavia, we have seen that groups who have been brought by force, the moment that central control falls, they just degenerate like oil and water.  so what I am saying is under the NRM, it is true that all forces have been encouraged to come together.  It is therefore very tempting for people to imagine the idea of movement type is to transform the NRM because the NRM is already there.  My belief of the NRM as opposed to what should be the Movement could be different.  As hon. Bidandi Ssali said yesterday, I do not have the benefit of sitting in the Cabinet, so I do not know whether there was an agreed position of what the NRM is, but what I am trying to say here is what my understanding of the NRM is.  You see, it is like Wasswa and Kato, NRA, NRM the first rule about the NRA is regimentation, what I mean by that is, the leadership of NRM has elective, is not democratic in the sense that you see Commanders/ Afandes - you know, it is not; you are wrong.  

So, the NRA with this twin NRM has brought some elements of this type of Movement.  As of now, we are undergoing a transition, legal transition by which we should introduce or transform the NRM into a Movement in which leadership will be elective, and that is what I support.  If for example, Kitariko wants to stand for President, may be with Cecilia Ogwal they can stand.  If Brig. Kyaligonza will stand may be with me as a running mate, because under the NRM, although broad based, we practice democracy at the lower levels only.  There is a difference between the role of the sustained peace, that we have had is because of that twin management.  I am here saying but, maybe, we fear the leadership of both NRA/NRM that happens to be fused under the same leadership.  Because the twin management has been what we call a clear-headed one and has done well to lead both the army and government which so much has been successful so far, is nevertheless unsafe.  Now when we go to movement type that must be changed so that the leadership is elected so as to avoid breeding any dictators.  I want to be counted among those who believe that we should not legislate against parties, so that if for example, somebody wants to stand or is being sponsored as party candidate, let such people stand.  I believe that there will however be a bigger force of many Ugandans and I believe that will include most of us here whom despite our association with the parties will stand on character as recommended by the Constitutional Commission.  Can we not deliberately agree that we promote somebody who will accept when elected to the Office of the President, to bring in all the other forces that may be elected into the legislature in his Government?  We have experimented during the NRM how such a system could work.  It has worked and I am sure it will work, the only difference is you have that confidence that, that is now our leadership elected by all Ugandans.  If Members really pose to consider this, all will realise that it is okay.  Why should you, if you are a particular party, wish to go and monopolise everything alone?  

So, I believe that even for Uganda, it is good that we encourage, it is like you know, at home, you know you disagree, when time come for food, when time come for that, you are all going for that food.  If we have not defined what is Movement type, I think we should spent time, political forces should for example make ideas, say okay, under the movement, because we did not work out details properly, for example, I want to reject this idea of National Council of state, you know it reminds me of this communist ideas, you know, when politic - bureaus monopolise power, and with our experience in this House whereby NEC has let down because you see I really - on this important issue should have been brought to us as a Parliamentary group to discuss, so that reasons are given by those who have attended.  I appreciate it is very difficult for a Minister or a Member of NEC to come and elect people, when people have taken position as to what to oppose, what not to oppose, but if you are made as a force as a Parliamentary group, that is why we would have learnt if you remember at the beginning of this NRC, we used even to have absence, so what I am saying now is because of the experience of NEC, I do not know whether we should experiment with some of this other select committees.  You see our committees here have done well you remember the Public Accounts Committee and I do not think hon. Kaheru was promoted a Minister to kill it, but from there it sets a standard, we have now had very many other commissions and they are making a lot of reports, and I think Members find that kind of Committee is more fair.  What I am saying here is for example, a Prime Minister wastes his time choosing a certain manager, the manager starts selling our properties without even telling us, I am not saying that there is no policy behind it, but you see if we were in this House, what I am suggesting here is would be divestiture, is something which although you do not know, IMF has been coming to us, I want this House to directly feel responsible for the control of situations, if when we come to that, me I have told my people that I will try to stand for this Constituent Assembly because I would like certain amendments in the main body like Ministers being answerable to this House, because sometimes, I believe you know, when the Head of State is assembling a team, he thinks of so many factors, but at least, this House should be given an opportunity of feeling responsible to censor any one of that, instead of collective as they do in Europe.  I think in our case if Minister X for example, is deliberately not doing and he thinks in our case he thinks he is untouchable, then this House should be able to reach him and of course, the Minister may think it is necessary and include some old those amendment.  

So, briefly, what I am trying to leave the Member with, is that whether you come back to this House in the Constituent Assembly, you have already seen how national unity at work is best operating. I was feeling sick, when I went to the doctor, he says, do you have stomach trouble?  Because he looked at me and thought the problem was stomach. What I am saying by is, when we go to our respective villages and we tell them the issue is not whether this party is good or that party is better.  The issue is that we need a time to further sustain national reconciliation, therefore, the issue right now is why should we not go ahead with this referendum so that we waste more time in organising the operation of that kind of machinery?  The parties should be grouped so that they can also make contributions to this kind of ideas.  If we do that, history is going to say that House, which led to the transition of Uganda, discharged its job very honourably.  Thank you very much.

MRS. SSEBAGEREKA (Women Representative, Mukono):  Thank you, Mr. Chairman, I had nearly given up.  I am pleased that you have allowed me to contribute to this very, very important Bill and I would like to start off by stressing the importance of this Bill and that we are at cross-roads and any mistake, any wrong footing we make, history will be there to charge this House.  

On January 26, 1986, when the President of this country was swearing in, he promised to let the people of Uganda make a new Constitution, a Constitution that is made by the people to bring the fundamental change in this country.  People when they heard it, they said, there was a hidden agenda, that the Constitution had already been made in the bush and many things were alleged.  Now, here we are proposing this Constituent Assembly Bill, and the same people are saying that why should we have a Constituent Assembly?  I would like to say, that it is very vital and it is very necessary to have this assembly elected by the people and to be dealing with the Constitution.  I would like here to divide the two things, this NRC is a political organ, it is over seeing everything that is being done.  The Constituent Assembly is just going to be handling the Constitution, it is a body that will sit here and deliberate for that long period that is given and for that period, you cannot expect somebody who is coming from Karamoja or who is coming from Mbale to go and be consulting the people, they will be here all the time.  Hence, I think that the Parliament should continue with its work so that the handing over of the Constitution is not made in a vacuum and that is my introduction.  Now, I am giving the views of the people from Mukono at its meeting held on 1st February, 1993 at Mukono Council Chambers.  The Mukono District Resistance Council made the following recommendations relating to the Constituent Assembly Bill.  The responsibility of making the Constitution should be vested in a directly elected Constituent Assembly.  The Chairman of the Constituent Assembly should be appointed by the President in accordance with the advice of the Cabinet.  The Deputy Chairman should be elected by the delegates from among themselves, this has been said by many other Members.  This will give us strength and knowledge that our President has been very instrumental in the fundamental change of this country.  It also lessen the time factor since the Constituent Assembly will be sitting just for four months, if we have to give the people time to know themselves then that will take time, so the time factor is also involved in this.  Resolution three, that in order to ensure fair representation the demarcation of Constituencies should be based on population distribution and it should be in places as soon as possible.  The maximum number of people per constituency should 70,000 special consideration should be made to cater for areas of very special population and difficult communication.  For example, Karamoja and the Islands.  Government should clarify on how the Constituent Assembly shall sit concurrently with the NRC considering that some delegates will be Members of both the NRC and the Constituent Assembly.  Here I say that, that option really does not arise if this House stays and deliberates and passes Bills while the Constituent Assembly is busy handling the Constitution.

MR. KARUHANGA:  Point of information.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman, I just felt I should give hon. Ssebagereka some information about the Constituency, because it seems she missed the hon. Minister’s point.  Every county will be represented whether is has got 5,000 people, 4,000 or 8,000 or 7,000 as long as it is a county, it will have a Constituent Assembly representative.  But from Municipalities and for those countries which have got more than 160 people, then they have to cut them down to 80, but whether you have a county of 20 people now, it will have a representative.

MRS. SSEBAGEREKA:  Thank you for the information but the people of Mukono thought that 7,000 should be the maximum, the cut off point, not that the other one with less population should not be represented.  The Constituent Assembly should be the final body to enact and promulgate the Constitution the same Assembly should be called upon to deliberate on those changes.  The effective date of the new Constitution shall be fixed by the Constituent Assembly.  Number seven, where as negotiations fail on any continuous matter that is of a local character to a particular region, District or Community, a referendum should be the deciding factor in that area or community.  Campaigning should not be made on political party lines, candidates shall go to their Constituencies and address the people freely without being controlled by returning or presiding officers.  

As far as women representation is concerned, the number should be increased and the Mukono Council supports that each district should have a women representative like we have in the Parliament.  With those few words, I support the Bill and I would like to add that we are living in a very dynamic society, we should not blame the history that we should learn what history has taught not to make the same mistakes again.  I support the Bill.   

MRS. MUGARURA (Women Representative):  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I stand here for a few minutes in the House to support this Bill.  I would like to thank you for allowing me this chance to join my Colleagues to support this Bill.  I have read the report thoroughly and I think it is justified to allow this Constituent Assembly to exist.  I have not dwelt on it, my Colleagues have given their views that I support, I have no problem with it, and Ugandans should have what they want.  I have an observation to make on the composition of this Assembly.  On studying this report, I got a summary in section 60, on the option page 26 - Mr. Chairman, I am trying to be brief; it states that, ‘while however, all agree that there should be representatives of the people at large, there is no anonymity on whose representative should be.  Some argue they should be special elected thoroughly for the purpose, there are however, a number of submission which propose the existing peoples’ representative could be used either instead of or in addition to the directed elected Members.  They suggest either or both officials of various levels of RC or Members of NRC.  There are also a range of different options suggested that which interest group should be represented’.  This is a summary that people who contributed their views to this report have no quarrel with Members of NRC becoming part of this body, because this is a summary.  I mean it puts everything all the views together, I could quote each section, say section 35, section 36, section 56, but section 60 summarises it all.  I want to give an example of a medical doctor who marries after three years of work.  He marries a wife of his father’s choice in agreement with their extended family.  These two people establishes a home, they live together amicably, they build themselves a house, a new house, a good house, they have had their children, they have a family, they are partner of a big family.  On the day they are going to enter the new house, the husband turns to the father who had recommended the pride turns around to the son and say, hay, can we not have a brand new bride to enter this new house?  If I were the old wife, I would have two options.  One is to say no, but to make it amicable, if we have been living happily and the parents and extended families insist on the new wife, we would share the home. (Laughter)  I cannot opt for a divorce whether I could do so, because it would be a total loss on my contribution. Why did I choose a medical doctor?  He spends five years studying, five years in the bush, three years later; he marries on the recommendation of the parents and the extended body.  The NRM Government goes in for elections, and the extended family, we, Ugandans come in agreement with our parents.  We have participated in the initial phases to Draft Constitution and the majority of the people as hon. Butagira said, have no quarrel with us being part of that body.  

So, since the NRM policy has been basically reconciliation, the more we discuss our problems, the more we understand one another.  I have admired the freedom of debate here, the practical criticism and yet in the end, we go with consensus and we amicably walk out of this hall.  So, I look forward to the day when we shall finally conclude this debate and you choose in favour of the shared home. (Laughter)  

On the representation, I have no quarrel with most - I share most of the views shared with my Colleagues but I will comment on a few and I will start with women representation.  The population of Bushenyi which I represent is according to 1991’s Census report, is 736,361 people.  Of those, 354.470 are men and 381,891 are female.  The population of Uganda is 16,671,705.  Out of those, 8,485,000 plus are female, 8,185,000 are male.  So, by all statistical data, there are more female in Uganda than male and you find that in homes, the basic unit is one, but the majority is one, plus one to two, one to four.  So seriously, there are many female and therefore, in my proposal, I do not want to speak on 39.  I want to propose the following; that in an area where if we have agreed on the basic proportion of 85 per Constituency, my proposal would prefer 50, so that the Municipality since the proposal for the report is 50 for the Municipality, it would still work elsewhere, because where I get 90,000 people, if you make 80, then we have a remainder of a few who do not deserve a new Member.  But if we made 50, we would get a good representation.  On that issue, I would say, if the counties who have more than 50,000 get more candidate, let the other candidate automatically be the NRC Women Representative now so that it gives the other women a chance to stand as district representatives so that we have more than 39.  I repeat, for those who are not clear, I am saying, if we are going to divide some counties into two or three constituencies, let the other extra be taken by women.  Support the women who stand and let them pass, so that we who are here and are interested in coming back to this Assembly, do open up an opportunity for more women to represent the district, since the population automatically shows that the more female than male.  On referendum, I feel I support hon. Kadaga’s view.  Hon. Katureebe commented on the unfairness exhibited in elections whereby some have advantages over others.  Why I like the option of NRC Members being automatically members of this body, I have two reasons for that.  One if we stand with the majority of other Ugandans, we are already advantaged because, I think we can raise 100,000/= but the rest of Ugandans I know will have very difficulty in raising that sum.  So, but if we are catered for here, then the others are left an equal opportunity to compete favourably.  So, this unfairness exists everywhere, it is just a matter of examining it and discussing it favourably.  

On the President electing the Chairman, be what he is, I have no problem.  I only think the disadvantage of it, will be people questioning his intentions in electing this Chairman and therefore causing doubt in the fairness of the whole thing.  But otherwise, I do not see any problem.  I only have a problem with the method of voting, it is obvious the majority of our people are illiterate.  I want to assure you that some people cannot even identify people from photographs.  And I want to give an example of an experience I had in my family.  In one of our photographs in the sitting room there is a family photo, where I am standing with my husband and the five children and when one of my aunts came to see who the people were, she thought I was my sister.  She thought that it was my sister, you know, because she could not work out that I was the one and yet the photograph is clear.  So, you cannot take it for granted that people will distinguish photographs.  It can be a loophole.  Why I say this, I am appealing to Members not to misunderstand me because I have sisters whom we look duplicates.  So, I think although we are in for this secret ballot, I really have reservation, for the results.  Suppose the majority of the areas do not agree with the results as shown after voting?  What provisions have we made to sort it out?  Will we not end up like the 1980 elections?  So, I think that we need to revisit this secret ballot and accept that the majority of us are illiterate and continue with lining up.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

MRS. MUTAGAMBA (Women Representative, Rakai):  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I want to make few points before I come to the Bill.  One, I want to express the gratitude of people of Rakai for the effort Government has made to give us Relief Supplies of food, during the strife of hunger.  People are grateful.  Another point and a serious one, Sir, we have been shocked when we read yesterday’s paper about the execution of prison convicts and it was stated that the majority of them were from Rakai.  As we know, Rakai is a very quiet area, we have never had insurgency, I have not had any political problems in Rakai and in our records, we do show any treason cases or murderers or thieves.  Otherwise, it sounded bad that mostly these people came from Rakai and they were treason cases.  I think the people of Rakai already have enough to take him.  I think the people of Rakai already have enough to take them besides the gallows.

However, I want to come to the Bill.  I support the Bill as far as it seeks to establish a Constituent Assembly that will debate the Draft Constitution and pass it afterwards.  However, I want us to be clear about one thing.  We have been here, we have been told that people have decided, people want this NRM Government says, the people have got the power to decide what they want, political parties come in and say, the people are saying this, we stand here and say, we were elected by the people.  I think it is high time before we make another step to consult these people.  Let us go back to them, let them tell exactly what they want.  Because we are going to make a Constitution, the last law or the highest law in this country with our legs apart.  We do not know whether we are standing for the parties whether we are standing for the Movement. (Laughter)  Some Members are just amused by the word apart but let us be serious about it.  You know, we cannot continue in the blanket cover of the people.  We cannot continue this blanket cover of the people, our people want this, the people are the supreme and yet we do not know what the people want.  Why do we not give them a chance.  If we are going to go for political parties, we shall know it and everybody will go back to the party he came from.  Those who do not have can actually start one.  What is wrong with starting an anti-corruption party?  So, if we are going t parties, we shall know we are going to parties.  If we are staying for the Movement for another period, let it be specified so that people devote their energies with a purpose.  Otherwise, we are being taken for granted.  

I want to talk about the participation of the NRC.  Participation of NRC has been talked about in the constituency by the Minister for Constitutional Affairs that actually people express the desire to have a separate body to debate the Constitution.  That is acceptable and we all like it and people of Rakai support it.  But then, we do not see why we should nominate or elect eight people.  We do not see their mandate in that body.  So, I stand to say that the NRC should actually not participate in the Constituent Assembly because one, we have got to continue with the Bills.   Secondly, if Members here go and stand, okay a good number will go through and come back to the Constituent Assembly, but those who will not go through, will find it difficult to come back here and speak for the people.  After all, they will be rejected.  There is not mandate, they will not have any power to come back here and speak for their people because they will know that they have lost.  So, in order to avoid that embarrassment and if Government still think that they need NRC to do some job, I would request and I stand by it, that NRC completely is out of this Constituent Assembly so that we carry on with the work of passing the Bills and setting the law; a new body is started, they debate the Constitution.  when they pass it, Assembly will come here and also endorse it.

MRS. OPOTI:  Point of information.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I stand up to substantiate that information as raised by the Member.  I look at the situation where things do not work out very well, and at first, we have been asked to render this power to the Constituent Assembly and if we entangle ourselves in it, then in future things do not work out well, we are all going to be dished into the same pot and blamed together.  If we give them the responsibility, let us give it full and we remain with ours here.

MRS. MUTAGAMBA:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Thank you for the information.  On the other hand, if the Minister’s intention of having NRC Members participate and if the Members of Parliament actually feel they should participate in this Constitution, then I would say, we dissolve Parliament so that we go back and seek fresh mandate and then we come back fully elected.  That will save us an embarrassment and also we shall have the mandate to debate the Constitution.  Then that one also answers the question raised on page 46 in the report.  Because the Constitutional Commission raised a procedural issue as to what will happen to NRC when they - will they continue with the debate?  I mean to sit in Parliament when the Constitution is going - the Constituent Assembly is sitting?  Or will they be absconding from here and if they do abscond or if they absent themselves, what about the forum and all that?  So, we either disqualify NRC or dissolve it, that issue would be dissolved.

I want to go to Clause 4 about the nomination at the position of the Constituent Assembly.  Having advocated for the election of the new body, and there is a provision that the President will have to nominate. I actually support the nomination of the President because he has got to bring in some people who may be he feels are important, have ideas to guide the Assembly.  However, there is one thing that we have got to look at.  It has been reported in the papers and nobody has refuted it that the President is standing somewhere in Rwemiyaga.  Is it Rwemiyaga or Sembule?  So, if the President is going to stand, then I do not see how he is going to nominate people.  Okay, let us hope that it is a rumour but it was in the papers.  Okay, if the President is given the mandate to nominate people, let him do us one favour?  Let him nominate these people before the elections.  It is so embarrassing to have somebody rejected at the polls and then gets nominated by the President.  That person develops an air of arrogance because he thinks he is superior, and he is not accountable to those people back home.  So, we ask the President he knows the people he wants to be in the Constituent Assembly, we can kick them off so that they do not have to stand, that we shall be saved an embarrassment of having people who have failed to be nominated to go there. 

I want to touch about the issue of law contentious matters.  It is said in the Bill that it will be through negotiations but it not stated who is going to negotiate with who.  Because when it comes to the Bill, when the Bill is passed, and people find with contentious issues, then they come to the Minister and the Minister says he can choose whether we want, after all, it was not stipulated in the Bill who is going to participate and who.  So, I think the Minister should come up with clear guidelines on these contentious matters in the law issues.  Then, about the qualifications of the people going to Constituent Assembly.  It is said some where in Clause 6, paragraph (ii) on page 7, that everybody is free to participate including civil servants.  But here we are, Mr. Chairman, with people coming from a period of a minimum of four months and maximum seven months or more, because we do not know how actually it will take.  And if we are going to go with referendum in between, because some issues are contentious or what, then it might even take longer.  But just imagine, a doctor in Mulago or a surgeon who has got to be away for seven months, or think of a teacher who teaches Senior four or Primary Seven, for that matter has got to be away for 7 months.  What arrangement is being made?  Supposing from one school we get four teachers coming?  So, I think the Minister should come out and answer to such possibilities which are likely to arise, because you may find that these people are engaged for more than half a year and then, or other sectors are going to be paralysed.  I think we have to be selective.  Then in Clause 24 of the Bill, we are talking about summary proceedings of petitions.  I am worried this one.  When you say summary proceedings that means one has no choice to appeal.  But in this case of a Constituent Assembly, when it has already been pointed out that its result may somehow influence the 1994 elections, I think one is entitled to appeal when he feels that the judgement he has received is not actually the right one or the true judgement.  So, I think the Minister, I am sure, has seen some Amendments here and there, should consider you know, removing this summary judgement.  I do not think it is the right of - I think the person will be denied of his right to appeal if he feels he has been aggrieved and the judgement he has received is not good for that matter.  I have one question that I really do not understand in the Rules, Clause 9.  It is talking of paying Shs. 100,000/= to Uganda Administration.  I do not know of that body Uganda Administration.  The Minister should actually be specific.  Is it Ministry of Finance, is it Local Government?  What is Uganda Administration?

MR. NTIMBA:  Mr. Chairman, in Government accounting procedures, Uganda Administration really means, Uganda Government, when people are writing cheques to Uganda Government, the account holders are normally designated as Uganda Administration.

MRS. MUTAGAMBA:  So, I hope when I write a cheque to Uganda Administration, it will not land in one of the Ministries, because they are part of Government.

THE CHAIRMAN:  Try to wind up.  Wind up, please.

MRS. MUTAGAMBA:  Mr. Chairman, about Rule No. 13, methods of campaigning.  This candidate’s meeting from Rakai people, where it is like a fashion show or political parade.  You know, getting somebody to talk and then somebody comes next, he speaks louder, even more impressive and I think we are not going to get the best candidate from such an arrangement.  People should be free to campaign if they are going to campaign or to speak on their own, when they feel like talking.

Finally, about the language, I think we have been simplistic if we still say that we are going to use all the languages and we are going to provide interpreters for who ever wants to speak his own language.  It would have been better if we stick to one language, that is the official language English, other than having to duplicate services of interpreters and you know, having to provide the interpreters allowances to maintain them.  With that, Mr. Chairman, I thank you.  

MRS. IKOTE ALELLUYA (Women Representative, Pallisa):  Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for giving me this opportunity to speak.  I stand to support.  No, not just to support but vehemently support this Bill seeking to create a new elected body to debate and gratify the Constitution.  In this House, we are men and women of integrity.  That is why we are here and we must continue to choose in this Bill as we have done in others nobly and fearlessly.  We have dispended the responsibilities and duties conferred upon us, with vigilance and honour so far.  Let us not be derailed at this crucial point in time, in our political lives, careers, at this crucial point in time in the history of Uganda.  There is not normal or logical reason for this august House to cling to power.  First of all, this Bill tries to address the problem of legality of the Constitution that is to be created.  We have heard what detractors say about this process.  NRM has already a Constitution at its sleeve and all the farce of Constitution making, is a farce.  NRC is full of Museveni’s men, historical, nominated, the army, even the elected members have been brain washed.  Interested groups want more recognition and say, they have been currently having.  That is the parties, the youths, the women, and etc.  And, therefore, it seems obviously, that in order to lay all these and other misgivings to rest, all the adult people of Uganda, of whom the detractors are a sub-set, should be involved in the selection of a Constituent Assembly as suggested by the Bill.  That is through direct elections.  There is a line of thinking that says, NRC should be dissolved after elections of the Constituent Assembly because they say people who come through the direct vote have legitimacy.  The NRC will no longer be legitimate.  Secondly, if you stand and you are beaten, how do you still claim to be the representative of the people?  Thirdly, these are indications of 1994.  So, if an NRC Member loses an election, he has no chance in 1994 and many other reasons like that, Sir.  But yesterday, hon. Butagira was asking what the hon. Minister for Constitutional Affairs meant by selfish people.  I contend, sir, that people who reason along this line are selfish, they have selfish and personal interests.  They should stop and see how much Uganda has suffered.  If there is a method that can ensure sustainable peace and tranquility for Uganda, and this methods excludes us, let us be nationalistic enough to put our interests aside and be left out.  This prevarication by the NRC is making us look bad.  Everyone is laughing at us that we do not want to relinquish power.  We are staling.  I have been in public places and listened to debates by the private citizens of Uganda and on the debate of the Constituent Assembly - but the feelings towards this august House, the NRC are not friendly at all.  It appears that the wrong people will be chosen because the local population can be manipulated and will select their candidate using wrong criteria.  This is the price of democracy.  We should not pay lip service to democracy.  In the final analysis, if one has been doing the job well, the people who elected him will bring him back.  If you have been doing the job and people are not appreciative, then we are better off not wasting our resources on such ungrateful people.  Let the people decide for themselves, they will have no one to blame.  In Pallisa, the Bagwere say, ‘Omwana niye akunga’, meaning ‘It is a child who eats whatever is on his plate and then cries’.  Therefore, let people decide and then they will have no one to blame but themselves.  The best way government can help the electorate to choose the correct people thoroughly on the purpose and criteria of this election and then leave it up to them.  On a merger of the two groups, the NRC and the elected body, this would make the body much too large.  The group would find it impossible ever to agree.  They will never agree on anything.  

MR. BUTAGIRA:  Point of information.  Thank you, I thought you are young in the House so you should receive information.  I am grateful for giving way.  I would like to inform you that there are larger Parliaments, for instance, the Parliament of Cuba with 140,000,000 people has got 489 Members and they deliberate effectively.  It is not a question of - you do not transact business only in Plenary Session but it is done conveniently in Committees and you just convene in the Plenary and finalised.  So, the question of numbers should not worry you.

MRS. IKOTE:  Thank you for that information, but the effectiveness of the Parliament of Cuba, I think is subject to debate because I cannot see an indicator economically or politically that Cuba is doing a better job because they have a big Parliament.  Secondly, a big body, a body of the two, will still be seen as an NRM because the NRC would still be bigger than the new body which is coming in.  Now, late last year, hon. Butagira brought a Motion and we supported it overwhelmingly and that was that if there was any doubt on the Chairman’s decision after debating a Bill, then Members could cause a counts, if 50 or more stood up immediately after the Chairman’s decision.  Personally, I feel that even if it is only one Member who is dissatisfied, it should be enough to cause the counts.  Now, here we have a similar, if there is doubt, however small, that the earlier decision that NRC should debate the Bill, then we should be able to have a vote on it by having an election similar to the Motion that was brought by hon. Butagira.  Why do we want to set rules for others and another one for ourselves?  There are those who say that they have talked to the people and the people at the grassroots who are the majority have said, they do not see any reason why NRC is not debating this Bill. Therefore this should mean that if you stand the people will automatically bring you back.  So, I do not see the worry, unless it is just to confirm the Constitutional Commission’s submissions that the people want a new body.  A referendum would indeed be putting the cart before the horse.  The type of a political system issue is only one of the countless possible issues that can arise from debating the Constitution and therefore we should debate this draft correct all the issues that are controversial and have one referendum.  On special interests groups - the ones mentioned are adequate.  The adequacy is taken care of except for the women who should be as already suggested at least one woman per district.  Otherwise, the Constitution is in danger of being debated by a very, very big minority.  The men are the minority and yet. (Laughter)  We also had deliberations in Pallisa District.  We had a full district gathering to discuss the Bill, Members came from all the counties, the general view was that NRC should not stand at the counties and also have a special consideration, a special interest group of 10.  The 10 should be scrapped and I tend to agree with this view also.  Otherwise, the time limit that has been specified for making the constitution is too short.  This Constitution is an important document, it is difficult to understand, it is long.  It needs to be digested.  Arguments for and against it need to be digested and so three to seven months are totally unrealistic.  If the Commission of Inquiry into Uganda Posts and Telecommunications has had to ask for extra time, I think it is totally unrealistic to think that a Constitution can be debated in about half a year.  I think the minimum period could be one year but that would also be first subject to extension.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  

THE CHAIRMAN:  With that we have come to the end of today’s session.  We adjourn until tomorrow at 2.30 p.m.  Thank you.


(The Council rose at 6.12 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 4th March, 1993 at 2.30 p.m).

