Tuesday, 3 March 2009

Parliament met at 3.16 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I am happy to see you and I thank you for what you have been able to do during the three weeks you had in your committees. I also welcome the chairpersons of the committees who have been having a retreat for three days. I hope you have new ideas which will enable us to do our work more efficiently. 

I am sorry we have started late, the budget process has been on since morning and since morning I have been working on it with other members; that is why I am late. 

Hon. Members, in the public gallery we have Members of the Gender, Social Welfare and Youth Sports Committee of South Sudan Legislative Assembly. You are most welcome to Uganda! (Applause) The delegation is led by hon. Martin Tako Moi, the deputy chair of the committee. You are most welcome. 

And, the Walter Reed Project, Makerere University, will make a presentation on Ebola immunisation tomorrow 4th March at 10.00 am in the training suite. Members on the Committee of Social Services and HIV and Members from Bundibugyo, Kampala, Kamwenge and Gulu districts are requested to attend. 

An honourable member – unfortunately we did not know – Stephen Kasaija Kagwera, MP for Burahya was involved in a motor accident and he is currently admitted in the intensive care Ward 3B, Mulago Hospital. Pray for him and visit him although being in intensive care, he may not be okay, but your prayers are required.  

3.20
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Prof. Morris Ogenga-Latigo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. At an appropriate time, when the new Members of the Government Frontbench take their seats, we will formally welcome them and we will congratulate those who have been brought in as new. But let me take this opportunity to congratulate those who have been given new assignments.

Mr Speaker, in the week of 11th to 14th, we informed you that we would be having our delegates’ conference and because we would not be in Parliament, you kindly adjourned Parliament to enable us participate in our delegates’ conference. I would like first of all to thank you for having given us the opportunity to go and execute our democratic responsibility within our party. 

I would also like to report to you that the delegates’ conference was very successful; we had open elections covered fully by the media and I would like to tell you that I stand before you having successfully defended my position as deputy president, northern. (Applause) 

My secretary general, hon. Alice Alaso also successfully defended her position. My former deputy president, hon. Sam Njuba, graciously accepted to lead the party at the position of chair and he successfully got elected. Two of our key members were very lucky; they did not have to defend their positions: the Opposition Chief Whip, hon. Kassiano Wadri was returned unopposed as deputy secretary general in charge of administration, and my deputy secretary for finance, hon. Nandala-Mafabi was also returned unopposed. 

We would like to thank all our colleagues who participated at that delegates’ conference and who offered themselves to occupy various positions: hon. Reagan Okumu, hon. Abdu Katuntu, hon. Patrick Oboi, hon. Kajeke, who eventually stepped down for our colleague, and some other members. 

Mr Speaker, while we were having our delegates’ conference, His Excellency, President Museveni made a trip to West Nile that weekend. While in West Nile, on Monday the 17th, the President addressed a gathering of Ugandans. We do not know what prompted what was reported in the papers but unfortunately, the papers quoted the President telling the meeting in Arua, which we confirmed that - I want to quote: “If you vote for Besigye, you would have voted for civil war. It is not a joking matter but a serious thing that you vote for NRM.”

Initially, we took it lightly knowing that democracy is sometimes about freedom of expression. But over the weekend, the President again addressed a group of teachers, and both The New Vision and renown The Monitor newspapers quoted the President as saying that he is not ready to hand over power. He is not going to allow those who want to warp the boat to ascend to power. We could interpret that to mean elements within NRM, who already want to remove him because we know there are people in the queue. But given what was said by the President the previous Monday, we are also right to assume that he is meaning power as provided for in the Constitution of Uganda.

Mr Speaker, these are utterances that we reflect on bearing in mind that sometime ago, the President told the people of Luweero that if Ssemogerere had defeated him in 1996, he would not have handed over power. We are concerned because we think the President and his party have done well to bring the country to where we are and we would not wish to see the President and his party subverting the democratic process that the country has achieved.

Secondly, we also know that such utterances will be taken by supporters literary. It immediately poses danger because if we are seen not to be patriotic, if we are seen as the people who are not respecting the President’s desire to continue, we run an obvious risk of suffering physical harm. It is our conviction that Article 1 of the Constitution is what we must all abide by, that power belongs to the people. We also base on the Constitution to contest for that power and as the Opposition we would want to be free to contest for that power and to allow for the will of the people to prevail. 

It is in this context that we the Opposition considered it absolutely important that I make this presentation to Parliament, given the importance of what is implied by the President’s statement. We have seen the chaos that has taken place in Kenya, we have seen the confusion in Zimbabwe, but earlier on utterances caused genocide in Rwanda and we would not like anything to take our country back. 

Therefore, I rise to ask the government side to explain to this country what the President meant in those utterances and also whether they can assure the country that this is still a multiparty democracy, that the 2011 elections will be there and that those elections will be free of intimidation and harassment as we all expect, given the gravity of this matter. If we do not get a satisfactory answer, we will be forced to come with a formal motion to express our displeasure. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. (Mr Okello-Okello rose_)- No, a request has been made. Let us first address it; let us get a legal reaction because if it is the same statement, then it has already been made. Let us get the reaction.

3.27
THE MINISTER OF INFORMATION AND NATIONAL GUIDANCE (Mrs Kabakumba Masiko): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to welcome Members back and I have noted the concerns of the Leader of the Opposition. It is interesting that he is quoting the media reports. And it has taken sometime and many of us are just a call away from him. If he had sought clarification earlier than today, maybe we would be giving an answer formally today. I undertake to crosscheck whether what was reported was what was actually said and I will report to this House. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: When? Please, give us a date. 

MRS KABAKUMBA MASIKO: Mr Speaker, my duty will be to write and call the head of state and my report will depend on when he responds to my call.

MR WADRI: Mr Speaker, I returned last night from the place where this statement was made, Arua, and the issues that have been raised by my senior brother Prof. Latigo are really worrying the public. Therefore, when the Minister for Information and National Guidance simply sweeps such a serious matter under the carpet as it were by saying that she will get to us as and when the respondent of her letter makes a response; that worries us. The respondent could also decide not to respond anyway! 

I think for us to move forward, we will at least expect some time frame; even if you said after a month, we would wait for that so that from that time frame, we can be able to get back to Parliament and say that, “on such a date, you made a commitment to give a response in one month”. But if you are not so sure about the time that you require for your respondent to respond to this issue, it really upsets us. 

Mr Speaker, I still wish to seek the indulgence of the Minister for National Guidance, to tell us when this response will come. Even if you say a year, we shall wait. Please, help the situation. 

3.30
MR LIVINGSTONE OKELLO-OKELLO (UPC, Chua County, Kitgum): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the Leader of the Opposition for raising this matter. This afternoon when I was going to your office, I met the Leader of the Opposition. I was going to seek your permission to raise this very matter. I am glad that he has done it. 

But the Leader of the Opposition quoted the President and stopped half way. The President said: “For your area to be developed, you must vote NRM.” This country is developed with the resources of the nation. We cannot allow the resources of our country to be used for the political career of one individual; they should be used for the development of all parts of Uganda. It is a matter of concern to our people. We can now clearly begin to see that that is why we are now fiddling with the project called, PRDP, covering the areas which do not normally vote for the President. It is all deliberate, Mr Speaker.

The Minister of Information and National Guidance should guide the nation properly not in a zigzag manner. You have taken on a job; do it. I think as a national Parliament we have the power to give deadline to a government minister. We cannot leave it open. I would like to suggest that we give the Minister of Information and National Guidance two weeks from today, to come before this House with a clear statement on these two matters: the civil war, who will wage it against who? Whether the President made a statement as an individual or any other person rather than presidential candidate, Yoweri Museveni? Why should there be civil war this time when somebody else is elected rather than Museveni? It is a matter of great concern. I suggest two weeks for the statement to come back to us here. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Okay. Can we agree on two weeks? Can we move on to another matter?  

3.33
MS SUSAN NAMPIJJA (CP, Lubaga Division South, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker.  I rise on a point of national importance. Human sacrifice as a form of human trafficking is on the rise today in Uganda. This is an issue which everybody should really take seriously. This is a matter, as Members of Parliament over which we should get concerned.  

A few days ago, in my constituency, we saved a ten-year old girl who was to be sacrificed by an unidentified woman. The woman picked the innocent girl from Kamuli because the witch doctor had promised the woman Shs 10 million. When the woman picked the girl –

THE SPEAKER: Excuse me, when you say Kamuli, is it here in Bweyogerere?

MS NAMPIJJA: Kamuli District in Eastern Uganda. When the woman picked the girl, she spent four days with her in Najjanankumbi. The girl could not go out, she could not move during the day because the woman used to lock her inside the house. It was not until the neighbours got concerned and they called us and we rescued the girl. So we linked up with the Police, that is how we saved the life of the innocent girl. 

I just beg that Parliament seriously condemns this rampant sacrifice of human beings. (Mr Kibanzanga rose_)

THE SPEAKER: Is the information on the same subject matter she is addressing us? She is addressing us on a particular case in her constituency. Is the information on that?

THE SPEAKER: Please, let us exhaust her report, unless the information is on that girl from Kamuli in her constituency - hon. Nampijja, continue with your story.

MS NAMPIJJA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I kindly request Parliament to seriously condemn human sacrifice. The Bible, in the book of Deuteronomy, seriously condemns human sacrifice because there is not a time when God encouraged human beings to sacrifice their fellow human beings. God only encouraged human beings to sacrifice animals as a sign of repentance. 

Government should come up with a comprehensive statement on human sacrifice urgently. So far, government has done nothing! We have all the state machineries. Where is the CID of this country? Where is the CMI of this country?

THE SPEAKER: Okay, hon. Nampijja, you have said that this happened in your constituency and the person was arrested, and you still say “unidentified woman?”

MS NAMPIJJA: Mr Speaker, the woman ran away. By the time we reached her home, she had escaped so we could not ascertain her name. But we interrogated the girl and she told us the whole story.

THE SPEAKER: No, but the woman had a home in your constituency and you did not know the owner of that home?

MS NAMPIJJA: The woman is known to the neighbours, she stays in Najjanankumbi.

THE SPEAKER: Okay.

MR MADADA: Mr Speaker, is the Member of Parliament in order to say that government is doing nothing on issues of child sacrifice when I am quite aware that my colleague, the Minister of Gender and Culture, last week had a meeting with traditional healers and there is a joint committee between Ministry of Gender, Ministry of Internal Affairs and Ministry of Ethics on measures to curb this matter and the Member is saying that government is doing nothing! Is she in order?

THE SPEAKER: Maybe she did not have that information.

MR KIBANZANGA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Last week some of us prepared a motion to substantively debate the issue of human sacrifice in this country. So, what I want to ask this House is to be a little more patient. When this motion is put on the Order Paper, this House will be in position to express -(Interjections)- we do not know when it will be put on the Order Paper but we have already communicated to the Speaker’s Office, we have communicated to the Clerk’s Office and even today we had come prepared to debate this motion; to condemn what is going on in this country in as far as human sacrifice is concerned.  

THE SPEAKER: Okay. Thank you very much.

3.41
MS MARIAM NALUBEGA (Independent, Female Youth Representative): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I appreciate that the motion is being drafted but we all know that all Ugandans have a right to life and everyday a person’s life is taken away in a careless manner, with impunity and I do not think we are going to wait for a motion to come to this Floor to just talk about child sacrifice when we do not have the solutions. 

On Sunday in Bukedde newspaper, there was a photograph of a boy of three and-a-half years whose private parts had been cut off by a neighbour, a witch doctor. I rang the IGP because I was so disturbed. I asked the IGP, “What are you doing?” The IGP said, “It is Parliament”. I said, “What about Parliament?” He said, “We need laws to enforce this”. And I said, “Mr IGP, do you not know that every Ugandan has a right to life and do you not know that we need to protect them? Can we not just have an exercise of curbing all these witch doctors? Can we not have this exercise done because we have the law for protecting Ugandans? Why do you want to just condemn things and yet we do not see action?” We have condemned so many things. We have condemned corruption but it is still around. So, condemning something is not a solution. We need to act.

This is not a matter for us to laugh about. Supposing tomorrow it is your daughter; supposing it is your son or your sister’s son or your brother because this is not far away from us. There is a lot of impunity; there is a lot of madness among our citizens. People are consuming alcohol, marijuana, day and night and we just look at them and we have a whole police force! We have security agencies but we have not even seen anybody charged for these daily murders that are happening and we all look on. 

Mr Speaker, I want to call upon the Parliament of Uganda, everybody believes in us, let us act. Let us curb this witchcraft – because I have my son, I do not want to wait for the day my son’s private parts are cut off! Thank you.

3.43
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR MICRO FINANCE (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I have been a Member of the National Security Committee until recently, which committee sits every Thursday morning beginning at 10.00 a.m. in the Ministry of Internal Affairs and it is chaired by the Minister of Internal Affairs. The issue of human trafficking, child sacrifice, has always been on the agenda whereby different players report to the National Security Committee. A lot has been done and I will therefore request that Parliament is given an opportunity of knowing government’s efforts so far, some of which has been reported by the Inspector-General of Police, Kale Kayihura, whereby they have gone to the extent of creating a special unit to deal with such people. 

I know a lot has been done and therefore I would request that either the Parliamentary Committee on Internal Affairs meets with the Ministry of Internal Affairs and discusses in the presence and participation of the IGP and a report is brought here –(Interruption)

MR KIBANZANGA: Mr Speaker, I have informed this House that we have a motion prepared and I am ready with the motion here except that it was not put on the Order Paper today. Would it be procedurally right if we amended our Order Paper and we tabled this motion and we gave this House an opportunity to debate this motion? 

THE SPEAKER: I think you are talking about something different. What I thought she was saying is that certain action has been taken by government. If it has been taken, it is the duty of government to come forward and make a statement and inform the country what it is doing instead of keeping it on your table without us knowing. And she said the minister is coming to make that statement.

MS NANKABIRWA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I had two suggestions and I said that either the Parliamentary Committee in charge of Internal Affairs should meet with the Ministry of Internal Affairs in the presence of the units including the IGP and the rest, make a report for Parliament or the Minister in charge of Internal Affairs comes here and makes a statement concerning the issue. Those are the options I had but -

THE SPEAKER: No, I think it is the duty of the Minister of Internal Affairs to come and tell us what is being done. It is not an option. It is something which the minister should come straight about because people are really concerned with what is happening everyday. So, let the minister come here and tell us what is being done.

3.47
THE MINISTER OF INFORMATION AND NATIONAL GUIDANCE (Ms Kabakumba Masiko): Mr Speaker, this problem has been with us and it is true a lot of efforts have been undertaken. Currently, the Minister in charge of Internal Affairs is on state duty in Kasese and I was left in charge of that portfolio and I wish to undertake that immediately he comes back he will come with a statement. However, I think the idea of interacting with the committee first is better because there is some information which may not necessarily be given on this Floor of the House but if the committee Members – I mean, if it is agreeable that the minister interacts with the committee, then more information can be given. But we have no problem in coming up with a statement regarding that concern.

3.48
MR HASSAN FUNGAROO (FDC, Obongi County, Moyo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and the hon. Minister of Information and National Guidance. You made me happy temporarily when you said that something is being done about this matter. But when you started taking the direction of first of all making a statement to the committee, I started losing the happiness that you gave me. Where is the official road for an issue to the committee? Who can come with an issue and bypass this main House? Compare this House with the committee, which one is superior? I thought we would delegate to the committee; that we would give an issue to the committee and say, “We have a problem here of human sacrifice”, and then the committee will report back to the House with their findings. 

Mr Speaker, let me also bring it to your attention that the issue of human sacrifice has also reached Moyo. Between 1st and 8th February, a woman was murdered between Yumbe and Moyo districts, Lefori sub-county particularly. Those were people who were displaced by NFA from Metu sub-county and resettled in a camp of IDPs called Goboro. The private parts of the woman were cut off. That is a woman, and I think we have women here. Do you want to wait until a Member of Parliament, who is a woman, is sacrificed for you to believe that this is a matter of national concern? In my opinion, therefore, I suggest that Parliament should perform its responsibilities now so that we empower the IGP and other organs of security including the anti-terror units. 

In Israel, if Hamas or the enemies of Israel fire a bomb and just one person dies, that is considered as terrorism. Now, according to our definition of terrorism, is child sacrifice not terrorism? Is killing a woman not terrorism? What are we doing with our forces? What do we call an emergency? I thank you.

3.51
MRS NABILAH SEMPALA (FDC, Woman Representative, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to note that we attended a conference on trafficking in persons and the issue of tagging sacrifices only to traditional healers is very escapist. What we noted is that most people are trafficking in body parts, like kidneys. And people now want to believe that it is traditional healers doing it. There are people who are coming into this country because our laws are lax and they are taking private organs of individuals. In India and other areas it was an issue; but because our border posts are very open, we let every person who wants to come into this country enter without checking them. 

Another issue is that, we have lots of immigrants and we have communities that have very bizarre practices in this country, and government does not come out to issue guidelines of who is allowed in the country and for how long. We are talking about FGM, where women’s private parts are cut off. We have the Somali community, it does this in the city but we condemn our indigenous people for doing the same. 

We also have an issue of communities that are coming en masse in this country. We have –(Interruption)

MR KAWUMA: Thank you, Mr Speaker, my colleague hon. Kibanzanga rose and said he has been working on a motion; he is ready with it. To me what is seemingly taking place are Members debating on the subject. Is it procedurally okay that we take the motion substantially and we debate on it? Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: What is the procedure there? Hon. Kibanzanga is planning to bring a motion and that would be anticipatory. We do not anticipate a motion. When it becomes a motion we shall deal with it but that does not prevent a Member from making a comment. Well, I do not have your motion therefore that does not prevent a Member from commenting on the subject. So, there is no procedural error here. Can you wind up, honourable member? We should end this debate and tackle other matters. 

MRS SEMPALA: I want to note that the issues that I am raising are with us in the community, and this is Kampala. Hon. Nampijja talked about this issue in the communities. We have strangers in our midst; communities that now own streets! When you go to an area in Kampala called Cooper Motors, that area is a Nigerian quarter. We do not know what their practices are and we do not know under what arrangement they are in the country. So, we cannot continue to condemn our own and not know where these bizarre practices are coming from. When the minister comes here, we want him to note that we cannot continue saying that these are internal matters when foreigners are coming in en masse without checks and balances. 

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Mr Speaker, is it in order for the honourable member to insinuate that child sacrifice is engineered by foreigners? Is she in order to claim that particular groups in Kampala are here illegally? Is she in order?

THE SPEAKER: What I gathered from her submission was that, it is not only the witchdoctors but she suspects that foreigners may also be contributing to the matter. That is what she was saying. But please let us wind up on this subject. 

MRS SEMPALA: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for your wise ruling. I want to remind my honourable minister that I am the area MP. I do not know the status of these people. We just know that there are areas that have been cordoned off by particular nationalities in Kampala and as residents we are very worried. So we would like to see that government comes out and also screens all these foreigners who are in the city and explains to us the status of their stay here. Thank you.

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE WHISTLEBLOWERS PROTECTION BILL, 2008

3.58
THE MINISTER OF STATE, OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT (ETHICS AND INTEGRITY) (Dr Nsaba Buturo): Mr Speaker, I move that the Bill entitled, “The Whistleblowers Protection Bill, 2008” be read for the first time. And in doing so, in conformity with rule 102, which concerns the Certificate of Financial Implications, it is my privilege to lay this on the Table.

THE SPEAKER: Is the Certificate of Financial Implications there? Okay, the Bill is committed to the appropriate committee of Parliament for consideration and necessary reporting. 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS

(I) STATEMENT OF BUSINESS

3.59
THE MINISTER OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Mr Adolf Mwesige): I rise to make a statement on the fire outbreak which destroyed property at Nakivubo Park Yard Market. 

THE SPEAKER: Is it one or – because there is a statement I see here: Prime Minister/Leader of Government Business. Are you having one? 

MR MWESIGE: Oh, sorry.

4.00
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Daudi Migereko): Mr Speaker, I stand in for the Rt hon. Prime Minister and Leader of Government Business and report on the business to follow from government. 

We shall have the following Bills brought before the House:

1.	The Mortgage Bill, 2007
2.	The Uganda Citizens and Immigration Control (Amendment) Bill, 2008
3.	The National Information and Technology Authority Bill, 2008

I wish to report. Thank you.

4.01
THE MINISTER OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Mr Adolf Mwesige): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I wish to inform the House that at about 4.30 a.m. on 25 February 2009, fire gutted Nakivubo Park Yard Market, which is located next to St Balikuddembe (Owino) Market, here in Kampala. 

The market lies between Nakivubo Stadium and Nakivubo channel along Nakivubo Place Road. This area was originally planned as a parking yard for the stadium. It accommodates about 20,000 vendors dealing mainly in second hand clothes, shoes, household items, polythene bags, electronics, tarpaulins and plastics, among others. 

In addition to the above items, there was cooking and food vending in the market. The cooking was done using charcoal stoves. The park yard market emerged as a result of overcrowding of St Balikuddembe Market. The vendors are a spill over from the St Balikuddembe Market. 

Kampala City Council collects revenue of about Shs 14 million monthly from this market. The market had makeshift stalls and pitches made of wood and tarpaulin shades with a few having iron sheets. Some of these makeshift stalls were connected to electricity. 

The cause of the fire is still unknown but investigations by the police are going on. Property estimated to be worth billions of shillings was destroyed. The actual value of the destruction will be established after a thorough assessment of the property has been done. 

No deaths have been reported but five people were injured, that is, three women and two men, and they were treated at the nearby clinics and discharged. 

The Fire Brigade Department of the Police was informed of this incident at 4.50 a.m. and they dispatched three fire trucks at 4.51 a.m., 4.55 a.m. and 5.02 a.m. These were later reinforced by three other fire trucks from M/s Fire Masters which arrived at 6.20 a.m. one from Civil Aviation Authority and another truck from Entebbe Police Station, which arrived thereafter.

Within a short time, fire had completely engulfed the makeshift wooden structures at the market. The situation was abetted by the windy conditions at that time and the highly inflammable materials used to partition the structures and stalls, materials like polythene paper and carton boxes. The items stored in the stalls for sale, which included fabrics and shoes also fuelled the spread and intensity of the fire. 

The absence of fire hydrants within the immediate vicinity of the scene of the fire forced the fire engine to repeatedly leave the scene to refill the tanks at the police fire station. In addition, the narrow lanes and congested alley ways in the area also hindered rescue efforts. Nevertheless, the combined and commendable efforts of the firemen managed to contain the fire from spreading to the adjacent buildings like the St Balikuddembe Market and others in the neighbourhood. 

Why the park yard market could not be saved is due to the following reasons: 
First, the market was built using thin dry wood, which burns easily. 

Second, the roofing of the market was with plastic tarpaulins. 

Third, the stalls were congested and intertwined catering for about 20,000 vendors. 

Fourth, the stalls were full of merchandise, which included clothes, plastic carpets and other inflammable materials including petrol and thinner, which the vendors use to clean shoes before selling them. The latter explains why sporadic explosions could be heard when the fire was spreading in the market. 

Fifth, there was a strong wind that morning after the rains had stopped. There were no fire hydrants in the vicinity of the market to provide instant water supply for the fire trucks. It was also difficult for the fire trucks to get closer to the scene due to lack of access.

And the way forward, Mr Speaker: for many years Kampala City Council and other urban councils in the country have not been building markets to match the fast growing population in urban areas. Consequently, most of the markets in the city and other urban areas across the country are overcrowded to the limit, to the extent that some vendors operate in makeshift stalls and pitches.

This kind of situation has generated a number of problems including fire outbreaks in a number of markets in the country. Such fires have destroyed central markets of Mbale, Jinja, Mbarara, and Soroti, and now Nakivubo Park Yard Market, among others.

In order to avert the above situation in the markets, government will take the following measures, among others: 

a)	Markets and other public places will be constructed in line with approved plans. These plans will include the provision for emergency facilities like accessibility, escape routes and fire hydrants.
 
b)	The government will strengthen the capacity of the police fire department both in terms of personnel and equipment.

c)	 The community will be sensitised by the local governments about the general health and safety in the markets.

d)	 Furthermore, local governments will ensure that regulations and guidelines relating to safety of operations within the markets, for example, prohibition of lighting fires, erection of makeshift kitchens and illegal electricity installation in the market are strictly enforced.

e)	Local governments will ensure that commodities that are sold in the markets are regulated and categorised. Commodities that are vulnerable to fire must be sold separately.

f)	Local governments under the supervision and guidance of my ministry will, as a matter of urgency, take on their responsibility of supervising and monitoring all activities in their areas of jurisdiction including the administration and management of markets.

In the meant time, however, the following measures are being taken to address the emergency situation on the ground:

a)	Kampala City Council (KCC) will establish an office at the Nakivubo Park Yard Market site to oversee and coordinate all the reconstruction work taking place there.

b)	KCC will come out with the redevelopment designs, which they are already working on, for the temporary 7,000 stalls of the park yard market. The cost of this is estimated at Shs 400 million.

Mr Speaker, His Excellency the President personally visited the Nakivubo Park Yard Market on Friday, 27 February 2009 and pledged a Shs 1 billion package to assist the traders whose merchandise was destroyed by the fire. The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and that of Local Government are working on the delivery mechanism of the fund. I beg to report, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, hon. Minister. Yes, hon. Lukwago.

4.10
MR ERIAS LUKWAGO (DP, Kampala Central Division, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also would like to thank the minister for this statement that brought out most of the salient issues concerning this disaster.

However, there are some issues that need some clarification. And for emphasis’ sake, Mr Minister, you will have to highlight more on the following issues: 

One, in the statement you more or less indicated that the market had been existing illegally, yet Kampala City Council has been collecting from it Shs 14 million per month. I need to get an explanation as to why the hon. Minister has indicated that in his statement.

Secondly, you did not bring out the issue of the land onto which this market is sitting. For example, who owns this land? I am asking this because we are made to understand that this land belongs to the Nakivubo War Memorial Trust. And of recent there have been wrangles over part of Nakivubo Stadium being turned into a park yard. The sentiments on the ground – probably this fire has a lot to do with those sentiments! I would like to ask the honourable minister, much as he said that the police are still carrying out investigations into the cause of the fire, to allay the fears of thousands of market vendors who have now embarked on reconstructing their market stalls.

On the question of water hydrants and fire brigade - honestly speaking, I thought you would tell this House exactly – if police got to the scene of the fire at 4.51 a.m. after it broke out at 4.50 a.m. it means they took five minutes. So, why did they fail to stop the fire? I feel the explanation that the minister has given is not satisfactory to us.

I appreciate the fact that we do not have enough fire hydrants, but the records we have indicate that in the 60s we used to have over 2,000 water hydrants in the city. Today, the report indicates that there are only 100 of them. What happened to the others? We need an explanation on that as well.

On the way forward, Mr Minister, you have indicated that you are strengthening the capacity of the Police Fire Brigade Department, but wouldn’t you consider a proposal to separate fire brigade from mainstream police; to establish an independent and self-accounting unit, which can run its own budget? I think this would help us so much. 

Furthermore, as Kampala City Council and Ministry of Local Government, you are supposed to work out mechanisms – I thought you would sign an agreement at least with that company called Fire Masters. Fire Masters’ staff came in as volunteers. They had no obligation whatsoever because there is no formal arrangement between them and government; it is a limited liability company. So, wouldn’t you, in the mean time as you work out long term measures, think of signing an agreement with Fire Masters, a company that seems to be more effective?  

Finally, I thank the people who visited the park yard, including the President, to console the vendors who lost their merchandise. I thank everybody who made a contribution - there are several people who came out and as indicated in the report, reconstruction of the market has started with people reconstructing their stalls.  

I would like, on that note, to request that since the Minister of Disaster Preparedness has indicated that government might not be having capacity - I appreciate the fact that the budget for the minister is very small. But now that several people including banks, musicians, politicians, leaders of political parties and others, have come out to help these vendors, I would like to move that, as Members of Parliament, we also make a humble contribution to these poor Ugandans who lost their property to enable them get a fresh start. I would like to suggest a contribution of at least Shs 100,000 per Member. I am just requesting. Let us be generous; let us be sympathetic; these are people who need humanitarian assistance from all of us. If people from all walks of life have come out to help, why not Members of Parliament? I request honourable members to be generous and kind enough. I thank you.

4.17
MR CHARLES ANGIRO (Independent, Erute County North, Lira): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. My concern is, we are aware that this is not the first and last fire because when you study - I do not know whether the honourable minister can tell us which of the central markets of Mbale, Jinja, Mbarara, Soroti and now this one, was the first to catch fire? What lessons did you learn from that? That you waited until Nakivubo came into this kind of upset, was a big mishap and you are now telling us the measures that are going to be put in place! 

Two, I think we should learn to appreciate the efforts of others when this kind of incident takes place. In the last paragraph of your report you are only thanking His Excellency the President for contributing Shs 1.0 billion, which is from the taxpayers’ money. You did not thank the private individuals, political leaders and the Kabaka who went there and contributed towards the reconstruction of the market. This should have been mentioned because this hazard happened due to our weaknesses. 

Three, I think we have to blame ourselves for lack of proper planning. I am saying this because even as we give out this contribution do we really know how many people have been affected? This was necessary because we might have to witness a scramble for this Shs 1.0 billion. And, are we planning on what kind of stalls vendors should have at Nakivubo? I am saying this because people are now reconstructing their stalls in their own styles. What have we put in place to ensure that this market is built well? Do we know the people who are going to operate from there? Are we sure about the 20,000 people? If we asked government to put before us the list of the people who are affected they would not do so; but they do not have it!

Therefore, it is important that we learn from this Nakivubo fire. If you go to Arua, one of the biggest central markets we have in this country, you will be surprised by the way things are being sold; you just do not understand it. And we are not even moving to address these issues! I think somebody somewhere should come out with a plan for the central markets so that it is genuinely understood - not that because the population has grown, anybody can go and put their stall anywhere.  

When you read this statement - this was a planned packing yard for Nakivubo and when did these people start to encroach on it? This is a situation where we are not going to get and take anybody to court because up to now we have not established what the cause of the fire was.  

Then when we reflect on the era of internally displaced persons - my honourable friend, Kabwegyere was laughing at me when internally displaced persons of Agweng were getting burnt everyday and week. Nobody came up to sympathize with the people of Agweng internally displaced persons camp. So, what kind of attitude are we trying to develop in this country? I think it is time to appreciate even the Shs 1 that those who went there contributed; we should learn to appreciate. Thank you very much.

4.23
MS BETI KAMYA (FDC, Lubaga Division North, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for this opportunity. I also wish to thank the honourable minister for his statement. I thank him for all the efforts that were made to comfort the people that lost their property. I thank government, through the President, for pledging Shs 1.0 billion.  

However, I would like to ask this: shat formula was used to arrive at Shs 1.0 billion? It may sound like a lot of money but we know people who have been given much more money - I would like to mention Mr Basajjabalaba who was given Shs 20 billion to bail out his business, which he had mismanaged on the basis that he was employing 6,000 people.  

We are told that there are 20,000 people that are getting their livelihood from the park yard market. From my experience and from my research, I know that the average person who works in a market or owns a boda boda spends a minimum of Shs 10,000 a day. They leave Shs 5,000 at home to buy food, charcoal and other things; they use Shs 2,000 for transport to work; they use Shs 1,000 for lunch and Shs 1,000 for breakfast. They spend a minimum of Shs 10,000 a day. Out of this, 30 percent actually goes to the public coffers. If you put this together, it amounts to Shs 60 million per day in taxes out of these people. This calculated in a month is Shs 1.8 billion per month in taxes.

THE SPEAKER: No, hon. Kamya -

MS KAMYA: Mr Speaker, I am developing an argument as to why these people should be given more than Shs 1 billion.

THE SPEAKER: Aren’t we more concerned with the causes? Is it really the assistance people are giving? What is our concern on this particular subject now?

MS KAMYA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I think these people are more interested in the help that they will get. The fire has been put out but they have no livelihood; they are seated at home. If the government intends to keep getting Shs 60 million a day, the government has got to keep them working and therefore in business. 

The argument I am developing is that these people, by going to work everyday, have contributed over Shs 200 million in ten years to the government coffers and they do not get it back, not in medicines, roads or schools. So, this is an opportunity to give these people back what they gave.

In my opinion, while Shs 1 billion may look like a lot of money, the government stands to lose more if they do not support these people to go back to work. By sitting at home and not working, the government will be losing a minimum of Shs 60 million per day. This is what they just leave at home. It does not include the clothes they will buy. It does not include the beers they will drink in the evening. It does not include all the extras. It is just the bare minimum that they spend.

I think it is in the interest of government, certainly in the interest of the Minister of Finance, to ensure that these people are facilitated to go back to work. The Shs 1 billion will not help them to restock their stalls and go back to work. This advice is for the benefit of all of us so that they continue to pay the taxes. I propose that they should get at least three months free of what they can pay per year. That is easy to calculate.

While we are talking about this fire, there have been many fires in the past and investigations into these fires have come to naught - the fire of Kicwamba, the fire of Kanungu, the fire in the schools and now this fire. There are many stories that relate these fires to arson. We need to know. I know that government says they are investigating, but if there are fires which have not been investigated after 10 or 15 years, we have a danger. There is a danger that we will not get to the bottom of these fires and that fires will continue and nothing will be done because we do not know the cause of these fires. We need to get to the bottom of these fires. 

There are strange stories that these fires are also related to human sacrifices. As we talk about sacrifices, some of these fires have also been linked to human sacrifice. 

In conclusion, I listened to the minister in charge of disaster preparedness telling these people that since they did not take the trouble to insure their goods, they will not be paid any compensation. I would like to know what the difference is between a disaster caused by floods and a disaster caused by fire where people lose everything. I would like hon. Kabwegyere to explain to us the difference between a disaster caused by floods and a disaster caused by fire where the victims are not responsible for this disaster.

4.29
MR STEVEN KALIBA (NRM, Fort Portal Municipality, Kabarole): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to take this opportunity to thank the newly appointed Minister of Local Government for this very precise and informative report.

I only wanted to request the minister, if possible, to include in his report the recent fire at Mpanga Market which I think I reported to this Parliament. I do not know how the minister forgot to include it. He included past fires of Mbale and Jinja but forgot the Mpanga fire. Hon. Minister, as you were making this report, Fort Portal was watching and when you do not report something on Mpanga, they will really feel very offended.

I want to add my voice also to thank His Excellency the President for the donation of Shs 1 billion to the vendors, most of whom are from my constituency. I think I will see hon. Lukwago at an appropriate time and make my contribution because a number of Batoro are in that area. Hon. Lukwago, we shall see; I will make my contribution towards that effort.

I also want to request the Minister of Local Government to follow up the matter promised by hon. Kahinda Otafiire, former Minister of Local Government. When he visited Mpanga Market, he promised the vendors that he would help them with low interest loans -

THE SPEAKER: But hon. Kaliba, we are dealing with the fire at Nakivubo. (Laughter)

MR KALIBA: Yes, I am aware of that, Mr Speaker. I have already thanked the minister for the statement and I have already said I am also going to contribute.

On page 5 of the statement, point No. 2, it says that the government will strengthen the capacity of the police fire department both in terms of personnel and equipment. I think that is a very strong point, and that is why I really request the Minister of Local Government to liaise with the Minister of Internal Affairs to help us equip our regional police headquarters with fire fighting equipment. I thank you, Mr Speaker. 

4.33
MR ABURA PIRIR (NRM, Matheniko County, Moroto): Thank you, Mr Speaker and honourable members. It is a pity and indeed it is very sad that since 2007, fires have been causing destruction and disaster. The latest one which occurred on Wednesday last week gives us a challenge - unless the government comes up with a sound fire fighting policy, we shall not really escape this destruction. 

Fires are different enemies. There are four types of fires and each fire requires a special chemical to extinguish it. For the ordinary fire you use water and for gas fire you use another powder. For oil and electricity fires, you have different chemicals. The equipment at the fire brigade station cannot fight any fire. We have not equipped our fire station. 

This has been rampant and the only place that you find the remedy for fire when it breaks out is the fire brigade. If you see the standard of our roads, when the fire breaks out, there is no way the fire engine can come to rescue that place. The Nakivubo fire did not need a fire engine; it needed a helicopter to spray gas from the air. 

Mr Speaker, we are not serious at times whenever we pass the budget for the Police. The Police is the only institution that is mandated to fight fires, but it is not equipped with fire-fighting equipment, fire tunics and so on. So, there is very low morale in this. I would therefore request that we put in place a policy for fire-fighting and then we can address this issue. Thank you.

4.36
MR THEODORE SSEKIKUBO (NRM, Lwemiyaga County, Ssembabule): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I stand to thank all those who came in to help the traders during their worst time. I must thank the President for coming out strongly to save the situation. I must also thank His Royal Highness the Kabaka of Buganda and all the people, the leader of the FDC and other Ugandans with big hearts who came out at the time when there was real need. 

The problem is that even such a disaster tends to be polarised along political inclinations, and I find that very unfortunate. When such a disaster emerges, let people not make political capital out of it but rather appreciate whoever has contributed positively to alleviate or to ameliorate such a situation

Mr Speaker, now and again we have received reports of fire outbreaks in Mbarara and in Jinja. In this ministerial statement, it also says that KCC will move in to establish and co-ordinate the reconstruction of the market but as everybody can see, the market is already up. What guidelines will you give when the structures are already complete? Can we tell someone to wake up! The people have moved out on their own and have put up structures and yet the only promise we get is that KCC will move in? At what stage are they moving in? We thought it would be at the drawing and designing stage. I think the minister should be serious with his statement and be honest to Ugandans and the vendors in the first place without making a cosmetic statement –

THE SPEAKER: What are you suggesting?

MR SSEKIKUBO: I am suggesting that the intervention should have been done yesterday and not today.

THE SPEAKER: That they should have the plans before the reconstruction?

MR SSEKIKUBO: Far from that, Mr Speaker. The minister should not give us a stale statement. This statement is stale. It has been overtaken by events. Vendors have built on their own and as we see, structures are already up. So I thought it should have been done yesterday or let him promise us the intervention measures that he is going to take right away.

I have also listened to the minister saying that in this park yard there are 20,000 vendors and KCC has a monthly collection of Shs 14 million. I wish to contest this statement because it cannot be true. If there are 20,000 vendors, it means that per month each vendor pays Shs 700 and each day Shs 23.3. This cannot be. Probably there is a racket and people are not declaring what is collected from this market. I know the vendors’ dues are on a daily basis and I am not sure that they are paying Shs 23.3 per day. 

Hon. Minister, this is your statement - vendors must not be paying Shs 23.3 per day. Who is sharing the loot from this market? Whom are you concealing, hon. Minister? How can you give us such a stale statement to underrate the contribution from the market to show that it is minimal? (Laughter) It is impossible! You cannot! Absolutely, you cannot and we are not fools. We can see through your statement that you are covering up something and this is unacceptable. You could be a lawyer but you could use simple arithmetic. Simple mathematics can do without you coming to make such a statement. (Laughter)

Mr Speaker, I would like to end my contribution but a fire breaking out at 4.30 a.m. is strange indeed because normally all fires break out by midnight. Apart from the early risers who arrive in the market at 5.00 a.m., who was there at that time?

Lastly, I would really caution my ministers to be cautious in their statements. You cannot speak on behalf of government - the Minister for Disaster Preparedness - and say there is no contribution. You cannot say, “We are sorry but there is no contribution from government”, only for your appointing authority to say the next day, “No, wait a moment, I am here, I am the head of state; we are making a contribution of Shs 1 billion.” No wonder that the other day the President said that he doubts the leadership abilities of the people around him; it could be because of such reasons (Laughter) I would have wanted someone to resign in good faith. Set an example that you cannot match Cabinet and bow out gracefully; and one is a professor at that! (Laughter) Mr Speaker, I thank you and thank all those that came out to assist at this time of need.   

4.42
MR ABDU KATUNTU (FDC, Bugweri County, Iganga): Thank you, and I would like to thank the honourable minister for this statement. Anyone who has lived in this city knows that it is always an accident about to happen. There is no planning in this city at all! All the issues being raised in this statement are issues of planning. You sometimes wonder whether the white house next door has ministers, city engineers or planners. I think it does not have. 

If you talk about narrow lanes as one of the reasons why this fire could not be stopped, the whole city has narrow lanes. If you talk of congested alleyways, the whole city has congested alleyways. If you talk about lack of fire hydrants, there are no fire hydrants. So, until we go back to the fundamentals, we are going to have fire after fire.

I am very disappointed because when you look at page 3 of the minister’s statement, it says: “The fire at the park yard market spread very fast due to the following reasons: first, the market was built using thin, dry wood which burns easily ….” You just need to go to that market now; they are reconstructing it and they are reconstructing using thin dry wood, which burns easily. (Laughter) 

They are talking about roofing the market with plastic tarpaulins, and that is what is happening. Third, when you are talking about stalls being congested and intertwined catering for over 20,000 vendors, that is exactly what is happening again. So, have we learnt any lessons from this fire? None! You see, some people study history to pass exams but not to pick lessons out of it. If these are the problems why the fire could not be stopped and we are going through the same, what will stop a fire from happening again? 

The honourable minister should take this matter very seriously. The problem is that we are sometimes populists. Maybe we would have sat down as government and said, “Can we plan and build a better market with fewer risks?” We did not. We have instead allowed these people who have lost billions of shillings to make the same mistakes and they will lose their money again tomorrow.

On page 4 it says markets and other public places will be constructed in line with the approved plans. Since the fire a couple of days ago, have we had an approved plan for this market? I want to know; is there an approved plan for this market or we have again gone ahead to give government money to build an unplanned market? We have not done anything. I think that we should go back and plan for this country. 

Some years back – I think it was at the beginning of the Seventh Parliament when there was some sort of fire accident - we ran out of this Chamber because we thought that a petrol station had caught fire. We ran out on foot. I remember running out with the Prime Minister on foot up to almost past Christ the King Church [Hon. Members: “Which Prime Minster?”] The real Prime Minister. (Laughter) Everybody in the whole town was running. This is because of unplanned buildings. 

We have had petrol stations built almost everywhere and we do not have any plans of evacuation. Look at the school where we have oil depots in Industrial Area. There is a primary school near all the depots in Industrial Area - Green Hill. Can we imagine if there is a slight accident in that place, we shall have thousands of people baked! 

We are saying that we are a city council or a country planning but we are not planning for this city. Unless we start planning for this city, buildings will continue coming up haphazardly. Some of these buildings are on road reserves and tomorrow you will say, “The lanes were narrow”. 

There is a lot of corruption especially in Kampala City Council. That is why we do not only have these fire accidents but even buildings are collapsing and people are being buried. Why? It is because City Council goes ahead and approves plans –

MR LUKWAGO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, and I thank my colleague for giving way. I want to inform you that there is a disaster which is about to happen. As we talk, people working along Kafumbe Mukasa Road are demonstrating and military police and the ordinary police have been deployed there. The reason is that there is a very big hole, about eight to ten feet deep, which was dug by the company that was contracted to construct that road. With this heavy downpour, it is now very deep and there are no safety measures to cover it. The people are worried. It is just an accident waiting to happen. People are about to drown there. So, the people have rioted and the Police are trying to calm them down. 

The assurance was that they were going to construct a road for them but it has turned out to be a huge pond, which is going to cause a catastrophe. That is the information I wanted to give you about poor planning and disasters in the city centre. There is also a building that collapsed in Nakasero on Thursday last week just shortly after this fire and one person was killed. I thought that the minister would give a statement about that. So, accidents arising out of poor planning are bound to happen on a daily basis in Kampala. That is the information I wanted to give.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Lukwago, what hon. Katuntu is telling you is that you should advise our unfortunate citizens who had their market burnt to have it planned before they re-construct it. What do you say about that?

MR LUKWAGO: Mr Speaker, the statement from the minister is clear. The Minister said that there is -

THE SPEAKER: I am talking about hon. Katuntu.

MR LUKWAGO: Mr Speaker, this market came about as a result of an influx of several people. Actually, it was a spill over from Owino Market. It came about as a result of lack of proper planning on the part of government. These people have to survive one way or another. We have pushed government, time and again, to provide a fund and to construct markets for the citizens just like our neighbours in Rwanda and Burundi. That is why you hear about riots in Kiseka Market, Nakasero Market and all over. It is because government has failed to come out with a policy to develop these markets on behalf of the people.

THE SPEAKER: Last night there was an announcement from the Inspector-General of Police that construction should stop until the area is planned. Do you agree with him? 

MR LUKWAGO: That is a very good question, Mr Speaker, and I would like to answer it. There are several people who have come out to help these people reconstruct the market. Among them is the Inspector-General of Police who contributed Shs 1 million for them to go ahead and carry out the construction. The President has pledged a loan of Shs 1 billion and many others have also pledged. 

It is the duty of government to ensure that there is planning in that place. By the time the Inspector-General of Police made that contribution, I am sure he was fully aware that what they were doing was lawful. I do not think the Inspector-General of Police would make a contribution today and tomorrow he says, “What you people are doing is illegal.” I do not think that this adds up.

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to give hon. Katuntu two pieces of information. The first one is that there seems to be a determined effort to turn the whole city into a slum. Areas that were beautifully planned like Nakasero, Kololo and Bugolobi have had their plots sub-divided into very tiny plots. There is one plot on Baskerville Avenue in Kololo which has been sub-divided into four. We are importing slums into areas that were properly planned. We cannot talk of planning in this city; the entire city is actually an executive slum.

Secondly, in modern urban planning, petrol filling stations are not allowed within town areas; they are put at the borders as you cross the town boundary, and on the left hand side as you go out but never inside the cities. We are sitting on a time bomb in this city. One day the entire city will catch fire and the whole town will burn down with people. I thank you.

MR KATUNTU: Mr Speaker, even when you look at page 2 of the statement of the minister and specifically the first paragraph, he is telling us that the market has makeshift stalls and pitches made of wood, and tarpaulin sheds with a few having iron sheets, and that some of these makeshift stalls were connected to electricity. For heavens sake, how do you connect electricity to a makeshift structure? First of all, who even pays for those bills? It could even be illegal tapping. Really, KCC is not doing its job. 

When the minister talks of Shs 14 million being collected as revenue monthly, definitely I think that this is what appears in the KCC books but for sure it can never be Shs 14 million. This is what they are recording. Thank you for this information; I think that the Committee on Local Government Accounts is going to take up this matter very seriously. This is what they are reporting yet there are 20,000 businessmen -

THE SPEAKER: But do you think that everybody in a stall pays the tax? You may have 20 people and find that only two pay.

MR KATUNTU: Mr Speaker, either way, we are interested in revenue collection and also whether the revenue collected reaches the public. If not, KCC should have collected it. Either way, I do not think that it is an excuse. This is a matter, which we should follow up.

Lastly, I am very happy that hon. Adolf Mwesige is the hon. Minister of Local Government. This is a baptism of fire as you take over this office. If only you were listening - hon. Nankabirwa has disrupted the honourable minister’s attention but I think that he is now settled. I think that this was a baptism of fire for you. As you go into office, realise that there are very many problems in local government and you need to work tirelessly to make sure that you alleviate some of these problems to save our people. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

4.58
MR MOHAMED KAWUMA (DP, Entebbe Municipality, Wakiso): Thank you, Mr Speaker, and I thank the minister for the statement. I also thank Sabasajja Kabaka and all those persons that made contributions to ensure that these people re-establish themselves. 

Like my colleagues have said, the problem of fire did not start today. It is history in Jinja, Entebbe and elsewhere. I recall when we were debating the motion on the Buddo fire outbreak we observed the element of fire hydrants. Similarly, there is the development of several petrol stations all over. 

Recently, there was a fire outbreak in one of the shopping centres. We are all aware that it is the legal mandate of a local government to provide fire services but in Uganda, which local government has this capacity? The law is there. Entebbe Municipality attempted to get a fire engine but it lasted only a week or so as it was very archaic. We have not prepared ourselves as government and as a country to address the problem of fire outbreaks. 

I recently had a problem in one of the islands in my constituency in Entebbe and I was very amazed. A civil aviation engine came to offer support but it was simply there. It did not have any pump for water out of the lake to stop this fire so the boat just moved around. They do not have the facilities. We recently bought a presidential jet of Shs 82 billion; supposing it gets a problem in Entebbe? We would not have the capacity to address the problem. 

As I wind up, I want to say that this government has made generous contributions to individuals. My colleagues talked of a contribution to Basajjabalaba of over Shs 20 billion. Tristar has not been paying for electricity, was not paying workers and it was given Shs 25 billion. Even at the recent Commonwealth conference held here, individuals who owned hotels were given billions of shillings. For these vendors who are self employed – and yet it is an obligation of government to provide employment for these people - we have failed to do that. 

We are failing to protect the employment these persons have created and when we come out to help them, we give them Shs 1 billion and it is loaned. I think we need to be very dedicated to ourselves and to this country as leaders. Many people were jubilating because of the Shs 1 billion. This is for over 20,000 people and yet over Shs 20 to 25 billion has been going to individuals. I think this is an unfair and we need to address – (Interruption)

MS ALASO: Thank you, hon. Kawuma. I am seeking clarification because I do not see this coming out. I would like to know whether this money, the Shs 1 billion, is a grant to the vendors or it is a loan. I ask this because of the way we are proceeding. Is it a way in which government is just donating this money? Our people would like to know because if it is a loan, probably if they go to any other place they could still get the same loans, with interest, just like this loan is going to be offered.

I think the government should come out clearly and tell Ugandans so that we do not mislead the public as though it is a donation. You know, people like Bobi Wine, Chameleon, Dr Besigye and the Kabaka went with donations. I think President Museveni has not gone with a donation.

THE SPEAKER: The announcement which was made official is that it is an interest free loan. 

MS ALASO: Mr Speaker, it is not very clear here and I think the minister should clarify. 

THE SPEAKER: What I heard was that it was an interest free loan.

MS ALASO: Mr Speaker, I did not hear and that is why I am asking that the government should clarify to Ugandans what type of money this.

THE SPEAKER: You are right.   

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR MICRO FINANCE (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I thought I was going to come in when everybody has contributed but let me give this information so that we debate from an informed background, and I thank you for having raised this issue.

When we met with the people, we realised that there were two categories of people who lost out. The first category are the “landlords”, these are the stall owners who had tenants who lost merchandise. So there are two categories of people and they both expect assistance from Government. 

Under this emergency arrangement of constructing emergency stalls, we get Shs 500 million to make sure that the stalls are replaced to that the tenants who lost merchandise can come and occupy the stalls and use the money – the first batch of Shs 500 million out of the Shs 1 billion - to begin business. The remaining Shs 500 million is a soft loan which Microfinance lends out as wholesale lending to an organised SACCO.

I asked whether they have a SACCO in that area and they told me that they have what they call Kampala Park Yard Savings. I instructed the Microfinance Support Centre to go tomorrow and meet with the leadership of that SACCO, make an assessment and see whether the SACCO qualifies to get this money. If it does not qualify, we have what we call a start-up kit for such SACCOs, which enables such SACCOs qualify to get this money. This is going to be done tomorrow. 

The question here was whether that money is free. The Shs 500 million is a grant because it is going to construct stalls. The Shs 500 million is an interest free loan, which the tenants who lost out will get, and the Microfinance Support Centre pledged to lend them more money, which is interest free. 

MR KAWUMA: Mr Speaker and members, I think I will rest my submission. We have noted fires breaking out but as we speak now, the reports on the investigations of earlier fires are not yet out.

Finally, the minister was talking of Shs 500 million advanced to construct stalls. Members have made contributions, including the Kabaka, how are you valuing and relating it to the contribution? In the minister’s report here, Shs 400 million is earmarked for reconstruction of these stalls; are you going to account for and relocate this money elsewhere? Hon. Members of Parliament, individuals and companies have contributed and the stalls are standing. My prayer is that as this problem did erupt, let the investigations be timely and caution be taken so that we do not follow the same footpath, as my colleagues observed earlier.

THE SPEAKER: Should we really continue with this? What new points are being raised? We are sympathetic but what else shall we do? Let the appropriate structures and agencies take up this matter. Most important is that there should be planning before stalls are constructed. Let the Committee on Local Government follow this up. 

5.10
MR HUSSEIN KYANJO (JEEMA, Makindye Division West, Kampala): Mr Speaker, I am exceedingly pleased with your decision to give me time to correct this error. Whenever we have had fires, we have looked into that narrow direction of the fire source. One time it was about schools and every word, law and suggestion was in the direction of schools. Now it is about markets. 

I want to make two points. One, the idea of looking at the Police, as the minister is suggesting, is not a bad one but he must know that the Police works on fire at the level of emergency. Police does not work on the fires conclusively; it does not. They have no capacity for that and it was deliberately arranged in that manner. The law is clear and the minister can consult Mr Rwego from the police force. He will tell you the details of that. 

To give you a way forward; we sat in meetings and we brought this up on the Floor of the House with the Minister of Internal Affairs, taking this responsibility where it belongs. It belongs to the Ministry of Local Government. If Members can remember, when hon. Seninde brought a motion here, we brought this out clearly but we do not revise our Hansard. The minister stood up and said they were going to work with the Ministry of Internal Affairs, Ministry of Local Government and the Attorney-General because the enabling law that would allow private fire fighters to exercise their powers freely stalled at the desk of the Attorney-General. 

Fire Masters is an NGO, apparently; it seeks permission from big men to go and extinguish fires. We are here talking about giving more powers to Police but it will not work out. In fact, it is a shame that we can stand up to announce that the fire attendant from the airport was dislodged to come to Kampala. What would British Airways do if they heard that the meager fire fighting equipment apparently stationed at the airport is now stationed in Kampala? They would divert their flights. It is wrong to mention things like that. 

Let the Minister of Local Government most honestly sit with the Minister of Internal Affairs and the Attorney-General to clear this law so that we can be able to see more investors entering into this business. Fire Masters is stuck, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Let the committee on Local Government examine this issue. Let the committee which is currently in charge examine the issue so that we find a solution. 

I beg that we end this debate here without prejudice to the committee’s investigations and advice to us so that we take up another matter. (Mr Lukwago rose_)

THE SPEAKER: Your motion was rejected. You saw the reaction; you were not supported.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION UNDER SECTION 3 OF THE SALARIES AND ALLOWANCES (SPECIFIED OFFICERS) ACT, (CAP. 291) FOR THE PURPOSE OF AMENDING THE SECOND SCHEDULE TO THAT ACT RELATING TO THE SALARIES, ALLOWANCES AND BENEFITS FOR JUDGES

5.14
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PUBLIC SERVICE (Ms Prisca Mbaguta Seezi): Mr Speaker, I want to move a motion for a resolution under Section 3 of the Salaries and Allowances (Specified Officers) Act, (Cap. 291) for the purposes of amending the second schedule to that Act relating to the salaries, allowances and benefits of judges. 

This is moved under Section 3 of the Salaries and Allowances (Specified Officers) Act and rule 43 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament. 

“WHEREAS part 1 of the second schedule to the Salaries and Allowances (Specified Officers) Act provides that salaries, allowances and benefits to be paid or afforded to judges are specified in that part; 

AND WHEREAS section 3(2) of that Act provides that Parliament may by resolution amend the second schedule to that Act; 

AND WHEREAS it is considered expedient to vary the salaries and allowances and benefits of judges in accordance with section 3(2) of the Salaries and Allowances (Specified Officers) Act, Cap. 291;

NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved by Parliament as follows:

1. That the second schedule to the Salaries and Allowances (Specified Officers) Act be amended with effect from 01 July 2006 by substituting for part 1 of that schedule the following new part:

“Part 1”
Salary, Allowances and Benefits for Judges
Category: Chief Justice
Salary (shillings per month): Shs 5,859,000
Allowances (in shillings): Medical Allowance of Shs 3,600,000 per year
Benefits: Furnished house, transport, chauffer driven car, security, travel first class, Shs 3,000,000 in lieu of official residence.

Category: Deputy Chief Justice
Salary:	Shs 5,330,200
Allowance:  Housing allowance of Shs 2,500,000 per month and medical allowance of Shs 3 million per year.
Benefits: Transport in a chauffer-driven vehicle, security and travel by first class.

Category: Principal Judge
Salary:	Shs 5,077,800 per month
Allowances: Housing allowance of Shs 2,300,000 per month, medical allowance of Shs 3,000,000 per year. 
Benefits: Transport in a chauffer-driven car, security and travel by club class.

Category: Justices of the Supreme Court
Salary:  Shs 4,910,400.
Allowances: Housing allowance of Shs 2,200,000 per month, medical allowance of Shs 2,400,000 per year, transport in a chauffer-driven car, security and travel by club class.

Category: Justices of the Court of Appeal
Salary:	Shs 4,743,000 per month.
Allowances:	Housing allowance of Shs 2,100,000 per month, medical allowance of Shs 2,400,000 per year. Benefits: Transport in a chauffer-driven car, security and travel by club class.

Category: Justices of the High Court
Salary:	Shs 4,575,000 per month.
Allowances:	Housing allowance of Shs 2 million per month, medical allowance of Shs 2,400,000 per year, Benefits: Transport in a chauffer-driven car, security and travel by club class.” 

Mr Speaker, I beg to move.

MR KATUNTU: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. First of all I am seeking clarification from you on whether this motion does not require a Certificate of Financial Implications.

Two, I note from the sixth paragraph that the amendment is with effect from 01 July 2006. So, are we talking about paying arrears from 2006 or are we talking about money that has already been expended? If judges were actually getting these emoluments without this particular amendment, it would mean that we are having a retrospective notice of motion to clear some illegality. If the monies were already paid without this motion, that raises quite interesting questions.

After those clarifications, I would like to have the opportunity to debate this motion.

THE SPEAKER: Well, I think this is an issue that was provided for to the effect that schedules can be changed. This is exactly what is being done.

As for backdating, I think it is clear that this money has already been paid and we are only regularising what has been going on. Anyway, the minister is here.

MR RUHINDI: Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. I would like to give clarification, and it is good hon. Katuntu raised it. As you notice, these benefits and salaries started being paid effective 1 July 2006. In other words, they were part of the package of the budgetary provisions that this Parliament passed. This is why in actual fact the amendment of the Specified Officers’ Act is more of a consequential legislation because the actual benefits and salaries were part of the package that was passed by Parliament. This is why they have been paid since that time. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Well, the thing is that we are regularising what was already paid. I think we should admit that this money has been earned since then though it required amending the schedule. I think that is clear.

MR KATUNTU: Mr Speaker, it is true we are regularising, but I think this House deserves an explanation and an apology from the Executive. What they have been doing all along is irregular. You cannot start paying monies to civil servants who are categorised under the Specified Officers’ Schedule without an amendment. You cannot do that! 

The point I am trying to make is that next time they should not do this. What they have been doing from 2006 is irregular. I expect the Attorney-General to say, “We are sorry. It has happened, but we are now correcting the mistake”, because it is incorrect under the law. So, as a House, we demand an apology from the Attorney-General.

Two, the Attorney-General talked about a consequential matter, but it should have been the other way round. Once you amend the schedule, then the passing of the money in the budget becomes consequential to that. It is not the other way round. Let us do things according to the law. There should be no second case of this nature, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Okay.

MR BYANDALA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. On the issue of the Chief Justice, I am not very clear where they say, “Three million in lieu of official residence.” Is it 3 million per month or per year? It is not clear. It is not written.

THE SPEAKER: It should be per month.

MR BYANDALA: No, it is not written. Do not assume.

THE SPEAKER: Anyway, I think you can put per month.

MR KATUNTU: Mr Speaker, now that those clarifications have been made, I would like to make one point before I support this motion.  

When you look at these figures and you look at the figures that the lower category of judicial officers earn there is a world of difference. Really the Public Service should take this into consideration. In fact the judicial officers of the lower cadre had even gone to court on the issue of tax exemption.  It looks like what we are doing is to cater for the upper echelons and yet the majority of these judicial officers: the chief magistrates, the registrars who really prepare work for these judges, who do the donkey work, are not being reasonably remunerated.

We as Parliament should look into the remuneration of the judicial officers at the lower levels. You see, it causes a little bit of a working relationship going bad if you have the bosses getting too much money and then the officers getting too little. 

Look at the bulk of the work, Mr Speaker. Even if you are talking about the cases handled by the chief magistrates and the magistrates, Grade I, the volume of work is too much compared to those up. So the remuneration of the officers under the Magistrates Courts, and even other judicial officers like the registrars should be urgently looked into. Let us not cater for only the judges.  Other than that, I support the motion, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, what we should know is that this is being controlled by a separate law and the remuneration of other cadres within the judiciary does not follow this one.  But I think you are making the point that next time when we have an opportunity, we look into it. But they cannot come under this particular one.

5.28
MR ERIAS LUKWAGO (DP, Kampala Central Division, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to support the motion. It was long over due because judicial officers were not adequately remunerated yet they do the donkey work. I support the motion, only that I share the same opinion with my colleague, hon. Katuntu on the question of retroactive validation.  We have a legal problem.  

I would suggest that the motion be amended. We appreciate that it has been done since 2006, but we as legislators, here in this august House, cannot acquiesce in that illegality because if we validate it retroactively, we shall also be making another mistake because we do not have those powers to amend the schedule retrospectively. We do not have those powers. 

So what we can do is to take cognisance of what has happened in the past and not condemn it, the minister takes the responsibility, but for us we do what is right. What we are obliged to do is to amend it as of now, not retrospectively. So, let the bygones be bygones. We say, “It has happened, fine, but we move on from here”. The moment we make it retrospective we shall also be passing an illegality.  

So I would move that this motion be amended so that it reads, as of now, this last paragraph, “Now therefore, be it resolved by Parliament as follows:

That the Second Schedule to the salaries and allowances be amended with effect from …” we say, “The next Budget.”  

If we leave it as it is, I hope you will agree with me, Mr Speaker, we shall also be passing an illegality. So I do so pray. Otherwise, the motion is well intentioned and I support it wholly. It is only that technical bit. I thank you.


MR DOMBO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Parliament is required to make all appropriations and to give authority to government to spend. Although it was an omission, money has already been spent and judges and these judicial officers have been paid money. If this amendment is not retrospective, it will in effect mean that the payment was illegal and they may be required to refund the money through the Public Accounts Committee of Parliament.  

I seek clarification. Don’t you think that supporting the honourable minister we would acknowledge the mistake but also regularise that something that has been done, at the same time keeping within the law? I seek clarification.

THE SPEAKER: Well, I think the point is this: it is not true to say we cannot make retrospective legislation. There are limitations where we cannot make retrospective legislation, namely, to deny somebody’s right to judgement, but other things can be done retrospective. The limitations are in the Constitution.

The other thing, as hon. Dombo has said, we are in charge of the budgets. The Judiciary is a self-accounting body which brings its budget to us and these monies which were paid for the last two or three years were approved by this Parliament. Otherwise you are going to cause a lot of embarrassment to the Judiciary.  

So the best we can do is - whose fault was it? You see the question will be: is it the fault of the judges that we earn this money when we approved it or some other person? Maybe it is some other person. Why don’t we really cover this? I think this is the reason, and I should put the question.  

HON. MEMBERS: Yes.

THE SPEAKER: I put the question to the proposed motion by the minister.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Motion adopted.)

THE SPEAKER: I think it is fair to the judges.

PRESENTATION OF PAPERS

THE SPEAKER: I think if we do not have time for the gender Statement, we can deal with it tomorrow.  But let us get the papers and then the minister can come in for the statement. It is just laying the papers on the Table.

5.33
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR MICRO FINANCE (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Mr Speaker, I beg to withdraw the statement on item 5(i) for further consultations. 

THE SPEAKER: Okay.

PRESENTATION OF PAPERS

UGANDA LAW REFORM COMMISSION ANNUAL REPORT 2009

5.34
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr Fred Ruhindi): Mr Speaker, first of all, I would like to make a correction. The paper to be laid is “The Uganda Law Reform Commission Annual Report, 2007, not 2009, because even the one of 2008 is still being printed and certainly we cannot have the one of 2009.  

Accordingly, in accordance with rules 28 and 29 of our Rules of Procedure and clause 2 of Article 248 of our Constitution, I beg to lay the Uganda Law Reform Commission Annual Report, 2007, on the Table.  Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Let the appropriate committee consider the report and subsequently report to us.  

presentation of papers

public service commission annual report (01 July 2007 – 30 june 2008)

5.36
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PUBLIC SERVICE (Mrs Prisca Seezi Mbaguta): Mr Speaker and hon. Members, in accordance with Article 166, Section 3 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, the Public Service Commission is required to make a report to Parliament in respect of each year, on the performance of its functions. I have the honour to submit to you the Public Service Commission Annual Report for the year 2007/2008. I beg to lay on the Table.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Let the appropriate committee take up the report for subsequent report to us.

PRESENTATION OF PAPERS

STATUTORY INSTRUMENT 2009 NO.4 – THE BUSINESS, TECHNICAL, VOCATIONAL EDUCATION AND TRAINING (ESTABLISHMENT OF THE UGANDA NURSES AND MIDWIVES’ EXAMINATIONS BOARD (UNMED) REGULATIONS 2009  

5.37
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PRIMARY EDUCATION (Dr Kamanda Bataringaya): Mr Speaker, hon. Members, I beg to lay on the Table, Statutory Instrument 2009 No.4- The Business, Technical, Vocational Education and training (Establishment of the Uganda Nurses and Midwives Examination Board) (UNMED) Regulations 2009. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Let the appropriate committee study the instrument.

PRESENTATION OF PAPERS

REPORTS OF THE LOCAL GOVERNMENT PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEES FOR THE YEAR 2008

5.37
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR MICRO FINANCE (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Mr Speaker, Section 88, sub-section 8 of the Local Government Act, Cap.243 requires the minister responsible for local governments to lay before Parliament, the reports of the Local Government Public Accounts Committees. 

I stand in for the Minister of Local Government and I wish to lay before Parliament, some reports of the Public Accounts Committees of the following local governments, as required by the provisions of the Local Government Act I have referred to above:

1.	Kabale District, 2008
2.	Mbarara Municipal Council, 2008
3.	Tororo District, 2008
4.	Kitgum District, 2007
5.	Nakasongola District, 2008
6.	Manafwa Town Council, 2008
7.	Budaka Town Council, 2008
8.	Gulu District, 2008
9.	Jinja District, 2008
10.	Kamuli District, 2008
11.	Nakasongola District, 2008
12.	Kampala District, 2008
13.	Ibanda District, 2008
14.	Kibaale District, 2008
15.	Rukungiri District, 2008
16.	Namutumba District, 2008
17.	Isingiro District, 2008

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much.

MR OKUPA: Mr Speaker, I seek clarification on the accounts which have been laid on Table. I do not know whether those accounts are for calendar years or financial years because there is a difference. I do not know whether it is the 2007/2008 financial year or it is just the calendar year 2008. Because I know the government accounts are based on the financial years. So, maybe we can make a correction if it is just a mistake.

THE SPEAKER: Well, the Order Paper says the year 2008 and another said 2002, 2003, 2004 and 2005. We shall check. 

MR OKUPA: Yes, that can be corrected if –

THE SPEAKER: So, let the appropriate committee handle those reports. 

PRESENTATION OF PAPERS

REPORTS OF THE LOCAL GOVERNMENT ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE: 2002, 2003, 2004 AND 2005

5.40
THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE LOCAL GOVERNMENT ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (Mr Abdu Katuntu): Mr Speaker, in accordance with Article 90 and rules 133 and 155 of our Rules of Procedure, I present to this House the report of the Local Government Accounts Committee on the report of the Auditor-General on the Public Accounts of district local governments for the Financial Year 2001/ 2002.

In accordance with the herein mentioned provisions of the law, I present another report of the Local Government Accounts Committee on the report of the Auditor-General on the Public Accounts of the district local governments for the Financial Year 2002/2003.

I further present the reports of the Local Government Accounts Committee on the report of the Auditor-General on the Public Accounts of the district local governments for the Financial Year 2003/2004. 

Lastly, I present to this House the report of the Local Government Accounts Committee on the report of the Auditor-General on the public accounts of the district local governments for the Financial Year 2004/2005.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. We shall later debate these reports. Thank you.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

5.43
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR GENDER (ELDERLY AND DISABILITY AFFAIRS) (Mr Sulaiman Madada): Mr Speaker and hon. Members of Parliament, 8th March every year is designated by the United Nations as International Women’s Day. Member states have marked this day since 1975, which was the International Women’s Year. In Uganda, International Women’s Day is gazetted as a public holiday and ceremonies are organised at national level as well as within local governments. 

The importance given to the observance of this day in Uganda lies in the commitment by government to the goals of gender equality and empowerment of women. Gender equality is upheld by the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, which guarantees equality of all citizens, irrespective of ethnicity, age, sex, faith and ability.

On this day, we reflect on the progress made by women and celebrate acts of courage and determination by women who have played extraordinary roles in the empowerment process of the women of Uganda. 

Mr Speaker and colleagues, remember that women struggles will be won by democratic means organised by women with support of men. The day is used further by both central and local governments to take stock of the contributions made towards the empowerment of women and what more needs to be done. 

This year, 2009 marks the 32nd anniversary of the adoption of the UN resolution proclaiming a day for women’s rights and international peace. The United Nations theme for International Women’s Day 2009 is, “Women and men united to end violence against women and girls.” 

This is a follow up of the UN Secretary-General’s in-depth study on all forms of violence against women carried out in 2006. The study assigns UN member states to address and prevent violence against women and presents a blue print for action by all stakeholders, calling upon them to make measurable progress in preventing and eliminating violence against women. 

Hon. Members, Uganda focused on violence against women in 2002 and 2003 when the national themes on International Women’s Day were, “Break the silence: Stop violence against women,” and “Act now and say no to violence against women,” respectively. 

You may also recall that at the national celebrations of the International Women’s Day 2008, His Excellency, the President, pronounced himself on the need to curb gender based violence in the country. 

Against this background, we have decided to focus our attention to education of the girl-child. This year’s national theme will therefore be, “Increase investment in girls’ education as a pre-requisite for development.” The theme is a follow up on the Commonwealth Women Affairs Ministers’ Meeting (Eighth WAM) hosted by the Government of Uganda in June 2007 under the theme “Financing Gender Equality for Development and Democracy” which calls for commitment to the goals of gender equality and the advancement of women, particularly, increasing resources and investing into programmes that promote gender equality and women’s empowerment. 

This theme is also in line with the Uganda government commitment to education for all as well as a quest to meet the Millennium Development Goals particularly goal No. 2, on achieving Universal Primary Education and goal No.3 on promoting gender equality and empowerment of women.

Education is a key to enhancing human capacities with wide ranging benefits including critical thinking, improved health and family planning, HIV/AIDS prevention, poverty reduction and active citizenship.

However, the high levels of illiteracy, especially, for women in Uganda impacts negatively on the people’s ability to meaningfully participate in their development. Therefore the call to increase investment in girls’ education is a prerequisite for development.  

With this year’s theme in mind, my ministry will coordinate the activities for the national celebrations which will be held in Mayuge District on Sunday, 8 March 2009. District local governments have been guided to mark this day with activities reflecting the theme. 

The day is usually preceded by a women’s week, in this case 1st to 7th March this year, during which various actors engage in self-help activities to show solidarity with women. In this regard, all actors in various sectors including district political leaders, women leaders, civil society, government departments, the media and the private sector are expected to participate in the preparations to ensure that this year’s International Women’s Day is memorable. 

I, therefore, call upon you to show solidarity with the women of Uganda and join us to observe the International Women’s Day in Mayuge District and also support your constituencies to mark this day. I beg to inform the House and the whole country. For God and My Country!

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much.

5.49
MS BEATRICE LAGADA (NRM, Woman Representative, Oyam): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I wish to begin by appreciating the minister’s statement on this year’s International Women’s Day and to appreciate the theme that the government has chosen for this year’s celebrations. 

The minister rightly points out that the international theme is, “Women and men united to end violence against women and girls” and he also notes that the year 2002 and 2003 the themes were, “Break the silence, stop violence against women and act now”, and “Say no to violence against women.” 

The minister also says that last year, His Excellency the President of Uganda did pronounce himself on the situation of violence against women and I wish to quote what the President did say under the sub-theme “Gender-based violence”. 

The president said, “The liberation and empowering of women therefore is a means of solving many social, economic and political problems especially for Africa.” And he goes on to say, “I order to curb this social economic effect on gender based violence, there is need for legislation, awareness rising on causes and consequences, increased resource allocation, and involvement of all stakeholders in a holistic framework. The Domestic Relations Bill is currently on agenda for presentation to Parliament. We should expedite the passing of the legislation on domestic violence.”

I stand here to question the Minister of Gender; what I have quoted was said by the President on 08 March 2008 - we have come round whole circle and one year down the road; where is the promised bill? 

I want to say there is a high correlation between the education of the girl and the achievement of women and domestic violence. All of us in this country read newspapers. On 03 January 2009, the New Vision reported that 73 women were killed in 2008 and 13 men were killed in the same year out of domestic violence. 

The Uganda Demographic Health Survey, 2006 reports that 66 percent of people interviewed had suffered domestic violence in their homes. 

The Uganda Law Reform Commission, 2006 reports that 60 percent of the people interviewed had experienced domestic violence and a whole 78 percent in Northern Uganda had suffered domestic violence. 

The Uganda AIDS Commission study 2008 says that the new AIDS infections that we have originated because of domestic violence and 43 percent of that is amongst monogamous relationships whereas 10 percent is from sex workers. 

How can we talk of empowering women; of economic development; of the achievements of women in this country; of the increased resources for education of the girl child, when those very women and girls are being butchered and killed in there families. 

I have been extremely disappointed that women have been killed in this country and we have had very little say about it. Women are being killed everyday and we are not having the laws that should help and protect the women, neither are we helping them to come on display. 

We have been promised again and again and as a woman of Uganda, I want to say that the women are tired. I want to say that even as we celebrate the achievements of women, the women civil society organisations are actually mourning. 

On Thursday this week, the women of Uganda are going to match in this city; they will come to Parliament and they expect you, Mr Speaker, to receive a candle being lit in memory of the women killed as a result of domestic violence. The women in the Africa region are also mourning in sympathy with us.

Mr Speaker, I want to beg on behalf of the women of Uganda that let government bring this Bill. I believe enough has been said and enough has been done; I mean look at us with mercy. What is it with this Bill that they cannot bring out? Why should we have Bills on all sorts of things coming on this floor but the ones that would protect your mothers, sisters and daughters cannot reach here, what is the problem? (Applause)  

I really think that we are being taken for a ride; the women of Uganda are being taken for a ride because if were not being taken for ride, people would feel the pain that we feel. 

And the men after having promised in 2002 and 2003 to join us to do everything possible to empower us and to protect our lives - this is 2009 – those things should have been done. 

I am surprised honourable minister that you made the statement and you did not refer to the activities that have been done since last year to ensure that the promise of His Excellency the President to the women of Uganda is fulfilled. 

You did not tell us how far you have gone in fulfilling the pledge of the President of Uganda to the women of Uganda last year. 

Therefore, as we celebrate the success of the women and the girl children, I want you to know the majority of us will be mourning in disappointment. I thank you. 

5.57
MS FRANCA AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Pader): Mr Speaker and hon. Members, I want to start by thanking the honourable minister so much for making this statement for this great day to come. 

Women’s Day has been celebrated year in, year out.  Today the minister makes a statement; it has become an annual routine to make a statement, which is good. And I want to say that this is a good one; thank you so much for it. However, I think that I have more reason to mourn than to celebrate on Women’s Day because of the following reasons: 

On page 4 of your statement, hon. Minister, you stated very clearly that: “Education is key to enhancing human capacities with wide ranging benefits including critical thinking…” et cetera. Mr Speaker, I want to say that there is an alarming need to support the girl child across the country. I want to give you an example in my district. At the end of last year on 19th December I had a meeting in one of my sub-counties over reproductive health issues and many of the questions that were being asked were to do with defilement of girls and the poverty that is really biting the communities and not enabling the young girls to go to school.  

 In Acholi Bur sub-county, it was reported that last financial year alone, over 300 girls of school going age were defiled. Of the 300, 30 were found to be HIV/ Aids positive, 17 of them got unwanted pregnancies and the rest have no future because they have no capacity to go back to school. 

Of all the cases that were reported, the Police have not been able to help the young girls go back to school or access justice for the reasons I do not know but I think the government has got to answer. 

When I contacted the District Police Commander over this issue, what he told me is that Members of Parliament have got to back them up in terms of fuel   to transport victims to the Police so as to get justice. 

Police in my district get 100 litters of fuel per month to run them through the district and they have to get this fuel from Lira, which means that they have to consume like 50 litters of fuel to come and go back. That means that they are getting something like 50 litres to run throughout the month.

If we talk of celebrating Women’s Day, we have got to think about how we have got to help the young girls who are going to be defiled; how we are going to help them go back to school; how we are going to empower them financially? 

I want to request that as government if we are really responsible, we have got to find a way of helping girls who are getting defiled, because for instance my district does not have a local government doctor. In order for Police to investigate, they have got to see the results of this girl in order to prove that she was defiled or draped. If there is no doctor, who is going to carry out this examination?  

We only have one non-governmental hospital and they do not offer these services for free. They offer at a minimum of about Shs 60,000; where can this girl get access to justice when she cannot even get Shs 5,000 to buy scholastic materials to go back to school. So, we have got to go in depth when we are talking about celebrating Women’s Day and especially if we are talking about the girl child. 

I want to thank you so much for coming up with this theme on which we are going to reflect. But when we are reflecting, we have to make sure that we assign tangible activities that will make a difference in the lives of these young girls as they go on with life. 

I do not want to believe that poverty is biting only in my district; it is of course the biting poverty that is on throughout the country; it may only be overwhelming in my district. If we really want to help women out of domestic violence, out of defilement and all these other social misfits against them, we have to make sure that we empower them economically, whether they went to school or not. There are those who did not have the opportunity to go to school but we can help them. 

We now have Prosperity-for-All programmes but we don’t see these programmes moving. We would really like it if such monies were being disbursed to help women in the market places change their lives or to empower them to have businesses so that they can pay their children’s fees and be able to follow cases of defilement in case their girl children are defiled. 

I request that we don’t just celebrate, hon. Minister. We also have to open our eyes and I am glad that this time we have a woman as the Minister of Finance. I must really thank the President for doing us that good favour. I pray that she will be given the powers to act accordingly.

Furthermore, the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development is under funded. Year in year out, the money that this ministry gets is not enough to enable them to do the work that we want them to do. So I want to request that this time the funding for this ministry is increased to make sure that we see some tangible work from this ministry. We want to see women active everywhere and if the ministry itself is not facilitated, how will they facilitate women to move forward? How will they facilitate young girls who are too poor to afford education? 

Lastly, as the saying goes concerning Women’s day celebrations, I would expect that women are respected that day. I want to request the male honourable members to cook for their women that day. Cook just one day and nurse them the way that you would have wanted to be done to you. 

Also, I want to refer specifically to cases last year where women members of Parliament were harassed when they went to celebrate this day. The RDCs and their deputies were struggling to be the chief guest. I want this to be clearly clarified; whether it is the woman MP who is the chief guest or it is the RDC. Let it be clear so that we do not behave like hooligans before our voters. It is very appalling if a woman MP is being undressed before her voters because an RDC has brought a number of soldiers to struggle for that chair.

On page 5, the minister says that the day is usually preceded by women’s week from 1st to 7th March, during which various actors engage in self-help activities to show solidarity with women. I want clarification on this, Mr Minister. What specific activities are you talking about? This is because I would expect women and especially those at the grass roots to own the day and to feel part of the whole system. If there are activities that are specifically identified to ensure that women get involved, we have to make this clear a week or two earlier so they can take part. With these words, thank you very much and I support the statement.

6.08
MRS BEATRICE RWAKIMARI (NRM, Woman Representative, Ntungamo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to take this opportunity to thank the minister for this statement and also thank my colleagues for the contributions that they have made. 

I would also like to thank the Movement Government for promoting the empowerment of women in this country. I think we have one of the most gender sensitive constitutions in the world and most of our laws are gender sensitive. Also, most of our policies, as you know are gender sensitive. 

However, I think that we can do much better as a country. For example, my sister hon. Lagada has referred to the Domestic Relations Bill. She has also referred to the Domestic Violence Bill and I would have loved that as the Eighth Parliament and as the NRM Government, we pass these laws so that we go in the books of history as having passed these laws -

THE SPEAKER: I don’t know why this information is not coming. The Domestic Relations Bill has been with us for many years but it was found that it was badly packaged and it has not been re-packaged. A new type of Bill has come up and certain things have been removed. Now it is a question of the person concerned to bring it before us. I can assure you that we shall be able to deal with it.

The other point concerns the problem, which was with the old Domestic Relations Bill, the marketing aspect. The marketing aspect of that Bill was a bit faulty and this had some negative effects on some of your colleagues in that it was always presented as a law for the women and to protect the women. I think this must have scared a number of your men colleagues and there was foot dragging. I think that there is need to improve on the marketing of this law and to project it as a law for fairness in the home. That way, I think that it will succeed.

MR RUHINDI: Mr Speaker, I want to thank you for the clarification that you have made. There is no doubt that many of us - I was here in the Seventh Parliament and for those who were there and those that are here now, we all know the history of the Domestic Relations Bill. It is true and there is no doubt that the Bill has grown beards. This is a Bill whose genesis starts in sixties until now and we regret that. 

However, as you have aptly put it, in the Seventh Parliament, it was noted that the Bill was not properly packaged and the marketing strategy was more or less faulty. We went back to the drawing board and I am very happy to note that the activists for the promotion of these Bills to be brought here expeditiously have been involved with our Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs in the evolution and re-packaging of these Bills. 

You have seen how those unsung heroes; the staff of the Law Reform Commission and Ministry of Justice, have been working day and night to complete the packaging of these Bills. 

I am, therefore, happy to note at this point that tomorrow morning, on the agenda of Cabinet, is the Domestic Violence Bill and the other two Bills are also in Cabinet that is the Domestic Relations Bill, which has actually been re-named the Marriage and Divorce Bill and also the Muslim Personal Law and Administration Bill. I am very confident that in three weeks’ time, out of Cabinet we shall have these Bills here for the first, second and third reading. Thank you so much.

MRS RWAKIMARI: Mr Speaker, I want to thank you very much for that information and I also thank the Attorney-General for the reassurance because that is the kind of news that we want to hear. People were getting a little bit impatient while others were thinking of matching and demonstrating but now that things seem to be on line and since the minister is also assuring us that tomorrow these very important Bills will be discussed in Cabinet, we are hopeful that we are finally seeing light at the end of the tunnel and the more reason, Mr Speaker, I was saying that let this government be in the books of history as having passed the DRB. We have heard that it has been in existence for the past 50 years; so, it would be really one of the biggest successes as the NRM Government.

Mr Speaker, like my colleague hon. Franca Akello has mentioned, sometimes I am perturbed by the rhetoric and the statements which we normally make on Women’s Day. We make beautiful statements which have become a song and at the end of the day, sometimes you wonder whether we are practicing what we are talking. 

For example, this country continues to lose 6,000 women per year due to preventable causes in pregnancy. Yet we are talking about empowering the girl child through education. We know that most of the dropout rates in school are girls. The children who get married early are girls; the children who stay at home to do domestic work are girls. In short, the girl child is still faced with a lot of challenges and yet we seem to relax and take less note of all these challenges.

Mr Speaker, I want to call upon the government; I want to call upon all of us to take note of the importance of educating the girl child. Most of you are married to educated women, your daughters are educated, your nieces are educated and you know the value of educating the girls. But in most of our constituencies, the people we represent have not yet appreciated the value of educating girls. Like in my district, most of girls are getting married at the age of 12, and it is sad to note that 47 years after independence we are still talking about educating the girls.

I think we need a strategy as leaders in this country to ensure that our people appreciate the value of educating the girl child. We shall go to the constituencies or over the radio, talk vehemently about the value of educating the girls but at the end of the day, most of the girls will continue to drop out of school, they will continue to get pregnant early and sometimes I wonder whether ministry of education has got any strategy in place to ensure that once these girls go to school they remain there and finish their education.

We all know that the longer the girl stays at school, the better for her. By the time the girl gets out of school, maybe at the level of university, she will have attained the age of 18 which is the right age for marriage and we know that once the girl gets married at that age, she is physiologically and psychologically prepared to get married, to get pregnant but when we continue getting girls, getting married and delivering at 12 - 13, then this country will continue to experience high rates of maternal mortality, high rates of infant mortality.

Therefore, I want to say that we should not simply read statements, we should not simply talk about issues but we should take them very seriously. If we want this country to develop, the women of Uganda must be educated. That is why we always say, “Educate a woman and you educate the nation”, because the benefits of educating the girl child are very clear.

Finally, I want to inquire from the Ministry of Finance whether they have got the money because in the last financial year we kind of rejected some loans and we were told that the Minister of Finance is going ahead to look for money to improve reproductive health with focus on maternal health in this country. Therefore, I would like to know from the Ministry of Finance whether this money has been obtained so that we can stop the death of mothers in this country. I thank you. (Members rose_)

THE SPEAKER: Haven’t we really heard it all? (Interjections) Let us conclude by having two - one from each of the sides.

6.20
MS WINIFRED MASIKO (NRM, Woman Representative, Rukungiri): Mr Speaker, I would like to thank the minister for this statement and especially for bringing it at this time as we prepare for the Women’s Day. I would like to thank him for the theme that Government has selected this year. I hope we shall not lose sight of the United Nations theme of the 2009, “Women and men united to end violence against women and girls.” I hope we shall all keep referring to that.

The Attorney-General has cleared my mind to a great extent by promising that these Bills tomorrow will be in Cabinet and thereafter they will with in two weeks - I think in the third week - he has stated that they will be here on the floor of Parliament.

I hope this will be adhered to because these are the Bills that most of us men and women in this Parliament have been working on; we have as you have rightly put it, we have marketed it in a better way; we have repackaged it and I think they are appreciated by the majority of the population. So, I hope the Attorney-General will keep this promise and that we will be able to tell the whole population on the Women’s Day that with in a month’s time, the laws will be in place.

I would like to thank the minister for raising the fact that education for all is in line with Millennium Development Goals No. 2 and 3. I would have appreciated if you also mentioned the other goals because I am sure education for girls will impinge on goal No. 1, No.4, No. No.5 - all the goals in the Millennium Development Goals can be improved if we invest in the girls’ education. 

The minister said this is a follow up of the Commonwealth Women’s Affairs Meeting which took place in 2007, two years back. I expect us as we celebrate this day to tell the nation how much increased investment we have put in girls’ education because this was a resolution out of the Commonwealth meeting. 

I would not expect us to say that from there we are going to increase the education investment but I would like us to see how much of the investment has been put aside if we are to really follow the theme. I hope the country will be privileged to get such statistics so that we appreciate this year’s theme.

I have just one other issue to look at. In this Parliament, the Women’s Day was also designated to be a tree planting day and we all were told that and I am sure government still adheres to that. May I know from government what is in place on that day as far as tree planting is concerned and what efforts have been put in place to make sure that as we celebrate the Women’s Day, we are making our country green? I would like that clarification given so that we know how to move because we have to keep the promises that we have given to the population. I thank you.

6.24
MRS CECILIA OGWAL (Independent, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Allow me to thank the minister for bringing this statement. I would like to look at this Women’s Day celebration from the positive perspective. I think the women of Uganda have every reason to celebrate because 10 to 15 years ago, women did not have a voice. And if we look at the statistics of women representation at local government level, at the parliamentary level; it was very low. 

Maybe just to refresh our memory, we know that at Independence, the Parliament had only one percent woman representation; if anything there was only one woman in a Parliament of about 126 Members. I think we have been improving. In the Sixth Parliament, we were more that 15 percent; in the Seventh Parliament, we were almost 20 percent and in this Parliament, we are past the benchmark; we are now 33 percent. I think we need to celebrate this. (Applause) There is nothing else we can do; I mean even in the growth of a child, it grows gradually and every year, the child is growing. I think we have every reason to thank the women of Uganda for persevering and the men of Uganda for encouraging us to reach this far. I think we need to do this.

We also as Uganda need to congratulate ourselves because Uganda is the most gender sensitive country in the world. That is something to be proud of and we also need to be proud because Uganda is the fifth country in the Sub-Saharan Africa with the highest women representation in Parliament. Of course Rwanda takes the lead, followed by Mozambique and South Africa and others but Uganda is the fifth. I think we have something to celebrate.

However, we need a commitment from government and from Parliament; we know that our Constitution has prescribed 30 percent benchmark and yes, we have reached 30 percent in Parliament. We have in fact surpassed the benchmark at the local government I think we have now reached about 48 percent. But then when it comes to Cabinet, we had a reshuffle recently; I do not know what is happening. Maybe we need to remind the appointing authority about the 30 percent benchmark. We do not have authority to change that but we are saying as women that can the government be conscious of the 30 percent benchmark and change the structure and the character of the Cabinet - and also the quality of representation? At the end of the day it is not the quantity that we want; we also want the quality of women so that wherever women are represented, they are able to display quality. And that is something we need to focus on.

Every year, we talk about the theme for celebration but how much does the rural woman understand of these things. If you ask a rural woman whether she understands the Beijing Plan of Action, she does not understand it. I think it is high time Parliament took celebrations of this nature to the sub-county and parish levels. However meagre the resources may be, it is important that we carry those messages to the rural population.

On the part of education, I would like to advise that much as we are also focusing on affirmative action because women have been left behind for a very long time, it is also important that we approach it with a bottom-up method so that we do not only give the points for the girls who are entering university but we start from the bottom. So, can the government begin to focus on how they can broaden the intake of girls from the primary level; how they can empower the girls to go to secondary and post secondary institutions? That is very important and we can start from the most simple. 

We know that many girls in schools when they reach their puberty they miss schools because they cannot handle themselves in class. All these impact negatively on girl child education. It is important that the Ministry of Education and the Gender Ministry begin to focus on supplying free sanitary towels to the lower classes. Some of these girls are orphans and they do not know what to do with themselves. Sometimes they go into their menstruation for the first time, the boys start laughing at them, they get scared and they do not come back to school for days and weeks. This impacts negatively on girl child education. It is important that we begin to focus on those simple things. They help us in making the race faster.

Finally, I would like to say that Parliament has a big role to play in this. We should not only talk about the most obvious. Domestic violence is the most obvious; we all hate it; God hates it. I believe that any normal thinking man cannot beat his wife. We always take it that the men who beat their wives are sick in one way or another. That is a fact. But I think it is very important that this Parliament begins to find out how they can positively impact on the life of a woman. 

You are talking about engendering the community; engendering administration; how do we do it? The bureaucrats do not even understand this issue of engendering. For them they are just doing civil service work; they do not care whether a woman is represented or not.  It is important that everybody gets sensitised about these gender issues. Parliament should ensure that Members understand the portion of the budget that goes to improve the life and welfare of women.  Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, hon. Members. We have come to the end of this debate. I think very good speeches have been made on the subject and many have been convinced more of the need to take care of the issues of women and girls. I would like to assure you that the effort to pass the cherished laws like the Domestic Relations Law and other related ones is still on.  

I want to thank you very much for what you have been able to do today. The House is adjourned until tomorrow at 2.00 p.m. Sorry, I have been told that UWOPA Members have got a function in the Members’ Lounge where all of you are invited.

(The House rose at 06.36 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 4 March 2009 at 2.00 p.m.)




