Thursday, 4th March, 1999.        

Parliament met at 2.14 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.
                  	
PRAYERS
 
 (The Deputy Speaker, Mr. Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair).
         
The House was called to order.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION TO CENSURE MR SAM KUTESA, MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (INVESTMENTS)

(Debate continued)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Hon. Members, you realise we have dealt with this Motion since Tuesday, and both sides, the petitioners and the Minister concerned, have made their cases. Yesterday, we started hearing from the Members who had listened to the two cases.  I intend to finish this business today. The general debate will not go on for more than two hours from now, therefore each person contributing will be restricted to ten minutes and then we pronounce ourselves on the matter.  

MR. JAMES MWANDHA  (Representative of Persons with Disabilities):  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  As chairman of one of the committees which sits on DRIC, and therefore, as a member of DRIC, I think it is important that Members should be informed by their representative, at least one of them, how the Uganda Airlines  shares in ENHAS were sold.

DRIC considered this matter in about ten meetings. The first meeting was held on 3rd March 1988, then the following day, on  4th, then on 6th, 9th, 10th, 17th, 18th, 19th. We took a decision on the 27th, and we had a report on the action on the 30th of April. Mr. Speaker, the Privatisation Unit reported to DRIC on the problems facing Uganda Airlines and they issued their DRIC memo dated 1st March.  In view of the time constraint, I will not go through this memo in detail, but suffice it to say, one of the issues that was raised was the fact that Uganda Airlines Corporation was facing serious financial problems which started far back in 1992.  They said, that year is when they last produced their audited accounts and when their operating revenue dropped from 4.3/= billion to 3/= billion.  Then this is when the real problem started.  

The important thing to note is, since 1992, Uganda Airlines Corporation had not produced audited accounts, up to the time when we are being informed. Apparently, there was an effort by PU to get the accounts audited and they hired Ernst and Young to prepare the accounts but they failed to prepare the accounts because there were no adequate records.  So, they produced what is normally called in business, a statement of affairs, simply to give a rough indication of the state of the financial standing of the organisation.  

There is a lot that I could have provided to the House with regard to the health of Uganda Airlines, but it is not possible because of the time. In short, however, the crisis facing Uganda Airlines relates to the fact that it was about to be liquidated according to this memo. It faces closure because of US $640,000 not paid to IATA, there was also an immediate payment of 551/= million to Shell and yet another one of US $625,000 to other supplies. The terminal benefits to people who had been laid off amounted to 900/= million.  Uganda Airlines had to contribute US $50,000 towards the repair of the aircraft engine in France, at that time the bill was 1.8/= million. Uganda Airlines financial crisis was therefore very grave.  
At the end of this memo, they said that since a sale of Uganda Airlines was envisaged, the Airline had to be kept operating, which entailed a cost of US $800,000 immediately- that was within one week and a further US $700,000 before the end of March. These funds, they said, could be raised two ways, one of them was actually to sell the ENHAS shares, another was to sell one of the aircrafts, which was grounded.  They concluded that the easiest way was to sell the shares in ENHAS.  Mr. Speaker, we deliberated on this situation in DRIC and at the end of the deliberations DRIC requested that the issues, which I am going to state below, needed adequate explanation at the subsequent meeting.

The issues were many, Mr. Speaker, but they involved the valuation of shares, how this valuation was arrived at and why certain people were chosen to buy shares and so on and so forth.  Mr. Speaker, subsequently, we decided that the Secretariat, that is the PU, should proceed and talk to the other shareholders in ENHAS with a view of selling the shares in ENHAS. We did not have any other option, and on that bid, we set a price of US $75 per share. 

You might ask, why did you arrive at that particular figure?  We had earlier information that there had been a valuation carried out by firms of accountants and the valuation, Mr. Speaker, was given as follows: two firms of accountants had been hired to give the valuation, the first one was Delloite and Touche. They submitted their valuation and they made a number of assumptions, one of them was based on earnings method, and they came up with a figure of US $7,500,000. That gave a value of 50 per share. Apparently, the assumptions were that ENHAS would be in perpetual existence, it would continue earning US $1.5 per year and government would continue re-licensing it every time after the end of its contract.  They also came out with another method of valuation which is known as discounted cash flow method, and that one gave them a valuation of 9,712,000. That would give a share value of US $64.75 per share.  Mr. Speaker, it is important that these figures be mentioned.  

There was another valuation carried out by another firm called Ernst and Young.  Ernst and Young used a number of valuation methods.  The first one was the earnings valuation method, the other one was the cash flow valuation method, the third one was the dividend method.  Now, those methods gave various scenarios.  The earnings method gave them the lowest figure at US $11.5 and the highest at US $7. The discounted cash flow method gave them the lowest at US $10 and the highest at US $10.3 million.  The dividend method gave them lowest at US $10 million and the highest at US $16 million.  Therefore, they came up with a valuation range of US $5,279,502 to 8,851,365 for 50 per cent of Uganda Airlines shares in ENHAS. 

When we came to DRIC, we looked at all these scenarios and some of us on DRIC felt that the Delliote and Touche figures could not really be relied on. We discovered that they were the seating auditors of ENHAS. In effect, I think Delloitte and Touche should have disqualified themselves from this exercise because, of course, they had an interest as seating auditors.  So, during the deliberations, some of us thought that the best and most realistic figure that we can actually put up was about US $5.2 million or rather US $75 per share, whichever is higher.  I think  US $75 is a little better, it is about 5.625.  So, we instructed PU to demand no less than 75 per share, because we felt that was the lowest end of the Ernst and Young valuation, which appeared to some of us, at least, more realistic. Since Ernst and Young were not involved with any of the companies, we saw this as a much more liable figure.        

The Minister said that ENHAS paid US $75 per share.  Now, if ENHAS had paid US $75 per share, Uganda Airlines would have bought 5,625,000, but Uganda Airlines bought 3,750,000. If you divide the number of shares which Uganda Airlines had in ENHAS, it is 75,000 shares, actually, the rate per share is not US $75 nor is it US $6. The Minister was saying that even Uganda Airlines did not know what kind of value they wanted; they wanted US $60.  It is in fact, US $50 per share and that is exactly what we got. Therefore, Mr. Speaker, if ENHAS says that they paid US $ 75 per share, then ENHAS would owe Uganda Airlines US $1,875,000 which - (Interruption).

MR. KUTESA:  Mr. Speaker, I would like to thank hon. Mwandha for giving way. I would like to inform him about what I said and what is on record, both in DRIC and in the papers. I said here that we paid US $75,000 per percentage share for the 50 per cent shares of Uganda Airlines.  Thank you.

MR. MWANDHA:  I thought the Minister was going to say, as a result of that, we paid so much, which tallies with that amount of shares.

MR. KUTESA:  And as a result of that, we paid US $3,750,000.

MR. MWANDHA:  So, really, Mr. Speaker, considering that Delloite and Touche should never have been involved in valuing these shares and considering that we, as DRIC, chose the lower end of the scenario by Ernst and Young, we believe that a fair value per share could have been US $75. This is what we insisted upon, but at the end of it all, we got US $50.  

MR. NDAULA KAWEESI:  I thank the hon. Member.  I want him to clarify.  I have got a document here on the DRIC meeting of 27th March, 1998. This meeting was chaired by hon. Musumba, and hon. Mwandha was present. Minute 3.3: DRIC decision reads: "DRIC decided as follows;-
(a)  Sale Uganda Airlines 50 per cent equity in ENHAS to other shareholders at a price of US $3.75 million." I want you to clarify to me what this means.  

MR. MWANDHA: Mr. Speaker, that is what I was going to get to.  As I told you, we held ten meetings between the beginning of March and the end of March to discuss nothing but the sale of shares in ENHAS. Some of these meetings were called at very short notice.  For instance, we would have a meeting, like the one we had on 4th, and give instructions to PU to go and do certain things say on the 5th, - look at the minutes of the meeting on the 4th. 

At the beginning of each meeting of DRIC, we were told that unless we sold the shares in order to pay for IATA fees, which were over due, the Airline was going to close, therefore, it was necessary that we should actually decide to sell the shares there and then. When you are sitting in a DRIC meeting and you hear somebody saying the Airline is going to close unless you sell those shares, you are really pushed against the wall and you end up -(Interruption).

MR. MOHAMMED MAYANJA: Mr. Speaker, the point brought up by hon. Mwandha, who is a representative of this august House on the Committee of DRIC, which is a very high powered Committee in the divesture process, is a very important point. I would like him to clarify beyond reasonable doubt who it is that was putting him against the wall, so that this House is very clear and is able to apportion blame rightly.  Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  If you have information and you actually intend to make a submission, I would rather advise you to clarify when you are making your submission. Let him clear up because he is actually out of time .

MR. MWANDHA:  Mr. Speaker, to react to the comments that the hon. Member raised, let me describe the kind of decisions that we took. On 3rd March, we were told that the Airline was insolvent and if we did not sell these shares, the Airline would go bankrupt and there would be no airline to sell.  We decided that the Secretariat should actually negotiate with ENHAS with regard to the sell of shares and report to us.  It is amazing that the following day they were back, we were called at short notice; 'Please come, we have already carried out negotiations.'  So, they reported to us, they gave the progress of their negotiations and DRIC was informed that the negotiations with minority shares proceeded as proposed. Three agreeable shareholders accepted 75 dollars per Uganda Airline share in ENHAS, one shareholder was yet to be contacted.  

DRIC again told the Privatisation Unit to go and negotiate with everybody and then report. On the 6th, two days later, they came back and informed us as follows: Negotiation with minority shareholders had proceeded as proposed. The third shareholder, who was not available, rejected the government offer of 75 dollars per share in ENHAS. They countered with an offer of 70 dollars per share.  Then we decided to obtain a loan from UCB for Uganda Airlines in order to pay IATA. We now felt that it was being pushed a bit too far.  So we told the Privatisation Unit to go and negotiate for a loan from UCB so that IATA can be paid immediately. We also said that since the people we are negotiating with are proving to be difficult, the speed of sale of Uganda Airlines shares in ENHAS should now be slowed down.  Members observed that this was likely to force the buyers to accept our 75 dollars per share or more if the sale is delayed. 

That was on the 6th, they came back on the 9th. Within a very short time, they came back again and informed us as follows, on  the progress of sale of Uganda Airlines shares in ENHAS:  'Other shareholders in ENHAS have offered to buy shares at 3,750,000/- shillings.' They requested us (DRIC) to approve that.  This was now the Privatisation Unit Secretariat.  They requested that because the funding for Uganda Airlines was very inadequate, the loan would only be a stop measure.  Uganda Airlines still required 1.5 million dollars to settle short term creditors, it also had 1.6 million dollars which had already been borrowed for it and the bankers were not willing to give any more money. 

DRIC was again requested to approve the sell of shares to ENHAS.  Members of DRIC noted that it was no longer necessary to sell Uganda Airlines shares in ENHAS as funds had been availed from the loan guaranteed by the Divesture account.  Apparently, the Privatisation Unit had obtained a big loan and given it to the divesture account as a grant.  We thought that these funds should now be used to get us out of the problems of having to sell our shares almost at give-away prices. Of course, the Secretariat went on to say that this money was already committed, therefore, it was necessary to go and sell these shares, after all they were non-core assets of the company.  So, we told them to go ahead and sell the shares at 75 dollars.  It was classified that the offer was in United States Dollars and not in Uganda shillings.  Therefore, the Minister, much as he has told his story, was not talking in terms of shillings as he was saying.  We were talking in terms of United States dollars and that is what we insist upon throughout the negotiation. After doing that -(Interruption).

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Hon. Member, you were given ten minutes.  I think somebody sought clarification from you as to whether you take responsibility for the decision to sell at the amount that is quoted in the minutes.  Another question was, who was pushing you?  These are things which we should know.

MR. MWANDHA:  Okay, Mr. Speaker, the law which set up the Privatisation Process does not -(Interruption).

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  He was supposed to address us in ten minutes, now it has gone to 20 minutes.  Now why do you not assist us by clarifying who pushed you?  And whether you think you made a decision to sell or if you did not, under what circumstances you made it.  Was it under duress?  I think these are the issues.

MR. MUSUMBA:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I just want to give information in the hope that the time of this House will be saved. It is true that the eventual decision of DRIC was to sell or to direct that a sale be carried out at a price of 3,750 US dollars.  However, Mr. Speaker, the circumstances which are being raised now, are what I talked about yesterday. I implied, yesterday, that I would probably get opportunity today to clarify that, as Members of DRIC, we were summoned for an urgent meeting and at that meeting we were informed that there was a crisis.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Incidentally, who is responsible for summoning you?

MR. MUSUMBA:  The meetings are called upon the direction of the Chairman, who in this case is the regular Minister of State for Privatisation, who presides over the day to day running of the privatisation process. So, the Minister, through his Secretariat, which is the Privatisation Unit, writes to us inviting us for a meeting.  So, we go to this meeting and we are told that there is a crisis.  The crisis was that we had to take a decision relating to Uganda Airlines.  We had two choices, either to find money for Uganda Airlines in 48 hours or liquidate Uganda Airlines. 

We had already lined up Uganda Airlines for divesture.  We asked Privatisation Unit whether they had money to pay the obligations of Uganda Airlines. Uganda Airlines, we were told, had debts to IATA, which was then going to cancel its Membership. This would then mean that it would never fly the routes that it has, we would lose the routes, we would lose the market share, we would lose the passenger lot. At the end of the day, we would not have a Uganda Airlines to sell.  Even the planes, if any, that we were told Uganda Airlines had, would be rendered inoperative if we did not get this money to pay.  So we asked the Privatisation Unit, 'where can we get money urgently to pay for this, so that Uganda Airlines remains afloat, as we hasten the process of divesting it.'  We proposed a number of scenarios.  One of them was borrow,  borrow money from wherever to rescue Uganda Airlines so that we can sell it and pay. We were told by the Privatisation Unit people, who are the technical people, and who, by law, are supposed to advise us as DRIC, that we cannot borrow the money because we are already heavily committed; the Divesture Account is heavily committed, there is no money.  

We asked what other options we had.  They told us there are some non-core assets that Uganda Airlines has. They told us that the non-core assets are its shares in ground handling.  So I asked how the shares in ground handling are a non-core asset?  They told me, for an Airline to operate as an Airline, it does not have to have shares in a Ground Handling venture, therefore, those are peripheral activities of the airline.  So I am Chairman, I am seated there and I am told your Airline is going, unless you liquidate some of its non-core assets and rescue it.  So, I asked what the value of our shares in that non-core business were. They said, 'well, this business is called ENHAS, the non-core assets are 50 percent of the shares.'  I asked for the value; then they brought the valuations as rated.  We went through these valuations and we said we would want to sell them. We asked whether they could go to the open market.  They said 'No,we cannot go to the open market because the terms of association of business are that, you first of all have to offer to the other shareholders.'  So, we said, 'can you offer to the other shareholders?'  They went back and said they could offer to the shareholders at a price of 500 million dollars.  They came back and said, they had refused. In fact, they said they wanted to pay us 2.5 million dollars.  We refused 2.25 because we thought that was too low. We asked them to go back and tell them that if they cannot accept our price, then no deal.  We wanted permission to go to the open market.  Then they came back and said they were now prepared to go a little further.  They were now prepared to pay slightly over 2.5.  

So, this discussion of the price kept going on. We were pushing the privatisation unit to come up with a good price from the other shareholders, and the other shareholders were insisting that they cannot go higher. It is at those meetings that we were told that actually Uganda Airlines had sat and made a valuation of their own shares. They had come up with a figure lower than the one we were insisting as the price at which to sell.  We said, 'no, given these valuations we cannot sell at this price, the lowest we can sell is 3.75 million dollars.'  This discussion took well over a month.  Eventually, we gave that direction to sell.  

In the meantime, during the crisis that was created, and this is why by hind sight I wonder whether there really was a crisis, they said that Shell was closing.  Up to now, I still read that Shell is still asking for its money.  That means the money we were so urgently told we must raise to defray these debts was not probably applied for those expenses. Secondly, there is something I did not understand about Ground Handling and ENHAS at that time. I did not know that it was one of the most profitable businesses in this country.  So, here I was seated, taking a decision -(Interruptions)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Hon. Members.

MR. MUSUMBA:  Mr. Speaker, those were the circumstances in which we sold these shares.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member you have exhausted your time, because you started at almost a quarter past, now we are going to ten minutes to.

MR. MWANDHA:  Just allow me to wind up, Mr. Speaker. To be very, very precise, I want to borrow one sentence from a DRIC note. A DRIC note is a note which contains the justification for the decision they want you to take.  It reads as follows:  "if the sell of shares is not acceptable, then DRIC should approve the winding up of the Airline."  Now, you imagine sitting in a DRIC meeting and the technical officers are telling you, either sell or permit us to go and wind up the Airline.  You are left with absolutely no option, but simply to accept.  So, that is what I meant; we were really being pushed against the wall.  Thank you.

MR. OKELLO OKELLO ( Chwa County, Kitgum):  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Ten minutes please, as I said.

MR. OKELLO OKELLO:  Mr. Speaker, I am a petitioner, so my position is very clear.  I rise to support the Motion.  

I would like to start with ground 2(a), about the conflict of interest.  Mr. Speaker and hon. Members, I invite you to look at this situation.  The 25th of July 1996 was a Thursday; hon. Sam Kutesa wrote a letter on behalf of ENHAS to the General Manager, Gold Trust Bank. The following day, 26th July 1996, was a Friday, a working day in Government, he wrote another letter to Trans Africa Bank Limited. That it document No.10 and No.9.

On 4th September, that was a Wednesday, still a working day in government, hon. Sam Kutesa again wrote to the General Manager of Gold Trust Bank, and it is marked document No.13 here.  
On 20th February, 1997, Thursday, a working day in government, the hon. Minister, Sam Kutesa, took time off and went to chair a Board meeting of ENHAS. On 2nd March 1998, Monday, hon. Sam Kutesa had a meeting with the Consortium of the share-holders in ENHAS starting from 4.30 p.m. until 6.15 p.m. and it is stated clearly that it was in hon. Sam Kutesa's Office - I do not know which one!  My suspicion, Mr. Speaker, is that it was in a government Office. According to this document here, he was being referred to as hon. Minister in that meeting. So, it is possible that the Minister converted government facilities to his personal use (Laughter).

To say that there is no conflict of interest when on many occasions, the Minister had to choose whether to serve the tax payers of Uganda or go for his personal business interest, really I fail to understand the argument. Those many hours spent doing ENHAS jobs belonged to the tax payers of Uganda. I am sure the Minister was paid fully for all these days and I am sure ENHAS also paid him on top of that. (Laughter).  Mr. Speaker, who would help that position?  Everybody would like to be in that kind of position. So, the question of conflict of interest has come out in this censure so clearly that I do not think anybody will come and say again there was no conflict of interest.  If you cheat government time, you are cheating us the people of this Country.  You are cheating us. So, I request that that question really be laid to rest. (Laughter).

I would like to touch on another ground - this is the ground of harassment of the workers. I am talking from personal experience here. I worked in the Civil Service for 26 uninterrupted years and I worked with many, many Ministers. On a number of occasions, I was the subject of harassment by some Ministers.  Mr. Speaker, I did not report any Minister to the Police.  To say that because Turinawe did not report to the Police, therefore, he was not harassed, is being simplistic.  A Minister who is being guarded by the Police, now you want to go and report him to which Police? (Laughter) I do not understand this!  

I would like to sincerely express my thanks to Turinawe for having stood up against the forces of destruction of our Country.  I think we should record our appreciation.  There are very few civil servants of that type now and we should encourage them.  They actually show me that Uganda is still salvageable.  So, we should not argue that because there is no Police file, there was no case.

Another issue, Mr. Speaker, in the meeting, they did not record in the minutes that there was a fight; there was harassment in that particular meeting. There is no sensible Company, government Department or Ministry that would record fighting as a part of its permanent records.  You do not do that. When a meeting is called, the notice comes with the Agenda and Items. Under which Item are you going to put fighting?  Under Any Other Business? (Laughter) What if it comes before you arrive at that Item, like it was in this particular case? It started before A.O.B, what number are you going to give?  So, we should not also argue that because there was no minute to that effect, therefore, the gentleman was not harassed. I think that is being simplistic. Mr. Speaker, harassment is real. I have already said that I went through quite a number very successfully and effectively, because I knew the role of a Minister and the role of a civil servant - I was trained.  So, those who tried, could not succeed.

Let me go to the harassment of the workers by denying them their shares.  Mr. Speaker, it was known right from the beginning that the workers of Uganda Airlines would first group themselves into a kind of association before they could pay.  This needed a little bit of time.  But when the workers were ready, they came to pay, they were thrown out.  Mr. Speaker, this did not show any good faith.  If there was good faith, they should have accepted the cheque and told the workers, 'Now, look, the price has gone up, you pay more', and if they rejected, then they would return the cheque.  But to say that, 'to hell with your cheque', was, to me, an intention to deny the workers their shares in Uganda Airlines.

Let me conclude, Mr. Speaker, by referring to the hon. Minister's defence yesterday.  The hon. Minister said that he knew very many Members of Parliament doing business with government and if they insisted for his head, they should watch out.(Interjection) Well, may be my words are not the very words, but it is something to that effect.

MR. KUTESA: Mr. Speaker, in view of the fact that I am on record, -(Interruption) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Just correct him, what did you say?

MR. KUTESA:  I did not say anything to the effect or even that could be construed to mean that there are Members of Parliament who do business and I know them and that if they take my head, they should watch out. I did not say anything that could have meant that or that could have construed to mean that.  Is it therefore, in order for hon. Okello-Okello, in his attempt to excite Members of Parliament against me, to allege what I did not say?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I would think, hon. Minister, you help us and repeat what you said.

MR. KUTESA: Mr. Speaker,  I will not begin to invent what I did not say.  I did not say anything related to that.

MR. OKELLO-OKELLO: Mr. Speaker, I am sorry.  I do sincerely apologise to the Minister if I did misquote him.  But there was something to that effect that the law should be changed.  The point I am trying to make here, Mr. Speaker, is that for an ordinary Member of Parliament, like myself, there is no law against me doing business with government.  I do not bear an appointment letter to any government office.  So, I can do business, as much as I want, with government. We are talking about public officers. Public Officers should not do business with themselves. Because you are in Government, you are doing business with yourself. This is the point.

In my days in the Civil Service, even doing business was not allowed.  Trading was not allowed.  Even your spouse could not do business with government where you are working because, how protected was the government?  

So, I would like to conclude by saying that, I come from a Constituency where people are suffering, people are dying without even attempting to go to the hospital. When they go, they are asked to pay because the government cannot afford free medi-care.  So, people are busy dying freely in the villages. When I see these sums of money that could have gone to that effect being squandered, being embezzled, being lost, Mr. Speaker, in my opinion, these people who are robbing this Country are not any different from the rebels in the bush that are killing us -(Laughter)- because they are also causing death indirectly. They are causing death to our people because we do not have drugs here because of their highhanded activities.  I thank you, Mr. Speaker.

MR. NYAI DICK (Ayivu County, Arua): Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker and hon. Members, yesterday I went through a two phase reaction.  One; I was very glad that this House offered hon. Sam Kutesa sufficient time to speak in his defence, and to me that was heart warming, at the same time, hon. Sam Kutesa then took me into a nose dive. Hon. Sam Kutesa told a very nice story here. He may think that it is a joke, but in summary, he said that we censured hon. Jim Muhwezi, Brigadier, as a dog and that this Parliament has constituted itself into trying dogs.  

MR. MUTYABA: Mr. Speaker, we were all here yesterday and whatever transpired is on the record of the Hansard.  I never heard the hon. Minister Kutesa referring to the censuring of hon. Jim Muhwezi as censuring a dog.  My understanding was that it was an analogy, which is allowed in English language to illustrate points. Is it in order for the hon. Member to say that the hon. Minister compared hon. Jim Muhwezi to a dog?  Is it in order, Mr. Speaker?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think what is out of order is his misunderstanding that that was an analogy.

MR. NYAI: Mr. Speaker, I am not so sure whether hon. Mutyaba's understanding of the English language is as good as mine -(Laughter)- but let it pass.

I know that a story teller, as an example, refers to realities on the ground. Mr. Speaker, the first point that I wanted to make is this, on this Censure Motion, there should be no acrimony in this House. Why do I say this?  I am saying this because all of us, hon. Members in this House, gave to our people of Uganda an election promise that we shall fight against corruption; that we shall support development - all of us. Mr. Speaker, the Constitution gives this Parliament a very unique role.  This Parliament is both Policeman/ Policewoman and Judge.  That is the truth of the matter.  

I find it strange for hon. Sam Kutesa to say that you cannot add other grounds in the debate about this censure. Normally, I believe the Police can arrest you on a holding charge and when they go to Court, they will adduce other evidence. This House should not be limited to technicalities.  Even when you go to a hospital to ask for treatment, the doctor will ask you many many questions.  Some of them, to you as a lay man, have nothing to do with your headache. He will ask you, how is your stomach? How do you feel?  For some of us, the stomach is way below down there and the head is up here.  It is in order that this House should go into complete details; One; to find hon. Sam Kutesa innocent or two; if he is not so found, to prove to this nation that this Court of last resort for their safety, to protect their interest, to protect their property, is doing its work. If we fail in that, Mr. Speaker, we shall have constituted ourselves into a guild of thieves, which will be unfortunate.

MR. OMARA ATUBO: Mr. Speaker, on this question of technicalities versus substance in the petition, I would like to draw the attention of this House to Article 126, Sub-clause (2)(e) of the Constitution. I am sure that my good Friend, hon. Sam Kutesa, who is a regular practitioner in law, is very much aware of this Provision in the Constitution. It says, "In adjudicating cases of both a civil and criminal nature, the Courts shall, subject to law, apply the following principles-"  I am quoting one of the principles; "(e)Substantive justice shall be administered without undue regard to technicalities" 

Here, Mr. Speaker, we are concerned with substantive justice, and technicalities should not undermine the basis of that substantive justice.  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.

MR. NYAI: Thank you for that brilliant contribution.  I believe -(Interruption)

MR. KATUREEBE:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  This is really to clarify on the point that my learned Friend, hon. Omara Atubo, has just mentioned. Indeed, there is even judicial authority on the interpretation of Article 126. The important thing is, whatever you do, you must have regard for the law, that is why it says the court shall be subject to the law. That is a very important consideration that you must have.  

Secondly, in the E that he has mentioned, there is that sentence, 'administered without undue regard', you may have regard, but it must not be undue regard. This has been interpreted by the supreme courts; you will not simply ignore the law nor will you not have due regard to technicalities of procedure. I just wanted to make this point of law clear.(Applause).

MR. NYAI: Mr. Speaker, I am very grateful for that information. I believe that we all agree that it is our duty, and the onus is on this House, to establish the facts.  Now, Mr. Speaker, when I was listening to hon. Kutesa Sam giving his defence, I was slightly disappointed by his presentation.  He talked very eloquently, I nearly compared him to Asa Hutchinson on the Republican team which tried Bill Cliton during the impeachment.  But for almost three and half hours, hon. Kutesa Sam took us through a rigmarole of technicalities of the law.  One, he said, the petition cannot hold because he was not an important man and that he had no influence.  

I want to submit to this House, Mr. Speaker, that the time when hon. Kutesa Sam was a man of no influence was very, very, long ago.  Hon. Kutesa Sam, whom I know, has variously been Assistant Secretary General of the Democratic Party; he holds the distinction of having defeated Mr. Kaguta Yoweri Museveni in an election.  Hon. Kutesa Sam was a Minister and Attorney General under Lutwa, hon. Kutesa Sam chaired one of the most delicate Committees in the Constituent Assembly - Committee 5, and hon. Kutesa Sam was on President Kaguta Yoweri's campaign team.  Now, to us, does that mean that hon. Kutesa Sam is a simple person? If we censure him now, while he is a Minister, and those matters come out, they are part of history, let us not pretend that there is no history.  Its testimony in law. Did he only murder by accident or he is a habitual murderer?  It is relevant. 

The hon. Minister said something, and these were his own words, and if I mis-quote you, hon. Kutesa Sam, correct me immediately.  Towards the end of your submission when were talking of change of signatories on the accounts of ENHAS while you were arguing about how the Board then confirmed your alterations, you said this, 'I have no apologies to make. I took unilateral decisions.'  Now, if that is the truth, Mr. Speaker, and our Constitution is replete with separation of powers, with arrangements of transparency, can you come out and say you have a Board of Directors and you do not consult them, you just act on your own because you think you are right? Is that the type of person we want as a Minister in this country?  You must have due regard. 

The Minister went went ahead and told us something else, he said this Parliament is against Ministers because we do not want them to do business.  Mr. Speaker, I want to submit this, that in civilized societies, to which we are aiming to be, once you are offered the post of a Minister, you put your business in trust or you give it to somebody else to run.  I know there are very many Ministers here who have their own private businesses, but I wonder whether they chair the Board meetings! So, Mr. Speaker, what hurt me most is that when you are made a Minister, you do not only work by your job description, as given by hon. Kajura Henry, there is a bigger power. I want to draw everyone's attention, particularly that of hon. Kutesa Sam, to Article 117 of the constitution.  I read, Mr. Speaker,- (Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But hon. Member, time is running out.

MR. NYAI: If you can allow me, Mr. Speaker, just to wind up. Article 117: " Ministers shall, individually be accountable to the President for the administration of their Ministries and collectively be responsible for any decision made by the Cabinet." 

By that, I understand that if a Minister of Health finds workers in the Ministry of Works looting government property and he passes by because that is not in his Ministry, he is being negligent to his duty. That, Mr. Speaker, leads to the final point of the conflict of interest.  The conflict of  interest,to a lawyer of hon. Kutesa Sam's eminence, a long serving lawyer, should become obvious.  If it is put to you that these are the interests of the people of Uganda and these are my interests, hon. Kutesa Sam, which should supersede? Do you believe that your individual interest will always override, as in this case, ENHAS interests over-rode Uganda Airlines whereas Uganda Airlines had majority shares in ENHAS. They were excluded from the management of that organisation.  

There is even a minute here, which he laid on the Table, about how Uganda Airlines and the Privatisation Unit withdrew to consult among themselves, then ENHAS and Associates went and consulted, and yet Uganda Airlines was majority shareholders in ENHAS. And it was Government property. Mr. Speaker, the people who do accounts will tell you about this thing called insider trading.  You know what the position is, so you hold the other one at ransom and buy cheaply.  In  Paris, in the New York Stock Exchange, the London Stock Market and Hong Kong, they will actually find you guilty and try you.  Mr. Speaker, therefore, I call  upon all of us here in this House to duly support this Motion and give our country hope for the future of our children.  I thank you. 

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR KARAMOJA AFFAIRS (Mr. Lokeris):  Thank you, Mr. Speaker, for giving me this chance. I have been listening to the debate with keen interest.  I have been looking at the saga; how did this saga came about?  why are we discussing it here? It is because the Uganda Civil Aviation Authority failed to do business. When it failed to do the ground handling business, it decided to put up an advertisement to the whole world that those of you who can assist to smoothly run this services at Entebbe Airport please do apply. Since this advertisement was for the whole world, everyone, including hon. Dick Nyai, had to apply -(Laughter).  Mr. Chairman, of course this is according to the laws of Uganda of 1964 which incorporated our companies -(Interruption)

MISS KIYINGI NAMUSOKE: Mr. Speaker, I realise that the hon. Member on the Floor is a Minister.  So, I am seeking clarification as to whether he is speaking as a Minister since there is what is called, 'collective responsibility' or as an hon. Member for Chekwii constituency?  I am seeking clarification Sir.

MR. LOKERIS: Mr. Speaker, allow me to inform the hon. Member that I came to this House after winning elections with an 85 percent vote  -(Laughter).  So, I qualify to speak as a Member of chwekii, Moroto District, Karamoja -(Laughter).  Mr. Speaker, as the  advertisement was for the whole world to come and salvage the business of ground handling at Entebbe, these companies did apply and they were considered;  Uganda Airlines itself, the workers of Uganda Airlines, the Sabena,  Calebs International, Global Air Links.  After sorting these companies, they were advised by the owners to form a consortium in order to have enough money to run the business smoothly.  This consortium, according to the document, was formed. When it was formed, in that year before the elections, hon. Kutesa Sam happened to be one of the members of one of these companies.  

In company law, it does not say the Chairman will be elected from the majority shareholders; unless you show me the section.  So, one of their members, the most efficient administrative business person, with  all the articulate acumen in business, was elected by those who conferred upon him that responsibility.  He was elected with the objective and mission of handling the ground services efficiently; that was the objective. These people did  promise that under the able chairmanship of hon. Kutesa Sam, they would do this business efficiently, and we have not, up to now, heard from Entebbe Airport that this business is not being done.  

The problem we seem to have when we are talking about hon. Kutesa  Sam and the business is not being able to separate the two. As per our laws, any company which has been incorporated, if it is under hon. Lokeris, or Mr. Lokeris, is not me, it is a fictitious person who can only talk through people who are alive. Since this company could not talk on its own, it is known, in company law, that the Chairman of the company has to talk; it could be the Managing Director of that company. These people efficiently articulated their business with business promotion.  They did excel in handling the services of ground handling.  The Kutesa Sam in that company, up to now,is a mere person, not a Minister. As far as I am concerned, if I was the Minister who was in privatisation Unit and hon. Kutesa came and sat opposite me, he would be at the firing line, therefore, I would not regard him as the Minister.  

The problem here is, we always carry these jobs even to our bedrooms; why?  Once your reach there, just forget it. If you hold a business meeting on a Sunday, as it had been outlined, that is private time! Go and hold your business in a small place, like you can discuss with a madam or daddy; there is no problem.  So, as far as I know, if we can separate the two; hon. Kutesa and  the business, we shall be talking business.  When it is business,  it is business -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: He is about to wind up.

MR. LOKERIS: Hon. Members, I really condemn the whole set up of Uganda Airlines. You are the majority share holders, who by law could even apply for injunction or could even apply to the responsible department to say things are going wrong here. It is legislated; you could even go to court.  As a shareholder or a General Manager with all the degrees flooded around your body, and you cannot say anything!  And when you fail to handle it, you are part of the business; then you come and abuse the other one who is for ENHAS; what were you doing in Uganda Airlines?  All of you, the batch seated there, in fact, should be dismissed for having not confronted these mere people of this mere company.  Mere people to become difficult infront of you, I am really very sorry -(Laughter)- Mr. Speaker, I hope you are counting the time used up as they are laughing, because I also want that to be counted.  Mr. Speaker, -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  You have now covered about 9 minutes, so you have one minute.

MR. LOKERIS: Thank you Sir. The performance of hon. Kutesa as a member of ENHAS did not interfere with any business at all, unless we are clouded by myopicsm. 

MR. MWESIGYE ADOLF (Bunyangabu county, Kabarole):  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I am petitioner number 40 and I rise to support the motion on the following grounds.  Mr. Speaker Sir, I will comment both on the technical and substantive grounds.  I am one of those who is always concerned about compliance with procedure before a political or judicial action is taken and I would like to submit, Mr. Speaker, that the technical points in this motion have been complied with.  

First of all, Mr. Speaker, there is a valid petition before this House, signed by 116 petitioners.  No petitioner has up to now withdrawn his signature. The grounds supporting that petition are laid down in the petition and in the elements which I see ranging from conflict of interest, threatening violence, and mishandling signatures. I discern one ground that the petitioners have relied on and this is the ground of misconduct. Mr. Speaker, petitioners do not need more than one ground to sustain a motion of censure.  A vote of censure can be passed on any of the following grounds: abuse of office, misconduct or misbehaviour, physical incapacity, mismanagement, incompetence.  I am interested in misconduct and I am saying, Mr. Speaker, on only this ground, a motion of censure can be sustained.  I am not interested in abuse of office because I do not have evidence of abuse of office.  The Minister is physically fit, he cannot be censured for physical incapacity.  There is no evidence that the Minister mismanaged his Ministry and I do not have evidence that he is incompetent but there is evidence of misconduct.  

The definition of misconduct is not defined in the constitution.  This Parliament is not going to follow the definitions of courts of law because this is not a court of law. I will give the definition  of misconduct as this Parliament understands it. Misconduct is what this Parliament knows as misconduct. (Laughter).  Nobody is going to challenge this Parliament on what misconduct is, not even the constitutional court, Mr. Speaker.  The elements of misconduct, as I have said, have been well laid down in the petition.  

The second technical point I would like to resolve Mr. Speaker, is whether hon. Kutesa committed the offenses that he committed while a Minister.  But before I come to that, he also pleaded  yesterday in his defence that the allegations must be restricted to his schedule of duties as a Minister of Investment.  Mr. Speaker,  misconduct is misconduct whether you are a Minister of Investment, Minister of Internal Affairs, Prime Minister, Minister of Local Government.  You do not have to have committed the crime in the schedule of your duties.  If a Minister of Investment forged - I am assuming - if a Minister of Investment forged a land title in the Ministry of Lands, he cannot plead that although he forged a land title, land does not follow under his schedule.  Forgery of a land title is a censurable offence.  I am not saying Ministers have done it, I am just assuming.  If a Minister issued a bouncing cheque, for example, that would be a very bad act. But he cannot plead that, although I issued a bouncing cheque, I did not do so under the schedule of my duties as a Minister.  That is misconduct.  I have limited time, Mr. Speaker, I am not permitting the information.  The act of misconduct does not have to have been committed in your schedule of duties and that must go down as a precedent. 

When hon. Kutesa committed the offenses he is alleged to have committed, he was a Minister.  When he tampered with signatures, this was July 1996, he was a Minister.  When he withheld information from representatives of Uganda Airlines, this was 1996 to 1997, he was a Minister.  When he bought the shares of Uganda Airlines below market rates, which shares he should have protected as a Minister, this was April, 1998 and he was a Minister.  When he threatened violence against Turinawe on 28th February 1997, he was  a Minister.  When he got instructions from  Hima (1994) Limited to defraud government of -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Order.  Hon. Member, I have looked at the petition itself and the subject in the petition is ENHAS.I think the home of ENHAS is at Entebbe, Mpigi District of Buganda and Hima must be in Kasese which is far away from Entebbe.  So, we should restrict ourselves to the grounds which were stated in there.

MR. MWESIGYE:  I withdraw that, Mr. Speaker. I am most obliged. Mr. Speaker, I am emphasizing the point that there is mischief Article 118 was intended to cure. The makers of the constitution wanted a very high standard of conduct from Ministers. I would not be party to a motion if the Minister was being censured for offenses he did not commit as a Minister.  But the evidence is very clear, he committed all these offences as a Minister and they are censurable offenses. Mr. Speaker, the evidence is available.  

When you look at documents number 3, 4, 5 and 6, which the Members have, they all relate to hon. Kutesa's deliberate withholding of information on the financial status of ENHAS from representatives of Uganda Airlines.  According to document number 7, hon. Kutesa himself says that he was forced to change signatories because of financial mishandling.  He does not tell us how much finances were mishandled.  He does not tell us who mishandled the money yet he is the chairman of the board of ENHAS.  

Conflict of interest has been proved because you have a Minister of government on the one hand and you have a Minister, hon. Kutesa, as chairman of ENHAS through his company Global Airlinks benefitting from the under valuation of the Uganda Airlines shares in ENHAS.  Members will recall that the chief petitioner did adduce evidence here to the effect that Uganda Airlines shares were valued by three reputable valuation firms. The first, Ernst and Young, ranged from five to eight million, DFCU five to eight million, Delloite and Touche which is associated to hon. Kutesa valued at 3.7, and actually the shares were bought at 3.7. If you take the average, if these shares had been sold on market rate, they would have been sold between five to eight million. Global Airlinks must have defrauded Uganda Airlines and government of 1.2 billion shillings and for that loss, hon. Kutesa must account.  

In conclusion, Mr. Speaker, I say the petition is before this House.  It was signed by more that a third of the Members of this Parliament.  The ground of misconduct has been pleaded in the petition, the ground of misconduct has been proved. The dates on which the offenses were committed relate to Kutesa when he was a Minister of Government, and misconduct is misconduct whether the offenses were committed by him outside the schedule of his Ministry. I thank you, Mr. Speaker.

MR. MAO NOBERT(Gulu Municipality, Gulu): I thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am a petitioner and I rise to support the motion to censure the hon. Sam Kutesa. I would propose that having listened to the defence of the hon. Minister, this defence, in my opinion, has been evasive, unreliable and actually largely irrelevant.  At best, I consider it an explanation.  It is not a defence, not even a justification, and nothing in it can exonerate him from the allegations contained in our petition.  

The facts speak for themselves, Mr. Speaker, and we have had them since two days ago. I think a prima facie case has been made and now the two fold presentation of hon. Dombo and hon. Okwir stand like a pair of handcuffs in the hands of hon. Sam Kutesa.  I do not see how he can wriggle out of that pair of handcuffs.  We have tried to concentrate on the five grounds and because the facts are so loud and clear, we do not even have to be very sharp shooters in order to get our target.  It is like being asked to aim and shoot at a mountain. You cannot miss it. (Laughter).  

In view of the facts,Mr. Speaker, the hon. Sam Kutesa is such a large target that any of the five grounds cannot miss catching him.  The hon. Minister said we should prove our case beyond a shadow of doubt.  I think in law it is required that we should prove a case beyond reasonable doubt and the hon. Minister knows that.  I have been heartened because the mood in this House is very serious and I think this mood will continue until the ballots are counted.  We are very serious, we are not being too diversionary.  At one point, following from what was going on in the House, I thought the Samson option had been resorted to.  Those who read the Bible know that Samson, when he was at Gaza, decided to bring down the pillars. Sporadic allegations were being made against all sorts of Members in this House to silence them.  I am glad that this has not come up in the debate and therefore I salute the Members for being serious; because at that time, we just concluded that there was no defence to the allegations and therefore the credibility of the House was being questioned.  

The presentation has been thorough, Mr. Speaker.  The evidence of political interference was proved in the report of the Select Committee and we are actually talking about an aspect of the privatisation process for which we are holding the hon. Sam Kahamba Kutesa responsible. The report, on page 24, said the privatisation of assets of Uganda Airlines Corporation, including those which went to ENHAS, was, 'most Ad Hoc, unethical and unfair'.  The privatisation process has been manipulated and taken advantage of by a few politically powerful people who sacrifice the people's interests.  I think that is why we even do not have a stock exchange up to now because that way, the market will be widened.  Mr. Speaker, the country is crying out.  Now who is going to heed this cry if not us?  

Fingers have been pointed and I think I have reason to believe that hon. Sam Kutesa should be censured. These fingers will continue to be pointed. We need people we can trust. We do not need people who are so sleek and sly that when they shake your hands, you have to count your fingers. (Laughter).  

The Select Committee report which was presented here led to a resolution of the House asking the President of the Republic of Uganda to remove the hon. Minister.  Are we going against that resolution?  That resolution was loud and clear.  That is why I believe that if we do not pass this vote of censure, we will have actually gone back on our own resolution, which will show that we are not serious. I have faith that this House will be consistent; the way we have always been.  The signatures were gathered in record time.  That means there was a prima facie case.  I already said you cannot miss a mountain.

The hon. Minister said he was just a lawyer and a businessman in town.  He is a powerful figure and has been a powerful figure for some time.  Hon. Dick Nyai enumerated his various positions of power; as a CA delegate, Attorney General, MP in 1980s and a Minister. It is one thing to become a chairman if you are not a Minister, it is another thing continuing to be a chairman while you are a Minister.  He said a minority stakeholder can be chairman.  I just have this answer.  It is one thing becoming a chairman when you are a minority shareholder, and not a Minister, it is another thing to continue being a chairman when you become a Minister, and, under your very nose, a public company is stripped of its core assets for your explicit gain.  Mr. Speaker, we do not have to bring any further evidence of explicit gain because you may rule us out of order.  Otherwise, we would have also loved to declare the hon. Minister's wealth for him. 

The style of management is what led to the loss of Uganda Airlines and therefore the people of Uganda.  I have concluded that the hon. Minister was what I would call a total chairman.  He changed signatories without board resolutions.  The letters are clear.  Hon. Dombo brought documents which showed the Uganda Airlines Corporation standing out and even questioning the management style. I believe that this business of changing signatures without resolution is wrong and nobody can say it was not wrong, not even the Minister himself.  He said he did it because it was inevitable.  But why was he not able to convene the board meeting?  We have proved conflict of interest, Mr. Speaker.  

I see that the principles of public life which we have got to uphold in this House are several.  I will name a few.  The first is selflessness.  We have got to take decisions in terms of the public interest, not to gain financial or other material benefits.  We have got to have integrity. We should not place ourselves under any obligation that might influence the discharge of our duties and we also have got to be objective. We have got to be accountable and submit to whatever scrutiny is appropriate.  We have got to be open, honest and provide leadership.  Mr. Speaker, when we come to vote, we will have to ask ourselves whether in view of all the evidence presented, we see that the Minister conducted himself with selflessness. Did he conduct himself with integrity?  Was he objective, particularly in terms of the market value of the shares?  Was he accountable, in view of the letters of Dick Turinawe crying out?  Was he open?  Was he honest? And do all those things amount to the leadership which the rest of us who are juniors should follow and aspire to emulate?  

As I wind up, I do not think this House should raise a white flag to corruption, no matter what.  We cannot raise a white flag on the roof of Parliament that we surrender because we are afraid  and under all sorts of pressures.  We cannot raise a white flag in the struggle. Let us not be deluded that dishonourable surrender to powerful people whose conduct has been questioned will take this country forward.  When you cast your vote, hon. Members, vote as your constituents would want you to vote.  Vote as the future generation would want you to vote.  We need commitment and our commitment will be demonstrated when we vote to censure hon. Sam Kutesa.  

Finally, Mr. Speaker, I have to make this general statement because I believe in it very strongly.  We are blessed with a President who is said to have impeccable personal integrity.  Unfortunately, he is allegedly surrounded by sharks and crooks. I find it hard to imagine integrity in that kind of fix. I think the test of integrity is its blunt refusal to be compromised. Now we are all a witness to the failure of what I would call the helpless integrity of the President of the Republic of Uganda to solve the problems of rampant corruption which threatens Uganda. Since we are a peace loving country, I think we are going to take time to resolve this problem. But to initiate positive change in the struggle against corruption, Mr. Speaker, the President of this country must take a decisive first step of ridding his administration of all persons on whom the slightest wind of corruption has blown.  When he summons the courage to do that, for instance by heeding to our first Resolution, when we advised him to remove the hon. Sam Kutesa, he will wake up one day to find that he has grown in stature and authority.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Please wind up.

MAJ.GEN.TUMWINE: Mr. Speaker, knowing the character of sharks with their teeth, knowing how they behave if they are surrounding anything edible, knowing the character of crooks; crooks who will always look for any opportunity to destroy and take advantage of you, knowing the people that are surrounding the President, including this Parliament, including all Members of Cabinet;  Mr. Speaker when you talk of surrounding, there are different levels of surrounding.  You could talk of the inner circle -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Are you seeking a clarification? 

MAJ. GEN. TUMWINE:  I am rising on a point of order and I am making my point.  Mr. Speaker, is the hon. Member holding the Floor in order to suggest that the people who are surrounding the President are sharks and crooks, when we know that the people surrounding the President have even given him votes beyond many people who are in this House?  Is he in order to suggest that he is surrounded by sharks and crooks?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  As I indicated yesterday, I said that the subject matter of this Motion is only, only, hon. Sam Kutesa, no other people should be involved in this Motion. So, if the reference was meant to draw other people in this Motion, then he is out of order.  At the same time, there is a problem, because somebody used an analogy and then the analogy was being interpreted. Please restrict yourselves to the subject matter namely; hon. Sam Kutesa.  I suppose you are putting a full stop, hon. Mao.

MR. MAO:  I am obliged, Mr. Speaker.  I think I owe the hon. Member an explanation. Because of the speed at which I was going, I forgot to say some sharks and crooks.  I did not mean everybody surrounding the President, and I believe that you cannot say that statement is not true.  Mr. Speaker, I was winding up as follows, to initiate -(Interruption)

MISS. EGUNYU:  Mr. Speaker, Rule 61 of our Rules says:" If a Member uses objectionable words and on being called to order fails to retract or explain the words and offer an apology to the satisfaction of the Speaker, any Member may, with the consent of the Speaker, move that the Member using the objectionable words be no longer heard..."  
I propose and move that hon. Mao no longer be heard. (Laughter).

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Hon. Mao has stopped contributing.  Let us proceed.

MRS. ZZIWA NANTONGO ( Woman Representative, Kampala):  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Since yesterday, Monitor Newspaper took the courtesy to remind us of the petitioners, I think my picture featured very well and I rise to support the Motion. From the onset, let me thank the Committee for bringing back this Report. Likewise, I thank hon. Kutesa for courageously answering all queries put across.  

I want to inform the House that in this great constituency of mine, I have the privilege to interact with the people almost on a daily basis.  Since December, I took keen interest to find out what the people think about this whole issue; first, on the issue of corruption, and secondly on the whole issue surrounding ENHAS, Uganda Airlines and particularly hon. Sam Kutesa.  In fact, if I could inform the House, I have had over 32 meetings and in all these meetings, this question of corruption, what decisions we are taking on the officers, men and women of Uganda who are corrupt, has always featured.  I take this opportunity to remind the Members of this House that some of us are strong Movementists and we shall acclaim that even at the last day of the Referendum we shall remain so.  

I also want to add, that the pertinent questions should not be mixed up with idealogy. I want to repeat these pertinent questions; they are the ones which I laid down then, and I still lay down to be answered by hon. Kutesa.  The first one is, was there financial loss to the parastatal of Uganda Airlines and subsequently to the Government of Uganda and the people of Uganda?

The second one is, if there was, who caused it?  Who is responsible, is it Uganda Airlines itself? Is it ENHAS? Is it DRIC? Is it the Privatisation Unit or even personalities like hon. Kutesa himself or the Privatisation Unit as a staff or even others like hon. Mutyaba, for instance?  Who caused it?  These are pertinent questions I have been asked in rallies where I have gone and I want them answered. (Laughter).

MR. MUTYABA: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Is it in order for the hon. Member, Woman Representative for Kampala District, to impute the possibility that I was involved in the loss of Uganda Airlines Shares, when first of all, I was here in this Parliament?  Is she in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  The guidance which I earlier gave, covers this particular question. I said that there is no any other person in this Motion that should be referred to other than hon. Sam Kutesa.  So if you draw in any other Member, it is a way of threatening such a Member, because you sort of black mail him and you inhibit him from making a contribution.  So, it is not in order to refer to any Member, including hon. Mutyaba, in this Motion.

MRS. ZZIWA: Thank you. For that matter I withdraw hon. Mutyaba's name. But as I said, it was a question put to me,  that was the way I brought it forth.  

The third one, Mr. Speaker, is also a very, very important question.  Were these people or personalities patriotic enough  in order to safeguard the interests of Ugandans, as a Government, and in order to work and see development for the people of Uganda?  We know that for a long time in this country, many people have been patriotic and they have fought hard. Some physically, by use of arms, others with words, in course of arguments, and others, of course, in selflessness, like those other peasants out in the country side. But are these people at the steering of this whole ENHAS saga patriotic to this country?  
This also leads me to another question.  Who prepares the contracts between the Government of Uganda and whichever party it is engaging in?  Who is there to protect the interests of Ugandans?  Fellow Members, these are pertinent questions, they are put to me everyday when I go out to my constituency.  
Let me just say that basing on the response from hon. Kutesa, there were few queries which I feel can be clarified.  On financial loss, he put across the issue in his defence, saying that in the firm, I think this is Delioite and Touche, there was no fraud and there were no irregularities during the year which ended in February, 1997.  I want to use the same Report to say that this very clause went ahead to say - that is Schedule (e)- " you will appreciate that our normal audit procedures are designed primarily to enable us to form an opinion on the financial statements as a whole. And therefore, do not necessarily bring to light at each audit all the weaknesses and internal control on all accounting practice which a special investigation might do."  
This is where I will put a question again;  as a Chairman of ENHAS and after receiving this note which may have been written on  6th January, 1999, because of whatever had been going on, did he take initiative to call upon special investigations to be carried out?  In accounts we know that the auditors may look at specifics or the general picture, not necessarily at specific votes.  If a code or a vote is paid to a certain firm, it may not be reflected as erroneous.  So, it may never be reflected as financial loss. In this particular respect, I think this statement was a very big oversight. I think hon. Kutesa should look at it again in order to be able to answer whether there was no financial loss.  Just the issue of fraud being stated by the -(Interruption)-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  She is winding up please.

MRS. ZZIWA:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Hon. Kutesa stated that from 1st March 1999, the contract of Ground Handling was passed on to ENHAS.  Again he says that they did not start on the work; it was Uganda Airlines which was asked to do that handling. I want to find out; since there is already money which was paid to ENHAS, was there any agreement signed between ENHAS this time and Uganda Airlines?  Was there an agreement formally signed to say that, as you are contracting or you are doing this work on our behalf, you will be able to pay us during this time?  In absence of that agreement, which I think would have been very relevant, and should have been laid on the Table, there is no way we can prove that that understanding existed. I think many people still query whether there was financial loss or whether money was paid to ENHAS which was not necessarily supposed to be paid.  

As I conclude on this, I want to also find out what makes hon. Kutesa feel that the loss, or the unauthorised withdrawal, of 23,000 US dollars from the bank would be the only cause for immediate action from him, other than the financial mismanagement which was reported continuously and consistently by the Acting Chairman of Uganda Airlines. I want to find out the difference, because that is also financial loss.  Why did he have to act on the other one immediately yet he could not act on this one immediately? He had to take about 20 days and in other instances, six months.  I want to find that out. 

As I wind up, Mr. Speaker, I want to state that, since the question of allegiance or the question of interest has not been clarified, in that hon. Kutesa is still serving as a Minister in the Uganda Government, and at the same time he is still serving as the Chairman of ENHAS, I think there is conflict of interest.  On that basis, and only that basis, he should save me from many of my Constituents who are saying; you the Movementists, what are you doing to save this country?  He should just be patriotic enough and say, I think let me step aside. If there is any  wrong he did, he can then plead forgiveness like he did yesterday.  Other than that, I bet many Ugandans are going to say, hon. Kutesa should be relieved of his duties.  I beg to submit.

MR. BENEDICT MUTYABA ( Makindye East, Kampala):  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I am not a Minister, but I think it is in order for me to come here because the other microphone is faulty.  Mr. Speaker, I did not sign the petition, but I have looked at the motion from the angle of my experience, as a Lawyer and also as a politician for the last three years.  I do not contest the right of Members of Parliament to bring this motion. I believe that the motion is a call on this House to analyze the evidence in both cases and to make a decision on the facts as seen through each Member's eyes.  

Before I continue, for the last three days I have been approached by some Members to say do not speak.  Yesterday, it was hon. Hashaka, but, Mr. Speaker, I am not on trial here.  My record in Uganda Airlines is very clear. In a few instances where my name has been mentioned, I do not think it has been done negatively.  Let me however tell friend and foe alike that hon. Benedict Mutyaba does not succumb to intimidation and blackmail.  So, I shall speak.  

I agree with my learned Friend, hon. Adolf Mwesigye, that when you look at this petition, there is only one ground; the ground of misconduct resulting from conflict of interest.  That is what hon. Sam Kutesa is being accused of.  Mr. Speaker, Members may want to note that the Leadership Code, in Clause 14(2), clearly outlines what is culpable.  That is: "A leader placing himself or herself in a position of conflict of interest in relation to the duties and responsibilities of his office."  Hon. Sam Kutesa said so. Each of us, hon. Members, may have a different interpretation of what this means.  Hon. Mwesigye said it is for this House to determine what misconduct is.  

My own opinion on conflict of interest is derived from the example which was given yesterday, 'The State of California Hot Colform Act, 1994.'  We are not re-eventing the wheel. We should take clue from examples from other jurisdictions. Under that example, and the Leadership Code, the conflict of interest arises when a leader in issue is in a position where he can make or participate in the making of a decision when acting within the authority of his or her Government position.  It is only those circumstances.  Or even when he negotiates with the Government entity regarding the decision, without disclosing his financial interest.  

It is implicit, in the definition and Clause 14(2) of the Leadership Code, that it is recognised that there is no way one can fully dispel the existence of conflict of interest in our daily activities. It is only when the conflict of interest influences our making of decisions or our participating in the making of decisions within our Government authority, that it becomes culpable. Hon. Members, you may want to reflect on whether, on the basis of the evidence on record, this has been proved.  

Yesterday, hon. Winnie Byanyima rightly cited the case of the Peter Mandelson and Robinson loan scandal, and the Lord Sainsbury genetic foods. She was right.  But in the first case, neither Mr. Mandelson nor Robinson had disclosed their relationship, as required by the House of Commons Resolution, passed in 1974: "In any debate or proceedings of the House or its Committees, all transactions or communication which a Member may have with other Members or with the Minister or with servants of the ground, we shall disclose any relevant pecunia interest or benefice of whatever nature whether direct or indirect that he may have had or may have or may be expected to have."  
They were contravening that Resolution.  They had not disclosed their relationship.

Hon. Members, in the case of Lord Saisbury, as again hon. Winnie Byanyima rightly said, he is a Minister, equivalent to hon. Sam Kutesa, in a larger Ministry.  So, you can see the correlation.  He is in the Ministry within that Ministry which deals with food.  So, it is right that he should be brought to account.  

Hon. Members, you may need to ask yourselves whether in the present case, and based on the facts, hon. Kutesa had or had not disclosed his interests, whether every body knew that he was a share-holder in ENHAS.  The only conclusion that can be derived from that House of Commons Resolution, if it can be of any assistance to us, is that Members of Parliament and Ministers are not expected not to be involved in business as long as their interests are disclosed and they have not put themselves in a position where they would make or participate in making a decision affecting their business interest.  In the present case, it has been proved, the decision maker was the Minister of Transport, Uganda Airlines, DRIC and the Privatisation Unit.  

The above position is a recognition of the old adage that 'the best of men are but men at best'.  The human mind is basically selfish and we can only pose stringent rules and standards to mitigate this selfishness.  In fact, in the U.K., to quote another example, the Prime Minister has made rules requiring Ministers on appointment to resign from directorship in all companies except those concerned with family estate.  So, for that matter, I agree with hon. Winnie Byanyima that this should be desirable, but it is not the rule now.  We may think of introducing it. We may need to reflect on whether we should not press Government to do the same. In the absence of such requirements, can we legalise our opinions on what the leader should do. I, of course, agree with the hon. Member that it would be desirable to have Members and Ministers with such interests, put them in trust, but it is not a requirement as of now as I have said.

We may also need to reflect on the IGG's request that the register of leaders' assets should be made available for inspection by the public so that it can give an early warning signal to Parliament, IGG and other bodies when any leader takes decisions which may lead to a conflict of interest.

Hon. Members, you may also wish to reflect on whether this Parliament is the best institution and has the powers to inquire into matters that have transpired in the Board Room of a Private Limited Liability Company.  I have looked at the Articles of Association of ENHAS and they say that ENHAS is a Private Limited Liability Company. I have also looked at the decree which set up Uganda Airlines, it says, "Uganda Airlines shall be governed by the loose governing companies, that is, Company law, and it has legal personality, it can sue and be sued in its name.  

You may also want to note that under the Articles of ENHAS, this is Article 91, a person does not need to be a shareholder to be a director in the Company, which I imagine it is in tune with modern Company practice. You may want to know that B.A.T is chaired by James Mulwana and, I think, Kakira Sugar Works or Nile Breweries by Jack Luyombya but they are not share-holders in these Companies.  You do not have to be a majority share-holder or a share holder at all to be the Chairman of the Company.

Hon. Members, you may also note that -(Interruption)

MR. ONGOM: Mr. Speaker, is it in order for the hon. Member holding the Floor, who is also a lawyer, to mislead the House when he quotes the position of Mr. Mulwana as the Chairman of B.A.T?  Mr. Mulwana is not the Chairman of B.A.T. as Mulwana; he was appointed by B.A.T, which is the majority share-holder in B.A.T Uganda Limited.  I was also the Chairman of B.A.T. 1984 (U) Ltd. and I had to be given a nominal share of 1 per cent - a norm which was withdrawn after I stopped being a share-holder and that is the position of Mulwana.  

Is it in order for the hon. Member to mislead the House, when the appointment is not Mulwana as such, but it is a B.A.T appointment and B.A.T. is the majority share-holder of B.A.T. Uganda Limited?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Well, I could only rule on this if I knew all the facts relating to this appointment.  I do not know whether the facts you have given us are the correct facts, or those given by him are the correct facts.  In the circumstance, I will decline to rule on this.

MR. KIVEJINJA: Mr. Speaker, thank you very much. Following your wise ruling, that we should not drag other people who are not a subject of this motion into this motion, is the hon. Member holding the Floor in order to mention people who are not in this House as reference in this motion?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: When I made that pronouncement, I said you do not refer to any other Member who is not the subject of this debate.

MR. MUTYABA: Thank you, Mr. Speaker, for your wise ruling.  I also want to give another example of Mr. Edward Nsubuga, who is the Chairman of Stanbic.  

MISS. BYANYIMA: Mr. Speaker, is it in order for the hon. Member, who knows better, to mislead this House that it can never be that the Chair of a Board is not dictated by the majority interest in the Company.  It is well known, Mr. Speaker, that the majority share-holders always dictate who is going to chair, whether it is themselves or they choose somebody else they trust.  They take the decision because they have the primary stake in the Company.  Is he in order to mislead us? (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I do not really know what to say about this.  It is a well known fact that hon. Mutyaba was in charge of Uganda Airlines.  I would imagine that his submissions are to the effect that Uganda Airlines gave a blessing to the choice of hon. Sam Kutesa.  It is up to him.  What we can do is to ask whether he knows whether Uganda Airlines agreed and endorsed the appointment of hon. Kutesa.

MR. MUTYABA: Mr. Chairman, I think the question is; did the Articles of Association of ENHAS allow a person who does not come from the majority share-holder to be the Chairman?  The answer is, yes.  Look at the ENHAS Articles of Association - Article 89(3) says that the Chairman will be elected by directors.  It does not say that it has to come from a majority share-holder.  

Hon. Members, you may also note that where, for example, a government body opts to go into a private commercial arrangement, the transaction is governed by private law.  In view of what was given as evidence, even if it is your conclusion that there was a conflict of interest, you may need to reflect on whether the outcome of the sale was affected by this conflict. You may have to apportion the degree of guilt between the Ministry of Transport, the Ministry of Finance, PU and probably ENHAS.  Does it require the highest punishment Parliament can mete out; which is censure.

I have remembered a story from the Bible.  Before Jesus was crucified and he had gone to Pontius Pilate, Pontius Pilate asked the Jews "Is this your King?".They said, "Crucify, crucify!" I do not know whether, as christians, if we were to ponder on that period, we would have actually said, 'crucify, crucify' (Interruptions).
Let me end by quoting two instances - one is a quotation from that great English man, Edmand Back.  He says, "Parliament is not a congress of Ambassadors from different and hostile interests, which interest each must maintain as an agent and advocate against other agents and advocates, but Parliament is a deliberative assembly of one nation, with one interest - that of the hall - where not local purposes, not local prejudices, ought to guide but the general good resulting from the general reason of the hall."

The second quotation, is an extract from the French Revolution; on 17th September, 1793, it is a factual account.  "All France is thrown into an insane state of suspicion.  No one feels safe, no one is safe.  If not suspect, one may be suspect of being suspect.  A revolutionary army of 6,000 is to wonder through France, helping the communists to clean up".  Thank you very much.  I yield the Floor.  

DR. BYARUHANGA FABIUS (Kitagwenda County, Kabarole): Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I am happy that this Parliament is taking up its role in overseeing the Executive very seriously. We are beginning to injure corruption in this Country, and if we continue as seriously as we are doing, we may manage to kill it.  

Today we have a Vote of Censure against hon. Sam Kutesa, Minister for Investment. Censure is defined as a formal way of criticizing the public official, but there are informal ways that can be used to criticize the public official. Even in our system here, we can use the Committees, we can use the Caucus. Outside here,our hands are abit tied because we must operate under the law, and in our case, it must be under Article 118 of the Constitution of Uganda.

When I looked at this Article, especially following the first Censure motions, as an individual - Byaruhanga from Kitagwend-I decided that henceforth, I shall be an assessor.  I shall wait to hear and see the evidence provided to me by all sides and thereafter decide on how I should vote on the Censure motion.  So, when I stand here, I stand here as an assessor, telling you why I have decided that I will vote the way I will vote (Laughter).  

As most Members have already said, this motion is mainly based on misconduct. When I look at the grounds of the Censure motions, I come out with the following: Ground No.1 - Conflict of interest.  Hon. Kutesa was a share holder in Global Airlinks.  Global Airlinks entered some arrangements with other companies, including Uganda Airlines, to form ENHAS. So, in my view, although I do not have the correct English to say it, Kutesa was not doing business with Uganda Airlines, but he was doing business for Uganda Airlines. They were partners in a Company called ENHAS.  Whatever action he took as Chairman, was for all the shareholders in that Company.  I am always against joint ventures, because the history of joint ventures in Uganda has been very bad.  The private side of the company usually mis-manages the company and in the end the Government is told to re-capitalise  because the company has gone down and the tax payer has lost money. That is why I have always been for out right sale.  But in this case, we are informed that the Directors from Uganda Airlines used to complain about mismanagement of affairs of ENHAS.  I would have wished to know whether other shareholders within ENHAS also complained about mismanagement, because if there was mismanagement, it was affecting everybody at once.  

Two; when this ENHAS lost money, who actually lost money?  It was all the shareholders. But in totality, what was the picture of ENHAS, and did Uganda Airlines lose or benefit from this arrangement?  From hon. Omongole's report, I read that Uganda Airlines was getting some dividends from this ENHAS arrangement. At the end of the day, the shares of Uganda Airlines in ENHAS - the 50 percent which it got through giving equipment to ENHAS which equipment was worth about 5 million dollars - ended up  being sold for 3.7 million dollars two or three years later.  Now, did Uganda Airlines lose or did it gain from this arrangement?  Looking at how other companies, especially public companies in Uganda have been performing, I believe that Uganda Airlines gained from this arrangement, and therefore, I do not find hon. Kutesa guilty of mismanaging Uganda Airlines? interests in ENHAS.  
We come again to ground number two, the 50 percent shares of Uganda Airlines in ENHAS which were sold to the other members of ENHAS.  We are informed that, within the company agreement, if you are a shareholder, and you are going out, the other members have got a pre-emptive right to purchase your shares. Who was responsible for naming the price and selling these shares, it was DRIC, whose membership is well known.  Finally, Uganda Airlines got 3.7 as compared to a price of 5 named by a certain auditing firm.  But, to compare this with what we have had in other cases of privatisation, Sheraton was valued at 50 million dollars, it almost went at 20, did we find anything wrong with that?  (Laughter) Uganda commercial Bank assets were valued above 100 million dollars, but it went for 10.  The story I have always had from your financial experts is that the selling price need not to be based on the valuation because it depends on whether you can get a willing buyer. In this case, it was actually DRIC and government, in its entirety, that were interested in getting these shares sold because Uganda Airlines was facing bankruptcy.  I, therefore, under this count, do not find Kutesa guilty either.  

The third count is threatening the life of Mr. Turinawe. Unfortunately, we have had to depend on the interim report from the Select Committee. I wish we had waited for the Committee to come out with its entire report.  After hearing from Turinawe,I would have expected the Committee to have interviewed all the directors of ENHAS who were present in that meeting and who also heard their story. If we had evidence from the Committee report that all the directors are saying that Kutesa threatened Turinawe, then we would have condemned hon. Kutesa.  But, as we stand now, we only have the word of Mr. Turinawe against Kutesa and therefore there I am not in position to say that hon. Kutesa threatened Turinawe or hon. Kutesa never threatened Turinawe.  But in this House, we have also got the Minister of Works, who was Turinawe's boss; we have heard that people fear to report to the Police or do not feel it of any consequence to report to the Police, why did'nt Turinawe report to the Board of Uganda Airlines so that the Board would in turn brief its Minister, who in turn would probably be able to tell us that he actually heard and knew that hon. Kutesa threatened the life of Turinawe.  

Finally, on the matter of the shares for the workers, I believe that is not a matter for us. It should go for arbitration  to the commercial court so that their interest can be well served.  So, on the whole, as far as this censure motion is concerned, I do not find Kutesa guilty. I cannot censure him here in this House, but should further information be available, which is not part of this ENHAS business, I am willing to come here and censure Kutesa. 

We have had a lot of interaction, there have been members from both sides who have come to some of us, whom they knew were neutral, to try and influence us to support either side. Whenever you ask why you should go to which side, sometimes somethings which are not part of this petition; somethings which are totally irrelevant to this petition, somethings of political interest, come up.  Now, if there are some political concerns over Kutesa, we can handle them elsewhere; but as far as this censure motion is concern, when we vote, I will vote against this motion because my conscious directs so.  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.

MR. NDAWULA KAWEESI (Kiboga West, Kiboga):  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker and hon. Members. I must confess this is a very interesting motion, because we are enjoined in a trial of a Minister in the Government of Uganda.  Mr. Speaker, we listened to the defence council yesterday, we had listened to the petitioners? council the previous day, and I find the facts very interesting.  

When we got in here, there was a letter that was circulated, which actually has prompted me to stand up and share the wisdom I have with other Members whom I think may share the same facts. I got the letter I am referring to when I came here. I will refer to it later, but let me submit, Mr. Speaker.  The remarks I wish to make are in relation with the change of signatories to bank accounts of ENHAS and the influence peddling or political meddling in the matters of ENHAS.  

As I indicated earlier, we listened to the defence council; he gave reasons why he had to step in to stop the fraudulence and money laundering in ENHAS.  He actually indicated that the General Manager, acting on behalf of ENHAS, or purportedly so, withdrew 23,000,000 dollars from the accounts of ENHAS.  I find this really very absurd. For just one signatory to withdraw money and go home with it clearly requires some action, if the financial management of the company is to be well maintained. I believe that in such circumstances, Kutesa Sam, the then Chairperson of ENHAS, was the one privileged with a confluence of prerogatives to take action.  I find that it could be negligence on his part, if he never took action, and more money left the accounts.  If this happened, we would be in this House today asking hon. Kutesa Sam; 'you were the one in charge; you were there presiding and money was being taken, why didn't you do anything?  He did something, money was stopped and I find this commendable.  Mr. Speaker, commendable in the sense that it was done in good faith and proper conduct.  Matters of this kind, in private owned companies like ENHAS, are a common business practice. You can find that you must take action without following the norms and the procedures.  

I want to compare this situation to what I think happened in the Government organisations, and this is what takes me to this letter I received today when we got here.  Mr. Speaker, in this letter, which is addressed to Miss Byanyima Winnie, my Sister and fellow Engineer, it is clearly indicated that she took an initiative, using connections and influence, to make sure that when hon. Rwabyomere was appointed a Minister in 1995, there was a vacancy on the Board of Directors of Civil Aviation Authority. Having no Chairperson for such a board would mean some fraudulence and mismanagement. She came up in her uprightness and zeal and took up the position as acting Chairperson; this is commendable to me.  

As I indicated earlier, when hon. Kutesa sent the letter changing signatories, he indicated that the next Board meeting was on the 4th of December 1996 and he was going to ratify. Mr. Speaker, and hon. Members, ratification is done when the decision of the Chairman is in consonance with the thinking of the Board members.  In resolution 4.6, you can see that the resolution of the Board of ENHAS was in Consonance because they maintained hon. Kutesa as a mandatory signatory.  In a similar manner, the then Minister of Works, Transport and Communication -(Interruption)

MISS. BYANYIMA: My name has been mentioned, Mr. Speaker, I wish to clarify.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Byanyima, people are now trying to assess the evidence which was received. We are likely to have different kinds of assessment and that kind of assessment may not please you but it may please another.  So, if the assessment is not to your liking, that should not invite clarification or information.  Let people assess this evidence. Not all of you are going to address the House, but I would think we should cut down on these points of information.  But, what is your clarification?

MISS. BYANYIMA: Mr. Speaker, I want to put some facts right because I have really been misrepresented and I think it is intentional. A letter was circulated of my appointment to the Civil Aviation Board. I am happy that it was circulated; it is dated 27th September 1995.  First of all, Mr. Speaker, I want to place it on record that I learnt of this decision from the hon. Minister, in the corridors of the CA. It had been decided; I never asked for that appointment, and I will challenge him to present any facts that I accepted that appointment on the Board.  
I want to place on record here too, evidence that was circulated by hon. Dombo. In that evidence, you will find minutes of a meeting of the Civil Aviation Board.  That meeting took place on the 23rd of February 1995, before I came on that Board.  You will find in that in document C. In that meeting, a decision was taken. I can read it for Members; the minutes are not numbered, but you can look on page 3 of those Minutes, the decision says, "AGREED: Both Global Airlines and Caleb International will be taken up as partners in the consortium."  
The decision was taken on February 23rd, 1995 before I came to the Board -(Applause). Mr. Speaker, I will also lay on the Table the letters and the memorandum and Articles of Association of ENHAS. They are dated and registered by the registrar herself, at the time Mrs. Masika Ruth; dated 23 of May 1995. Winnie Byanyima was not yet on the Board of the Civil Aviation Authority.  

I want to inform this House that the record is clear at the Civil Aviation; I first sat on the Board on November 24th, 1995 at the 33rd board meeting, and that was on the 1st of December 1995 -(Interjection)- I need to clear myself. I know that when someone is in danger and drowning, they will clutch on anything -(Laughter). From that time onwards, if you look at the minutes of the Civil Aviation Authority, no decision was taken to give the concession; it was taken in February 1995. Mr. Speaker, as additional information, at my second meeting at the Civil Aviation Authority, that was on 1st of December 1995, a matter was brought up before the Board, - (Interruption) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  I think you have made up your point. When you became a member of the Civil Aviation Board, a decision had been taken.  I think that was the purpose.

MISS. BYANYIMA:  Thank you Mr. Speaker.

MR. NDAWULA KAWEESI:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  My submission was very clear, if only the hon. Member had given me time.  I said, I have the letter here; I can read it to the hon. Members, because I intend to refer to it further.
"Office of the Minister of Works, 						    Transport and Communications, 
P. O. Box 10, 
ENTEBBE.
UGANDA.
REF: C/CAA.

27th September, 1995.

Ms Winnie Byanyima,
P. O. Box 449,
KAMPALA.
APPOINTMENT AS MEMBER OF THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS FOR UGANDA CIVIL AVIATION AUTHORITY
In accordance with Section 9 sub-section (ii) of the Civil Aviation law, I am pleased to offer you appointment as member of the Board of Directors of the Civil Aviation Authority of Uganda.
Part II:
The terms and conditions attached to the appointment are as follows:-
Tenure of office;
The current board has already served one year and 11 months.  You will serve for the remaining period of one year and one month renewable.

Effective date of appointment:
The appointment takes effect from 26th July 1995.  When you started acting as chairman Civil Aviation Authority." 

This is what I was referring to hon. Members.

MISS.BYANYIMA:  Mr. Speaker, is it in order for the hon. Member to suggest that I ever, even for one minute, acted as chairman of Civil Aviation Authority, when my letter of appointment is clear. I have never served, even for half a second, as a chairman of that Board. My position was a member of the board. Is he in order to misrepresent me? His letter is not right!

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  My understanding is that he is reading the contents of a letter, which was written to you.  It could well be that the author might have stated a wrong thing which did not happen.  That is different, but the Member is just reading a letter.  Proceed and wind up.

MR. OMONGOLE: Mr. Speaker, I am getting more and more perturbed. You earlier on ruled wisely, and I repeat, wisely, that we should not drag the names of people who are not concerned with this petition into this petition. From the way Engineer Ndaula Kaweesi is proceeding, he is trying to drag the name of hon. Winnie Byanyima into this petition. Mr. Speaker, is the hon. Member holding the Floor in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  I think I have stated this matter many times, I have said, when dealing with this motion; you only deal with the subject matter of this motion, that is hon. Kutesa.  I do not know the purpose for which this letter was read. Let us restrict ourselves to the matter before us and that is about the Minister, it is not about an MP, it is not about any other Minister. When contributing, do not try to bring in matters that will threaten any other Member to speak, because, you may drag his name into this motion.

MR. NDAWULA KAWEESI:  Mr. Speaker, as I indicated, I was only reading this letter, actually not as an adversary to the hon. Member, but I was only emphasising that she was doing this in her uprightness - that actually, her action in saving CAA, as the chairman of the Board, was ratified by the Minister, just like the Board of Directors of ENHAS did in this case. It was not adverse at all, Mr. Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  I think it will serve the purpose if hon. Members address themselves to the five grounds as listed.  Just say whether you think you support them or you do not support them and give reasons and we proceed.  Otherwise, time will be wasted on other matters that are irrelevant to the motion.

MR. NDAWULA KAWEESI:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker, for that wise ruling, but as, I indicated, because of the interruptions that were so numerous, the essence and the wisdom of my submission may have got derailed.  

I said that the Defence Council yesterday indicated change of signatories on the bank accounts of ENHAS and this was done with an upright mind. I was only saying that was okay with me.  

Secondly, Mr. Speaker, a lot has been said about influence peddling and political meddling in this transaction. Again, as I indicated, we have parties here, we have got the Ministry of Transport, the Civil Aviation Authority - the statutory body to undertake ground handling, Uganda Airlines which is a flag carrier, and before the Statute was ammended it was the one doing the ground handling, then we have got a consortium - actually, a legal person created by Civil Aviation Authority, then we have got Privatisation Unit, to which Uganda Airlines was further transferred, we have got DRIC that took decisions on behalf of all of us and all Ugandans.  

I wish to submit, Mr. Speaker, that the issue of influence meddling and political meddling or influence and political meddling could not have arisen in the matters of ENHAS.  I will go further to say that this was not possible, because, all of us in this House and outside, fight corruption.  Everybody knows all of us, and many have even attained positions of recognition in that fight.  Clearly, there are quite many who rid the esteem out of this crusade against corruption.  Mr. Speaker, from the previous letter I read, nobody in this House can say hon. Winnie Byanyima is a good patriot when it comes to fighting corruption.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  What is the relevance of Winnie Byanyima in this motion?  Hon. Members, order. It will not serve any useful purpose to talk about any other member, be it a Minister, be it an ordinary Member of Parliament.  It will not solve this problem.  Just address matters that are relevant to the motion before us.  Do not drag in any other name.  Please concentrate on the motion. You have only two minutes to wind up.

MR. NDAWULA KAWEESI:  Mr. Speaker, in conclusion, I wish to state that I find the five grounds, as listed in the petition; two which referred to the Leadership Code, very unfortunate.  The Legislature of this country is the third arm enjoined to the other two arms to make Uganda a better society.  We enacted this leadership code in this Parliament.  As I wish to indicate, Members of Parliament come and go, the Legislature remains, the Acts of Parliament remain.  I find it unfortunate that the Parliament, which is supposed to set the laws, implements them and even, passes a sentence using that particular law.  
Many of us were old enough when Idi Amin was the President of this country.  He was called a dictator then and to-date, he is still called a dictator.  It is because he set the laws in form of decrees, implemented them and punished those who went against those laws.  Mr Speaker, in this practice, we have  done, on the Floor of Parliament, what was done by the judiciary.  Many times, Judges have expressed concern that the law is lacking.  We cannot incriminate victims. If the judges? council sat and said, Parliament is dragging its feet in making this law good, let us set a better law so that we convict those who have been brought before the Bench.  That would be a disaster for this society.

Finally, Mr. Speaker, I wish to say that it is very unfortunate that the buyer gets reprimanded for something he has bought from a good representative of the owner, when he goes to the same bench that he bought it cheaply. Mr. Speaker, I wish to appeal to the hon. Members to look at these grounds as enshrined in the petition, to see that the wisdom of reasoning prevails. We should ask ourselves, is it wise to take a punitive measure as in our Articles of censure. Is it the best disciplinary measure, which we would have given our disciplinary committee?  

I implore the wisdom of very many Members of Parliament here, while many have said the police must come in, the legal technicalities should not be entertained, I wish to say, it would be unfortunate if we establish a legislative tyranny and dictatorship in the Legislature of this country.  Mr. Speaker, I thank you very much, thank hon. Members.  Thank you.

MR. BAKU  (West Moyo, Moyo):  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  
Yesterday, in the Monitor newspaper, I was listed as one of those who are lined up for the defence of hon. Kutesa.  I would like to state here very clearly, that I have never been lined up and I have never lined up myself for the defence of hon. Kutesa. In fact, according to the Constitution, it is only the accused, or the person petitioned against, who is entitled to his defence.  Other Members of Parliament are not expected to be listed in the defence of a person who is petitioned against.  So, I will make my contribution not as a person enlisted to be on his defence, but as a Member of Parliament representing West Moyo County, upon the evidence, which has been placed here before the House, and upon the laws governing censure and grounds for censure of Ministers.

Secondly, Mr. Speaker, within the corridors of this Parliament, I was approached by a Member inquiring whether it was true, we the Directors of the Movement Secretariat have been instructed to support Kutesa.  I told him that it was not true and I would like to restate here, I am under no instruction to say what I am going to say.  I am going to speak out my mind.

I would like to address this matter from the position of the Constitution, particularly Article 118 under which the motion is purported to have been moved.  I would like to state that I looked at the provisions of Article 118 and I looked at the grounds which were stated, and which have been read over and over again in this Parliament.  I would not like to go into it once again. I looked at the petition and I found no ground stated in the petition, which is directly related to, or addressing the grounds that are stated in the Constitution.  I would like to state that these grounds, which are stated here, might be valid, but they are not based on Article 118. 

When this matter came up in Parliament, there was a lot of talk outside Parliament and within Parliament that this motion had been portrayed as a crusade against corruption; eliminating corruption.  Elimination of corruption is one of the points of the 10 Point Programme, actually point No. 7, if I can take over from hon. Butele.  It is point No. 7, which says that the Movement will fight to eliminate corruption.  Therefore, if this is a crusade against corruption, I would have been one of the forerunners in fighting for and in upholding the motion.  But when I looked at the motion and the grounds, I have not seen any word related to corruption; even the word corruption itself is not put here as a ground. I have looked at grounds 2 (a) up to 2 (e), I have not seen the word corruption or any other word derived from that word.  That is my first point.  

I am making this point because at the end of the day, if hon. Kutesa is censured, the message which goes out is that hon. Kutesa was censured for corruption, while there is no ground which is pleading corruption on this document called; petition against hon. Kutesa.  It is not pleaded, it has not been called upon, but it has been mentioned more or less in passing. I would like our debate to be based on the grounds which he has explicitly stated, so that even when we are voting, if I could volunteer an opinion, we vote on each of the grounds and see which ground we are voting on and on which ground he is being convicted.  

Now, Mr. Speaker, those were my general comments.  My conclusion on these general and preliminary comments is, the petition has not been based on Article 118.  That is one conclusion.  The second conclusion is that corruption has not been pleaded in this petition and therefore, the whole exercise may not qualify to be a crusade against corruption.  
Going to the grounds of the petition, specifically, Mr. Speaker, I listened to the petitioners' case very keenly and I was almost convinced that there was a case for hon. Kutesa to answer. Yesterday, I also listened to hon. Kutesa very keenly and I thought all the matters, which are raised in this petition, were appropriately explained. In fact, when somebody, I think it was hon. Mao, said that the statement from hon. Kutesa was not a defence but an explanation, he was right. When a petition is raised, the other party is called a respondent and a respondent's duty is to reply to the accusations against him.  So, when he replied, I think he served his duty of replying to the complaints that were raised against him.  

If you take the first ground of the petition, that is 2(a), the gist of the matter is that, hon. Kutesa placed himself in a position of conflict of interest.  The definition and understanding of conflict of interest was expounded on by hon. Mutyaba very clearly. I go by that definition and I find that on this count, the hon. Kutesa did not place himself in a situation of conflict.  In fact, no conflict situation has been expounded on the Floor of this House.  There was no incidence elaborated here indicating that hon. Kutesa as a Minister in the Ministry of Finance or as a Minister in the Ministry of Planning was put in a situation where he had to take a decision in relation to ENHAS.  That one has never been brought on the Floor of this House. 

2(b) says that hon. Kutesa being the Chairman of ENHAS bought the shares of Uganda Airlines at a price which is below the market price.  I would like us to appreciate the meaning of market price.  What is market price?  Market price is not evaluation price.  It is not the value as estimated by a valuer.  It is the price which the market is ready to take that good for.  In that case, what was the market price?  How many prices were offered?  As far as the evidence on record is concerned, ENHAS had the first option to reject buying the shares, the price was offered by DRIC.  DRIC took a decision and said this is the price we are going to take from the shareholders of ENHAS.  If they do not want to give this price, then you can go out in the open.  According to Law, that is a correct step and they exercised their first right of option to reject. I think they did it reasonably and there is no accusation of any criminal act involved in taking that decision.  So, I find that the shares were sold at a price that was acceptable to both parties involved in the transaction.  

2(c) says the hon. Minister threatened violence.  This one was not adequately proved, because there was only the evidence by Mr. Turinawe, which was also countered by some other evidence of a Board Member who was at the meeting.  Therefore, I find that this was not really proved.  And in any case, even if there was a threat of violence, we have to go further to question whether this threat of violence was justified or unjustified.  Yes, I am going to the extreme.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please wind up.

MR. BAKU:  According to Law, killing a human being is a crime called murder.  It is murder.  But when you kill a human being for a justifiable reason, for example when you kill a human being in self-defence, that ceases to be murder, it becomes a justifiable homicide or it could even become manslaughter.  So, we must go beyond this although I know that the hon. Minister denied having threatened, and this threat has not been proved beyond reasonable doubt.

2(d) -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Hon. Baku, please wind up.  You have now gone on for 15 minutes, please wind up.

MR. BAKU:  Mr. Speaker, I was following your guidance that we should go by the points, which are raised in the petition, so I was going through the points according to the way I appreciate them.  

The next one, which is (d), is about the shares, which were offered to the workers of Uganda Airlines and workers of Civil Aviation Authority.  I think this matter has been adequately explained. The shares are still available to Uganda Airlines workers and I think no contrary evidence has been given to that effect.  Lastly, honourable -(Interruption)

MR. PINTO:  Mr. Speaker, when you opened the session this afternoon, you reminded us and asked us to be conscious of time.  In fact, you did set a time limit and said within two hours you would like to bring this debate to a conclusion.  Judging from what is happening now, Mr. Speaker, some Members seem to be confused, some Members seem to be getting tired.  Going by your guidance on time, we have had extensively from both sides, I would like to move a motion, that we conclude this Debate and take a vote.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  I am inclined not to accept this motion for the time being. As I had indicated to you, after the hon. Member for Moyo West, we are going to balance the gender.  As you realise, we have had only one or two from the other side, addressing us on this issue.  So, I think hon. Baku has finished; now I am going to balance this up by calling upon the other side to contribute.  Please wind up now.

MR. BAKU:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I just rise to wind up by saying that even number 2(e), which was alleges a financial loss of 445,761 US dollars, was adequately explained by the Minister.  I think his explanation has not been contradicted by any other evidence on this Floor. It was actually to the benefit of Uganda Airlines that the rebut was given, and this was an erroneous reflection on the books of accounts.  I take it that, that was a correct statement because no other contradictory statement has been given.  

So, Mr. Speaker, I would like to make it very clear that these positions, which I have taken, are my positions. I would like to say if there was any preliminary procedure, I think this petition should have been stopped at the preliminary objection, because it did not comply with the requirements of Article 118.  And also, because the matters which are raised in this petition did not relate to the Office of the Minister, but to the Minister as chairman of ENHAS which should have been treated in other fora, not within the forum of Parliament. These are matters relating to a business company, which should have been addressed within an environment of a business meeting.  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.

MRS. SALAAMU MUSUMBA (Bugabula South, Kamuli):  I thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I rise to support the motion and in doing this, I am trying to make a few clarifications because I know Members have already taken a stand on how they will vote.  And I am sure they are ready to vote after I have made my contribution.  

The chronology of events in the financial management of ENHAS has not received sufficient attention on the side of hon. Kutesa. I believe that for a company like ENHAS, with Uganda Airlines Corporation as the majority shareholder, having complained so many times and having been ignored for over six months, deserves a lot of attention.  This is the area where financial meddling creates problems.  

I want to run through the chronology of events here.  ENHAS, as of 28th August 1996, run seven accounts and the majority of them were in a bank called Trans Africa. Of the major signatories, the mandatory ones were the hon. Sam Kutesa; Chairman, and the others came from either his company, Global Airlinks or Efforte but never from the Uganda Airlines Corporation.  I find this a bit irregular, because there was never a Board Resolution.  Even if this was made, we have no knowledge or it has not been presented by hon. Kutesa that he tried to hold or to pass a Resolution for the shareholders to ratify in good time.  It took a whole six months.  Anything could have happened to the seven accounts in six months, which to me is a long time.  To other Members it may be normal, but I find that a transaction of six months is way out of the norm.  

When I analyzed the Trans Africa Bank Accounts, I found it unacceptable because the main reason for this irregular transaction is that the hon. Sam Kutesa is a director in Trans Africa.  To be a director in a bank in which you are banking your own money and in which you have marginalised the majority shareholders, to me, is criminal.  It is really criminal because we are talking about money, and the biggest shareholder does not know what is happening.  To me, this is sufficient ground to censure hon. Kutesa, without bothering your ears my dear Colleagues.  Because with our investments, I am not sure what he is going to do with his pen.

I do not think we need to strain too far to see what the weight of a title called a Minister can do.  Unilaterally, you can do things and nobody questions, and even if they tried to question, you are not obliged and there is no Law in this country, which forces you to comply.  So, this is what makes me a bit jittery looking at this matter as a small thing.  We have seen in evidence that the Board tried very, very much through the legitimate means of calling meetings, even asking for emergency meetings, and this was not granted six months down the road.  What the hon. Kutesa tells us is this; that in their 19th Board meeting of ENHAS on 4th December, minute 6.4 " in response to the demand by Uganda Airlines, it was noted that it was more appropriate for the Chairman to be a mandatory signatory as he has been elected by the Board.  He would take care of the collective interest of the shareholders."  This is what he did not read though.  It continues to say, " it was noted further that information on financial transactions was a separate issue from acting as signatory and Uganda Airlines interest would be adequately addressed if the flow of such information is guaranteed."  

We have two political crimes here, in my view.  One, they say that they do not have to be signatories much as they know that Uganda Airlines should have been, because it was a shareholder.  They also go on to say that financial information would be provided and they did not provide it.  Uganda Airlines? officials complained up to December but it was never given, and it all ended up in a fight.  Finances brought a fight in the operations of ENHAS.  What we have on record is a semblance of a Resolution arising out of that meeting, in that particular minute I have read, but it also says they have ratified it.  How can you ratify a decision where the stakeholders are complaining and complaining and the minority are bullying and bullying?  And these are not regular minority shareholders, they are people of substance they are people of power, they are people who -(Interruption)

MR. OMARA ATUBO:  Point of information.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Please, she does not want the information.

MR. OMARA ATUBO:  She has accepted.  Mr. Speaker, on the issue of ratification, I would like to inform the hon. speaker on the Floor that you can only ratify something which is, at inception, legal.  My view is that, if the letter of hon. Kutesa to the bank changing signatories to the account was not in compliance with the Company's Act, nor with Articles of Association, in that they were not by Board Resolution, then right at inception, as we say in Law at ibinitio, it was illegal. Therefore, there was absolutely nothing for the Board to ratify.  Thank you.

MRS. MUSUMBA:  Mr. Speaker, I imagine hon. Kutesa should have known better, because I know he is a fantastic lawyer down town.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Please wind up.

MRS. MUSUMBA:  Mr. Speaker, we have almost been derailed by hon. Mutyaba. When we talk about hon. Mutyaba, who has just left the service of Uganda Airlines, defending the ripping off of Uganda Airlines Corporation, I think we get very suspicious.  In my possession, Mr. Speaker, are documents in which -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Yes, hon. Kiyonga.

MRS. MUSUMBA:  Is it information, Mr. Speaker?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Is it information or order?

MR. KIYONGA FRANCIS: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I would like clarification on this point of suspicion. A lot of words, a lot of tactics and strategies have been employed in this motion, and an allegation has been made that some Members have been bought.  Could the hon. Member clarify why she suspects hon. Mutyaba for defending or for opposing this motion?

MRS. MUSUMBA:  Thank you very much.  Mr. Speaker, I was just about to clarify.  I had these documents long before we got into this mess of vandalising Uganda Airlines Corporation. I have a memorandum from Mr. Turinawe to hon. Mutyaba, then General Manager.  It is a lengthy document, but I just want to highlight one point, which is pertinent to our discussion. It says, "We risk finding ourselves in rather conspiratorial arrangements something Uganda Airlines - (Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Hon. Member, I do not know when you got that document.  I think the proper time to read it should have been when hon. Mutyaba was here. He would have sought clarification on this.

MRS. MUSUMBA:  Mr. Speaker, you could not allow information then.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, but now the problem is that Mr. Mutyaba cannot respond to this matter.  Why do you not leave it?  Just concentrate on hon. Kutesa. 

MRS.MUSUMBA:  Mr. Speaker I would have left it if he was not the General Manager then and if he was not the man who rolled off this whole controversy.  Because if somebody- (Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Because hon. Mutyaba will not assist us, he has gone.

MRS. MUSUMBA:  I leave it, Mr. Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Please leave the point.

MRS. MUSUMBA:  Mr. Speaker that being the case, I want to say that there is an hon. Member who said that it is not valid for the petitioners to mention that Mr. Dick Turinawe was sufficiently intimidated, and that he should have gone to Police, if not to Police then he should have done something in the next Board meeting.  I want to report here that the next Board meeting which was scheduled and which was held on 20th March, found out that actually the Board of Uganda Airlines had been dissolved on the 19th of March at 7.00 p.m.  So, all these are tactics behind the scenes. You dissolve a Board at 7.00 p.m. on 19th so that you cannot discuss the issue of threatening or fighting on the 20th.  So, Mr. Speaker, I want this honourable House to know that we are dealing with a very, very high conspiracy of ripping this country off.  Thank you very much.

MRS. BAKOKO BAKORU (Women Representative, Arua): Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker and hon. Members of Parliament in this House today.  I want to say that this is a turning point, a milestone, in our democratisation process.  We are all obliged here today to make a decision and a decision from an informed position and by choice.    

Hon. Members, last week in the papers, it was written that MPs from West Nile and Karamoja had been bought to support hon. Kutesa. I want to say it clearly on record, as I told some Members of this House, we had not been bought. I would like to see that money, if anybody from West Nile or Karamoja has been bought.  

Let me make it clear again and put it on record that I do not condone corruption - I do not condone corruption, but at the same time, I want to make it clear, I hate manipulation. 

I want to thank the Chief Petitioner and the Seconder of the motion for their very eloquent presentations.  I also want to thank hon. Kutesa for his clear explanation, which I believe now puts us in a very clear position to take decisions today.  Mr. Speaker and hon. Members of Parliament, yesterday, from the Minister's humble and clear presentation, one could see that he could not and was not directly involved or responsible, as per the Portfolio he was serving at that time, for whatever was alleged on that Petition.  

Parliament, in its wisdom, before we closed the last Session, exonerated some Ministers.  I am not saying that Parliament did a wrong thing, but I am saying, hon. Kutesa deserved a similar exoneration from this House, especially when he was just chairing a Board and he was elected like any other Member of this House onto the Board because of the trust that the Members had in him.  

I would have thought that DRIC should have taken more responsibility for what happened.  It is apparent when hon. Mutyaba - I hope he will allow me to say this - was a General Manager of Uganda Airlines, we did not get this confusion of mismanagement that run down Uganda Airlines, which Mr. Turinawe seems to be alleging; when he has been part and parcel of the running down of Uganda Airlines.

If I were Mr. Turinawe, who claims that he was given 'a death threat', I believe the first thing I would do, would be to go to the authority.  How powerful is this Minister?  Is he God?  I hear that in this place people think that there are some people who are gods, but I do not think that is true.  Mr. Turinawe was just diverting the information so that he could get sympathy from Members amidst the fat allowances and amorphous staff they failed to manage in Uganda Airlines.  

A number of people in leadership get appointed, seconded or elected as Chairpersons of Boards or Members of Boards.  Many of us here are Members of Boards, or Chairpersons of Boards and this is because people have trusted us to take up those positions.  I want this to be on record, if you are a Member or one who holds a position in a Company, to me that should not mean compromise of roles of responsibilities.  I want to say again that this Censure motion cannot be separated from its legal position.

Hon. Okwir, the other day said, 'we love Uganda' - all of us love Uganda, this is our motherland.  I have been a refugee for more than ten years, I know what it is to be outside Uganda, I also know what it means to be inside Uganda, and I think hon. Okwir also experienced something similar when he was outside Uganda.  So, let us make sincere judgments.  Listen to our concerns; exonerate hon. Kutesa because he is not guilty of the charges against him.  

Hon. Kutesa, his family, his children have been subjected to a lot of stress since speculation started last year, Mr. Speaker.  The message is clear.  This particular Censure motion is going to open our minds, it is not going to be like the Censure motion we had before where people came and lobbied and voted without looking at things open mindedly and broadly.  

Finally, Mr. Speaker, the Republicans, in their wisdom, realised that all offences are not impeachable, so they voted to acquit President Clinton. Even where the Speaker resigned and put pressure on President Clinton to resign, he did not; this is justice.  Hon. Kutesa must be given justice and he is seeking justice.  Unfounded allegations, as a basis for censure, are not and will never be a solution. Let hon. Kutesa also receive the fair and just treatment that upholds our Constitution and rule of law.  I want to say this on record.  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Hon. Members, we have come to the end of the debate on the Floor.  I now give the opportunity to the two parties to make the last observations and this will be restricted to seven minutes.  

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (INVESTMENTS) (Mr. Sam Kutesa):  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.   would like to take this opportunity to wind up and to thank all hon. Members who have either contributed to this motion or listened attentively to the contributions of the Petitioners, myself and other contributors to this motion.  Mr. Speaker, I would also like to thank you for the manner in which you have guided the debate on this Censure motion.  

Hon. Members, I am required to answer and you are required to pass judgement, not on anything else, but on those five Grounds stated in the Petition. Nothing else, not how tall one is, not the history of anybody, not whether I served in Lutwa's Government, not whether I was in DP as Secretary General, but as Kutesa, who is being judged in the Petition and the Grounds that are stated therein.

It is my honest belief, Mr. Speaker, that I presented, in the most honest and truthful manner, the facts relating to the Grounds that were levelled against me in the Petition.  Mr. Speaker, as has been said, the two real Grounds are:Did Mr. Kutesa misconduct himself?  And the answer to that is, "No".

Secondly, did he ever place himself in a position of conflict of interest?  And the answer, I think, is clearly, "No".  
Did Kutesa threaten violence on one Turinawe Dick?  The answer is manifestly, "No".  

Indeed, instantly, hon. Byanyima Winnie tried to tell this House that the credibility of Mr. Tyten's affidavit should be doubted simply because Mr. Tyten is an employee of ENHAS.  If that is the Ground on which you want to dismiss statements made on oath, then we must also state that Dick Turinawe had been summoned to the Committee on Privatisation, partly to explain the mismanagement in Uganda Airlines, and in order to save his skin, he diverted from the subject matter and started making allegations that could please some Members of that Committee.  That must be made clear, and therefore, the credibility of both these statements on oath and affidavits must be challenged.  If indeed you believe that simply because someone is -(Interruptions)

MR. OMONGOLE: Mr. Speaker, I thank the hon. Minister for accepting my point of order and I thank you, Mr. Speaker.  

The Minister has intimated that Members of my Committee had a personal interest to grant while working for the Committee that this House put in place.  As far as I know, as Chairman of this Committee, we were put in place by Parliament on our individual merit, not because we had requested to be on the Committee, but because Parliament thought that we would be able to do a good job.  Mr. Speaker, is it in order therefore, for the hon. Minister to insinuate that some Members of my Committee had personal scores to settle, and that is why they invited Mr. Dick Turinawe to testify on my Committee?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is not my understanding of the submission of the Minister.  I think the Minister was developing an explanation to counter the position that had been taken by hon. Winnie Byanyima on the affidavit which hon. Minister had tendered here.  According to hon. Byanyima, we should not believe the affidavit because the person who made that affidavit is an employee under the Minister, therefore, he could have lied.  That was the case on the other side.  

He is saying that if you take that as acceptable, then my explanation on the Turinawe's affidavit is that because he has mismanaged the Uganda Airlines and he had been called to the Committee, he was finding excuses for explaining the mismanagement.  I think it was not intended to for the Members of the Committee, but he was trying to say, now balance up the affidavit, if you discard mine, also discard the other.

MR. KUTESA: Mr. Speaker, I thank you for your ruling.  I do not believe that hon. Mwesigye Adolf is right in saying that misconduct was alleged in the petition.  If you look at the petition, and I argued this at length yesterday, there was no ground in which misconduct was ever, ever pleaded in the.  

There is a statement that is just quoting Article 118, but not misconduct as a plea; it has never been one of any of the Grounds in that petition.  If hon. Mwesigye Adolf stated that, the only ground that is maintainable against me in this petition was misconduct, then this House must also accept that since misconduct was not part of the petition, there are no grounds against me.

I would like to say that I am not a Director of Trans-Africa Bank, Mr. Speaker.  This was stated by Mrs. Musumba.  It is a fact that I am not a Director of Trans-Africa Bank and I want to place that on record.  

Let me conclude my entire defence, Mr. Speaker, by pointing out what was said today, right at the beginning, by the hon. James Mwandha and hon. Isaac Musumba - Members of DRIC.  I think there is no doubt any more in the mind of any Member of this House that I did not influence the decision to under-value the shares of Uganda Airlines.  The decision was made by DRIC, if they were under pressure, I do not know from whom -(Interruption)

MR. WACHA: Mr. Speaker, I hate to interrupt the hon. Minister at such a crucial time, but I also do not wish this House to make judgement based on untruth. I have a form of an annual return of a Company having a share capital and that Company is Trans-Africa Bank.  The return was made on 8th March 1998.  It was filed by one, Kopal, as Secretary of that Company.  Sir, this return gives details of directors of Trans-Africa Bank.  One of the directors, No.8, is named as one, hon. Sam Kutesa, a Ugandan, Minister of State for Finance and Economic Development, -(Interjections)- Government of the Republic of Uganda.  Sir, is it in order for the hon. Minister to tell this House a lie that he is not a Director of Trans-Africa Bank?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Well, I have been presented with this form by hon. Wacha. May be I will hear something from him, then I will be able to say what I want to say.

MR. KUTESA: Mr. Speaker, I categorically repeat what I stated in to this House; I am not a Director in Trans-Africa Bank, I was not even a Director on that day and I challenge hon. Wacha to produce a certified record of this. I challenge this document.  Mr. Speaker, what I am stating is correct.  I am not a Director of Trans-Africa Bank.  I challenge the authenticity of this document; let him have it certified -(Interjections).  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: This document has been presented to me.  It is a photocopy of a document apparently which indicates that it was filed with a register of companies on 17th March 1998.  This is a document which also indicates the receipt, that is, the payment of shs.450/=, and the receipt is No.1762482 of that date. The document carries a stamp, which says, "Trans-African Bank, Kampala Branch".  But the document has not been admitted by the Minister who is named in it.  Our way of getting evidence normally is to get a certified copy - it is certified by the Registrar. 

Now, what we can do as far as this matter is concerned, we can save it for the time being, since it has nothing to do with the motion.  But we shall follow it up - we shall follow it up, we shall check with the relevant records and an appropriate report will made and the ruling will be given.  We proceed!

MR. KUTESA:  Mr. Speaker, I was saying that I am sure that hon. Members do realise that there was no case of misconduct mentioned in the petition. If hon. Adolf Mwesigye, who is a very respected lawyer, submits that the only ground that could have been found against me is the ground that was never pleaded in this petition, I call upon hon. Members to dismiss the whole petition. The only ground, according to Mr. Petitioner No.40, is one that does not exist in the petition.  

We have argued for long, Mr. Speaker, we have talked for a long time and it is quite true that my family has also under-gone a lot of pressure. I understand the difficulties that one goes through during such a motion of Censure.  I therefore, agree that we should bring this whole matter to an end.  As we come to the end of this, I can only end by reminding hon. Members that once a Great Prime Minister of England, Sir Winston Churchill, said that 'a man's conscious is his greatest friend.'  Hon. Members, as you approach the voting on this motion of Censure, I appeal to you to use your greatest friend, that is your conscious.  Dispel any intimidation; dispel any persuasion.  Do not mind what your neighbour is saying, do not think about what they will say about you, use your greatest friend, rely on your greatest friend. As Sir Winston Churchill said, 'Your greatest friend is your conscious', I will walk out of the gates of this House with my conscious very clear because I believe it is my greatest friend.  I therefore implore you to follow your conscious, vote wisely against this Censure motion because that is the only thing a wise conscious can dictate.  I thank you. (Applause).

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. hon. Kutesa. Now, I understand it is hon. Okwir, the seconder, who is going to wind up. Again, he will be given seven minutes.(Applause). Hon. Rabwoni Okwir, you will end at 10 minutes past.

MAJ.OKWIR:  I thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker, hon. Members, once again I stand before you on the matter of the resolution of censure against the Minister of State for Finance Planning and Economic Development in Charge of investments, the hon. Kutesa Sam.  After listening carefully to both the petitioners and the defence of the hon. Minister facing censure, this House will make a judgement.  This judgement will either reinforce and uplift the image of this 6th Parliament in relation to its historical mission of preserving the mechanisms of checks and balances that characterise any democratic system, or it will lower its esteem and standing in the eyes of the Ugandan people. (Applause).  

The hon. Minister contends that we should not turn this Parliament into a Police Station, that this Parliament is not the office of the IGG neither is it a directorate of public prosecution.  But, let me, through you, Mr. Speaker, take him back to the way the Movement system of Government works. Parliament is one of the highest organisations in the Movement system of government after the Chairman and National conference. It is imperative, therefore, that the law organisations look to us for guidance; they cannot sanction us.  Mr. Speaker, therefore, we as Parliament cannot resign our responsibility to clean ourselves and wait for the DPP to catch us and bring us before the law. (Applause).  If that where to be the case, where would the political will be in removing the obstacles to clean leadership and to accountable Government?  Mr. Speaker, it is therefore incumbent upon us to make a political judgement on ourselves, through article 118 of the constitution of the Republic of Uganda. From there, the other organisations of Government can come in and reinforce our efforts.  If I was commanding three different forces; infantry, mechanised and Air force, I would not complain that my target is being hit by aircraft and mechanised forces when I, as the infantry, is the one supposed to be fighting; we join and crash the enemy. (Laughter).  

Having said that, allow me to turn to some excerpts of the petition that the hon. Minister referred to in his defence.  Mr. Speaker, and hon. Members, we the petitioners have proved beyond any reasonable doubt that the hon. Minister deliberately denied financial information to the management of Uganda Airlines, despite consistent and persistent pressure from the Uganda Airlines Corporation.  (Interruption) I beg, Mr. Speaker, that you save me from the hon. Kyaligonza.  

The hon. Minister could have done the following; he could have called for an emergency meeting instead of waiting for the regular board meeting, he could have called up the directors on telephone and informed them, he could have copied his letters to the bank and to the other members of the board. Mr. Speaker, even when there is a crisis, you hold transactions on that account until further notice. (Applause).   Why should you change signatories to accounts?  

I will now go on to the point of threatening the life of Dick Turinawe as he defended Government interests on the Board of ENHAS. I can only say that Mr. Tytens, who worked with Sabena Airlines and was complaining as a Director on the Board of ENHAS, and was one of the people who invoked the law in the letter asking for an emergency meeting to be convened, is the same one whose affidavit the Chairman of ENHAS later gives in his rebuttal.  This is not only the case in point were this man has been a very dubious man, I can quote others.

EHNAS gives 50 percent discount for its ground handling services to the company.  In order to terminate the contract, ENHAS is required by the contract to give Uganda Airlines Corporation two months notice.  Now, ENHAS was so greedy that it could not, for two months, raise its charges. Mr. Tytens backdated a letter to 1st December 1998 in order to achieve his target of 1st February.  However, Mr. Tytens gave himself away when, in the same letter of 1st December 1998, he referred to the events of January 1999. The question I ask myself is, is Mr. Tytens a fortuneteller?  Mr. Speaker, hon. Members, I ask you to reject this rebuttal. The evidence by Mr. Dick Turinawe still stands; hon. Kutesa Sam, Minister of State for Finance in charge of -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Members, you know that the rules are very clear on this issue of clarification and information. It is not mandatory that whenever you stand, you be given the Floor. It appears that the Member is proceeding; therefore, he has declined to give you the clarification.  Just listen to him, and then assess the case.

MAJ. OKWIR:  Mr. Speaker, those are three minutes, I beg for more time.  Hon. Members, I request you, and I call upon you, to reject this rebuttal.  The evidence by Mr. Turinawe still stands; hon. Kutesa Sam threatened him in an attempt to coerce him to return the distributed accounts. On the other hand, Mr. Bageya, who was in the same meeting, supports Mr. Turinawe?s statement. The petitioners believe that the hon Minister's interpretation of what conflict of interest is all about, is narrow, simplistic and legalist, to say the least.  Mr. Speaker, what the people of Uganda are concerned about is the general commitment of our leaders to peoples interests, wherever they may be and wherever you find them; they could be in a parastatal in any Ministry, they could be in the Local Government Tender Board, they could be in another Ministerial colleagues' domain, but you do not and should not collude with him to rip off Government.  Mr. Speaker, all I am saying is that here should be collective responsibility in safeguarding national interests.  

In conclusion, Mr. Speaker and hon. Members, the eyes of Uganda, of Africa and of the world are upon us. (Laughter).  Mr. Speaker, -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It is time.

MAJ. OKWIR: Mr. Speaker, I am concluding. The history of the Movement is full of landmarks of heroism, hate and sacrifice.  What we have done or inherited is a very heavy burden and responsibility that we must cherish. The policies of liberalisation, privatisation, civil service reform and demobilization have put grave challenges before us. Our people, the peasants and workers of this country, have bravely absorbed them with a lot of pain and sacrifice. All the time they have been tightening their belts believing that there is a better future for all of them.  We, the leaders, are the ones who have convinced them to accept those policies as the better tool Uganda must take to build a better future.  How can we be the same leaders who are cutting corners and manipulating the very same policies to enrich ourselves, is this not a betrayal?  

The peasants of Uganda are watching us, Mr. Speaker, the workers and the disabled on our streets are watching us, the soldiers in the trenches are still as disciplined as ever, the long suffering women are watching us, the youth, the primary stake holders who inherit all these social evils are expectantly watching.  Let us, therefore, not hide our heads in the sand, let us not deceive ourselves because one day they will bring us to book; history will be very cruel to us.  Some of us are close friends to hon. Kutesa, some of us are his business partners, some of us are his relatives, but let us put all those considerations aside and look at the aspiration of our people.  Their daily sacrifices, their expectations, are in us, the leaders they cast their votes for, and it is there that our duty lies.  I thank you, Mr. Speaker. (Applause).

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, we have come to the conclusion of the submissions on the motion before us. As you may recall, this motion is a constitutional one; it is a motion coming under 118, which started with a petition, which was duly signed by 116 Members of Parliament and was sent to the President.  Maybe, for your benefit, I will read part of the petition which was sent to the President; it says: "Your Excellency, your humble petitioners being Members of Parliament are dissatisfied with the conduct of hon. Kutesa Sam a Minister in the Government of the Republic of Uganda holding the portfolio of Minister of State for Finance, Planning and Economic Development in charge of Planning and Investment, and intend to move a motion for a resolution of censure in accordance with Article 118 of the Constitution - and then they go on to set up the ground.

So, what we have been dealing with here is not the petition.  What we have been dealing with is a motion arising from the petition which was sent to His Excellency, the President.  You have now heard the two sides; it is now up to you to pronounce yourselves on this motion; either to support it or not to support it.  However, you would recall that last year, we had a similar censure motion against the then Minister of State for Education, hon. Jim Muhwezi.  The current rules, which we have, did not place this kind of voting by secret ballot.  However, when we had hon. Jim Muhwezi's censure motion, we could have pronounced ourselves on that, so that the Speaker determines. Later, however, there was a motion, which was moved on the procedure to be taken on deciding the motion.  The procedure, which was determined then, was that we vote by secret ballot and this is the procedure which we followed.  However, we must note that there was a motion, and you determined that procedure.  I cannot say, because in hon. Jim Muhwezi?s censure we voted by secret ballot, we have to do it.  There was a specific motion on this matter.  Now, it is up to you to tell me what you want.  Otherwise, if you do not, I will use my discretion.

MR. PINTO:  Mr. Speaker, in accordance with the procedures of this Parliament, in the motion for censure against hon. Sam Kutesa, I move that we vote by secret ballot.  Mr. Speaker, I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Is the motion seconded?
                
(Question put and agreed to).

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Since we have one motion, we are going to vote on that motion. In the past, in Uganda here, we had a very well known man named Mr. Prigram.  Mr. Prigram was a person who was usually in charge of elections in this country and I think we have a Mr. Prigram in this House; I therefore, appoint hon. Apollo Nsibambi to be the Prigram and the other presiding officers will be hon. Syda Bumba and hon. Martin Aliker. The polling assistants will be Mr. Bakwega, Mr. Madete, Mr. Kasirye and Miss. Gloria Nakebu.  I call upon Mr. Prigram, the hon. Apollo Nsibambi, to take charge of the process. 

As is normal practice, names will be read according to alphabetical order, and then you get your vote.  So, can the names be read please!
You will go to the Table, you will be given your ballot paper, you go out to mark, and then come back. If you support the motion, you tick 'YES'; if you do not support the motion, you say 'NO'.

(The names of the hon. Members were read out)

(The Voting exercise was carried out)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  There is a Member of Parliament, Col. Tumukunde, who has just arrived and obviously has not been seen voting.  So, hon. Nsibambi can use his discretion - I am not dictating to him - to allow him to vote if he can. This is to clear any doubts. Obviously, we have not seen hon. Col. Tumukunde voting and if he is given one ballot outside and he ticks it, I think it does no harm. His uniform is not threatening because, after all, he is represents the Army.  

(The Ballot papers were counted)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, since Tuesday, we have been dealing with a motion of censure of the hon. Sam Kutesa, Minister of State for Finance, Planning and Economic Development in charge of Investments. This motion was brought under the provisions of the Constitution - Article 118.  We concluded the debate and pronounced ourselves as to what procedure to take to pronounce ourselves on the motion. We decided that we should pronounce ourselves by holding a secret ballot and I appointed Members of this House to preside over the process. The process has been concluded and there were no incidents that need to be reported.  

The relevant provision in determining the results of the motion is found in Article 118, in particular paragraph 3.  It provides as follows: "Proceedings for censure of a Minister shall be initiated by a petition to the President through the Speaker signed by not less than one-third of all Members of Parliament giving notice that they are dissatisfied with the conduct or performance of the Minister and intend to move a motion for a resolution of censure and setting out particulars of the grounds in support of the motion."  

Actually, the relevant one for this particular point is 118, "Parliament may, by a resolution supported by more than half of all Members of Parliament, pass a Vote of Censure against a Minister on any of the following grounds..."  So, for the motion to succeed, more than half of the Members of Parliament must vote in support of that motion.  Well, of course you know in Parliament we have some ex-officio Members; they are not entitled to vote. The Speaker as the person presiding over the proceedings is not entitled to vote.  

The votes which were cast today were 247, with one invalid vote and therefore the valid votes counted were 246. Votes in favour of the motion were 152, votes against the motion 94. The half of Parliament required to pass this motion is 138 plus 1, that is 139.  
In view of the results of the secret ballot, I declare that the "Ayes" have it and therefore the motion has been carried. (Applause). At this juncture, I must thank the returning officers and their team. I adjourn the House to Tuesday, 2.30 p.m.  Thank you.                            
(The House rose at 7.29 p.m and adjourned until Tuesday 9th March, 1999 at 2.30 p.m.)                                                                          

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      

									
