Tuesday, 2nd March, 1999.

Parliament met at 2.30 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr. Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair)

The House was called to order

STATEMENT BY HER EXCELLENCY THE VICE PRESIDENT REGARDING THE INCIDENT AT BWINDI FOREST IN SOUTH WESTERN UGANDA

THE VICE PRESIDENT (Dr. Wandira Kazibwe): Mr. Speaker, hon. Members of Parliament, I regret to inform Parliament and the Country that Bwindi Tourist Camp was attacked by a group of 130 to 150 armed Intarehamwe, on the morning of 1st March, 1999, between 2.30 a.m. and 9.30 a.m.

The Intarehamwe attacked Buhoma Tourist Camps, comprising of Camp A, Kitandara, and Community Camp.  While this was happening, another diversionary Intarehamwe group attacked Butogota.  These assailants, armed with assault rifles, were aged between 18 and 30 years and spoke French and Kinyarwanda.  

The following properties were destroyed:five vehicles burnt, two motorcycles burnt, Buhoma Camp was burnt. 
The following were stolen: four guns belonging to the Game Ranchers, three base radio sets, and four walkie-talkies.  One Game Warden, the late Paul Wagaba, was killed, three ranchers were also killed, and one civilian was injured.

The UPDF Detach at Kanyantorogo, which responded to the attack, killed two Intarehamwe at the spot, two others were killed during hot pursuit and one SMG assault rifle was recovered while the pursuit was going on.

At Buhoma camp, there were American, French, British, Swiss, Australian, Canadian, Danish and New Zealander tourists.  The Intarehamwe attackers abducted five Americans, three Britons, one Canadian, one Australian, one New-Zealander girl, and one Ugandan pilot.  Six of the abducted have been rescued by the UPDF, five are confirmed dead, three are still missing.  Of those rescued, two are English, one Swiss, one American, one Canadian, and one New Zealander. Of the dead, four are female and one male; all the missing are male.

Speaking to one French lady tourist called, Peltiel Ann, now at the White Horse, Kabale, the Intarehamwe gave her the following message:
"The Intarehamwe are not happy with Americans and British because they have preferred to support the Tutsi Ethnic minority against the Ethnic Hutu majority".  

Government strongly condemns this barbaric act of the terrorist Intarehamwe who have no respect for human life.  

Government wishes to re-affirm its stand to fight these acts of terrorism.  For some time now, Uganda has been involved in re-establishing her image as a tourist attraction, through public relations in the local and international media this campaign has continued.  This incident is an attempt to undermine the Government efforts towards the promotion of tourism.  

Hitherto, security in the gazetted and leased parts of the National Parks has been undertaken by Park Management through their own law enforcement staff, who are normally called, Ranchers.  Government has now stepped up security in these areas to ensure maximum safety for all the people, including tourists. 

Through you, Mr. Speaker, I would like to seek the indulgence of the House to stand up for one minute in memory of those who died during this barbaric act.

(The House stood up for one minute)

DR. WANDIRA KAZIBWE: May their souls rest in eternal peace!

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, as you realise, this statement has been made by the Vice President, who is also a Minister. Under Rule 37 of our Rules, therefore, there is no debate, unless there are only few questions for something that is not clear from the statement.  But I hope the statement is very clear, though it is very sad too.  

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION TO CENSURE HON. SAM KUTESA, MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (INVESTMENTS) MOVED IN ACCORDANCE WITH ARTICLE 118 OF THE CONSTITUTION.

MR. DOMBO EMANUEL (Bunyole County, Tororo): Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Mr. Speaker and hon. Members of Parliament, this 2nd day of March, 1999, the 6th Parliament of Uganda here assembled is going to express itself on an issue of a Constitutional nature. 

I want first and foremost to remind the Members of this House, and the entire public, that this Parliament is a product of the NRM struggle. It is a product of the fallen gallant sons who sacrificed their lives so that democracy and the rule of law may return to this Country. We stand up in this Parliament to uphold the foundations for which the gallant sons of this Country went to the bush and shed their blood to ensure that the rule of law comes to this Country. 

I beg to move a motion for censure of hon. Kutesa, Minister of State for Finance and Economic Planning in charge of Planning and Investment, Mr. Speaker.  

When this censure process was initiated, various individuals, some of them Members of this august House, attempted to introduce arguments clearly meant to divert the attention of the public and hon. Members from the critical matters being addressed by the Censure Motion.

This Motion, Sir, is not against hon. Sam Kutesa the person.  Sir, this Motion is not about the supposed rivalry between the Movement and Political Party Systems.  Mr. Speaker, neither is it a Motion about the supposed rivalry between the Bairu and the Bahima, whatever that may be. This Motion is not an attempt by the Movement supporters to ride on the backs of the multiparty supporters in Parliament, to the detriment of Multipartysts, as it has been argued in certain cases.  Sir, this Motion is about a philosophy about which the NRM and the Movement System cherishes most.  It is about leadership, Mr. Speaker; clean leadership. It is about upholding the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda. 

One eminent Canadian politician, the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, Brian Mulroney, on September 1st 1985, wrote to Members of the Canadian House of Commons the following: "It is a great principle of administration - I could even say an imperative, that to function effectively, the government and the Public Service of a democracy must have the trust and confidence of the public they serve.  In order to reinforce that trust, the government must be able to provide competent management, and above all, to be guided by the highest standards of conduct".  

Sir, while agreeing in total with Prime Minister Brian Mulroney about peoples' expectations of the conduct of leaders in government, I wish to add that, in a Country like ours, where we are still nursing a young democracy, the peoples' trust in the leadership is fundamental.  Moreover, the peoples' trust has to be based on the peoples' belief that its political leaders are acting in public interest, guided by the highest standard of conduct.  Their political leaders must be seen, in the execution of their public responsibilities, not to be benefiting from their public office at the expense of the public they serve.

The Petitioners who have appended their names and signatures to this petition under five grounds, contend that hon. Sam Kutesa Kahamba, Minister of State for Finance, Planning and Economic Development in charge of Investment and Planning, has, in his activities as a Minister, fallen far short of these standards of conduct expected of him. Therefore, he deserves to be censured under the Provisions of Article 118 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, 1995.

Ground number one, which is identified as number 2(a) in the Petition, states that the hon. Sam Kutesa, acting in his capacity as Chairman of the Board of Directors of Entebbe Handling Services (ENHAS), and simultaneously holding the above Portfolio, placed himself in a position of conflict of interest, contrary to Clause 14(2) of the Leadership Code of Conduct. 

Before I deal with the various pieces of evidence related to this ground, Mr. Speaker, I wish to deal with one small matter connected to this ground.  It has been argued in some circles that because this ground makes mention of the Leadership Code of Conduct, and since the Inspector General of Government is the institution supposed to oversee the implementation of the Leadership Code of Conduct, then Parliament cannot act on matters related to it.  

This argument is synonymous to the one which states that if a Minister were to be caught smuggling ivory or gold, because that act can only be dealt with under the Penal Code Act, and therefore overseen by the Police and the DPP, Parliament cannot take action against him or her under the Provisions of Article 118 of the Constitution.   Mr. Speaker and hon. Members, you will note that both arguments are of course fallacious and should be rejected outright.

We, the Petitioners, state that misconduct in the office of the Minister, whether described under the Leadership Code or not, properly falls under Article 118, Sub-section (1) (b) and can therefore be appropriately handled therein.  Hon. Members should not be diverted from handling the merits of this Petition by the use of misleading technicalities.  

Substantially, Sir, this ground of the Petition deals with the fact that, when the hon. Sam Kutesa became a Minister and chose to continue serving as Chairman of the Entebbe Handling Services (ENHAS) Board of Directors, he placed himself in a situation of serious conflict of interest. He had, on the one hand, as an entrepreneur, to defend his individual interest, and on the other hand, as Minister, to defend a government interest. As I shall show, many times these interests conflicted and the hon. Sam Kutesa's prime interest was, unfortunately, always to safeguard his own financial interests at the expense of the people's interest.

Allow me, Sir, to give a few examples. (a) The ENHAS Concession; this Concession is marked document No.1 in the set of evidence that was forwarded to you.  Mr. Speaker, I first of all wish to lay this document on Table. I hope the hon. Members have accessed document No.1, which is the ENHAS Concession.  The ENHAS Concession begun on March 30th, 1996.  For the whole of March 1996, Uganda Airlines Corporation carried out ground-handling operations at Entebbe, as it had always done.  

MR. MUTYABA: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Is it not proper that after a motion has been moved, it should be seconded before explanation? It is true that hon. Dombo has moved a motion, but there was no secondment.  Is this not how it should be done, Mr. Speaker?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is this Motion seconded or not?

AN HON. MEMBER: Yes.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It is seconded.  Proceed!

MR. MAYANJA MOHAMMED: Mr. Speaker, Article 118 of the Constitution gives the basic principles and rules as to the presentation of the petition.  These broad principles and rules should have been incorporated, and their implementation ought to have been secured by the Parliamentary Rules of Procedure specifically addressed to the censure.
Mr. Speaker -(Interruption).

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, why do we not first hear what he wants to say? He is in the middle of a sentence, and I do not know what he is talking about.  

MR. MAYANJA MOHAMMED: Mr. Speaker, I am entitled to referring to what I have so that I am able to make a presentable presentation. Under the circumstances, Mr. Speaker, I beg to move, according to Rule 7 of our Rules of procedure, which stipulates that any question of procedure not provided for in these rules shall be decided by the Speaker, whose decision shall be final.  Mr. Speaker, I request that according to this rule of procedure, you spell out and provide the House with procedural guidelines to be observed by both the petitioners and those opposed to the petition.  Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, this Parliament has been in existence for two and half years and we have been operating under rules which we started with when the life of this Parliament started.  We have been moving on, and maybe looking at the rules and revising them wherever necessary.  But, before this House, we have a motion for resolution of censure of a Minister.  This is not the first time that this kind of Motion has been moved in this House.  We have a precedent; we had one against hon. Jim Muhwezi, we carried it through. It is true that some people have indicated that the rules are inadequate; maybe the appropriate bodies are still working on this.  

The matter before the House, moved by hon. Mayanja, is that I should invoke my powers under rule 7, and give guidelines as to how this censure Motion should move.  This matter is not new, sometime this week or last week, this was a matter which was raised by people concerned with this Motion.  The hon. Minister, the subject of this censure Motion, wrote to me and the other side also wrote to me about the same issue. They wanted me to give written guidelines as to how the censure Motion should move.  I entirely agree that in absence of rules, and when we are stuck, the Speaker can invoke the powers under rule 7 and give guidance.  Since we had just started this Motion, unless a Member thinks that there is a problem, which he does not understand, and there is no rule to cover that particular situation, then a Member is free to rise up and say, can we be guided and I will do it. 

As far as I am concerned, as of now, nothing has arisen. If something has arisen let somebody be specific and I will give the guideline.  Would you proceed?

MR. DOMBO:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, for your wise counsel.  I was dealing with a few examples. In example A, the ENHAS concession - a document which I have laid on the Table - begun on March 30th, 1996.  Members will note that, for the whole of March 1996, ground-handling operations at Entebbe Airport were carried out by Uganda Airlines, as it has always done. Because of this, therefore, there would have been no point in paying ENHAS for services it never carried out. 

ENHAS, however, took a contrary view. They insisted that since the Minister responsible had agreed in the earlier meeting that the franchise to ENHAS begins from March 1st, 1996, ENHAS was therefore entitled to all the money generated during the month of march, even if it was Uganda Airlines which was still carrying out ground handling operations, and even if the concession was eventually granted to begin on 30th March 1996.  Hon. Sam Kutesa's position, as Chairman in this respect, was to give aggressive support for ENHAS against Uganda Airlines' interests.  

In its Board of Directors Meeting of 23rd May, 1996, hon. Kutesa insisted on ENHAS being paid for the months of March, 1996 for work actually done by Uganda Airlines Corporation.  Hon. Kutesa's comments, in minute 4 of document number 2, illustrate these factors.  Hon. Members, I will refer you to document number 2 in the set of the evidence that you have.  I wish to quote from the minutes of the 15th meeting of the ENHAS Board, held on 23rd May, 1996, I will quote from paragraph number 5: "Hon. Kutesa raised the issue of the March income. It was agreed and minuted that Uganda Airlines would act on behalf of ENHAS from 1st to end of March, therefore money made during this period was owed to Enhas although Enhas took over from 1st April, 1996."  

Hon. Kutesa explained that ENHAS was given the condition of having the money on the account, which was done, thus the Minister agreed on the franchise to ENHAS with effect from 1st March 1996.  I wish to continue with the quotation:"It was agreed that Uganda Airlines Corporation should not suppress ENHAS and this objection was to be minuted strongly as a suggestion by the Chairman of the Board." 
The Chairman of the Board was, and still is, hon. Kutesa Sam.  

I lay document number 2 on the Table, Mr.Speaker.  Hon. Members will note from that document, that the words 'Uganda Airlines corporation should not suppress ENHAS' were therefore typed in bold and underlined for extra emphasis.  Sir, the Chairman of the Board who was so emphatic at resisting Uganda Airlines demands was, and still is, the hon. Kutesa Sam. Uganda Airlines corporation eventually lost the March income for Ground Handling Services at Entebbe Airport to the new owners of ENHAS, although they had actually done all the work.  I wish to point out that hon. Kutesa became Minister in June 1996, but after this appointment he pressed on for the recovery of this money from Uganda Airlines Corporation.  

I go to the second example, Mr. Speaker and hon. Members. At a time when Uganda Airlines Corporation controlled 50 percent shares of ENHAS and hon. Kutesa Sam, Minister in the Government of Uganda, was its Chairman, the corporation was kept in total darkness about the financial position of the company.  I wish to draw the attention of the hon. Members to letters from the acting General Manager, Uganda Airlines corporation, dated November 7th, January 7th, February 6th and March 5th 1997; all expressing the Corporation's frustration at being kept in the dark about the financial position of the company.  The letters are numbered documents 3,4,5 and 6, in your set of documents.  
I wish to read these letters, Mr. Speaker. The first letter is marked document number 3 in your set of documents. This is the letter of 7th November 1996, it is addressed to the General Manager Entebbe handling services and the title is financial information.  It says: "As agreed in the last Board meeting, you are to furnish the Directors with Financial Information in order to keep us abreast with the performance of the company.  To date I have not received any information to this effect. 

The purpose of this letter is to remind you of this directive and to request that this information be availed as soon as possible."  

Dick Turinawe, Acting General Manager Uganda Airlines, signed this letter and it was copied to the Chairman Board of Directors.  
I wish to lay this document on the Table.  

When you look at document number 4; this is the letter of 7th January,1997, hon. Members will note that this is a whole 3 months later. The Acting General Manager again writes to the General Manager, Entebbe handling services.  I will quote from paragraph 2: "Inspite of the Board Directive, I have so far not received any financial information as had been agreed.  This is to inform you that Uganda Airlines views this as a matter of serious concern especially so when we are the majority shareholders.  I must put it to you that we expect better co-operation if our joint venture is to progress.  I wish to remind you that we should not be seen to be pushing for this information, as we would expect it to flow normally.  

Finally, I wish to advise you that continued withholding of this information from Uganda Airlines may be taken to mean that our share holding is in jeopardy and necessarily we will be forced to adopt necessary steps to avoid being sidelined as we have authorities to whom we are accountable.  

We would be obliged to assist in case you have any problem in organising and disseminating the subject information.  Please treat as a matter of utmost urgency."  This letter was signed by the acting Managing Director of Uganda Airlines Corporation. This is document number 4, and I also wish to lay it on the Table.  

You will note, Mr. speaker and hon. Members, after persistent frustrations and after failing to get answers to his request for information, the acting General Manager decides to ask for an emergency board meeting. This is in the letter marked document number 5 in your set of evidence.  This is a letter addressed to the Chairman, Entebbe Handling Services, who is also the hon. Kutesa Sam. This letter was written on 6th February 1997. The headline is, 'Emergency Meeting of the Board.' Mr. Speaker, I beg to read: "It is our feeling that there is a crisis in the running of the company especially the financial management. Accordingly, we demand for an Emergency Board Meeting before the 9th February 1997.  We trust that you will appreciate our concern and call for the meeting." Mr. Speaker, this is a letter signed by the acting General Manager whose stake in the franchise was 50 percent holding.  

Hon. Members, also note from that letter that this was an expression of the continued frustration and marginalisation of the financial affairs of Uganda Airlines Corporation from the joint venture for the franchise of ENHAS.  Mr. Speaker, Members will be surprised to learn that this request was ignored by the Chairman of ENHAS, who is also the hon. Minister we are moving a motion of censure against. 

MR. KUTESA: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to thank you for giving me opportunity to give information on the statement that has just been made by hon. Dombo, the chief petitioner.  Hon. Dombo has read a letter from the document he has circulated. The document states that the letter written on 6th February by Mr. Turinawe, demanding an emergency meeting, was ignored by the Chairman of the Board, who was hon. Kutesa Sam.  Mr. Speaker, we have received two sets of documents from the petitioners. In one set, certain documents are missing and in the other they are present. The kind of document that we received last would tend to suggest that I ignored the letter written on 5th of February, while the first document that I received contained a letter written by me on the 7th of February. Turinawe wrote on the 6th of February, on the 7th of February there is a reply by me. This letter is actually supplied not by me, but by hon. Dombo and it reads: 
"The Acting General Manager,
Uganda Airlines, 
ENTEBBE.

Dear Sir,
EMERGENCY MEETING OF THE BOARD
I have today received your letter of the 6th of February 1997, demanding for an emergency meeting to be held on Sunday, the 9th of February 1997.  

There was a request to hold a meeting on the 9th of February.  Unfortunately, neither myself nor two other Members of the Board are available on Sunday.  I have also checked to see if the alternate Directors would attend in place of the other Directors. But all are also committed.  I trust that you are aware that there is a scheduled meeting to take place on the 20th February 1997 and the notice to that effect was issued on 5th February. That is the day before he wrote 1997.  

I am therefore, of the view that in order to have a comprehensive discussion of the burning issues of the company, all Directors should endeavour to attend the meeting on 20th February, 1997, as I believe they will have received sufficient notice." It was signed by me and copied to all Directors.

The information I want to give is that, as it is very well known to hon. Dombo, who supplied us with these documents, the letter of 6th from the General Manager was never ignored.  I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Excuse me, hon. Members. I can see that the Minister's information is contradicting the position, which was brought forward by hon. Dombo. According to my understanding, this is a defence. So, I suggest that the petitioner put up his case, maybe seconded by the other side. I do not think the House is going to make up its mind by just listening to hon. Dombo and his side. After hon. Dombo, supported by the Seconder, put up their case, I will give opportunity to the Minister concerned to put up his case. When he is putting up his case, I do not envisage him bringing such documents and saying now this is rubbish to me. No, he is not going to use that language.  He is going to say, 'I am sorry, but hon. Dombo is not telling you the truth, because this is the reaction I gave to the letter of 6th.'  Then after that, we shall consider, because, hon. Members, now the motion is being moved.   

What I envisage in your mind when you are assessing the case of the petitioner and the case of the hon. Minister, is what is alleged to have been done, and whether it was done or whether the omission was committed.  

Secondly, if committed, was it committed by a Minister when this Act or omission occurred?  Was the person, now before the House, a Minister?  Then after that, you will have to consider another issue.  If you think that it did not happen, then other issues will not arise.  But, did it happen?  Was he a Minister?  Then after that, you can say, does it fit in the grounds listed under Article 118; that is what you are going to do. You will only be able to do this after you have heard the two sides.  So, I would think at this juncture, we reserve the defence. Let us hear the case of the petitioner, then after hon. Dombo, we shall hear the Seconder. I will give opportunity to hon. Kutesa to put up his case, including presenting documents that will contradict the case by the petitioner.

MR. DOMBO:  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, for your guidance. I still stand firm on what I have just submitted. The letters from the acting General Manager, Uganda Airlines Corporation, were ignored.  Hon. Sam Kutesa has just told us that he had called a meeting on 20th February 1997. In your set of evidence, if you look at document No. 6, it was written on 5th March 1997 and addressed to the chairman, Board of Directors, ENHAS. The chairman is the said Minister against whom we are moving a motion of censure. This is now Uganda Airlines Corporation together with the minority shareholder, Sabena Airlines, invoking the law to force a board of directors' meeting. This letter was written on 5th, Mr. Speaker, and it reads: 
"RE: NOTICE TO CONVENE AN EXTRA ORDINARY MEETING OF ENHAS.
We herewith requisition and call on you to convene urgently an Extra Ordinary General Meeting of ENHAS.  We invoke the provision of Article 63 of the Articles of Association of ENHAS and section 132 and 133 of the company's Act, Chapter 85 of the laws of Uganda.  

We shall, therefore, expect the meeting requisitioned to convene not later than 7th April 1997.  

We propose the following agenda for the said meeting:-
1. ENHAS financial status and the provision of periodic (quarterly) financial statements to shareholders/Directors.
2.  The administrative status and structure of ENHAS and the management style thereof."

The Directors of Sabena Airlines and the acting General Manager of Uganda Airlines Corporation, Dick Turinawe, signed these letters.   Hon. Members, this letter brings out one clear fact, it becomes unfortunate that a whole Minister of the Republic of Uganda should have the law read to him by junior officers in order for him to know that he must protect the interests of government.  Mr. Speaker, this is completely unacceptable!  I wish to lay document number 6 on the Table.  
One cannot but conclude, Mr. Speaker and hon. Members, that the action of hon. Sam Kutesa to keep Uganda Airlines Corporation in the dark about the finances of the company which it owned 50 per cent, was deliberate and calculated to prevent Uganda Airlines Corporation from defending its legitimate interests.  This example raises the issue of lack of transparency, by the Minister, in his financial dealings with a government body.  The petitioners find that his conduct fell far short of what is desirable of a Minister in government.  

Besides keeping Uganda Airlines Corporation in the dark about ENHAS' financial position, despite its 50 per cent stake, the chairman of ENHAS who is an hon. Minister, went ahead to prevent Uganda Airlines Corporation from being a signatory to the account of the company. This was despite repeated complaints by Uganda Airlines Corporation that as the major shareholder, it was not fair for it to be excluded from signing the accounts. 

The marginalisation of Uganda Airlines Corporation in the financial decision making became complete on July 25th 1996, when hon. Sam Kutesa unilaterally, and without the backing of any Board resolution, altered the signatories to all the company's accounts. He made sure that signatories came from Efforte Corporation of General Salim Saleh or Global Air Links of hon. Sam Kutesa.

At this point, Mr. Speaker, Uganda Airlines Corporation was not a signatory to any of the accounts.  Hon. Sam Kutesa's letter, making this alteration, is marked document No. 7. The letters he wrote to the banks ordering the change of the signatories are marked 8, 9 and 10. Mr. Speaker, I beg to lay these documents on the Table.

It is against the law of this country to change the signatories of a company account without a Board resolution, yet this is the extent to which an hon. Minister of this Republic went in his relationship with a government parastatal.  Hon. Members, this type of conduct is completely unacceptable and it is upon this that we strongly move that hon. Sam Kutesa should be censured.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, as I indicated to you, you will have to hear both sides before we make a decision. (Laughter)

MR. DOMBO:  Mr. Speaker and hon. Members, Uganda Airlines Corporation did not accept this unilateral and irregular decision by the hon. Minister. Actually, the acting General Manager immediately wrote to him to protest and call for an emergency meeting to look into the financial management of the company.  The letter of 12th August 1996 is marked document No. 11 in your set of evidence. I will read that document.
Document No. 11 is a letter, which was written on August 12th, 1996. It was addressed to the chairman, Board of Directors, Entebbe Handling Services.  That chairman was and still is hon. Sam Kutesa.  The letter is entitled,  "change of signatories to bank accounts." I will start from paragraph No. 2.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But hon. Member, I thought you had talked about document 7, 8 and the rest.

MR. DOMBO:  Mr. Speaker, I lay them on the Table.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: How do they become part of the record without being read?  Anyway, it is your case.

MR. DOMBO:  Mr. Speaker, these documents, like I said, were letters from hon. Sam Kutesa, chairman ENHAS, and also from the Minister, stating the change of signatories.  

Document No. 7 is addressed to Mr. Acaali Manzi of Uganda Airlines Corporation. The letter is dated 5th August 1996, when hon. Sam Kutesa was chairman and was Minister of the Republic of Uganda. It reads: 
"RE: CHANGE IN SIGNATORIES TO BANK ACCOUNTS.

This is to inform you that I am forced to change the signatories to all Bank Accounts due to mishandling of funds.  

I will inform you regarding this in the next Board meeting."

Mr. Speaker, the decision to change the signatories to the account, where a government parastatal had 50 per cent stake, was unilateral and without the backing of a Board resolution.  That is contrary to the laws of the Republic of Uganda.  

Document No. 8 is addressed to the Director Trans Africa Bank.  It is dated 25th July 1996.  It reads:
"Please note signatory to the above mentioned account as follows: - 
Group 1" -where a government parastatal has 50 per cent stake.
"1. Hon. Sam Kutesa.       
 2. Mr. Ramesh Masrani
 Group 2
 1. Mr. Hezi Bezalel
 2. Mr. Shiff
 Group 3 
 1. Mr. Jurua Jackson
 2. Mr. Deepak Varma"
Members will note that with all these six signatories, Uganda Airlines Corporation, which had 50 per cent stake, did not have a single signatory on the account.  This is unacceptable.  

This document was signed by hon. Sam Kutesa, as chairman of ENHAS, at the same time he was a Minister of the Republic of Uganda. Hon. Members should note that this situation puts the hon. Minister in a very serious position of conflict of interest.  As Minister in the Republic of Uganda, he accessed himself unilaterally to 50 percent stake of Uganda Airlines Corporation without due course from any authority.  This is completely unacceptable and it is on this ground that we feel the hon. Minister should be censured.

I beg to read document number 9.  This document is dated 26th July 1996 and it is addressed to the Director, Trans Africa Limited, Entebbe. This is another account and it reads:
"RE: ACCOUNT NO.010001- ENHAS.
Please note signatory to the above mentioned account as follows: - 
GROUP 1                       GROUP 2
Hon. Sam Kutesa              Mr. Jurua Jackson
Mr. Zeev Shiff                Mr. Deepak Varma

The above account shall be obligated only pursuant to the signatures of two of the above signatories, one from each group, as a foresaid.  
For the sake of good order, please note that there is no change in signatories on our account no. 010002." 
It was signed by hon. Sam Kutesa, Chairman of ENHAS and Minister in the Republic of Uganda.  Hon. Members, Uganda Airlines Corporation did not take this lightly. 

Hon. Members, document ten, dated 25th July 1996, is addressed to the Manager, Gold Trust Bank, Impala House, and not Entebbe this time.  Gentlemen, it reads: 
RE: ACCOUNT NO.02983(UG.SHS.) AND........F.E.0268.  
Please note signatory rights to the above mentioned accounts as follows:-  GROUP 1            GROUP 2
Hon. Sam Kutesa               Mr Hezi Bezalel
Mr. Ramesh Masrani            Mr. Zeev Shiff

The accounts shall herein after be obligated by two signatures, one of the members of each group."  
It was signed by hon. Sam Kutesa, Chairman ENHAS.

Hon. Members, you will note one peculiar thing here; a whole hon. Minister unilaterally accesses himself to public funds without consulting the Board. This puts him in a very compromising position. It pitied him against the interests of Uganda Airlines Corporation, which had 50 percent stake in the company. The hon. Minister should have protected the interests of the corporation and the interests of the people of Uganda whom he swore to serve.

Uganda Airlines Corporation did not accept this unilateral and irregular decision by the hon. Minister.  The acting General Manager immediately wrote to him to protest and call for an emergency meeting to look into the financial management of the company.  This is in the letter of 12th August 1996, which is marked document Number 11.  The letter is addressed to the Chairman Board of Directors, Entebbe Handling Services.  The title is "change of signatories to bank accounts."  I will read the whole letter: "Your letter of even reference dated 5th August, 1996 on the above subject refers.  

As far as Uganda Airlines is concerned, we considered that a situation where funds are being mishandled calls for an Emergency Meeting of the Board.  Change of Bank Signatories should be effected by a Board Resolution and should not be unilateral.   

In view of the above, we request for an emergency meeting of the Board in which we should address not only the signatories of the bank account, but the financial mismanagement system of the company." 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, are you reading from a different document from the one I have? (Laughter)  Hon. Member, you should realise that what you read becomes part of the official record.  I thought the document, which you had marked, is the same document you are reading; would you please read what is there?

MR. DOMBO:  Hon. Members and Mr. Speaker, I must agree that I am overwhelmed by the assortment of documents, and because I knew every Member has a copy I had no intention of reading, but may I read what is in the letter: "In view of the above, we request for an emergency meeting of the Board in which we should address, not only the signatories of the bank account, but the financial management system of the company."

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Well, the record is accordingly corrected.

MR. DOMBO: Mr. Speaker, this letter was signed by the acting General Manager of Uganda Airlines Corporation, Mr. Dick Turinawe.  One thing I want Members to note here, is that this is a junior Member of a government parastatal reminding a whole Minister in the Republic of Uganda about the conduct of business according to the accepted norms and ethics in this country.  Members must also note that the unilateral decision to alter signatories meant transferring government's money from Uganda Airlines Corporation directly into the pocket of the Minister.  This is unacceptable as it is against the existing Laws of procedure, Mr. Speaker. 

MR. KUTESA:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I would let it pass, but I think that it is absolutely intemperate for an hon. Member to make an allegation that is not substantiable. It is wrong to say that by changing signatories I moved money from the Government of Uganda into my pocket, but I did not rise on this point.

MR. DOMBO:  Mr. Speaker, I wish, for re-emphasis and clarity, to repeat this to Members of the House. The unilateral decision by hon. Sam Kutesa to change the signatories of the account in which he removes signatories of a government parastatal which has 50 percent stake, and he puts signatories from his company and that of Efforte Corporation, was actually transferring money from a government parastatal under his custody, which is completely unacceptable hon. Members.   
Besides keeping Uganda Airlines Corporation in the dark about ENHAS' financial position, in a typically arrogant style, the Chairman ignored this request. It was not until October 25th that a Board meeting was held.  This was a whole two months later.  At this meeting, Uganda Airlines Corporation complained about the irregular change of signatories to the ENHAS accounts.  

I wish to quote from minute 6/BD 25/10/96, which I have marked as document number 12.  Mr. Speaker, document number 12 is a minute of the Board meeting of 25th October 1996.  The title is "ENHAS bank accounts and signatories".  I will read minute 6.1. "Uganda Airlines and SABENA expressed concern as follows: -

i) That it was irregular to effect a change in signatories in Bank accounts without the Board's approval and formal resolution.

ii) That the reported occurrence of money being irregularly drawn was so serious and required the convening of an urgent extraordinary meeting of the Board, which was not done."  

These are minutes of the Board, hon. Members, imagine!
"iii) that Uganda Airlines demands to be a mandatory signatory to all headquarters accounts and would provide 2 signatories for the purpose."   
This was irregular conduct, Mr. Speaker, and I wish to lay this document on the Table.  That is a quotation, which I have selected to back a document which I am presenting before this House.

ENG.NDAWULA KAWEESI: Mr. Speaker, as you rightly pointed out, at any time we would come in to seek points of procedure.  This document is marked document 12 but it does not say in here that the whole document will be quoted.  Mr. Speaker in this document 12, minute 6.2, in my view, has been found to be important, because I have read it.  I have the document here.  May I therefore seek your guidance in this matter and request that the Chief petitioner reads this entire document?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, we have two sides in this particular motion, each side is putting its case.  As far as I am concerned, the part which he has read, and which has gone on record is the one which the petitioner is trying to use. In case you find that he has left out another part in the same document, which is to your advantage, you will read it.  

MR. DOMBO: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, for your continued guidance. I hasten to add that the Chairman, Mr. Sam Kutesa, on September 4th, 1996 appointed Mr. Dick Turinawe, Acting General Manager of Uganda Airlines Corporation, a signatory to one of ENHAS' many accounts, though not a principle one. Members refer to document number 13, which I beg to lay on the Table. The document is dated 4th September 1996 and it is addressed to the General Manager, Gold Trust Bank.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The only problem I see is the way these documents were arranged. They should have been arranged in chronological order, but that is your case.  But if you had arranged according to dates, it would have been better. Proceed.

MR. DOMBO:  Mr. Speaker, the document reads:"RE: ACCOUNT No. 268
Please note signatory rights to the above accounts as follows: -  
GROUP 1                       GROUP 2
1.Hon. Sam Kuteesa            1.Mr. Hezi Bezalel
2.Mr. Ramesh Mashrani         2.Mr. Zeev Shiff

GROUP 3                        GROUP 4
1.Mr. Dick Turinawe            1.Mr. Ramesh Mashrani
2.Mr. Ramesh Mashrani          2.Mr. Zeev Shiff

The account shall here in after be obligated by one of the Members of any of the four groups.
Thank you.
Yours faithfully, 

Hon. Sam Kutesa
CHAIRMAN " Minister in the Republic of Uganda.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, and any Member who may have to refer to a document, I would expect you to just read what is in the document.  Do not add or subtract any title.

MR. DOMBO: Mr. Speaker, I basically wanted to repeat for emphasis.  I thought I had finished the quote.  I will clarify as I read that the quotation has ended.  But I want to clarify that hon. Sam Kutesa, who signed this document, was Chairman of ENHAS and also Minister in the Republic of Uganda, although the title "Minister" has not been appended to this letter.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I entirely agree with you.  But you are reading a document, later on you will conclude and say, from such a period to such a period, so and so was a Minister.  Do not add anything to the document.  

MR. DOMBO: Mr. Speaker and hon. Members of Parliament, in all these situations, hon. Sam Kutesa, a Minister in the Government, never raised a finger to assist Uganda Airlines Corporation, the major share-holder in ENHAS.  Besides sidelining Uganda Airlines Corporation in the financial management of ENHAS, there was also a definite move to sideline Uganda Airlines Corporation from the actual management of the Company.  

At the beginning of ENHAS operations, as Chairman of the Board, hon. Sam Kutesa appointed Mr. Ramesh Masrani from his own Company, Global Air-Links and Mr. Zeev Shiff from Efforte Corporation, as joint Managing Directors of ENHAS.  Uganda Airlines Corporation was not included in the top management despite its major share in the Company.  It was not until December, 1996, that a third joint Managing Director from Uganda Airlines Corporation was appointed, and even then, after very strong pleas and protests from Uganda Airlines Corporation.  It is evident that Uganda Airlines Corporation's situation in ENHAS was not helped by hon. Sam Kutesa's assumption of the office of Minister. As a matter of fact, difficulties for Uganda Airlines Corporation in ENHAS actually increased.  

Let me move on to Ground No.2(b), Mr. Speaker, which also illustrates serious conflict of interest. It exposes the Minister as someone who does not hesitate to exploit all situations to his advantage, even at the expense of the national interest.  Ground No.2 reads that the hon. Sam Kutesa being a Minister of Government of the Republic of Uganda and Chairman of ENHAS, was offered and accepted to buy some of the 50 per cent shares of the Uganda Airlines Corporation shares in ENHAS at a price below the market value as determined by Delloite and Touche, an audit firm associated with his private Company, to wit, Global Air-Links, thus causing financial loss to the Republic of Uganda. 

Sir, I would like to remind Members of the facts leading to the sale of Uganda Airlines Corporation shares in ENHAS.  Some time in early 1998, DRIC decided that in order to offset some of the debts that Uganda Airlines Corporation had contracted, Uganda Airlines Corporation shares in ENHAS should be sold off to willing buyers.  Because of the existence of a pre-emptive rights Clause in the ENHAS Articles of Association, the shares were offered to ENHAS share-holders first.  Three firms were contracted by DRIC to value the shares. Ernest and Young returned a value of shares between 5,279,502 million US dollars and 8,851,000 million US dollars.  DFCU returned a value of between 5 million US dollars and 8 million US dollars. Delloite and Touche returned a value of only 3.375 million dollars.

Global Airlinks of hon. Sam Kutesa and Efforte Corporation of Major General Salim Saleh jointly bid for the shares at 2.25 US million dollars. The Select Committee on Privatisation asserts on Page 23 of its Report that, "after protracted negotiations, the representatives of Global Airlinks and Efforte Corporation raised their offer to US $ 3.75 million.  The matter was, therefore, referred to DRIC, who in their 177th meeting, held on Monday 9th March, 1998, approved their price of 3.75 million dollars."  See the DRIC note 181/1 of 19th March 1998, marked document No.14.  Mr. Speaker, I beg to lay it on the Table as part of the evidence.

There was definitely a very wide discrepancy between the amount paid by hon. Sam Kutesa's group and that quoted by Ernest and Young and DFCU.  Under normal circumstances, a Government Minister would be expected to assist Government bodies achieve the best for themselves.  In this case, whose interest was hon. Sam Kutesa pursuing?  His, or that of Uganda Airlines Corporation?  We, the Petitioners, contend that hon. Sam Kutesa was bent on getting the best deal for himself and that meant sacrificing the interest of Uganda Airlines Corporation and the government of the Republic of Uganda, to which he is an hon. Minister.

Sir, this is another example of how the hon. Minister, Sam Kutesa, abandoned the public interest for his own individual gain.  All in all, there could never be clearer cases of conflict of interest leading to misconduct and financial loss to a Government Company. 

A leader of the calibre of a Cabinet Minister is expected to be exemplary in every thing he does or says.  At that level, Sir, a leader is expected to act in a manner so proper that it would bear the closest public scrutiny.  It is the view of the Petitioners that hon. Sam Kutesa's conduct at one particular instance fell short of this expectation.  

Hon. Members, Ground No.2(c) of the Petitioners' grounds states, (Interjections) that the hon. Sam Kutesa, in his capacity as Chairman of ENHAS Board and being a Minister, holding the above Portfolio, threatened violence on the Uganda Airlines Corporation representatives of the Board after they had complained about hon. Sam Kutesa's presentation of false accounts to the 20th Board meeting of 20th February, 1997 in the Efforte Board Room; contrary to Section 14(1)(d) of the Leadership Code of Conduct.  

The House will recall Sir, that on Pages 30 and 31, the Omongole Committee report narrated an incident when the hon. Sam Kutesa threatened violence on Mr. Dick Turinawe at a Board meeting of ENHAS, on February 20th, 1997, in the Board Room of Efforte Corporation.  That was on the 4th Floor of Impala House in Kampala.  I have extracted Minute 6.5 of the ENHAS Board Minutes and marked it document No.15. I am also presenting to the House an affidavit, sworn by Mr. Dick Turinawe, serving as Director of Uganda Airlines Corporation on the ENHAS Board at the time of the incident.  It is marked document No.16.  I beg to lay these two documents on the Table as part of the evidence.

I have also extracted the Select Committee's evidence of Mr. Dick Turinawe while he was testifying to the Committee on this particular incident. It is marked document No.17.  Mr. Speaker, I beg to lay document No.17 on the Table.  Mr. Speaker, this document is extracted from the evidence submitted to the Select Committee on Privatisation, and this was Mr. Dick Turinawe speaking under oath before a Committee of Parliament.  I will quote from line 10, it says:"...and thereafter, in a board meeting, we were given some financial statements by the Corporation Secretary and he said these had been produced by the accountant before he had left.  Now, when we looked through, they looked good reports.  Then one of the board members said no, no, these documents are wrong they are not correct; and the Chairman ruled that we should return the documents, and me and my other director, Mr. Bageya George, we said, no, we are not going to return these documents because we have waited for six months to get these records.  At least give us a chance to go through. I remember then I refused the Chairman told me that he hoped I would live to read those documents..."

On the next sheet of the same document, asked again, "What did the Chairman say?"  Mr. Turinawe Dick replied, "He said that, I hope you will live to read those documents, and of course this touched me as a person because I said, are you threatening my life? Or are you threatening my job?"  

I continue with the quote, Mr. Speaker. "I remember telling him that I know if it is the job, I know you are capable of... "  - then there is an "inaudible" - "...but as long as I am here, I am supposed to do this job."  
This was a junior member of Uganda Airlines Corporation, junior to the Minister, trying to give evidence before the Committee of Parliament of on how he felt threatened by a Minister in a public office.  
Mr. Speaker, I wish to lay this document as part of the evidence on the Table.  

The summary of the incident enunciated by the above documents is as follows: Hon. Kutesa Sam was Chairman of a Board meeting of ENHAS on February 20th, 1997.  During the Board meeting, a document containing draft financial performance reports was circulated to members.  The Chairman later asked that the document containing the draft financial performance report be withdrawn.  The Directors representing Uganda Airlines Corporation, which had for long been denied access to ENHAS financial reports, declined to hand over the documents.  There followed a scuffle to grab the documents from Mr. Dick Turinawe, hon. Kutesa Sam got annoyed and abusive and threatened Mr. Dick Turinawe with the words, 'I hope you will live to read it'.  Mr. Dick Turinawe took the words to mean a direct threat to him and stated this to the hon. Minister. 

I wish, Mr. Speaker, to ask this august House to look into the incident in the light of two matters. The fact that at the time of the incident hon. Kutesa Sam was a Minister in the Government, whose very words could not be taken lightly.  And secondly, the fact that hon. Kutesa Sam, being a Minister in government, had the responsibility of protecting government interests and was therefore expected to side with Uganda Airlines Corporation and not against it.  

We, the petitioners, find that hon. Kutesa's utterances were a clear case of acting against officials who were protecting government interests.  There can be no doubt that in this case the hon. Minister placed himself directly against the interests he should have been protecting.  This is unacceptable conduct by a government leader and must not be condoned.

Secondly, the petitioners believe that the days when Ministers and leaders would go about this dispensing threats or actual violence on subordinates are long gone. I plead with this august House to reject any attempt by anybody to drag this country back to that dark period of our history.  I pray, Sir, that this House finds that in uttering threats against Dick Turinawe, hon. Kutesa Sam, a Minister in Government, conducted himself in a manner that is completely unacceptable by any standards of decent leadership.  This cannot be the mark of a leader in the Movement, which we cherish. This House should pronounce itself loudly and clearly on this matter by voting for this motion.  

Ground number 2(d) of the petition reads as follows: that hon. Kutesa Sam, acting in his capacity as Chairman of ENHAS board and while holding the above portfolio as Minister, denied workers of Uganda Airlines corporation their due shares of 2.5 percent in ENHAS, contrary to the Shareholders' agreement.  

According to the share allotment, Mr. Speaker, the workers of Uganda Airlines Corporation were supposed to take 2.5 percent shares in the company.  At a Board meeting of ENHAS, held on December 4th, 1996, and chaired by hon. Kutesa Sam, it was noted that the shares offered to Uganda Airlines Corporation and Sabena Airlines were each purchased at 10,000 shillings per share.  The shares bought by Global Air links and Efforte Corporation were also valued at the same price.  

On March 19th, 1997, upon inquiry from the Uganda Airlines Corporation secretary, the company secretary of ENHAS wrote indicating that the value of the Uganda Airlines Corporation shares in ENHAS were the equivalent of 35,500 United States Dollars only. A copy of this document is marked number 18, I wish to lay it on the Table as part of the evidence.

On the basis of the above information, Mr. Speaker, Uganda Airlines Corporation, the overseer of the workers' interests in ENHAS, sent ENHAS a cheque of the sum of 5 million Uganda shillings on March 20th, 1997 as initial payment.  The General Manager of ENHAS returned the cheque to Uganda Airlines Corporation on the grounds that the board was still discussing the matter.  

On May 15th, 1998, the acting General Manager of Uganda Airlines Corporation introduced the Uganda Airlines workers' company to the ENHAS Board Chairman and enclosed another cheque of 5000 US Dollars as part of payment for the workers' shares in ENHAS.  Photocopies of the letter and the cheque are numbered document number 19 and 20 respectively. I lay them on the Table as part of the evidence.  Although the letter had been addressed to the Chairman of ENHAS, it was replied to by a firm of advocates, which returned the cheque with an explanation that the shares for the workers were valued at 187,500 United States Dollars. Pleas by the Uganda Airlines Corporation acting General Manager that the value of the workers' shares as at the time of allotment was 37,500 US Dollars and not 187,500 US Dollars, fell on deaf ears. Both Uganda Airlines Corporation and M/s Peninsula Investments Limited, the Uganda Airlines Workers' Company, made formal approaches to the Executive Director, Enterprises Development Programme (EDP), Mr. Muganwa to intervene.  A meeting called by Mr. Muganwa to sort out the problem flopped because hon. Kutesa failed to turn up.  To date, Uganda Airlines Corporation workers have not got their shares in ENHAS.  

Sir, again on this ground of petition, we are confronted with the activities of a Minister of Government in a business organisation where both government interests and the interest of workers in a public enterprise have to be protected. But the Government Minister opts not to protect the public servants and acts in a manner, which comes very near to cheating those interests.  

While it is true that the workers were slow to pay up for their shares, as the Chairman of the Board, hon. Kutesa Sam should have tried to safeguard the workers' interests by retaining the cheques and agreeing on an acceptable formula for calculating the value of the shares.  As things stand now, the workers could lose their allotted shares and nobody would argue that hon. Sam Kutesa has not had a hand in causing the loss.  Refusing or failing to negotiate with the workers of Uganda Airlines Corporation, after being invited by the Privatisation Unit, smacks of arrogance and selfishness.  The workers of this country deserve better treatment than this from a political leader at the level of a Minister.  

All of us here, collectively and individually, have a big role in seeing that the workers of Uganda, who play important roles in sustaining our economy, are thanked and paid back in some form by the society.  That is why the Privatisation Statute is very clear on the role the workers are supposed to play in the privatisation process.  Section 10 of the PERD statute states that: "A public enterprise may provide for participation in the ownership of the enterprises through investment by its employees in shares and may, to this end, permit 
(a) Individual, union, collective and institutional ownership of shares;
(b) Payment of share calls and other dues through discounts, instalments, bonus schemes and other arrangements meant to benefit employees."  

In line with this provision, the workers of Uganda Airlines Corporation had been offered 2.5 percent shares in the ownership of ENHAS, but a government Minister, who should have safeguarded the workers' claim, at best did nothing, and at worst actively abetted the denial of workers their rightful share in the company.  For failing to respect and protect the workers of our country, Parliament should show its dis-pleasure towards the hon. Minister by voting to censure him on this ground as well.  

The last ground states that the said hon. Kutesa Sam, acting in his capacity as Chairman of ENHAS, and while still a Minister in the Government of the Republic of Uganda, condoned the financial loss of the sum of US $ 445,761 which the Board of the said ENHAS wrote off as a bad debt, thus causing financial loss to Uganda Airlines Corporation, an enterprise belonging to the Republic of Uganda. 

The Board of ENHAS received from the chairman audited accounts for the year ended 28th February 1997.  The meeting noted that there was an unaccounted for difference of 238,000 US Dollars between invoices and payments.  This figure was corrected in ink on the financial statements to 445,761 US dollars and written off as a bad and doubtful debt. In minute 4.1.1, Mr. Speaker, the board comments on this matter as follows: "Meeting noted a strong need to investigate further and establish the cause of the disparity and if the amount is collectable.  Important to establish cause of shortfall in order to guard against similar occurrences in future."   

This advice was ignored. In his capacity as head of ENHAS, the hon. Minister takes responsibility for the financial loss to the company and consequently to Uganda Airlines Corporation.  I present the financial statement as document 21, and the minute 4.1.1 of the Board meeting held on 5th of August 1997, as document 22, as part of evidence which I beg to lay on the Table.  
In conclusion, Mr. Speaker, what is at stake here is the quality of leadership we want to give our people.  The questions the petitioners are putting before this House are:

1. Was the conduct of the hon. Minister in his affairs with Uganda Airlines corporation, a government-owned company, beneficial to the people he swore to serve faithfully?  When there was conflict between the interests of Uganda Airlines Corporation, a government owned company, and the interest of the Minister as a shareholder of ENHAS, whose interests did he pursue; his or the government ones?  

2. Is hon. Sam Kutesa's conduct, as outlined in the petition and proven by the evidence, the acceptable norm for all the Movement leaders, and in particular, Ministers? (Laughter)

3. Should we allow any minister who wishes to do so, to aggressively pursue his private interests at the expense of the government interest?  
4. This is a question to the hon. Members of this House, where do we draw the line between honest, personal business and abuse of office for personal gain?

5. Hon. Members, the question the petitioners are putting forward is, should we allow a Minister to bully, intimidate and threaten state employees?  Hon. Ajeani and hon. Otafiire fell short of this respect and honourably resigned their portfolios. Hon. Members, should hon. Kutesa get away with it?  If he does, what precedent do we set for the future? 

Allow me, Mr. Speaker and hon. Colleagues, to take you back to the report of the Select Committee on Privatisation. This House and the country at large were shocked by the contents of the report, which showed that the privatisation process had been hijacked and derailed by some powerful influence peddlers. In its wisdom, Parliament adopted a resolution requesting the President to immediately relieve the hon. Sam Kutesa of his duties as Minister. This did not happen, unfortunately. This censure motion seeks to assert the wish of Parliament through its resolution of December last year. Indeed, if the hon. Minister respected this House, he would have resigned voluntarily, having witnessed Parliament withdraw its approval of his appointment at that time.  Through this censure, the House will be recording its strong disapproval of the conduct of hon. Sam Kutesa, Minister of State for Finance in charge of Planning and Investment.  

By passing this motion, Parliament will have taken another step in the direction of raising standards of public conduct.  A positive message will go out to all levels of leadership in the country and to our development partners about the quality of leadership required in the Movement Government.  Mr. Speaker and hon. Members, our people are watching us. Their expectations in us are great.  Let us not fail them, let us set the highest standards of leadership for ourselves and live by them.  

Mr. Speaker, I beg to move.  Thank you.

MAJ. RABWONI OKWIR  (Youth Representative, Western): Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to support the motion.  

Let me, at the outset, thank Parliament, the Movement Government, and the people of Uganda for creating the requisite climate for this debate; the requisite climate for the struggle for democratic governance and accountability in public affairs, that forms the basis for political stability and sustainable economic development.  
Through you, Mr. Speaker, let me thank hon. Members, the media, and the general public for giving the issues raised by the Select Committee on privatisation, the seriousness they deserve. I call upon them, in their wisdom and objectivity, to take a principled stand and rid our country of elements of corruption and decadence.

This motion, Mr. Speaker, hinges on the twin pillars of influence peddling and conflict of interest; they form the bedrock of corruption in high places. It is sad to note that after so much sacrifice, loss of life and property, in the process of liberating this country, this Parliament is half the time fighting to stem the haemorrhage of resources from the national purse instead of attending to important issues of national development.  

This Movement government has great and lofty ideals. Mr. Speaker, we are talking about democratic governance, sustainable peace and security, modernisation of the economy, and regional integration in a Pan Africanist agenda.  These ideals can only be achieved with a serious, dedicated, selfless team of leaders; leaders with impeccable credentials; clean leaders.  

The 6th Parliament of Uganda has a historic mission, Mr. Speaker. This mission of bringing to fruition the hopes and aspirations of the coming generations of Ugandans, the hopes of building responsible and accountable government.  It is imperative therefore, that the way forward is to remove from our body politic, the way a surgeon removes a cancerous tumour, all elements of corruption and decadence for the sake of safe guarding the national interests and the interests of posterity.  

It is against this background, therefore, Mr. Speaker, that this censure motion against hon. Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development in charge of Investments, hon. Sam Kutesa, must be seen as a genuine effort to cleanse out body politic.  It is not about settling personal scores, it is not about ethnic rivalry; Bairu against Bahima. It is also not about Movementists against multipartists, neither is it about who entered the Movement when. (Laughter) This motion, Mr. Speaker, is about transparency and accountability in the conduct of government business.  This Parliament is not out to victimise hon. Sam Kutesa.  

In Shakespeare's Julius Ceasar, Cacius says:" Not that I loved Julius Ceasar less, but that I Loved Rome more".We do not hate hon. Kutesa, but we love Uganda more. (Applause) 

Having said that, Mr. Speaker, allow me to turn to the substance of the motion.  It is important that we closely observe the sequence of events.  It is our humble opinion that, prior to his appointment as a Minister of State, the hon. Sam Kutesa had already spearheaded activities that would later prompt conflict of interest arising from his Ministerial position on one hand and his continued chairmanship of ENHAS on the other.  

I would like to emphasise, therefore, that while we, the petitioners, do not intend to delve into hon. Kutesa's activities before his appointment as grounds for censure, we feel it is necessary to establish causal links between the anomalies in the process of the formation of the ENHAS Consortium and the resultant conflict of interest on his elevation to a sensitive portfolio in the Ministry of Finance. 

Allow me, Mr. Speaker, to briefly enumerate this sequence of events. Because, Mr. Speaker, hon. Kutesa, and rightly so, last December, in his defence, intimated that people were raising issues about what he did before he was appointed to the portfolio he now holds and that was not fair.  We also believe so, Mr. Speaker, but we just want to establish a causal link; a logical background, so that from there we can infer whether later, when he agreed to take up a Ministerial position, he had already realised that there would arise conflict of interest.

On the 22nd of April 1993, the New Vision newspaper advertised the privatisation of ground handling services at Entebbe Airport.  On the 23rd of January 1995, nearly two years after the public notice, hon. Sam Kutesa, then chief Executive of Global Airlinks expressed an interest in ground handling in a letter to the Civil Aviation Authority. 

I will not go deep into explaining and reading the documents because my Colleague, the Mover, has done that.  I would like to save time, so that you, hon. Members, can also have time to deliberate. So, I will move a little bit fast.  

On 31st January 1995, a prompt reply came from the Managing Director of CAA, which interalia said, and I quote from document A, "...to enable us evaluate your potential to participate in this vital airport operation, you are requested to prepare and submit to us, as soon as possible, your company's profile for our study and action".
My Colleague has already alluded to these two documents, Mr. Speaker.

On 30th March, 1995, only two months after the hon. Kutesa's application, Uganda Clearing and Forwarding Agents Association (UCIFA) applied to the Civil Aviation Authority. The chief executive replied on 25th April 1995 saying: "It is worth noting that the interest shown by UCIFA at this stage in time to be granted a concession to carry out Ground Handling Services is too late."

On 23rd February 1995, the chief executive officer of the Civil Aviation Authority had invited Global Airlinks to a meeting on the formation of a consortium, prior to the submission of the company's profile.  So, prior to this, Maj. General Akandwanaho of Calebs International, for whom there is no documentary evidence of a written inquiry or an invitation, also attended the said meeting.  Mr. Speaker and hon. Members, the outcome of the meeting was the rather strange agreement according to which both parties became partners in the consortium, in direct contravention of the second Schedule of the PERD Statute. It stipulates that, "Every effort shall be made by the Committee" - that is DRIC - "to satisfy itself to the standing and credentials of all interested parties before any negotiations are entered into. For this reason, all interested parties shall be requested to provide details as to their business history, affiliations and future business plans".  

All this is in this document, Mr. Speaker.  Now, I lay on the Table minutes of the meeting, which granted this consortium without even studying the company's details.  Mr. Speaker, what I am trying to state here, is, while submitting a company profile and other necessary documents, it should have been a prerequisite for granting the consortium. The two gentlemen, hon. Sam Kutesa, representing Global Airlinks, and Maj. Gen. Caleb Akandwanaho, representing Calebs International, were granted a consortium after matching into a meeting without a single piece of paper.  In view of the foregoing, Mr. Speaker, I would like to submit that, while influence peddling cannot be traced through correspondence, it can be inferred through a series of actions and decisions taken in consideration of the major influence- peddler.  
It is against this background, therefore, that the hon. Sam Kutesa, well aware of the anomalies that characterised the formation of the consortium at the outset, not only went ahead to maintain his controversial position as chairman of the Board of Directors, despite his appointment as a Minister of State, but also continued to conduct the operations of the company in the same manner.  

Let me now turn to the situation at ENHAS by the time hon. Sam Kutesa was appointed Minister. The background is finished, the hon. Sam Kutesa is Minister, what does he do?  What was the situation by then?  Mr. Speaker, hon. Members, by the time the hon. Sam Kutesa was sworn in as a government Minister, the situation at ENHAS was as follows: 

(a) The Uganda Airlines Corporation, with 50 percent of the shares in ENHAS, had only two directors out of a total of six.  It can therefore be deduced that the government of Uganda, which owned half the interests in the company, only had a third of the voice in decision making.  

(b) Last December, hon. Sam Kutesa, in his defence, said that it was possible for a minority shareholder to chair the Board of Directors of a Company, citing the example of hon. Mubanda, when he was Chairman of BAT. This is untrue; it defies business logic for a minority shareholder, whose interest is competing with a majority shareholder, to take the Chair of a Company.  The example of hon. Alfred Mubanda in BAT was most inappropriate and probably intended to confuse the House.  
I can tell this House categorically that, when hon. Mubanda was Chairman of BAT, he was not a minority shareholder in the company.  In fact, he was not a shareholder at all.  Hon. Alfred Mubanda, then a permanent secretary, was representing a 60 percent government Stake in BAT.  

By the time the hon. Sam Kutesa was sworn in as Minister, there were two joint Managing Directors representing Global Airlinks and Efforte Corporation, with nobody representing Uganda Airlines Corporation.  It was only after pressure had been brought to bear on hon. Sam Kutesa, that it was reported on 4th of December 1996 that the Board had agreed to appoint Mr. J.D. Mugizi to represent the Uganda Airlines Corporation.  All this time, there were repeated complaints over the exclusive control exercised by the Chairman of the Board of Directors over the finances of the company.  

To conclude this point, Mr. Speaker, here is a man who takes an Oath to defend the interests of the government of the Republic of Uganda, while at the back of his mind he is well aware that he chairs a company where government interests are marginalised by himself.

(c) Sidelining Uganda Airlines Corporation interests and the conflicts within the ENHAS Board of Directors.  Mr. Speaker, hon. Members, the petitioners, on close scrutiny of company correspondence, discovered the following:

(i) That there were complaints emanating from the Uganda Airlines Corporation Directors over the failure of the Chairman to provide information on the financial status of the company, in blatant contravention of established business procedures.  There were further complaints as to the high handedness of the chairman, who took unilateral decisions regarding the administration of the company, thus flouting standard procedure and failing to adhere to Board resolutions.  My Colleague, the Mover, has substantiated this through correspondence Tabled.  

This document, which he read, says that "we herewith requisition and call on you to convene urgently an extraordinary General Meeting of ENHAS.  We invoke the provision of Article 63 of the Articles of Association of ENHAS and Section 132 and 133 of the Company's Act, Chapter 85 of the Laws of Uganda.  

We shall, therefore, expect the meeting requisitioned to convene not later than 7th of April 1997.  

We propose the following agenda for the said meeting: -
1. ENHAS financial status and the provision of periodic (quarterly) financial statements to shareholders/Directors.
2. The administrative status and structure of ENHAS and the management style thereof."

Here are government officials, junior to a Minister of State, invoking Company Law and proposing the agenda for an emergency meeting to bring to the attention of the Minister that government interests were in jeopardy!    

(ii) The petitioners also discovered that the hon. Minister/Chairman Board of Directors of ENHAS, broke the Law by unilaterally changing signatories to company accounts.  The hon. Minister, who is a Lawyer, knew that it is standard procedure that signatories to company accounts can only be changed through a Board resolution.  The Minister had informed them about his unilateral action on the 5th of August 1986.  The grave anomaly here, therefore, is that, signatories have not only been changed, but Uganda Airlines Corporation does not have a mandatory signatory, as opposed to his own corporation, Global Airlinks and Efforte, who are minority shareholders. 

If we go back to hon. Dombo's documents, you can see these groups of signatories.  If you look carefully, on the first two accounts, there is nobody representing Uganda Airlines Corporation.  In this one which has four groups of signatures, the people in group one are both directors in Efforte and group two; Global Airlinks. Group three is where you have one Member of the Board representing Uganda Airlines Corporation and the other is Global Airlinks and in group four, Uganda Airlines is not there.  So, even if a representative of Uganda Airlines had been put there, of course you can see, the other person could sign in his absence.  So, he was just a rubber stamp.  He was there for appearance.

So, Mr. Speaker, hon. Members, you can now visualise a situation where I am a majority shareholder and you are a minority shareholder in a partnership.  I wake up one morning to find you are in total control of the company, you are the mandatory signatory to all accounts, and you even have the audacity to refuse to talk to me and to meet me when I ask for a meeting.  Remember that I hold 50 percent of that company.  You are the only signatory, you take unilateral decisions, they tell you that 'honourable let us meet', you do not even have the audacity to say, 'even if I am treating this gentleman unfairly, let me listen to his side of the story.'  

It is this unacceptable behaviour that we construe to be misconduct of by a leader in a public office.  This is what we demand, even from a LC III handling public affairs, the highest standard in the conduct of State affairs.  

4. Threatening violence against Uganda Airlines Corporation representatives on the Board.  Mr. Speaker, the Mover has clearly described the events of the famous, or the infamous, 20th Board meeting of ENHAS that sat on the 20th of February 1997 at the Efforte Board Room, 4th Floor, Impala House in Kampala.  Before storming out of the meeting in protest, the hon. Minister/Chairman, is said to have uttered the words, "I hope you will live to read it."  His words were aimed at a representative of a government parastatal, Mr. Dick Turinawe, who was striving to safeguard the government interests on the ENHAS Board.  
Mr. Speaker, hon. Members, compatriots, what more evidence do you need? (Laughter) What more evidence do you need to establish conflict of interest between hon. Sam Kutesa and the Government of the Republic of Uganda?  Mr. Speaker, this pattern of bullying and intimidation can also be traced even after the 20th Board meeting.  Document (d), which are minutes of the Board meeting held on the 5th of August 1997; minute 912 reads: "General Manager, Uganda Airlines, was not satisfied with the statement showing Income and Expenditure for the months of March to June.

He questioned the manner in which certain payments are done and the secrecy surrounding them.

The Chairman observed that accusations of impropriety should only be made when all facts are available bearing in mind the positions of those involved."  
I beg to lay it on the Table, Mr. Speaker.

5. The appointment of a new Uganda Airlines Corporation Board of Directors: Mr. Speaker, after that stormy ENHAS Board meeting, a new Uganda Airlines Corporation Board was appointed. And as fate would have it, the new Chairman of Uganda Airlines Corporation Board, out of 22 million Ugandans, was none other than Mr. Agad Didi, Managing Director of Calebs International, a sister Company to Efforte, which, as you will remember, is together with Global Airlinks in the ENHAS consortium.  

I have defined influence peddling before; how lucky is this man, that when his relationship with Uganda Airlines has broken down irretrievably, a new Board emerges, immediately after the infamous 20th Board meeting. Mr. Speaker, I should hasten to add that Mr. Agard Didi, after a short time, fell out with the Chairman over the interests of Uganda Airlines Corporation in ENHAS.  He failed to work with him!  This was because Mr. Agard Didi was trying to defend the interests of Uganda Airlines Corporation in ENHAS and therefore conflicting with the Chairman of the Board, who is the hon. Minister, Sam Kutesa.  Mr. Speaker, hon. Members, this intricate web of conflicting interests and interchangeable positions is, to say the least, mind-boggling!  Was this by design or default?  I leave it to you, hon. Members, to judge.  
6. Undervaluation of Uganda Airlines Corporation shares in ENHAS by Delloite and Touche.  The Uganda Airlines Corporation shares in ENHAS were valued as follows: Ernst and Young - five to eight million US dollars, DFCU - between five and 7.5 US dollars, and Delloite and Touche was 3.75 million US dollars.  Mr. Speaker, it is interesting to note that Delloite and Touche, who were called in as ENHAS auditors by the Chairman, assessed the shares at the lowest figure, which figure carried.   

If we could take an average of the valuations of these shares, we would find it somewhere in the region of five million US dollars.  Which means that Uganda Airlines Corporation and the Government of Uganda lost something in the region of 1.25 million US dollars. 

It is equally interesting to note that the first meeting between ENHAS shareholders and the Privatisation Unit, on the sale of Uganda Airlines Corporation shares, was held at hon. Kutesa's office.  Document (e) reads: " MEETING WITH A CONSORTIUM OF ENHAS SHAREHOLDERS. 
Place  - Office of hon. Kutesa. 
Time   - 4.30 p.m. - 6.15 p.m.
Date   - Monday, 02 March 1998.
PRESENT:
Hon.Sam Kutesa      -  Global Air Links Limited
Mr.Ramesh Masrani   -  Global Airlinks Limited 
Mr. Zeev Shiff      - Efforte Corporation 
Mr. L. Muganwa      -  Executive Director(ED) 
Mr. Nyirinkindi     -  Director, Parastatal Monitoring Unit (DPMU). 
Mr. M. Opagi        -  Director Privatisation Unit(DPU) 
Mr.Orono Otweyo     -  Team Leader/PU 
Mr. Muteefu         -  Business Analyst/PMU 
Mr. Acali Manzi     -  Uganda Airlines 
Mr. Derek Else      -  Uganda Airlines."  
I request to lay this on Table, Mr. Speaker.

If I, as hon. Okwir, intend to purchase the Nile Hotel, Mr. Speaker, is it possible for me to convene a meeting, conducting business under my chairmanship with a Privatisation Unit, at my small office in Kisugu? (Laughter) I leave this to you, Mr. Speaker and hon. Members, to judge if there was absence or presence of influence peddling and conflict of interest.  

Other documents also show that the hon. Sam Kutesa was deeply involved in the negotiations to buy Uganda Airlines Corporation shares in ENHAS, contrary to what he said last December; that he was not directly involved in any way in the buying of these shares.  This document indicates that he participated, but came out of the whole thing after the deal had been clinched.  So, the subsequent meetings were not of much consequence.  

In conclusion, Mr. Speaker, hon. Members, I humbly submit that at this point in time, the Movement System of Government and our Country Uganda are at historical cross roads. We clean ourselves, stick to the stated aims and objectives of our revolution and survive, or we agree to cover up the rot and decadence in our midst and we sink.  
It is therefore, incumbent upon us, as honourable Legislators in this august House, to use the yardstick of truth and objectivity, devoid of all obscurantism and render service to our people and to posterity.

With these few words, Mr. Speaker, I beg to second.  Thank you very much. (Applause).

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: At this juncture, hon. Members, you have now heard the case of those moving that the resolution of censure be passed. Before the debate is open to other Members of the House, I think it is appropriate to give opportunity to hon. Sam Kutesa to put up his case.

MR. KUTESA SAM: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Given the voluminous presentation that has been made today, also considering the number of allegations and interpretations that have been attached to documents that have been laid on the Table or read to this House, Mr. Speaker, I would seek your indulgence. I ask that you give me overnight to peruse through these documents. I can assure you, Mr. Speaker and hon. Members, I will give you my own defence as honestly and as wholesomely as possible. Mr. Speaker, I ask that you allow me to start my defence tomorrow, having had an opportunity to address the issues that have been raised in these documents. I am not asking for a long time tomorrow, because I have no doubt in my mind, Mr. Speaker, that when the truth comes out, we will not need to spend a lot of time on all these volumes.  Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, you have sat here since 2.30 p.m.  You have had elaborate submissions by the Petitioners. I think it is in your interest that you also get time to scrutinise the documents and internalise the submissions.  So, I find it fair for the Minister, and it is also fair to you, that we adjourn the Proceedings to tomorrow 2.30 p.m. prompt.  

(The House rose at 4.45p.m. and adjourned until 2.30p.m. on Wednesday, 3rd March, 1999)
